 Prometheus ( / <unk> / pro @-@ <unk> @-@ thee @-@ <unk> ) is a 2012 American science fiction film directed by Ridley Scott , written by Jon Spaihts and Damon Lindelof , and starring Noomi Rapace , Michael Fassbender , Guy Pearce , Idris Elba , Logan Marshall @-@ Green , and Charlize Theron . It is set in the late 21st century and centers on the crew of the spaceship Prometheus as it follows a star map discovered among the artifacts of several ancient Earth cultures . Seeking the origins of humanity , the crew arrives on a distant world and discovers a threat that could cause the extinction of the human race . 
 Development of the film began in the early 2000s as a fifth installment in the Alien franchise . Scott and director James Cameron developed ideas for a film that would serve as a prequel to Scott 's 1979 science @-@ fiction horror film Alien . By 2003 , the development of Alien vs. Predator took precedence , and the project remained dormant until 2009 when Scott again showed interest . Spaihts wrote a script for a prequel to the events of the Alien films , but Scott opted for a different direction to avoid repeating cues from those films . In late 2010 , Lindelof joined the project to rewrite Spaihts 's script , and he and Scott developed a story that precedes the story of Alien but is not directly connected to that franchise . According to Scott , although the film shares " strands of Alien 's DNA , so to speak " , and takes place in the same universe , Prometheus explores its own mythology and ideas . 
 Prometheus entered production in April 2010 , with extensive design phases during which the technology and creatures that the film required were developed . Principal photography began in March 2011 , with an estimated US $ 120 – 130 million budget . The project was shot using 3D cameras throughout , almost entirely on practical sets , and on location in England , Iceland , Spain , and Scotland . It was promoted with a marketing campaign that included viral activities on the web . Three videos featuring the film 's leading actors in character , which expanded on elements of the fictional universe , were released and met with a generally positive reception and awards . 
 Prometheus was released on June 1 , 2012 , in the United Kingdom and on June 8 , 2012 , in North America . It grossed over $ 403 million worldwide . Reviews praised both the film 's visual aesthetic design and the acting , most notably Fassbender 's performance as the android David . However , the plot drew a mixed response from critics , who criticized plot elements that remained unresolved or were predictable . A sequel , Alien : Covenant , is scheduled to be released on August 4 , 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As a spacecraft departs a planet , a humanoid alien drinks an iridescent liquid then dissolves . The remains of the alien cascade into a waterfall . 
 In 2089 , archaeologists Elizabeth Shaw and Charlie Holloway discover a star map in Scotland that matches others from several unconnected ancient cultures . They interpret this as an invitation from humanity 's forerunners , the " Engineers " . Peter Weyland , the elderly CEO of Weyland Corporation , funds an expedition to follow the map to the distant moon LV @-@ 223 aboard the scientific vessel Prometheus . The ship 's crew travels in stasis while the android David monitors their voyage . Arriving in 2093 , mission director Meredith Vickers informs them of their mission to find the Engineers , and not to make contact without her permission . 
 The Prometheus lands on the barren , mountainous surface near a large artificial structure , which a team explores . Inside they find stone cylinders , a monolithic statue of a humanoid head , and the decapitated corpse of a large alien , thought to be an Engineer ; Shaw recovers its head . The crew finds other bodies , leading them to surmise the species is extinct . Crew members Millburn and Fifield grow uncomfortable with the discoveries and attempt to return to Prometheus , but become stranded in the structure when they get lost . The expedition is cut short when a storm forces the crew to return to the ship . David secretly takes a cylinder from the structure , while the remaining cylinders begin leaking a dark liquid . In the ship 's lab , the Engineer 's DNA is found to match that of humans . David investigates the cylinder and the liquid inside . He intentionally taints a drink with the liquid and gives it to the unsuspecting Holloway , who had stated he would do anything for answers . Shortly after , Shaw and Holloway have sex . 
 Inside the structure , a snake @-@ like creature kills Millburn , and sprays a corrosive fluid that melts Fifield 's helmet . Fifield falls face @-@ first into a puddle of dark liquid . When the crew return , they find Millburn 's corpse . David separately discovers a control room containing a surviving Engineer in stasis , and a star map highlighting Earth . Meanwhile , Holloway sickens rapidly . He is rushed back to Prometheus , but Vickers refuses to let him aboard , and at his urging , burns him to death with a flamethrower . Later , a medical scan reveals that Shaw , despite being sterile , is pregnant . Fearing the worst , she uses an automated surgery table to extract a squid @-@ like creature from her abdomen . Shaw then discovers that Weyland has been in stasis aboard Prometheus . He explains that he wants to ask the Engineers to prevent his death from old age . As Weyland prepares to leave for the structure , Vickers addresses him as " Father . " 
 A monstrous , mutated Fifield attacks the Prometheus 's hangar bay and kills several crew members before he is killed . The Prometheus 's captain , Janek , speculates that the structure was an Engineer military installation that lost control of a virulent biological weapon , the dark liquid . He also determines that the structure houses a spacecraft . Weyland and a team return to the structure , accompanied by Shaw . David wakes the Engineer from stasis and speaks to him in an attempt to explain what Weyland wants . The Engineer responds by decapitating David and killing Weyland and his team , before reactivating the spacecraft . Shaw flees and warns Janek that the Engineer is planning to release the liquid on Earth , convincing him to stop the spacecraft . Janek ejects the lifeboat and rams Prometheus into the alien craft , while Vickers flees in an escape pod . The Engineer 's disabled spacecraft crashes onto the ground ; its wreckage crushes Vickers . Shaw goes to the lifeboat and finds her alien offspring is alive and has grown to gigantic size . David 's still @-@ active head warns Shaw that the Engineer has survived . The Engineer forces open the lifeboat 's airlock and attacks Shaw , who releases her alien offspring onto the Engineer ; it thrusts an ovipositor down the Engineer 's throat , subduing him . Shaw recovers David 's remains , and with his help , launches another Engineer spacecraft . She intends to reach the Engineers ' homeworld in an attempt to understand why they wanted to destroy humanity . 
 In the lifeboat , an alien creature bursts out of the Engineer 's chest . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Noomi Rapace as Elizabeth Shaw : 
 Rapace described Shaw , an archaeologist , as a believer in God with a very strong faith , and said that , " In the middle of the movie , things happen and she changes into more of a warrior . And in the end , she 's such a survivor . " To aid her method acting , she developed a complete backstory for Shaw , and worked with a dialect coach to achieve a British accent . She also asked her make @-@ up artist to apply extra blood and sweat during filming to more accurately portray her character . Rapace said , " I was out there filming for about six months and it was super @-@ intense , my body was in so much pain sometimes but it was absolutely amazing . " She dismissed comparisons to the Alien franchise 's Ellen Ripley . Rapace came to director Ridley Scott 's attention for her performance as Lisbeth Salander in the 2009 drama film The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo . She met Scott in August 2010 , and by January 2011 she had secured the role . Actresses Anne Hathaway , Natalie Portman , Gemma Arterton , Carey Mulligan , and Abbie Cornish were all considered for the role during development . Lucy Hutchinson , who was eight years old in 2012 , portrays Shaw as a child . 
 Michael Fassbender as David : 
 David is an android that acts as the ship 's butler and maintenance man . It is designed to be indistinguishable from humans , and begins to develop " its own ego , insecurities , jealousy and envy " . Writer Damon Lindelof stated that the character provides a non @-@ human perspective on the film 's events , and said , " what does the movie look like from the robot 's point of view ? If you were to ask him , ' What do you think about all of this ? What 's going on ? What do you think about these humans who are around you ? ' Wouldn 't it be cool if we found a way for that robot to answer those questions ? " Fassbender said , " David 's views on the human crew are somewhat childlike . He is jealous and arrogant because he realizes that his knowledge is all @-@ encompassing , and therefore he is superior to the humans . David wants to be acknowledged and praised for his brilliance " . In developing his character , Fassbender avoided watching the android characters of Alien ( 1979 ) and Aliens ( 1986 ) , and instead observed the replicants in Scott 's 1982 science fiction film Blade Runner , with a focus on Sean Young 's character Rachael , whose " vacancy " and longing for a soul interested him . Fassbender drew further inspiration from the voice of the HAL 9000 computer in 2001 : A Space Odyssey , the " funny walk and economy of movement " of Olympic diver Greg <unk> , and the performances of David Bowie in The Man Who Fell to Earth , Dirk Bogarde in The Servant , and Peter O 'Toole in Lawrence of Arabia . David 's blond hair was modeled on that of T. E. Lawrence . Scott favored Fassbender for the role ; by January 2011 he was confirmed to have joined the cast , despite earlier reports that his agents had sought too high a fee . 
 Charlize Theron as Meredith Vickers : 
 Vickers is a Weyland Corporation employee who is sent to monitor the expedition . Theron described the character as " a suit who slowly sheds [ her ] skin through the film " , and also as " somewhat of a villain ... [ who ] definitely has an agenda " . She stated " Vickers is pragmatic , and desperately wants to control the situation . " Scott wanted the character to lurk in the background of scenes watching other characters instead of being the focus . Theron said that this helped layer her character because " you 're just so suspicious of her , instantly . " The similarities between the appearances and mannerisms of Vickers and David were intended to raise the possibility that David was based on Vickers 's DNA , or that Vickers is an android herself . After Theron was cast in the role , she developed three new scenes with Scott and Lindelof to expand her character . Physical action scenes , some of which involved her running through sand in 30 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) boots were a problem for Theron . It was intended that Theron would portray Shaw , but a prior commitment to Mad Max : Fury Road prevented her involvement . When that film was delayed , she was able to rejoin Prometheus . Michelle Yeoh and Angelina Jolie were considered for the role . 
 Idris Elba as Janek : 
 Janek is the captain of the Prometheus . Elba described the character as " a longshoreman and a sailor " , with a military background . He said , " [ being the captain is ] his life and the crew is his responsibility , " and " he 's a realistic , pragmatic character . He has to get involved ... in a film with huge ideas , you need a character like this , who can go ' Wait ... why are we doing this ? ' " . 
 Guy Pearce as Peter Weyland : 
 Weyland is the billionaire founder and CEO of Weyland Corp. Lindelof described him as having a massive ego and suffering from a god complex . Applying the necessary prosthetics and make @-@ up to transform Pearce into the elderly Weyland took five hours , and an hour to remove it . Pearce observed old people to gain insight into the movement for his character , as he found replicating the impeded physical movement the most difficult part of the role . Max von Sydow was Scott 's original choice to play Weyland , but the casting of Pearce made it possible for him to portray Weyland as both an elderly character , and a younger man who appeared in an earlier script draft . 
 Logan Marshall @-@ Green as Charlie Holloway : 
 Holloway is an archaeologist and Shaw 's love interest . Marshall @-@ Green was cast after he was seen performing on stage " off @-@ off @-@ off Broadway " . He described Holloway as the " X Games @-@ type scientist " , and said that he liked the character 's " leap @-@ before @-@ looking " philosophy . He also said that Holloway " doesn 't want to meet his maker . He wants to stand next to his maker . He 's willing to go to the edge to get that . " Describing the character 's motivation , he said : " he goes to the extreme in everything he does , sometimes for the better , sometimes for the worse of the [ Prometheus crew ] . I think what drives him is the thrill of the search . " Marshall @-@ Green contrasted Holloway with Shaw , and said : " she 's the believer . I 'm the scientist . I 'm the skeptic . I 'm the atheist " . 
 Sean Harris portrays Fifield , a geologist who has become mentally unstable after many missions . Harris described the character as " someone who can sense when things are up . He 's your audience guy , going , ' Don 't go in that tunnel . We should not be doing this ! ' " Fifield 's bright red mohawk hairstyle was designed by Harris and Scott , based on Scott 's sketch of a man with a " severe haircut " . Rafe Spall portrays Millburn , a biologist . Spall auditioned for another role , but Scott wanted him to play Millburn . On his casting , Spall said " Alien is one of the best films ever made , and it 's a real buzz to be in a space suit on an Alien set with Ridley Scott coming and speaking to you . It 's incredible . That 's why I wanted to be an actor , to be in a space suit on an Alien set " . 
 Other cast members include Kate Dickie as the ship 's medic , Ford ; <unk> Elliott and Benedict Wong as , respectively , ship pilots Chance and Ravel ; and Patrick Wilson as Shaw 's father . Ian Whyte and Daniel James portray Engineers . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The central theme in Prometheus concerns the eponymous Titan of Greek mythology who defies the gods and gifts humanity with fire , for which he is subjected to eternal punishment . The gods want to limit their creations in case they attempt to usurp the gods . The film deals with humanity 's relationship with the gods — their creators — and the consequence of defying them . A human expedition intends to find God and receive knowledge about belief , immortality and death . They find superior beings who appear god @-@ like in comparison to humanity , and the Prometheus crew suffer consequences for their pursuit . Shaw is directly responsible for the events of the plot because she wants her religious beliefs affirmed , and believes she is entitled to answers from God ; her questions remain unanswered and she is punished for her hubris . The film offers similar resolution , providing items of information but leaving the connections and conclusions to the audience , potentially leaving the question unanswered . Further religious allusions are implied by the Engineers ' decision to punish humanity with destruction 2 @,@ 000 years before the events of the film . Scott suggested that an Engineer was sent to Earth to stop humanity 's increasing aggression , but was crucified , implying it was Jesus Christ . However , Scott felt that an explicit connection in the film would be " a little too on the nose . " 
 Artificial intelligence , a unifying theme throughout Scott 's career as a director , is particularly evident in Prometheus , primarily through the android David . David , the android , is like humans but does not want to be like them , eschewing a common theme in " robotic storytelling " such as Blade Runner . David is created in the image of humanity , and while the human crew of the Prometheus ship searches for their creators expecting answers , David exists among his human creators yet is underwhelmed ; he questions his creators about why they are seeking their own . Lindelof described the ship as a prison for David . At the conclusion of the film , David 's creator ( Weyland ) is dead and his fundamental programming will end without someone to serve . Lindelof explained that David 's programming becomes unclear and that he could be programmed by Shaw or his own sense of curiosity . Following Weyland 's death , David is left with Shaw , and is sincere and interested in following her , partly out of survival and partly out of curiosity . 
 Another theme is creation and the question of " Who Am I ? Who Made Me ? Why <unk> Thou Forsaken Me ? " Development of the in @-@ universe mythology explored the Judeo @-@ Christian creation of man , but Scott was interested in Greco @-@ Roman and Aztec creation myths about gods who create man in their own image by sacrificing a piece of themselves . This creation is shown in the film 's opening in which an Engineer sacrifices itself after consuming the dark liquid , acting as a " gardener in space " to bring life to a world . One of their expeditions creates humanity , who create artificial life ( David ) in their own image . David then introduces the dark liquid to Holloway who impregnates a sterile Shaw , and the resulting child impregnates an Engineer , creating the child of all three generations . Scott likened the Engineers to the dark angels of John Milton 's Paradise Lost , and said that humanity was their offspring and not God 's . 
 Shaw is the only religious believer in the crew and openly displays her religious belief with a necklace of a Christian cross . Lindelof said that with her scientific knowledge , her beliefs felt outdated in 2093 . Shaw is excited when she learns that she was created by the Engineers and not a supernatural deity , but it does not cause her to lose her faith , it reinforces it . Lindelof said that asking questions and searching for meaning is the point of being alive , and so the audience is left to question whether Shaw was protected by God because of her faith . Scott wanted the film to end with Shaw 's declaration that she is still searching for definitive answers . In addition to the religious themes , Lindelof said that Prometheus is pro @-@ science and explores whether scientific knowledge and faith in God can co @-@ exist . 
 Beside drawing several influences from Paradise Lost , The Atlantic 's <unk> <unk> noted further influences , and wrote that " [ t ] he striking images Ridley Scott devises for Prometheus reference everything from Stanley Kubrick 's 2001 to Leonardo da Vinci 's Vitruvian Man and Mario Bava 's Planet of the Vampires . Scott also expands on the original Alien universe by creating a distinctly English mythology informed by Milton 's Paradise Lost and the symbolic drawings of William Blake . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development on a fifth film in the Alien franchise was in progress by 2002 . Scott considered returning to the series he created with his 1979 science fiction horror film Alien , to pursue a sequel that would explore the engineered origins of the series 's Alien creatures , and the " space jockey " — the extraterrestrial being , who briefly appears in Alien , as the deceased pilot of a derelict spaceship . Alien star Sigourney Weaver also expressed interest in returning to the series . Aliens director James Cameron discussed the potential for a sequel with Scott , and began working with another writer on a story for the film . It was then that 20th Century Fox approached Cameron with a script for a crossover film that would pit the series 's monsters against the title characters of the Predator films ; this project became the 2004 science fiction film Alien vs. Predator . After Fox confirmed that it would pursue the crossover , Cameron stopped working on his own project , believing the crossover would " kill the validity of the franchise . " In 2006 , Cameron confirmed that he would not return to the Alien sequel project , believing that the series was Fox 's asset , and he was unwilling to deal with the studio 's attempts to influence the potential sequel . 
 In May 2009 , Fox said that the project was a " reboot " of the Alien franchise , and soon afterwards was reported as an untitled prequel to Alien . Development stopped in June 2009 when Fox clashed with Scott over his selection of former television advertisement director Carl Erik <unk> as director . Fox was only interested in pursuing the project if Scott directed . By July 2009 , Scott was contracted to direct the film , and screenwriter Jon Spaihts was hired to write the script based on his pitched idea for a direct Alien prequel . With the director and writer in place , and pleased with Spaihts 's pitch , Fox scheduled a release date for December 2011 , but this was eventually canceled . In June 2010 , Scott announced that the script was complete and that pre @-@ production would begin , and a filming date was set for January 2011 . Fox eventually pushed to develop the project into an original work , and by July 2010 , Lindelof had been hired to redevelop Spaihts 's screenplay . In October 2010 , Lindelof submitted his rewritten screenplay to Fox . Scott had initially requested a $ 250 million budget and an adult oriented project , but Fox was reluctant to invest this amount of money , and wanted to ensure the film would receive a lower age @-@ rating to broaden the potential audience . 
 In December 2010 , it was reported that the film would be called Paradise , named after John Milton 's poem Paradise Lost , but Scott considered that this would convey too much information about the film . Fox CEO Thomas Rothman suggested Prometheus , which was confirmed as the title in January 2011 . A release date was scheduled for March 9 , 2012 , but weeks later the release was postponed until June 8 , 2012 . With the name confirmed , the production team began to publicly distance the film from its Alien origins , and were deliberately vague about the connection between the films , believing it would build audience anticipation for Prometheus . Scott stated that " while Alien was indeed the jumping @-@ off point for this project , out of the creative process evolved a new , grand mythology and universe in which this original story takes place . The keen fan will recognize strands of Alien 's DNA , so to speak , but the ideas tackled in this film are unique , large and provocative . " In June 2011 , Scott and Lindelof confirmed that Prometheus takes place in the same universe as the events of the Alien series . In July 2011 , Scott stated that " by the end of the third act you start to realize there 's a DNA of the very first Alien , but none of the subsequent [ films ] . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Spaihts met Scott in late 2009 and they discussed Scott 's desire to pursue an Alien prequel . Spaihts offered his concept , including a " bridge " that would connect the story of the film 's human characters to the Alien saga . Spaihts was quickly hired , which he credited to the reception of his " bridge " idea . Spaihts claimed he created the concept spontaneously , without preconception . Spaihts wrote a 20 @-@ page " extremely detailed outline " ; within three and a half weeks he had completed his first draft , and he submitted it to the producers on Christmas Day , 2009 . Within 12 hours , Scott returned the script with notes for changes , and Spaihts spent the Christmas holiday redrafting . 
 Spaihts was tasked with exploring unresolved mysteries from Alien , such as the Space Jockey . He considered the mysteries of Alien to be alien in nature , and said , " all the mysteries have alien players : the exoskeleton nightmare and ... the elephantine titan that was called the ' space jockey ' ... How do you make anyone care about events between creatures like this ? " His solution was to link the alien mysteries to the past and future of humanity . He said : " if that story is somehow ours , and deeply enmeshed with the human story . That story changes meaning within our own life , things of such significance that we think of our own lives differently . " Spaihts found translating Scott 's stylistic visual concepts to text difficult , and he periodically constrained some of Scott 's ideas . He reminded Scott that in the scene they were discussing , the characters were subject to gravity and so could not simply float . By April 2010 , the script was on the fourth draft . Scott said about the script , " we are talking about gods and engineers . Engineers of space . And were the aliens designed as a form of biological warfare ? Or biology that would go in and clean up a planet ? " In June 2010 , Scott announced that the script was complete and ready for filming . 
 However , Scott instead contacted Lindelof and asked him to review Spaihts 's script . Within the hour , a messenger delivered the script to Lindelof and informed him that he would wait outside to return it as soon as Lindelof had finished reading it . Lindelof was unaware of what Scott and the producers liked about the existing script , and informed them that he found the general concept appealing , but that the story relied too heavily on elements of the Alien films , such as the Alien creatures ' life @-@ cycle . As a direct prequel to Alien , it was focused on leading into that film 's story , and recreating the familiar cues of that series , and Scott wanted to avoid repeating his previous accomplishments . Lindelof said , " If the ending to [ Prometheus ] is just going to be the room that John Hurt walks into that 's full of [ alien ] eggs [ in Alien ] , there 's nothing interesting in that , because we know where it 's going to end . Good stories , you don 't know where they 're going to end . " " A true prequel should essentially precede the events of the original film , but be about something entirely different , feature different characters , have an entirely different theme , although it takes place in that same world . " 
 Lindelof said that the other parts of the script were strong enough to survive without the Alien hallmarks , such as the Alien creature , which he believed had been diluted by the exposure it had received . He said , " [ The producers ] were just looking for someone to say to them , Hey , we don 't need the Alien stuff in here . It shouldn 't be about that . It can be a part of this movie , but it shouldn 't be what it 's about . " Lindelof said that the film could instead run parallel to the Alien series , and that a sequel would be Prometheus 2 and not Alien , and submitted an idea for how such a sequel could work . Lindelof met with the producers the following morning , and was hired shortly afterwards in late 2010 . Under Lindelof , the script diverged from Spaihts 's Alien prequel into an original creation . Scott and Lindelof worked together five days a week between July and August 2010 to construct the vision Scott wanted to convey and decide what script changes were needed , including scaling back the Alien symbolism and tropes . In August and September 2010 , Lindelof spent almost five weeks writing his first draft , which he submitted in mid @-@ September 2010 . Inspired by Blade Runner and Spaihts 's script , Lindelof thought that it would be possible to combine an Alien story of action and horror with " the Blade Runner thematic , " to ask bigger questions than he felt were normally posed in science fiction films . Lindelof said , 
 Blade Runner might not have done well [ financially ] when it first came out , but people are still talking about it because it was infused with all these big ideas . [ Scott ] was also talking about very big themes in Prometheus . It was being driven by people who wanted the answers to huge questions . But I thought that we could do that without ever getting too pretentious . Nobody wants to see a movie where people are floating in space talking about the meaning of life ... That was already present in [ Spaihts 's ] original script and [ Scott ] just wanted to bring it up more . 
 Scott 's story concept was partially inspired by Chariots of the Gods ? , Erich von Däniken 's work about the theory of ancient astronauts which hypothesizes that life on Earth was created by aliens . Scott said , " NASA and the Vatican agree that [ it is ] almost mathematically impossible that we can be where we are today without there being a little help along the way ... That 's what we 're looking at [ in the film ] , at some of Erich von Däniken 's ideas of how did we humans come about . " Spaihts originated the idea that David , the android , is like humans but does not want to be anything like them , eschewing a common theme in " robotic storytelling " such as Blade Runner . He also developed the theme that while the human crew are searching for their creators , David is already among its creators . Scott liked these ideas and further explored them in Lindelof 's rewrite . For Shaw , Lindelof felt it was important that she was distinct from Alien 's Ripley , to avoid inevitable comparisons between the two characters . In Spaihts 's draft , Shaw was directly responsible for the events of the plot because she wants to seek out potentially dangerous knowledge . As with David , Lindelof expanded this facet of the character during his rewrites . He spent approximately eight months developing the script , finishing in March 2011 as filming began . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Pre @-@ production began in April 2010 . A team developed graphic designs for the film . Scott convinced Fox to invest millions of dollars to hire scientists and conceptual artists to develop a vision of the late 21st century . The production of Prometheus was marked by a high degree of secrecy and story details were kept " extremely under @-@ wraps . " Ridley Scott was determined to maintain the secrecy of the plot , and he required the cast to sign clauses to prevent them disclosing story details , and the cast were only allowed to read the script under supervision in Scott 's production office . One exception was made when a courier flew to one actor outside the US , and then stood guard while the actor read the script . Scott said , " I was insistent that the script not leak onto the internet , where it gets dissected out of context , which spoils it for everyone . " 
 In July 2011 , Lindelof said that the film would rely upon practical effects , and would use CGI generally for on @-@ set pre @-@ visualization of external space visuals . Scott said that " you can pretty much do anything you want " with digital technology , and , " Doug Trumbull once said to me ' If you can do it live , do it live . ' That was 29 years ago . Even though we have remarkable digital capabilities I still say do it live . It 's cheaper . " Cinematographer Dariusz Wolski convinced Scott that it would be possible to film in 3D with the same ease and efficiency of 2D filming . 3D company 3ality Technica provided some of the rigs and equipment to facilitate 3D filming , and trained the film 's crew in their proper operation . According to Scott , the decision to film in 3D added $ 10 million to the film 's budget . Since 3D films need high lighting levels on set , the hallmark dark and shadowy atmosphere of the Alien films was added in post @-@ production using color grading processes , and the 3D equipment was based on post @-@ Avatar technology . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Principal photography began on March 21 , 2011 , lasted 82 days , and had an estimated $ 120 – 130 million budget . Filming began at Shepperton Studios and Pinewood Studios in England . Scott used eight sound stages for filming , including the 007 Stage . Studio space was limited and the crew had to make five stages work for approximately 16 sets , and increased the size of the 007 stage by over 30 % . 
 Exterior shots of the alien world were shot in Iceland , where filming occurred for two weeks . It commenced on July 11 , 2011 , at the base of Hekla , an active volcano in southern Iceland . Speaking about working at the volcano , Scott said , " If one is afraid of nature in this profession then it would be best to find a different job " . Filming also took place at <unk> , one of the most powerful waterfalls in Europe . The Iceland shoot involved 160 Icelandic crew members and over 200 imported crew . Scott said that the filming in Iceland comprised approximately fifteen minutes of footage for the film , and that the area represented the beginning of time . Morocco had been chosen as a location for these scenes , but the 2010 Arab Spring protests forced the change of venue . Alternatives including the Mojave Desert had been considered , but Scott explained that Iceland was ultimately chosen because " here it is so rough and ' Jurassic @-@ like ' and that proved decisive " . 
 In September 2011 , filming moved to the Ciudad de la Luz audiovisual complex in Alicante , Spain . Shooting areas included the complex 's large water tank , and a nearby beach . The complex was booked from August 22 , 2011 , through to December 10 , 2011 , and set construction occurred from August until late September . Approximately 250 people worked on the three @-@ month @-@ long Spain shoot , generating over € 1 million in the local economy . Filming also took place in the Wadi Rum valley in Jordan . 
 Scott avoided using green screens unless necessary . Instead , he used various items so the actors would know where they should be looking in any particular scene on the practical sets where CGI elements would be inserted in post @-@ production . Rapace said that green screens were used fewer than six times during filming . The production used five 3ality Technical Atom 3D rigs , four of which were configured with Red Epic 3D cameras set on camera dollies and tripods , which were continuously in use during filming . The fifth rig used an Epic camera as a steadicam , which was used only occasionally . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Scott focused on using the 3D footage to increase the illusion of depth . Despite this being his first 3D film he found the process easy . He said , " You can literally <unk> a knob and the depth will increase " , and , " the trick is not to overdo it " . In December 2011 , Rapace undertook additional dialogue recordings for the film . Additional pick @-@ up scenes were filmed during January 2012 , including a one @-@ day shoot on the Isle of Skye , Scotland , and a new scene shot at a cave in the Scottish mountains . For dark scenes , the film was color graded to specifically compensate for the light loss of 3D glasses , to ensure the image was comparable to the 2D version . 
 In July 2011 , Scott said that he was filming Prometheus with both adult @-@ oriented R and more accessible PG @-@ 13 film ratings in mind , allowing the more adult content to be cut if necessary without harming the overall presentation . Scott said he had a responsibility to 20th Century Fox to be able to present a PG @-@ 13 cut of the film if the studio demanded , allowing it to be viewed by a wider potential audience . When asked about the rating , Scott said , " the question is , do you go for the PG @-@ 13 , or do you go for what it should be , which is R ? Financially it makes quite a difference ... essentially it 's kinda R ... it 's not just about blood , it 's about ideas that are very stressful . " Scott also said that , regardless of rating , he would present the most aggressive cut of the film he could , while Rothman said that Scott would not be forced to compromise the film 's quality to avoid an R @-@ rating . On May 7 , 2012 , Fox confirmed that the film had received an R @-@ rating and would be released without any cuts being made . According to Scott , the scene of Shaw surgically removing her alien offspring was the significant cause of the restrictive rating , and it was suggested that removing the scene entirely would be the only way to gain a lower one . A fight scene between Shaw and the Engineer was shortened because Scott decided that Shaw directly wounding the Engineer diminished his role . Scott concluded work on the film in March 2012 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Marc Streitenfeld , who had worked with Scott on earlier projects , composed the musical score for Prometheus . It took just over a week to record with a 90 @-@ piece orchestra at Abbey Road Studios in London , England . Streitenfeld began writing ideas for the score after reading the script before filming commenced . He used some unusual techniques to compose the score , and said , " I actually wrote out the sheet music backwards so the orchestra played it backwards and then I digitally flipped it . So you 're hearing the score as it 's written , the same melody , but with a backwards sounding orchestra which gives it a kind of unusual , unsettling sound . " The Prometheus ( Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) album was released on iTunes on May 15 , 2012 , and on CD on June 4 , 2012 . It features 23 tracks by Streitenfeld and two supplemental tracks by Harry Gregson @-@ Williams . Frédéric Chopin 's " Raindrop prelude " ( 1838 ) is also featured in the film . 
 = = Design = = 
 Production designer Arthur Max led the film 's design staff . His art team were tasked with deconstructing the art and visuals of Alien , and reverse @-@ designing them for the chronologically earlier setting of Prometheus . Influence was drawn from the work of Alien creature designer H. R. Giger , and designers Ron Cobb and Chris Foss , including their designs for that film which Scott had been unable to develop at the time . 
 = = = Costumes and sound = = = 
 For the crew 's space suits , Scott was inspired to include spherical glass helmets after reading a story in Steve Jobs ' biography about building an office out of Gorilla Glass . Scott said , " If I 'm in <unk> and I 'm going into space , why would I design a helmet that has blind spots . What I want is something where I have 360 [ vision ] . Glass , by then , will be light and you won 't be able to break it with a bullet . " The interior of the prop helmets had nine functioning video screens , internal lighting , an air supply provided by two fans , and battery packs concealed within a backpack . The helmet 's exterior featured a functional light source and high definition video cameras with a transmitter and recorder . For the suit itself , Scott wanted to avoid the unwieldy NASA @-@ style suit . His frequent collaborator , <unk> Yates , used medical research concepts relating to skin replacement treatments and materials to develop a garment that would be believable , flexible and comfortable . The outfit comprised a neoprene suit worn under an outer space suit , a base to which the helmet could be attached , and a backpack . 
 Aboard the ship , Yates gave the characters their own distinct looks . Theron is dressed in an ice @-@ silver , silk mohair suit . Yates said , " [ Theron ] is the ice queen . It was always our vision to make her look as sculptural as possible " . Fassbender 's David is dressed similarly to other crew members , but his outfit was given finer lines to produce a more linear appearance . To create a casual , relaxed appearance , Marshall @-@ Green 's Holloway was dressed in hoodies , fisherman pants , and flip @-@ flops , while Elba wore a canvas @-@ greased jacket to represent his long career at the helm of a ship . 
 Sound effects were generated with a variety of sources including Pop Rocks — a brand of popping candy — and a parrot . The glistening ice forming on the stone cylinders discovered in the film was created by applying the popping candy to materials such as wet metal and stone that was then sprayed with water to produce the " popping , cracking " sound . Sound designer Ann <unk> 's parrot was recorded over several weeks to document her variety of vocalizations which were then used as beeps , alarms and the cries of Shaw 's alien offspring . 
 = = = Sets and vehicles = = = 
 Arthur Max designed the sets such as the alien world landscape and structures , and the vehicles , including the Prometheus and the Engineer 's ship . Digital 3D models and miniature replicas of each set were built to allow the designers to envisage the connections between them and to know where the CGI elements would be inserted . To better blend the practical and the digital , the design team took rock samples from the Iceland location so they could match the graphical textures with the real rocks . To create the Prometheus , Max researched NASA and European Space Agency spacecraft designs , and extended these concepts with his own ideas of how future space vehicles might look . He said that he wanted " to do something that was state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art , which would represent a flagship spacecraft with every technology required to probe into the deepest corners of the galaxy . " 
 The interior of the Prometheus was built across a two @-@ level structure , fronted by a large , faceted , wrap around windscreen . Theron 's quarters were designed to represent her high status in the crew , and were furnished with modern and futuristic items , including Swarovski chandeliers and a <unk> piano . The ship 's garage was built on the backlot of Pinewood Studios in England . The vehicles inside were built in 11 weeks and were designed to operate on difficult terrain while having a futuristic aesthetic . Max created a large pyramid structure for the alien world , which had its main interior areas connected by a series of chambers , corridors , and tunnels ; it was so large that some members of the film crew became lost inside it . The pyramid was enhanced in post @-@ production to further increase its size . One of the key sets , the chamber where the crew find the humanoid @-@ head statue , was designed to resemble the interior of a cathedral and convey a quasi @-@ religious impression . Giger designed the murals that appear within the chamber . 
 For the scene of the Prometheus ' descent to the alien moon LV @-@ 223 , visual effects art director Steven Messing referenced NASA imagery , including vortex cloud structures . He also used aerial photographs of locations in Iceland and Wadi Rum shot by VFX supervisor Richard Stammers and his team . Messing painted over these images and combined them with 3D set extensions to create a realistic altered landscape . Scott wanted the ship 's descent scenes to have a sense of grandeur to contrast the dark and shrouded descent featured in Alien . Much of LV @-@ <unk> world was based upon the world visited in Alien , but scaled back as Scott felt some elements were too unrealistic . Other influences were the Martian mountain Olympus Mons and several large mountain structures on Earth . NASA advisers provided concepts for the aesthetics of alien worlds which were incorporated into the design work . MPC developed a digital representation of Wadi Rum using the design material , modified it to locate the alien pyramid and a landing area for the Prometheus , and resized the planet 's natural features relative to the alien structures . 
 = = = Creature effects = = = 
 Neal Scanlan and Conor O 'Sullivan developed the film 's alien creatures , aiming to convey that each creature has a logical biological function and purpose . Scanlan said that much of Scott 's inspiration for creature design is drawn from natural life , such as plants and sea creatures . Creature designer Carlos Huante chose to make the creature designs pale to contrast the black @-@ toned , Giger @-@ influenced aesthetic of Alien . Huante designed them to be white and embryonic because the events in the film occur before Giger 's influence had taken effect . Huante took influences from references Scott was using to design the pale @-@ skinned Engineers . Huante also referenced other Giger works , national monuments , large sculptures , and the Crazy Horse Memorial statue in South Dakota . Part of Huante 's early design work included developing precursors to Alien 's Facehugger , and a primitive Alien creature , but these were cut from the final release . When designing the Engineers , Scott and Huante referenced paintings by William Blake and J. M. W. Turner , and classical sculptures . Scott wanted the Engineers to resemble Greco @-@ Roman gods , and instructed designer Neville Page to reference the Statue of Liberty , Michelangelo 's David , and Elvis Presley . The 8 @-@ foot tall , humanoid Engineers were created by applying bulky , full @-@ body prosthetics to the actors , whose facial features were diminished by the material , and were later digitally enhanced to preserve the " godlike " physical perfection . Scott described the Engineers as tall , elegant " dark angels " . 
 The snake @-@ like alien dubbed the " Hammerpede " was given life through a mixture of CGI and practical effects , and the wires controlling the practical puppet were digitally removed . For a scene in which the Hammerpede is decapitated , the VFX team digitally animated and inserted the spontaneous growth of a replacement head . During the scene in which the Hammerpede erupts from Spall 's character 's corpse , Scott controlled the puppet using wires . Scott did not inform Dickie about what was to occur in the scene and her screaming reaction was real . The creature 's design was partially inspired by translucent sea creatures with visible arteries , veins , and organs beneath the skin 's surface , and cobras . The designers gave the creature a smooth , muscular , and powerful appearance . Early designs of the " Trilobite " , the tentacled offspring cut from Shaw , resembled an octopus or squid . Page redeveloped this creature as an embryo in an early state of development , with tentacles that began fused together and would gradually split , creating new tentacles , as the creature developed . The practical creature was a remotely operated animatronic creation with a silicone skin . 
 The mutated Fifield effects were achieved mainly through the use of make @-@ up and prosthetics . Due to concerns that the practical effects would be unsatisfactory , the filmmakers completed an alternative version of the sequence , in which Fifield was rendered as " a digital character with elongated limbs and an engorged , translucent head , incorporating a semblance of Harris 's face " . Three other variations of the mutated Fifield were modeled , but these were rejected as being too inhuman . 
 For its grown form , the " Adult Trilobite " , Max found inspiration from an arthropod @-@ like creature from Earth 's Cambrian period , and the alien octopus in Jean Giraud 's illustrations for the comic strip The Long Tomorrow . Further inspiration came after Max found a formaldehyde @-@ preserved giant squid , an image which met with Scott 's approval . The film 's last @-@ unveiled creature , the " Deacon " , was named by Scott for its long , pointed head that he considered resembled a bishop 's mitre . Scanlan aimed to represent the creature 's genetic lineage , beginning with Shaw and Holloway who produce the Trilobite which impregnates the Engineer , in its design . However , they focused on making the creature feminine , and said that " it was born of a female before being born of a male . " Messing drew inspiration for the Deacon 's birth scene from the birth of foals , and created an iridescent appearance for its skin , based on the equine placenta . The Deacon 's protruding jaw was inspired by the goblin shark . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Prometheus contains approximately 1 @,@ 300 digital effect shots . The main effects studio was Moving Picture Company ( MPC ) , which produced 420 of the shots . Several other studios , including Weta Digital , Fuel VFX , Rising Sun Pictures , Luma Pictures , Lola Visual Effects , and Hammerhead Productions , also produced effects shots for the film . 
 The creation of life from the disintegration of an Engineer in the film 's opening scene was created by WETA Digital . The scene was difficult to produce because it had to convey the story of the Engineer 's DNA breaking apart , reforming and recombining into Earth DNA in a limited span of time . The team focused on making the DNA stages distinct to convey its changing nature . Scott requested the studio to focus on the destruction occurring within the Engineer . A light color scheme was used for the Engineer 's DNA and decayed fish spines were used as an image reference , while the infected DNA had a melted appearance . To find methods of depicting the DNA destruction , the team carved vein @-@ like structures from silicone and pumped black ink and oils into them while filming the changes occurring over an extended period of time . 
 A key scene involving a large 3D hologram star map , dubbed the Orrery , was inspired by the 1766 Joseph Wright painting A Philosopher Lecturing on the Orrery , in which a scientist displays a mechanical planetarium by candlelight . While discussing the necessity of a star map with Spaihts , Scott mentioned that he envisaged a physical representation being similar to the painting , although he was unaware of its title and described it as " circles in circles with a candle lit image " . Using Scott 's description , Spaihts located an image of the painting . Spaihts said , " making the leap from a star map , to an Enlightenment painting , and then back into the far future . [ Scott 's ] mind just multiplexes in that way " . The Orrery was one of the most complex visual effects , contained 80 – 100 million polygons , and took several weeks to render as a single , complete shot . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Prometheus ' marketing campaign began on July 21 , 2011 at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , where images and footage from the film were presented by Lindelof and Theron ; Scott and Rapace participated via satellite contribution . A segment of the footage showed Theron performing naked push @-@ ups , which attracted much attention . A teaser poster was released on December 14 , 2011 , with the tagline , " The search for our beginning could lead to our end . " A bootleg recording of an incomplete trailer was leaked online on November 27 , 2011 , but was swiftly taken down by Fox . The trailer was released on December 22 , 2011 . 
 On March 17 , 2012 , Scott , in partnership with AMC Theaters , hosted the premiere of the first full Prometheus trailer at the AMC Downtown Disney during WonderCon in Anaheim , California . The event was streamed live via Facebook , Twitter , and the AMC Theater website , and the trailer was posted on AMC 's YouTube channel immediately after its debut . Reactions to the trailer from WonderCon attendees , and on Twitter , were generally positive , and it received nearly three million views in the three days following its release . On April 10 , 2012 , media outlets were shown a 13 @-@ minute montage of scenes in 3D from the film 's opening at the Vue Cinema in Leicester Square , London . The screening , and in particular the 3D visuals and the performances of Fassbender , Rapace , Theron , and Elba , was well received . 
 On April 29 , 2012 , the international launch trailer debuted in the United Kingdom on Channel 4 during the first advertisement break of the TV show Homeland . Viewers were encouraged to share their opinions about the trailer on Twitter , some of which were then shared in a live broadcast during a later break . This was the first time that viewers ' tweets were used in a broadcast advertisement . A competition , offering viewers a chance to win tickets to the film whenever the social platform <unk> detected the advertisement airing , was launched on that site . On May 8 , 2012 , the advertisement became the subject of an investigation by the British broadcasting regulatory body Ofcom for allegedly breaching broadcast rules when a voiceover encouraged viewers to book tickets during the advertisement with the Channel 4 logo onscreen . The broadcast potentially broke a ruling that advertising and <unk> must be clearly distinguishable from editorial content . 
 Although marketers typically avoid promoting adult @-@ oriented films to reach a broader demographic , the film attracted several promotional partners including Coors , Amazon , and Verizon FiOS , which were estimated to have spent $ 30 million in marketing support . Amazon directed interested users to purchase tickets through Fandango , and placed promotional material in products shipped to customers ; this was the first time that Amazon had allowed such marketing by an external company . The premiere in London was streamed live via the film 's website and the Verizon FiOS Facebook page . The event was facilitated by <unk> , which took audience questions from social sites and gave them to reporters to ask at the event . The National Entertainment Collectibles Association ( NECA ) released a series of Prometheus action figures in September 2012 . A book , Prometheus : The Art of the Film , containing production art and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes photographs , was released on June 12 , 2012 . 
 = = = Viral campaign = = = 
 A viral marketing campaign began on February 28 , 2012 , with the release of a video featuring a speech by Pearce , in character as Peter Weyland , about his vision for the future . Set in 2023 , the video presents a futuristic vision of a TED conference , an annual technology and design event held in Long Beach , California . The segment was conceived and designed by Scott and Lindelof , and directed by Scott 's son , Luke . The production was made in collaboration with , and made available through TED because Lindelof wanted to introduce new audiences to the conference itself . Lindelof said that the scene takes place in a futuristic stadium because " a guy like Peter Weyland — whose ego is just massive , and the ideas that he 's advancing are nothing short of hubris — that he 'd basically say to TED , ' If you want me to give a talk , I 'm giving it in Wembley Stadium . ' " 
 TED community director Tom Rielly helped the film 's producers gain approval for the use of the TED brand , which had not previously been used for promotional purposes . Rielly was involved in designing the 2023 conference , and said that the association generated millions of unique visits to the TED website . The video 's release was accompanied by a fictional TED blog about the 2023 conference and a tie @-@ in website for the fictional Weyland Corporation . On March 6 , 2012 , the Weyland website was updated to allow visitors to invest in the company as part of a game , which would reveal new Prometheus media . 
 During the 2012 WonderCon , attendees at the film 's panel were given Weyland Corporation business cards that directed them to a website and telephone number . After calling the number , the caller was sent a text message from Weyland Corporation that linked them to a video that was presented as an advertisement for the " David 8 " android , narrated by Fassbender . An extended version of the video , released on April 17 , 2012 , lists the android 's features , including its ability to seamlessly replicate human emotions without the restrictions of ethics or distress . A full page " David 8 " advertisement was placed in The Wall Street Journal ; a Twitter account operated by a <unk> , that allowed Twitter users to ask the character questions , was included . A partnership with Verizon FiOS was launched , offering a virtual tour of the Prometheus spaceship . Another video , " Quiet Eye " , starring Rapace as Shaw , was released on May 16 , 2012 , and debuted on the Verizon <unk> Facebook page . In a telephone call monitored by Yutani , a fictional company from the Alien series , Shaw requests Weyland 's aid to seek out alien life . In France , the Saint @-@ Martin ghost train station was converted to resemble alien architecture from the film , and was visible to passing commuters . The campaign continued after the film 's release with a website that was listed during the film 's end credits . The site referenced the philosophical novel Thus Spoke Zarathustra by Friedrich Nietzsche , and featured a video of Weyland , who quotes from the book . Another video followed in September 2012 , featuring Elba 's Captain Janek preparing for a mission . 
 At the May 2012 Digital Hollywood conference , Lindelof said that the videos originated from the question of the film 's status as an Alien prequel . It was decided that creating videos with the film 's stars would generate more interest than any commentary about its connection to the Alien films . He also said that the videos needed to be cool enough to justify their existence , but not so important that their absence from the final film would be an issue for audiences . 
 = = Release = = 
 The premiere of Prometheus took place on May 31 , 2012 , at the Empire cinema in Leicester Square , London . The film was released in the United Kingdom on June 1 , 2012 , and in North America on June 8 , 2012 . It was simultaneously released in IMAX theaters and in 3D , and it is encoded for D @-@ Box motion seats that provide physical feedback to the audience during the film . 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , approximately £ 1 million ( $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) of tickets were pre @-@ sold . 18 @,@ 827 tickets pre @-@ sold for the London IMAX , the largest IMAX screen in the country , which broke the theater records for the highest grossing week of pre @-@ sales with £ 293 @,@ 312 ( $ 474 @,@ 687 ) , and the highest grossing first day of pre @-@ sales with £ 137 @,@ 000 ( $ 221 @,@ 717 ) . It extended this record to 30 @,@ 000 tickets sold and £ 470 @,@ 977 ( $ 737 @,@ 588 ) earned , and become the most pre @-@ booked film at that theater , exceeding the performance of high @-@ profile IMAX releases including Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 2 and Avatar . 
 In North America , audience tracking showed high interest among males , but low among females . In the week before the film 's release , predictions were conflicted on whether Prometheus or Madagascar 3 : Europe 's Most Wanted ( the first family @-@ oriented film of the summer ) , which were released simultaneously , would reach number 1 for that weekend . On June 6 , 2012 , Fandango reported that with 42 % of daily sales Prometheus was beating Madagascar 3 . The online tracking for Prometheus surged with each additional promotional footage . Prometheus was predicted to earn approximately $ 30 million , and Madagascar 3 around $ 45 million . As the weekend approached , tracking suggested a $ 55 million debut for Madagascar 3 and $ 50 – $ 55 million for Prometheus . Prometheus was disadvantaged by Madagascar opening in 264 more theaters and its adult rating . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Prometheus was considered a financial success overall . After a strong start in North America , the film failed to meet the studio 's expectations , but it continued to perform strongly in other territories until the end of its theatrical run . Prometheus earned $ 126 @,@ 477 @,@ 084 ( 31 @.@ 4 % ) in North America and $ 276 @,@ 877 @,@ 385 ( 68 @.@ 6 % ) elsewhere for a worldwide total of $ 403 @,@ 354 @,@ 469 , making it the 15th highest grossing film of 2012 , and the 159th highest @-@ grossing film worldwide unadjusted for inflation . 
 Prometheus was released in 15 markets between May 30 and June 1 , 2012 — about a week before its North American release . The earlier start in these countries was timed to avoid competition with the start of the 2012 UEFA European Football Championship the following week . On its opening day , which varies depending on the country , it earned $ 3 @.@ 39 million in the United Kingdom , $ 2 @.@ 2 million in Russia , and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in France . The film earned $ 34 @.@ 8 million during its opening weekend from 4 @,@ 695 theaters in 15 markets , and debuted at number 1 in 14 of them , with an average of $ 7 @,@ 461 per theater . Its overall rank for the weekend was third behind Men in Black 3 and Snow White & the Huntsman . Its opening weekends in the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta ( $ 10 @.@ 1 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 9 @.@ 80 million ) , and France and the Maghreb region ( $ 6 @.@ 68 million ) represented its largest takings . By June 8 , the film had opened in a total of 50 markets , and was also successful during its opening weekends in Australia ( $ 7 @.@ 2 million ) and South Korea ( $ 4 @.@ 2 million ) . During its late August opening in Japan , the film earned $ 9 @.@ 6 million . 
 In North America , Prometheus earned $ 3 @.@ 561 million in midnight showings at 1 @,@ 368 theaters , including $ 1 @.@ 03 million from 294 IMAX theaters , and went on to earn $ 21 @.@ 4 million through its opening day . During its opening weekend , the film earned $ 51 @.@ 05 million from 3 @,@ 396 theaters — an average of $ 15 @,@ 032 per theater — ranking second behind Madagascar 3 ( $ 60 @.@ 4 million ) , which made it the second largest opening for a film directed by Scott behind his 2001 thriller Hannibal , the third largest second @-@ place opening , the ninth largest opening for a prequel , and the tenth largest for an R @-@ rated film . The largest demographic of the opening weekend audience was over the age of 25 ( 64 % ) and male ( 57 % ) . 3D showings accounted for 54 % of ticket sales , while IMAX contributed 18 % — the majority of which was accounted for in the 3D figure . The film closed on September 20 , 2012 after 105 days ( 15 weeks ) in release with a total gross of $ 126 @.@ 4 million . The figure made it the number 43 highest grossing film to never finish a week as the number 1 film . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film garnered a 73 % approval rating from 273 critics — an average rating of 6 @.@ 9 out of 10 — on the review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , which said , " Ridley Scott 's ambitious quasi @-@ prequel to Alien may not answer all of its big questions , but it 's redeemed by its haunting visual grandeur and compelling performances — particularly Michael Fassbender as a fastidious android . " Metacritic provides a score of 65 out of 100 from 42 critics , which indicates " generally favorable " reviews . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was a " B " on a scale of A + to F , with audience members under 25 rating it the highest at A- . Reviews frequently praised both the film 's visual aesthetic and design , and Fassbender 's performance as the android David received almost universal acclaim . However the plot drew a mixed response from critics , who criticized plot elements that remained unresolved or were predictable , tempered by appreciation for the action and horror set @-@ pieces . 
 The Hollywood Reporter 's Todd McCarthy called the film 's visuals vivid , stunning , and magnificent on a technical level , and praised the performances of Fassbender , Rapace , and Theron , but wrote that the film " caters too much to imagined audience expectations when a little more adventurous thought might have taken it to some excitingly unsuspected destinations . " Time Out London 's Tom Huddleston wrote that " the photography is pleasingly crisp and the design is stunning " , but that , " [ t ] he script feels flat ... the dialogue is lazy , while the plot , though crammed with striking concepts , simply fails to coalesce . After an enjoyable setup , the central act is baggy , confusing and , in places , slightly boring , while the climax has flash and fireworks but no real momentum . " Emanuel Levy wrote that the writing was his only complaint about the film , which , he said , " is not only uneven , but promises more original ideas and thematic provocations than it can possibly deliver . " Roger Ebert gave the film 4 out of 4 stars , labeling it a " seamless blend of story , special effects and pitch @-@ perfect casting , filmed in sane , effective 3 @-@ D that doesn 't distract . " Ebert wrote that Rapace 's performance " continues here the tradition of awesome feminine strength begun by Sigourney Weaver in Alien " , but considered that Elba 's Janek has the most interesting character evolution . Ebert thought that the plot raises questions and does not answer them , which made the film intriguing and parallel to the " classic tradition of golden age sci @-@ fi " . He later went on to name it as one of the best films of 2012 . 
 Total Film 's Jonathan Crocker wrote that the plot successfully integrated itself with Alien 's mythology while offering its own original ideas . Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum was positive towards the cast , particularly Rapace , and the cinematography . Salon 's Andrew O 'Hehir wrote that the film was " somber , spectacular and ponderous , " but that the " <unk> and grandiosity ... is at once the film 's great strength and great weakness " and criticized the characters for lacking common sense . O 'Hehir also mentioned Wolski 's cinematography and Max 's production design . The New York Times ' A. O. Scott criticized the story as weak , and argued that the narrative 's twists and reversals undermine its " lofty , mindblowing potential " . He said the film has no revelations , just " bits of momentarily surprising information bereft of meaning or resonance " , and that Rapace is a " fine heroine , vulnerable and determined " . 
 Variety film critic Justin Chang wrote that the film 's narrative structure was unable to handle the philosophical dimension of the plot , and that Prometheus was lazily deferring key plot points under the presumption that a sequel would be made . The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw wrote that Prometheus was " more grandiose , more elaborate — but less interesting " than Alien , and lacked the latter 's " central killer punch " . Ian Nathan of Empire magazine was unimpressed by Rapace — whom he described as an unconvincing lead — and said that with " a lack of suspense , threadbare characters , and a very poor script , the stunning visuals , gloopy madness , and sterling <unk> can 't prevent Prometheus feeling like Alien 's poor relation . " The Village Voice 's Nick Pinkerton wrote that the film is " prone to shallow <unk> " , and that Scott " can still mimic the appearance of an epic , noble , important movie — but the appearance is all . " He criticized Rapace and Marshall @-@ Green for failing to instill interest in their characters ' relationship , but added : " there are a few set pieces here that will find a place of honor among aficionados of body horror and all things clammy and viscous " . 
 James Cameron said : " I enjoyed Prometheus . I thought it was great . I thought it was Ridley returning to science fiction with gusto , with great tactical performance , beautiful photography , great native 3D . There might have been a few things that I would have done differently , but that 's not the point — you could say that about any movie . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In North America , Prometheus DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc releases were listed for pre @-@ order in partnership with Amazon on June 1 , 2012 , a week before the film was released in theaters . A limited number of cinema tickets for the film were offered as a pre @-@ order incentive . In June 2012 , FX obtained the rights to the film 's network television premiere . On September 7 , 2012 , Fox announced that Prometheus would be the launch title of its new digital distribution initiative " Digital HD " . The film was released on September 18 , 2012 , three weeks prior to its DVD , Blu @-@ ray disc and Video on demand ( VOD ) release , for downloading and streaming through platforms including Amazon , iTunes , PlayStation Network and Xbox Live in over 50 countries . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray disc and DVD on October 9 , 2012 . The Blu @-@ ray disc edition of the film was released in a 2 @-@ disc set and a 4 @-@ disc " Collector 's Edition " . Both versions contain the theatrical cut of Prometheus , commentary by Scott , Lindelof and Spaihts , a DVD and digital copy of the film , alternate and deleted scenes , and other features . Additionally , the Collector 's Edition contains the 3D version of the film and approximately 7 hours of supplemental features including a documentary on the film 's production . On October 8 , 2012 , it was reported that Fox had requested an extended version of the film for home media , but Scott refused to edit cut scenes back into the theatrical version of the film , which he considered his director 's cut . During its first week of sale in the United Kingdom , Prometheus was the number 1 selling film on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc , outselling its nearest competitor by a factor of three . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On March 17 , 2012 , Scott said that the film leaves many questions unanswered and that these could be answered in a sequel . He said , " If we 're lucky , there 'll be a second part . It does leave you with some nice open questions . " Asked whether a sequel would be a direct prequel to Alien , Lindelof said : " If we 're fortunate enough to do a sequel ... it will <unk> even further away from the original Alien . " In June 2012 , Lindelof said that while plot elements were deliberately left unresolved so that they could be answered in a sequel , he and Scott had thoroughly discussed what should be resolved so that Prometheus could stand alone , as a sequel was not guaranteed . Scott said that a sequel would follow Shaw to her next destination , " because if it is paradise , paradise cannot be what you think it is . Paradise has a connotation of being extremely sinister and ominous . " Lindelof cast doubt on his participation , and said , " if [ Scott ] wants me to be involved in something , that would be hard to say no to . At the same time , I do feel like [ Prometheus ] might benefit from a fresh voice or a fresh take or a fresh thought . " Scott said that an additional film would be required to bridge the gap between the Prometheus sequel and Alien . Scott later stated it would take an additional two sequels to bridge the gap to Alien . 
 As of August 1 , 2012 , Fox was pursuing a sequel with Scott , Rapace , and Fassbender involved , and was talking to new writers in case Lindelof did not return . The film would be scheduled for a release no earlier than 2014 . In December 2012 , Lindelof had decided not to work on a sequel , citing other commitments . In June 2013 , Jack Paglen was in negotiations to write the sequel . In October 2013 , Scott confirmed that the script was complete , but in March 2014 , Michael Green was hired to rewrite Paglen 's script . In August 2015 , it was announced that production for the film would begin in January 2016 with Michael Fassbender and Noomi Rapace reprising their roles , and Scott directing . While at the Toronto Film Festival to promote his film The Martian , Scott stated that production on the film will begin in February 2016 . In September 2015 , Scott said that the title of the sequel will be Alien : Paradise Lost , an allusion to John Milton 's epic poem which may also suggest a deeper connection with the Alien franchise . In an interview with Empire , Scott said that the title change did not affect the film 's story and the film will have a connection to the character of Ellen Ripley . 
 In October 2015 , Deadline.com reported that Rebecca Ferguson is in negotiations for a role . In November 2015 , Scott announced that the film was retitled Alien : Covenant . In December 2015 , Deadline reports that actress Katherine Waterston was cast in the lead role of Daniels . Alien : Covenant will take place ten years after the events of Prometheus . Scott has stated that the sequel will be a hard R rating . In February 2016 , Danny McBride entered negotiations to join the film as a crew member of the Covenant ship. along with Demian Bichir , <unk> Smollett , Amy <unk> , Carmen <unk> , Callie Hernandez , Alex England and Billy Crudup joining the cast . 
 The film is currently scheduled for release on August 4 , 2017 . 
 = = Comics = = 
 In 2013 , a comic book series was announced by Dark Horse Comics that serves as a spin @-@ off to Prometheus . The series , titled Fire and Stone , is an Alien vs. Predator crossover featuring content exclusive to Prometheus . The first issue of Fire and Stone was released on September 10 , 2014 . 
 = Ned Williamson = 
 Edward Nagle " Ned " or " Ed " Williamson ( October 24 , 1857 – March 3 , 1894 ) was an American Major League Baseball player for 13 seasons from 1878 until 1890 . He played for three different teams : the Indianapolis Blues of the National League ( NL ) for one season , the Chicago White Stockings ( NL ) for 11 seasons , and the Chicago Pirates of the Players ' League for one season . 
 From 1883 and 1887 , Williamson held the single @-@ season record for both doubles and home runs . Although his record for doubles was surpassed in 1887 , he held the home run record until 1919 , when it was topped by Babe Ruth of the Boston Red Sox . Statistically , he was one of the best fielders of his era . During the first eight years of his career , he led the league at his position in both fielding percentage and double plays five times , and he also led his position in assists six times . Later , when he moved to shortstop , he again led the league in both assists and double plays . 
 His career was shortened by a knee injury that he suffered in Paris during a world @-@ tour organized by Albert Spalding . After he left organized baseball , his health declined rapidly . He contracted tuberculosis and ultimately died at the age of 36 of dropsy . 
 = = Career = = 
 Born in Philadelphia , Williamson began his major league career on May 1 , 1878 for the Indianapolis Blues of the National League . That season he played in all 63 of the team 's games as the starting third baseman , leading the league in that category . He umpired his only game on August 12 , calling a game between the Chicago White Stockings and the Providence Grays . His season @-@ ending statistics included a .232 batting average , one home run , and 31 runs scored . 
 The Blues were only a major league team for the 1878 season , resulting in Williamson joining the Chicago White Stockings for the 1879 season . He was their regular third baseman , leading the league in multiple fielding categories for his position , including fielding percentage , assists , putouts , and double plays . As a hitter , his numbers improved . He finished second in the league with 13 triples , and eighth in doubles with 20 , while also raising his batting average to .294 . During the next three seasons , his batting statistics fluctuated from year to year . His batting average rose from .251 in 1880 to .282 in 1882 ; likewise , his 20 doubles in 1880 were good for seventh in the league , but dropped to 12 in 1881 . He followed that season with 27 in 1882 , which was fourth in the league . During this time period , when his level of hitting had dropped , his play in the field did not . He led the league in fielding percentage from 1880 to 1882 , and in assists in 1881 and 1882 . 
 In 1883 , Williamson set the major league record for doubles in a single season by hitting 49 , surpassing King Kelly 's 37 set the previous year . Williamson 's record for doubles stood until Tip O 'Neill of the St. Louis Browns hit 52 in 1887 . Williamson 's doubles achievement was attributed to the short dimensions of Chicago 's Lakeshore Park ; the distances were 186 feet ( 57 m ) in left field , 300 feet ( 91 m ) in center field , and 190 feet ( 58 m ) in right field . Balls that were hit over the fence were counted as doubles until 1884 , when they became home runs . On September 6 , Chicago scored a record 18 runs in one inning during a 26 – 6 victory over the Detroit Wolverines . Williamson contributed three hits , and scored three runs in that inning , setting individual records in both categories . Other than runs scored , the other team records set that day included the most hits and total bases in one inning . 
 During this time period , the establishment of the ground rules of each park rested with the home team . In 1884 , team captain and on @-@ field manager Cap Anson decided that balls hit over the fence were to be home runs . Williamson used these short dimensions and new ground rules to set the single @-@ season home run record by hitting 27 in a 112 @-@ game season , surpassing the record of 14 set by Harry Stovey the previous year . Of the 27 home runs he hit that year , 25 of them were hit at home . This record stood for 35 years until it was broken in 1919 by Babe Ruth , who hit 29 for the Boston Red Sox in a 140 @-@ game schedule . The first three of Williamson 's 27 home runs came on May 30 , in the second game of a doubleheader against the Detroit Wolverines . Williamson became the first major league baseball player to hit three home runs in one game . During these two record @-@ breaking seasons , his fielding prowess did not recede . He did not lead the league in fielding percentage in either 1883 or 1884 , but did lead in assists , capping off a streak of five consecutive years in which he did so , while also leading the league in double plays for the second and third consecutive years . 
 After the 1884 season , the White Stockings moved to West Side Park , and Williamson 's power numbers dropped . Without the short fences , his home run total dropped to three , his doubles went down to 16 , and his batting average dropped to .238 , his lowest average since he became a White Stocking . Despite his low hitting numbers , he did lead the league in games played with 116 , bases on balls with 75 , and yet again , led his position in assists , double plays , and for the fifth and last time , fielding percentage . Chicago won the National League championship that season , and agreed to play the American Association champions , the St. Louis Browns in a seven @-@ game " World Series " . Before game one began , the players of both teams held a field day which included contests of skill , and Williamson won the long throw with a toss that traveled 400 feet , four inches . The 1885 series ended in a tie when each team won three games , and one game ended in a tie . Williamson collected two base hits in 23 at bats , for a <unk> batting average , and scored one run . 
 Beginning in 1886 , Williamson switched his fielding position to shortstop , while the Chicago White Stockings again won the National League championship , their fifth in seven years . The team 's success did not coincide with Williamson 's slide in seasonal numbers . His batting average dropped to his career low of .216 , and his strikeouts jumped up to a career high of 71 , in 430 at bats , although he did finish third in bases on balls . The White Stockings met the St. Louis Browns following the season and agreed to play a best of seven " World Series " for the second consecutive year . The Browns won the series , four games to two , and Williamson 's statistics for the series did not improve . In fact , they were worse than in 1885 . He gathered one base hit in 18 at bats , for a <unk> batting average , and scored two runs . 
 1887 was Williamson 's second season at shortstop , his last full season in the majors , and his numbers began to climb back to what they were during the early part of his career . His batting average jumped back up to .267 , hit 20 doubles , 14 triples , 73 base on balls , and nine home runs . In 1888 , his batting average dipped again , this time to .250 , but he did finish fourth in the league in both RBIs with 73 , and base on balls with 65 . In the field , he led the league in assists and double plays . 
 = = Spalding 's world tour = = 
 At the completion of the 1888 baseball season , Albert Spalding organized an around @-@ the @-@ world tour to promote the game of baseball . The two teams Spalding selected were the White Stockings and a collection of players from other National League teams . The tour departed on October 20 , 1888 to play exhibition games throughout the western United States for a month , before departing to Hawaii . The tour visited several foreign countries , such as Australia , Egypt , Ceylon ( Sri Lanka ) , France , Italy , and England . It was during a game played on at the Parc <unk> in Paris , France on March 8 , 1889 , when Williamson suffered a torn knee cap which forced him to be bedridden in England on doctor 's orders , missing the tour through Britain . Though players in the 19th century were responsible for their own medical care , Williamson asked Spalding to help him financially with the mounting medical costs . Spalding refused , citing that he was not obligated to assist , and Williamson never forgave him for this . Williamson , among his baseball contemporaries , wrote the most colorful articles to newspapers as the tour was unfolding . Williamson , an 1880s teammate of Anson in Chicago , had a knack for roasting — poking fun at — his teammates while always coming across as good @-@ natured . A testament to the letters ' significance is that they are a dominant source of one recent book 's World Tour presentation . Williamson is portrayed by Charlie Crabtree in the 2015 movie " <unk> " which depicts his life and journaling of the world tour . 
 = = Late career and death = = 
 The injury to Williamson 's knee caused his career to suffer , as he played in 47 games during the 1889 season . He batted .237 , and of his 41 hits that season , only five of them were extra base hits . He joined the Chicago Pirates of the Players ' League for the 1890 season , his final major league season , and played in 73 games , hitting .195 . 
 In the spring of 1894 , Williamson traveled to Hot Springs , Arkansas , in hopes that he could recover from a liver ailment and lose some weight as well , but the treatments did not work . Williamson died on March 3 of that year , at the age of 36 in Willow Springs , Arkansas , of dropsy ( edema ) complicated by consumption ( tuberculosis ) . He is interred in an unmarked grave at Rosehill Cemetery in Chicago . 
 = Gliese 876 b = 
 Gliese 876 b is an exoplanet orbiting the red dwarf Gliese 876 . It completes one orbit in approximately 61 days . Discovered in June 1998 , Gliese 876 b was the first planet to be discovered orbiting a red dwarf . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Gliese 876 b was discovered independently by two different teams , one led by Geoffrey Marcy ( with data from Keck Observatory and Lick Observatory ) and the other by Xavier <unk> ( at Geneva Observatory ) . Like the majority of known extrasolar planets , it was discovered by detecting variations in its star 's radial velocity as a result of the planet 's gravity . This was done by making sensitive measurements of the Doppler shift of the spectral lines of Gliese 876 . It was the first discovered of four known planets in the Gliese 876 system . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 Gliese 876 b is in a 1 : 2 : 4 Laplace resonance with the inner planet Gliese 876 c and the outer planet Gliese 876 e : in the time it takes planet e to complete one orbit , planet b completes two and planet c completes four . This is the second known example of a Laplace resonance , the first being Jupiter 's moons Io , Europa and Ganymede . As a result , the orbital elements of the planets change fairly rapidly as they dynamically interact with one another . The planet 's orbit has a low eccentricity , similar to the planets in the Solar System . The semimajor axis of the orbit is only 0 @.@ 208 AU , less than that of Mercury in the Solar System . However Gliese 876 is such a faint star that this puts it in the outer part of the habitable zone . 
 A limitation of the radial velocity method used to detect Gliese 876 b is that only a lower limit on the planet 's mass can be obtained . This lower limit is around 1 @.@ 93 times the mass of Jupiter . The true mass depends on the inclination of the orbit , which in general is unknown . However , because Gliese 876 is only 15 light years from Earth Benedict et al . ( 2002 ) were able to use one of the Fine Guidance Sensors on the Hubble Space Telescope to detect the astrometric wobble created by Gliese 876 b . This constituted the first unambiguous astrometric detection of an extrasolar planet . Their analysis suggested that the orbital inclination is 84 ° ± 6 ° ( close to edge @-@ on ) . In the case of Gliese 876 b , modelling the planet @-@ planet interactions from the Laplace resonance shows that the actual inclination of the orbit is 59 ° , resulting in a true mass of 2 @.@ <unk> times the mass of Jupiter . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Given the planet 's high mass , it is likely that Gliese 876 b is a gas giant with no solid surface . Since the planet has only been detected indirectly through its gravitational effects on the star , properties such as its radius , composition , and temperature are unknown . Assuming a composition similar to Jupiter and an environment close to chemical equilibrium , it is predicted that the atmosphere of Gliese 876 b is cloudless , though cooler regions of the planet may be able to form water clouds . 
 This planet , like c and e , has likely migrated inward . 
 Gliese 876 b currently lies beyond the outer edge of the habitable zone but because Gliese 876 is a slowly evolving main @-@ sequence red dwarf its habitable zone is very slowly moving outwards and will continue to do so for trillions of years . Therefore , Gliese 876 b will , in trillions of years time , lie inside Gliese 876 's habitable zone , as defined by the ability of an Earth @-@ mass planet to retain liquid water at its surface , and remain there for at least 4 @.@ 6 billion years . While the prospects for life on a gas giant are unknown , large moons may be able to support a habitable environment . Models of tidal interactions between a hypothetical moon , the planet and the star suggest that large moons should be able to survive in orbit around Gliese 876 b for the lifetime of the system . On the other hand , it is unclear whether such moons could form in the first place . However , the large mass of the gas giant may make it more likely for larger moons to form . 
 = Humfrey Gale = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Humfrey Myddelton Gale KBE , CB , CVO , MC ( 4 October 1890 – 8 April 1971 ) was an officer in the British Army who served in the First and Second World War , during which he was Chief Administrative Officer at Allied Forces Headquarters and later SHAEF under General of the Army Dwight Eisenhower . After the Second World War he was European Director of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration , worked for the Anglo @-@ Iranian Oil Company , and was chairman of the Basildon , Essex New Town Development Corporation 
 = = Early life = = 
 Humfrey Myddelton Gale was born in London , England on 4 October 1890 , the eldest of five children of Ernest Sewell Gale , an architect , and his wife Charlotte Sarah née Goddard . He was educated at St Paul 's School , London and studied at the Architectural School , Westminster from 1908 to 1910 . While there he served with the Artists Rifles . He decided to pursue a career in the British Indian Army and applied to the Royal Military College , Sandhurst . His application was successful and he entered the college in 1910 . However he did not graduate sufficiently high in his class to qualify for a posting to the Indian Army and was instead commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Army Service Corps in September 1911 . His early service was at Woolwich and Aldershot . 
 = = First World War = = 
 During the First World War , Gale served on the Western Front , where he was awarded the Military Cross . He was promoted to lieutenant and then captain in 1914 . In 1915 , he became Deputy Assistant Director of Transport , British Expeditionary Force , and served in that post at General Headquarters for the remainder of the war . He was twice mentioned in despatches , and was awarded the Order of Wen @-@ Hu ( 5th Class ) . He married Winifred Cross in 1917 . Their marriage lasted until her death in 1936 , and produced two daughters . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Gale served as a staff captain at the War Office from 1919 to 1923 . Thereafter his inter @-@ war service alternated between regimental duty at home and in Egypt , and postings to the War Office . He was promoted to the brevet rank of major in 1921 but was not promoted substantially until 1930 . He returned to the War Office in 1928 , where he became Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General in 1930 . After ten years as a major he was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1932 . In 1934 , he became an instructor at the Staff College , Camberley . He became Assistant Director of Shipping and Transport , War Office and was promoted to colonel in 1937 and then brigadier in 1939 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Gale was appointed Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General of the III Corps , which was deployed to France with the new British Expeditionary Force in 1940 . He was responsible for administrative arrangements during the Battle of Dunkirk and managed to keep the supply system working . For his services in the campaign , he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . Gale was promoted to major general and appointed Major General , Administration ( MGA ) , Scotland . In 1941 he became Chief Administrative Officer ( CAO ) to General Sir Alan Brooke , Commander in Chief United Kingdom Home Forces . His work was recognised in June 1942 when he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 On 15 September 1942 Gale was appointed its Chief Administrative Officer of Lieutenant General Dwight Eisenhower 's Allied Forces Headquarters ( AFHQ ) . While the general staff sections of AFHQ were integrated , the British and American administrative systems differed so greatly that separate organisations were established . Gale 's job , which Eisenhower called " unique in the history of war " , was to coordinate the two . For the Allied invasion of Sicily , Gale was tasked with the planning and coordination of the sea convoys . Ships had to depart multiple ports in the United Kingdom and the Middle East on a predefined schedule , loaded with enormous quantities of supplies , equipment , stores and troops . For a time it was feared that demands of the Sicilian operation would be so great that other operations would have to be curtailed . For his contribution to the victory in the Tunisia Campaign , he was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in August 1943 . He was also appointed a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order , and was awarded the United States Legion of Merit . 
 When Eisenhower left the Mediterranean to become the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe , Gale was one of a number of key officers that Eisenhower insisted on taking with him to his new headquarters , SHAEF . When Field Marshal Brooke demurred at this , Eisenhower 's chief of staff , Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith pointed out that Eisenhower had always felt " he would be unwilling to undertake another large Allied Command without Gale 's administrative assistance .... He has that irreplaceable quality of being able to handle British @-@ American supply problems with tact and judgement and he is almost as familiar with the American system of supply as with the British . " However , General Gale found that while his title at SHAEF was the same , his role was different from that at Allied Force Headquarters . In the Mediterranean he had also had broad responsibility for logistics . In the European theatre , General Bernard Montgomery 's 21st Army Group controlled its own supply while the American units had Headquarters , Communications Zone under Major General John C. H. Lee . At SHAEF , Gale had less real control over supply and administration than at Allied Force Headquarters and his duties mostly involved coordinating the activities of the SHAEF staff sections and serving as chairman of various high @-@ level committees that dealt with matters of supply . Gale was promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant general in August 1944 , and in January 1945 he became Colonel Commandant of the Royal Army Service Corps , a position he held until 1954 . He was also colonel commandant of the Army Catering Corps from 1946 to 1958 . For his work at SHAEF , he was awarded the U.S. Army Distinguished Service Medal . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Gale married again in 1945 , this time to Minnie Grace , the daughter of Count Gregorini @-@ Bigham of Bologna and the widow of Prince Charles Louis of Beauvau @-@ Craon . From September 1945 to July 1947 he was the European Director of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration . Gale retired from the British Army with the honorary rank of lieutenant general in October 1947 , and took up a position with the Anglo @-@ Iranian Oil Company . In 1954 Harold Macmillan persuaded Gale to become chairman of the Basildon , Essex New Town Development Corporation , a post Gale served in until 1964 . Macmillan described Gale as one of the most efficient officers he had ever known . Gale and Minnie lived in La Tour de Peilz , Vaud , Switzerland , where he died on 8 April 1971 . His papers are in the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives . 
 = The Beyoncé Experience Live = 
 The Beyoncé Experience Live is a live DVD by American recording artist Beyoncé , released by Columbia Records on November 20 , 2007 . It was shot at the Staples Center , Los Angeles , California , on September 2 , 2007 during her worldwide tour The Beyoncé Experience . It features guest appearances from rapper Jay @-@ Z on " Upgrade U " and former Destiny 's Child mates Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland on " Survivor " . The show featured on the album was broadcast on different channels ; for one night only on November 19 , 2007 , the show was shown in ninety @-@ six theaters across the US , Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) aired an edited version of the concert on Thanksgiving day and AEG Network and <unk> also aired the concert . 
 The album features performances of songs from Beyoncé 's two studio albums Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) and B 'Day ( 2006 ) as well as songs which she recorded with Destiny 's Child . Upon its release , The Beyoncé Experience Live received mostly positive reviews from music critics who praised Beyoncé 's live performances of the songs . The DVD was also commercially successful , peaking at number two on the US Billboard Top Music Videos chart and receiving five certifications including three @-@ time platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The live version of " Me , Myself and I " ( 2003 ) from the album gained a nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 51st Grammy Awards in 2009 . The DVD was re @-@ enacted by performer Neal Medlyn during his performance at the New Museum in April 2008 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The Beyoncé Experience Live was shot at the Staples Center , Los Angeles , California , on September 2 , 2007 , during Beyoncé 's worldwide tour The Beyoncé Experience in promotion of her second studio album B 'Day ( 2006 ) . The DVD features guest appearances from rapper Jay @-@ Z on " Upgrade U " and former Destiny 's Child mates Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland on " Survivor " . At the end of the show Rowland and Williams led the audience in singing " Happy Birthday to You " to Beyoncé , to mark her birthday two days later . The DVD features a 27 @-@ song jukebox feature which was achieved by the use of advanced " bitwise " programming . The DVD was authored by Neil Matthews at Ascent Media in New York City . 
 It was released in the United States on November 20 , 2007 , and in the UK on November 26 . The DVD has also been released on iTunes Store on November 19 , 2007 , as an audio version called The Beyoncé Experience : Live Audio . The DVD was released in Blu @-@ ray Disc format on November 18 , 2008 simultaneously with Beyoncé 's third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce . In some countries the live DVD was packed with Irreemplazable as a bonus disc . Some of the concerts live version instrumentations were made available to download on March 25 , 2008 , and included the songs from " Speechless " onward . Although it is credited as Various Artists , technically the album is performed by Beyoncé 's tour band Suga Mama . The Beyoncé Experience Live was shown at ninety @-@ six cinemas across the United States on November 19 , 2007 , one day before its DVD release . Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) broadcast the show on Thanksgiving Day on November 22 , 2007 and later on December 18 the same year . On December 31 , 2007 The Beyoncé Experience Live was broadcast to members of the United States Army serving in the Iraq War through AEG Network . On December 31 , 2008 , European network <unk> aired the concert in Germany , Austria and Switzerland . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 Onstage Beyoncé had an all @-@ female band , and the show used men only as dancers for the female audience as noted by Pareles of The New York Times . The show included many references such as to James Brown and Donna Summer as well as routines inspired by Sweet Charity and Marilyn Monroe . It opened in darkness with Beyoncé emerging through a hole in the stage amidst smoke , sparkles and pyrotechnics to perform " Crazy in Love " and a snippet of Gnarls Barkley 's " Crazy " in a sparkling silver gown and walked to the front of the stage , as fifteen disco balls hung from the ceiling . Her background band started playing the music to the funk song and while singing , Beyoncé walked up a huge staircase which moved forward in two places where her all @-@ female band and three backup singers were positioned . At the top of the staircase / mini @-@ stage , she tore off the bottom of her dress and walked back down to the main stage . Her three backup singers came down as well and did the " uh @-@ oh " dance from the song with her . 
 During " Freakum Dress " Beyoncé played an air guitar , while the stage 's stairs were lit green during " Green Light " which she performed with six female dancers . She wore a belly @-@ dancing outfit , including harem pants , while singing " Baby Boy " . She descended the staircase holding an umbrella and was met by three guys wearing fatigues . A short section of the reggae classic " Murder She Wrote " was incorporated into " Baby Boy " . During " Beautiful Liar " , Beyoncé sang into a microphone that fell from the ceiling and performed a Shakira @-@ styled dance similar to the song 's music video ; Shakira appeared on the video screen throughout the song . " Naughty Girl " was also sung with Donna Summer 's " Love to Love You Baby " being incorporated and while performing she belly @-@ danced on the song 's beat . " Me , Myself and I " was performed at a slower tempo than the original recording , after which Beyoncé sang " Dangerously in Love 2 " with a snippet of " He Loves Me " . She cried during " Flaws and All " and showed her " imperfections " before being embraced by a dancer dressed as an angel . During the performance of the song , she sang wide @-@ eyed in a video close @-@ up . Beyoncé sang " Speechless " while seated on a sofa designed like a pair of lips . 
 The intro to " Ring the Alarm " paid homage to the " Cell Block Tango " from the film Chicago , as women told of how they had been hurt by men and the performance saw Beyoncé wearing a red overcoat . During the performance of " Suga Mama " , Beyoncé performed a pole dance . Afterwards Beyoncé 's duets with Jay @-@ Z - " Upgrade U " and " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " were performed . During " Get Me Bodied " she removed her robot costume to reveal black and yellow dress to emulate a bee and further led the crowd in a dance routine . " Check on It " was preceded by an instrumental of " The Pink Panther Theme " , during which the stairs were colored pink . A Dreamgirls segment was performed , incorporating the title song and " Listen " from the 2006 musical film in which Beyoncé starred in . The final song on the tour 's set list was " Irreplaceable " ; it began with the audience singing the first verse to Beyoncé after she announced " I 've been singing my heart out for over two hours . Now it 's time for you to sing for me . " Between segments of the show , Suga Mama performed periodic instrumental interludes , with every member giving a solo so Beyoncé could change her costumes seven times . The show included a ten @-@ song Destiny 's Child Medley which contained female solidarity @-@ themed songs . As the concert ended , Beyoncé was walking on the stage and pointing to individual fans saying " I see you ! " and describing their clothes or the signs they held . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mark Deming of the website Allmusic commented that the album " captures her dazzling live act as she shines in a performance . " A writer of MTV News commented that the album contained " more than two hours ' worth of content in total " . Kurt <unk> of the same publication commented that the DVD showcases a " huge " tour . Scott Kara of Time Out also praised the " thrilling , booty @-@ shaking pizzazz " of the DVD adding that fans would feel " just like being there [ on the concert ] " . An editor of the website Jam ! graded the DVD with four out of five stars , calling it a spectacle . The editor further noted , " [ It ] has the giant stage , the massive lights , the troupe of dancers , the kickass all @-@ girl band , the costume changes , the VIPs and more . But all of it can 't pull focus from the incredible Ms. Knowles , who works it for two @-@ plus hours , wailing and gyrating through a sweat @-@ soaked show with nary a hair out of place . " Grading the DVD with three out of four stars , Chuck Arnold and Ivory Jeff Clinton from People magazine wrote , " The elaborate production gets a bit overblown at times , but in this concert ... the tireless diva is a veritable force of nature on high @-@ energy numbers such as ' Crazy in Love ' and ' Déjà Vu . ' " The live version of " Me , Myself and I " ( 2003 ) from The Beyoncé Experience Live gained a nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 51st Grammy Awards in 2009 . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 On the chart issue dated March 1 , 2007 , The Beyoncé Experience Live peaked at number two on the US Billboard Top Music Videos chart and it also stayed on the same position the next week , behind Celine Dion 's Live in Las Vegas : A New Day ... at number one . On December 8 , 2007 , the DVD debuted at number twenty three on the Billboard Digital Albums chart and it also became its peak position . The DVD has been certified three @-@ time platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It appeared at number four , eight and thirty @-@ one on Billboard 's Top Music Video Chart 's year @-@ end list for 2008 , 2009 and 2010 respectively . 
 For the week ending November 26 , 2007 , The Beyoncé Experience Live peaked at number two on the Spanish Music DVD Chart and later , it was certified Gold by the Productores de Música de España . On December 1 , 2007 the album debuted at number six on the Belgian Music DVD Chart which later also became its peak position on that chart . The next two weeks it stayed on the same position on that chart and its last position was at number nine on December 22 , 2007 before it fell out of the chart . On the Dutch Music DVD Chart , The Beyoncé Experience Live debuted at number three on December 1 , 2007 and after almost a year of ascending and descending the chart , it became its peak position . It appeared on the Dutch Music DVD year @-@ end charts in 2008 and 2009 at number twenty two and forty eight respectively . On November 14 , 2009 , The Beyoncé Experience Live peaked at number twenty five on the UK Music DVD Chart . On September 21 , 2009 , the album peaked at number eight on the Australian Music DVD Chart and was later certified 2 × Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 = = Neal Medlyn re @-@ enactment = = 
 Performer Neal Medlyn re @-@ enacted the DVD during his performance at the New Museum in April 2008 together with dancers Will Rawls and Erick Montes . His performance was one @-@ hour long and it was titled The Neal Medlyn Experience Live . He sang along to the DVD audio track , complete with word @-@ for @-@ word between @-@ song patter and band introductions . Booth Newspapers ' Roger <unk> reviewed the re @-@ enactment positively writing , " The event ... was a hoot , and the audience loved every second of it . Medlyn has Beyoncé 's signature , often spastic , moves down pat , down to each minute hand gesture and facial expression ... Unlike a drag show , Medlyn does not try to convince anyone they are seeing Beyoncé . There wasn 't much in the way of costumes ( well , he did enter in a black wig , tube top and hot pants , but those bit the dust rather quickly ) , and why bother ? " . He concluded that the length of the show was " perfect " as it " ended before the shtick wore out its welcome " . <unk> finished his review by writing , " It was a delicious pop @-@ culture skewering , right down to the back @-@ up dancers , with their over @-@ the @-@ top moves and expressions ... Clearly it enhanced the ' experience , ' if you had a passing acquaintance with Beyoncé 's songs ... but such knowledge was not a prerequisite to enjoying this homage " . Claudia La Rocco of The New York Times described his re @-@ enactment as " absurdly faithful " and added that it wouldn 't have been nearly as " smart or touching " without the dancing of Rawls and Montes . She further put the performance in her list of the " richest " moments of 2008 and noted , " These astounding performers slipped between genders and among genres , enveloping Mr. Medlyn in utter fabulousness and proving just how sophisticated pop culture can be . Backup dancers everywhere should feel proud . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for The Beyoncé Experience Live , adapted from CD 's liner notes and Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Helgoland @-@ class battleship = 
 The Helgoland class was the second class of German dreadnought battleships . Constructed from 1908 to 1912 , the class comprised four ships : Helgoland , the lead ship ; Oldenburg ; Ostfriesland ; and Thüringen . The design was a significant improvement over the previous Nassau @-@ class ships ; they had a larger main battery — 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) main guns instead of the 28 cm ( 11 in ) weapons mounted on the earlier vessels — and an improved propulsion system . The Helgolands were easily distinguished from the preceding Nassaus by the three funnels that were closely arranged , compared to the two larger funnels of the previous class . The ships retained the hexagonal main battery layout of the Nassau class . 
 The ships served as a unit in the I Division , I Battle Squadron alongside the Nassau @-@ class ships in the II Division of the I Battle Squadron . They saw combat during World War I , including the Battle of Jutland in the North Sea and the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in the Baltic . All four survived the war , but were not taken as part of the German fleet that was interned at Scapa Flow . When the German ships at Scapa Flow were scuttled , the four Helgolands were ceded as war reparations to the victorious Allied powers in the sunken ships ' stead . Ostfriesland was taken by the US Navy and expended as a target during Billy Mitchell 's air power demonstration in July 1921 . Helgoland and Oldenburg were allotted to Britain and Japan respectively , and broken up in 1921 . Thüringen was delivered to France in 1920 , and was used as a target ship for the French navy . The ship was eventually broken up between 1923 and 1933 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Triple Entente between the United Kingdom , France , and Russia had been signed in 1907 . Germany had become significantly isolated — on the Continent , Germany was hemmed in by France in the west and Russia in the east , and the UK , with her powerful navy , was capable of blocking German access to the world shipping lanes . Admiral von Tirpitz reacted to this development with the request for newer and stronger capital ships . His thoughts on the matter were , " The aim which I had to keep in view ... for technical and organizing reasons as well as reasons of political finance was to build as steadily as possible . " His appeal came in the form of the proposed Second Amendment to the Naval Law , which was passed on 27 March 1908 . 
 For the second class of German dreadnoughts , there was considerable debate as to what changes would be made from the first design . In May 1906 , the Reichsmarineamt ( RMA , Imperial Navy Office ) received word that the British were building battleships equipped with 13 @.@ 5 inches ( 34 cm ) guns . As a result , the General Navy Department advocated increasing the caliber of the main battery from 28 cm ( 11 in ) to 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) . Admiral von Tirpitz was reluctant to agree to this change , as he wished to avoid escalating the arms race with Britain . 
 Admiral von Tirpitz 's hesitation at increasing the armament of the new ships was lost when it became known in early 1907 that the United States Navy was building battleships with 30 @.@ 5 cm guns . In March 1907 , von Tirpitz ordered the Construction Department to prepare a design with 30 @.@ 5 cm guns and 320 mm ( 13 in ) thick belt armor . Some dispute remained over the arrangement of the main battery . The two Minas Geraes @-@ class battleships being built for Brazil mounted the same number of guns , but in a more efficient arrangement . <unk> turret pairs were placed on either end of the ship , with two wing turrets amidships . Admiral von Tirpitz favored adopting this arrangement for the Helgoland class , but the Construction Department felt two superfiring turrets could be easily disabled by a single hit . As a result , the hexagonal arrangement of the preceding Nassaus was retained . 
 The Naval Law stipulated that the lifespan of large warships was to be reduced from 25 years to 20 years ; this was done in an effort to force the Reichstag to allocate funds for additional ships . The reduction necessitated the replacement of the coastal defense ships of the Siegfried and Oldenburg classes as well as the Brandenburg @-@ class battleships . The battleships that von Tirpitz had failed to secure in the First Amendment to the Naval Law of 1906 were now approved by the Reichstag . The Naval Law also increased the naval budget by an additional 1 billion marks . After the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads had been replaced by the four Nassaus , three of the Siegfried @-@ class ships — Siegfried , Beowulf , Frithjof — and the unique coastal defense ship Oldenburg were the next slated to be replaced . The Helgoland @-@ class ships — SMS Helgoland , SMS Ostfriesland , SMS Thüringen , and SMS Oldenburg — were ordered under the provisional names Ersatz Siegfried , Ersatz Oldenburg , Ersatz Beowulf , and Ersatz Frithjof , respectively . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships were longer than their predecessors , at 167 @.@ 2 m ( 548 ft 7 in ) overall . The ships had a beam of 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 ft 6 in ) and at full load a draft of 8 @.@ 94 m ( 29 ft 4 in ) . The ships were significantly heavier than the Nassau class ; the Helgoland @-@ class ships displaced 22 @,@ 808 tonnes ( 22 @,@ 448 long tons ) at a standard load , and 24 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 310 long tons ) at full load , nearly 4 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 900 long tons ) more than the earlier ships . The ships had 17 watertight compartments and a double bottom for 86 % of the length of the hull . 
 The class had greatly improved handling characteristics over the preceding Nassau class . The Helgolands were much better sea boats and did not suffer from the severe rolling that the Nassaus did . The ships were responsive to the helm , and had a tight turning radius , and lost only minimal speed during swells . The ships lost up to 54 % of their speed at hard rudder , and would heel up to 7 ° . For comparison , the earlier Nassaus lost up to 70 % speed and held a 12 ° heel with the rudder hard over . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships retained older triple @-@ expansion steam engines rather than the new steam turbines in use in the British Royal Navy . This decision was based solely on cost : at the time , Parsons held a monopoly on steam turbines and required a 1 million gold mark royalty fee for every turbine engine . The triple @-@ expansion engines were three @-@ shaft , four @-@ cylinder engines arranged in three engine rooms . Each shaft drove a four @-@ bladed screw propeller that was 5 @.@ 1 m ( 16 ft 9 in ) in diameter . The engines were powered by 15 marine @-@ type boilers with two fireboxes apiece for a total of 30 . The engines were rated at 27 @,@ 617 ihp ( 20 @,@ 594 kW ) with a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . On trials , the power @-@ plant produced up to 35 @,@ 014 ihp ( 26 @,@ 110 kW ) , and a top speed of 21 @.@ 3 knots ( 39 @.@ 4 km / h ; 24 @.@ 5 mph ) . The ships carried 3 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 150 long tons ) of coal , and were later modified to carry an additional 197 tonnes ( 194 long tons ) of oil that was to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full fuel capacity , the ships could steam for 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ships ' electrical power was provided by eight turbo @-@ generators that produced 2 @,@ 000 kW ( 225 V ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Like the Nassau class which preceded it , the Helgoland @-@ class ships carried their main armament in an unusual hexagonal configuration . Twelve 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns were emplaced in long @-@ trunk Drh LC / 1908 mountings , an improved version of the previous LC / 1907 and LC / 1906 mounts used in the Nassau class . The guns were arranged in pairs in six twin gun turrets , with one turret each fore and aft , and two on each flank of the ship . The guns could initially be depressed to − 8 ° and elevated to 13 @.@ 5 ° , although the turrets were later modified to allow − 5 @.@ 5 ° depression and 16 ° of elevation . The guns fired 405 @-@ kilogram ( 893 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 855 m / s ( 2 @,@ 810 ft / s ) ; at 13 @.@ 5 ° , this provided a maximum range of 18 @,@ 700 m ( 20 @,@ 500 yd ) , and with the upgraded 16 ° elevation , the range was extended to 20 @,@ 500 m ( 22 @,@ 400 yd ) . The guns had a total of 1 @,@ 020 rounds for 85 shells per gun . 
 The ships ' secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns , which were mounted in casemates . The guns fired 45 @.@ 3 @-@ kilogram ( 100 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 840 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns could be elevated to 19 ° , which provided a maximum range of 14 @,@ 950 metres ( 16 @,@ 350 yd ) . The ships also carried fourteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns , also in casemates . These guns fired a 10 @-@ kilogram ( 22 lb ) projectile at 650 m / s ( 2 @,@ 100 ft / s ) , and could be trained up to 25 ° for a maximum range of 9 @,@ 600 m ( 10 @,@ 500 yd ) . After 1914 , two 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed and replaced by two 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak guns , and between 1916 and 1917 , the remaining twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm casemated guns were removed . These anti @-@ aircraft guns fired a slightly lighter 9 @.@ 6 @-@ kilogram ( 21 lb ) shell at 770 m / s ( 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ) . They could be elevated to 45 ° and could hit targets 11 @,@ 800 m ( 12 @,@ 900 yd ) away . The Helgoland @-@ class ships were further armed with six 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One tube was mounted in the bow , another in the stern , and two on each broadside , on either ends of the torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships were equipped with Krupp cemented armor , in almost the same layout as in the preceding Nassau @-@ class ships . The only major differences were slight increases in the armor protection for the main and secondary batteries , and a much thicker roof for the forward conning tower . The ships had an armored belt that was 30 cm ( 12 in ) thick at its strongest points , where it protected the ship 's vitals , and as thin as 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in less critical areas , such as the bow and stern . Behind the main belt was a torpedo bulkhead 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The ships ' decks were armored , between 5 @.@ 5 and 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 and 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The forward conning tower on each vessel had a roof that was 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick , and sides 40 cm ( 16 in ) thick . The aft conning tower was not as heavily armored , with only a 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick roof and 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) sides . The main battery turrets had roofs that were 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , and 30 cm sides . The casemated secondary battery had 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) worth of armor protection , and 8 cm thick gun shields . The Helgolands were also fitted with anti @-@ torpedo nets , but these were removed after 1916 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Four ships of the class were ordered , under the provisional names Ersatz Siegfried ( Helgoland ) , Ersatz Oldenburg ( Ostfriesland ) , Ersatz Beowulf ( Thüringen ) , and Ersatz Frithjof ( Oldenburg ) , as replacements for three of the coastal defense ships of the Siegfried @-@ class , and the unique coastal defense ship SMS Oldenburg . SMS Helgoland was built at Howaldtswerke , Kiel . She was laid down on 24 December 1908 , launched 25 August 1909 , and commissioned nearly two years later on 23 August 1911 . 
 SMS Ostfriesland was built at Kaiserliche Werft Wilhelmshaven . She was laid down 19 October 1908 , launched five days after her sister Helgoland , on 30 August 1909 , and commissioned 1 August 1911 . SMS Thüringen was built by AG Weser in Bremen . She was laid down on 7 November 1908 , launched on 27 November 1909 , and commissioned on 10 September 1911 . SMS Oldenburg , the final vessel , was built by Schichau in Danzig ; she was laid down 1 March 1909 , launched 30 June 1910 , and commissioned on 1 May 1912 . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = History = = 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships operated as a unit in the High Seas Fleet ; they served as the I Division of the I Battle Squadron . The ships of the class participated in several fleet operations in the North Sea , including the sortie on 31 May 1916 that resulted in the Battle of Jutland . The ships also saw limited service in the Baltic Sea , primarily during the abortive Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . 
 = = = Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby = = = 
 The first major operation of the war in which the Helgoland @-@ class ships participated was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The raid was primarily conducted by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . The Helgoland @-@ class ships , along with the Nassau , Kaiser , and König classes steamed in distant support of Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , decided to take up station approximately in the center of the North Sea , about 130 miles east of Scarborough . 
 The Royal Navy , which had recently received the German code books captured from the beached cruiser Magdeburg , was aware that an operation was taking place , but was not sure where the Germans would strike . Therefore , the Admiralty ordered David Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , the six battleships of the 2nd Battle Squadron , and several cruisers and destroyers to intercept the German battlecruisers . However , Beatty 's task force nearly ran headlong into the entire High Seas Fleet . At 6 : 20 , Beatty 's destroyer screen came into contact with the German torpedo boat V155 . This began a confused , 2 @-@ hour long battle between the British destroyers and the German cruiser and destroyer screen , often at very close range . At the time of the first encounter , the Helgoland @-@ class battleships were less than 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) away from the six British dreadnoughts ; this was well within firing range , but in the darkness , neither British nor German admirals were aware of the composition of their opponents ' fleets . Admiral Ingenohl , loathe to disobey the Kaiser 's order to not risk the battlefleet without his express approval , concluded that his forces were engaging the screen of the entire Grand Fleet , and so , 10 minutes after the first contact , he ordered a turn to port to a southeast course . Continued attacks delayed the turn , but by 6 : 42 , it had been carried out . For about 40 minutes , the two fleets were steaming on a parallel course . At 7 : 20 , Ingenohl ordered a further turn to port , which put his ships on a course for German waters . 
 Many in the German navy were furious over Ingenohl 's timidity , and his reputation suffered greatly . Großadmiral Alfred von Tirpitz remarked that " On 16 December , Ingenohl had the fate of Germany in the palm of his hand . I boil with inward emotion whenever I think of it . " The captain of the battlecruiser Moltke was even more scathing ; he stated that Ingenohl had turned away " because he was afraid of eleven British destroyers which could have been easily eliminated ... Under the present leadership we will accomplish nothing . " 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships also sortied from port to support the German battlecruisers during the Battle of Dogger Bank , but did not actively engage British forces . 
 = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = 
 On 3 August 1915 , several heavy units of the High Seas Fleet were transferred to the Baltic to participate in a planned foray into the Riga Gulf . The intention was to destroy the Russian naval forces in the area , including the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava , and to use the minelayer Deutschland to block the entrance to Moon Sound with naval mines . The German forces , under the command of Vice Admiral Hipper , included the four Nassau @-@ class and four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , the battlecruisers Seydlitz , Moltke , and Von der Tann , and a number of smaller craft . The four Helgolands were not committed to the actual battle , however . For the duration of the operation , the ships were stationed outside the gulf in order to prevent Russian reinforcements from disrupting the laying of minefields . 
 The Russians ' own minefields were larger than had been expected , and so clearing them took longer than the Germans had planned . This delay was compounded by stiff resistance from the Russian navy ; Deutschland was ultimately unable to lay her mines . Reports of Allied submarine activity in the area prompted the withdrawal of the German naval force on the morning of 20 August . Indeed , the battlecruiser Moltke had been torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E1 the day before , though only minor damage was sustained . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 The ships took part in the inconclusive Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . For the majority of the battle , the I Battle Squadron formed the center of the line of battle , behind Rear Admiral Behncke 's III Battle Squadron , and followed by Rear Admiral Mauve 's elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . Ostfriesland served as the division flagship , under the command of Vice Admiral E. Schmidt . 
 The Helgoland @-@ class ships first entered direct combat at 19 : 20 on the first day of the battle . Ostfriesland , Helgoland , and Thüringen began firing on HMS Warspite , which , along with the other Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle squadron , had been pursuing the German battlecruiser force . With the exception of Ostfriesland , the firing only lasted for four minutes , because the German line had been in the process of turning to the east @-@ northeast , and the ships quickly lost sight of the British battleships . Thüringen and Helgoland only fired around 20 main battery shells before they lost sight of their target . Ostfriesland , however , was able to keep visual contact until 19 : 45 , at which point she , too , ceased firing . At 20 : 15 , during the third Gefechtskehrtwendung , Helgoland was struck by a 15 in ( 38 cm ) shell in the forward part of the ship . The shell tore a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) hole in the hull and rained splinters on the foremost port side 5 @.@ 9 in gun ; approximately 80 tons of water entered the ship . 
 At around midnight on 1 June , the Helgoland- and Nassau @-@ class ships in the center of the German line came into contact with the British 4th Destroyer Flotilla . A chaotic night battle ensued , during which Nassau rammed the British destroyer Spitfire . The 4th Flotilla broke off the action temporarily to regroup , but at around 01 : 00 , unwittingly stumbled into the German dreadnoughts a second time . Oldenburg and Helgoland opened fire on the two leading British destroyers , but a British shell destroyed Oldenburg 's forward search light . Shell fragments rained down on the bridge and wounded the ship 's captain , Kapitän Hopfner , and killed his second in command , Kapitänleutnant <unk> , along with a number of other men on the bridge , including the helmsman . Oldenburg was temporarily without anyone to steer the ship ; she was in danger of ramming either the ship to her rear or to her front . Kapitän Hopfner , despite his injuries , took the helm and brought the ship back into line . 
 Shortly after 01 : 00 , Thüringen and Nassau encountered the British armored cruiser Black Prince . Thüringen opened fire first and pummeled Black Prince with a total of 27 heavy @-@ caliber shells and 24 rounds from her secondary battery . Nassau and Ostfriesland joined in , followed by Friedrich der Grosse . 
 [ Black Prince ] presented a terrible and awe @-@ inspiring spectacle as she drifted down the line blazing furiously until , after several minor detonations , she disappeared below the surface with the whole of her crew in one tremendous explosion . 
 By this time , the 4th Destroyer Flotilla had been largely destroyed as a fighting unit . The few remaining , heavily damaged ships had been scattered and would take no further part in the battle . 
 Following the return to German waters , Helgoland and Thüringen , along with the Nassau @-@ class battleships Nassau , Posen , and Westfalen , took up defensive positions in the Jade roadstead for the night . During the battle , the ships suffered only minor damage . Helgoland was hit by a single 15 in shell , but sustained minimal damage . The Oldenburg was hit by a shell from a secondary battery that killed 8 and wounded 14 men . Ostfriesland and Thüringen escaped the battle unscathed , although on the return to German waters , Ostfriesland struck a mine and had to be repaired in Wilhelmshaven . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 The ships of the class saw no further significant action during the war , and were ceded to the Allies under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles . All four ships were stricken from the German navy on 5 November 1919 . Helgoland was taken by the British and was scrapped in 1921 in Morecambe . Her bow ornament was retained and was eventually returned to Germany ; it is now on display in the Dresden army museum . Oldenburg was surrendered to the Japanese , but they did not take possession of the ship . Instead , they sold the vessel to a British salvage firm that scrapped it in Dordrecht in 1921 . Thüringen was taken by France ; the ship was nearly scuttled by her crew while en route to Cherbourg in 1920 . She was used as a target until she was beached in 1923 at Gavres . She was broken up in situ , but a large portion of the hull remains off shore . 
 Ostfriesland was ceded to the US Navy , and was later used as a stationary target during a demonstration of air power , conducted by General Billy Mitchell on 21 July 1921 off Cape Henry in Virginia . The ship sank at 12 : 40 after sustaining several bomb hits and near misses . However , she likely would have avoided these had she been underway , and if she had been hit , damage control teams would have kept the ship afloat . 
 = Bristol Temple Meads railway station = 
 Bristol Temple Meads railway station is the oldest and largest railway station in Bristol . It is an important transport hub for public transport , with bus services to many parts of the city and surrounding districts and a ferry to the city centre in addition to the train services . Bristol 's other main @-@ line station , Bristol Parkway , is on the northern outskirts of the conurbation . 
 It opened on 31 August 1840 as the western terminus of the Great Western Railway from London Paddington . The railway including Temple Meads was the first one designed by the British engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel . Soon the station was also used by the Bristol and Exeter Railway , the Bristol and Gloucester Railway , the Bristol Harbour Railway and the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway . To accommodate the increasing number of trains the station was expanded in the 1870s by Francis Fox and again in the 1930s by P E Culverhouse . Brunel 's terminus is no longer part of the operational station . The historical significance of the station has been noted , and most of the site is Grade 1 listed . 
 The platforms are numbered 1 to 15 , but passenger trains are confined to just eight tracks . Most platforms are numbered separately at each end with odd numbers at the east end , even numbers at the west end . Platform 2 is not signalled for passenger trains , and there is no platform 14 . 
 Temple Meads is managed by Network Rail and the majority of services are operated by the present @-@ day Great Western Railway . Other operators are CrossCountry and South West Trains . In the 12 months to March 2014 , 9 @.@ 5 million entries and exits were made from the station . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Temple Meads derives from the nearby Temple Church , which was gutted by bombing during World War II . The word " <unk> " is a derivation of " <unk> " , an Old English variation of " <unk> " , meadow , referring to the water meadows alongside the River Avon that were part of Temple parish . As late as 1820 the site was undeveloped pasture outside the boundaries of the old city , some distance from the commercial centre . It lay between the Floating Harbour and the city 's cattle market , which was built in 1830 . 
 = = = Brunel 's station = = = 
 The original terminus was built in 1839 – 41 for the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , the first passenger railway in Bristol , and was designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , the railway 's engineer . It was built to Brunel 's 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad gauge . The station was on a viaduct to raise it above the level of the Floating Harbour and River Avon , the latter being crossed via the grade I listed Avon Bridge . The station was covered by a 200 @-@ foot ( 60 m ) train shed , extended beyond the platforms by 155 feet ( 47 m ) into a storage area and engine shed , fronted by an office building in the Tudor style . Train services to Bath commenced on 31 August 1840 and were extended to Paddington on 30 June 1841 following the completion of Box Tunnel . 
 A few weeks before the start of the services to Paddington the Bristol and Exeter Railway ( B & ER ) had opened , on 14 June 1841 , its trains reversing in and out of the GWR station . The third railway at Temple Meads was the Bristol and Gloucester Railway , which opened on 8 July 1844 and was taken over by the Midland Railway ( MR ) on 1 July 1845 . This used the GWR platforms , diverging onto its own line on the far side of the bridge over the Floating Harbour . Both these new railways were engineered by Brunel and were initially broad gauge . Brunel also designed the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway , but this was not opened until 25 August 1863 , nearly four years after his death . It terminated at Temple Meads . 
 = = = Bristol and Exeter Railway station = = = 
 In 1845 the B & ER built its own station at right angles to the GWR station and an " express platform " on the curve linking the two lines so that through trains no longer had to reverse . The wooden B & ER station was known locally as " The Cowshed " ; but a grand headquarters was built at street level on the west side of its station in 1852 – 54 to the Jacobean designs of Samuel Fripp . The Bristol and Portishead Pier and Railway opened a branch off the Bristol and Exeter line west of the city on 18 April 1867 , the trains being operated by the B & ER and using its platforms at Temple Meads . 
 In 1850 an engine shed had been opened on the south bank of the River Avon on the east side of the line to the B & ER station . Between 1859 and 1875 , 23 engines were built in the workshops attached to the shed , including several distinctive Bristol and Exeter Railway 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 4T locomotives . 
 = = = Goods stations = = = 
 The GWR built a 326 @-@ by @-@ 138 @-@ foot ( 99 m × 42 m ) goods shed on the north side of the station adjacent to the Floating Harbour , with a small dock for transhipment of goods to barges ( not seagoing ships , as the wharf was upstream of Bristol Bridge ) . Wagons had to be lowered 12 feet ( 4 m ) to the goods shed on hoists . On 11 March 1872 , a direct connection to the harbour was made in the form of the Bristol Harbour Railway , a joint operation of the three railways , which ran between the passenger station and the goods yard , across the street outside on a bridge , and descended into a tunnel under the churchyard of St. Mary Redcliffe on its way to a wharf downstream of Bristol Bridge . 
 The B & ER had a goods depot at Pylle Hill ( south of the station ) from 1850 , and the MR had an independent yard at Avonside Wharf on the opposite side of the Floating Harbour from 1858 . 
 = = = Effects of the change of gauge = = = 
 On 29 May 1854 the Midland Railway laid a third rail along their line to Gloucester to provide mixed gauge so that it could operate 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge passenger trains while broad gauge goods trains could still run to collieries north of Bristol . Sidings at South Wales Junction allowed traffic to be transhipped between wagons on the two different gauges . The GWR continued to operate its trains on the broad gauge , but on 3 September 1873 it opened the standard gauge Bristol and North Somerset Railway . This had a junction nearly 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) from the station on the London line and so mixed gauge was extended to that point . During the following year mixed gauge track was continued beyond Bath in connection with the conversion of the Wilts , Somerset and Weymouth Railway to standard gauge . Mixed gauge was laid through Box Tunnel on 16 May 1875 and so standard gauge trains could run to London , although broad gauge was retained west of Temple Meads and through trains from London to Penzance and other stations in Devon and Cornwall continued to be broad gauge . Goods traffic was transhipped between the two gauges in the B & ER yard at Pylle Hill . 
 The B & ER converted the line to Taunton to mixed gauge by 1 June 1875 , but the remainder of the line to Exeter was not done until 1 March 1876 , three months after the B & ER had amalgamated with the GWR . The remainder of the lines beyond Exeter were converted to standard gauge on 21 May 1892 so the extra rails at Temple Meads fell into disuse and were removed to leave a purely standard gauge layout . This allowed the through station to be rebuilt with two additional platform faces . 
 = = = 1870s expansion = = = 
 The additional railway routes put the two short 140 @-@ yard ( 130 m ) platforms of Brunel 's terminus under pressure and a scheme was developed to extend the station . An enabling Act of Parliament was passed in 1865 and between 1871 and 1878 the station was extensively rebuilt . Brunel 's platforms were extended by 212 yards ( 194 m ) towards London and a new three @-@ platform through station built on the site of the express platform , while the B & ER station was closed and the site used for a new carriage shed . This work is usually attributed to Brunel 's former associate Matthew Digby Wyatt , but there is no documentary evidence of his involvement in the Minutes of the Station Joint Committee . The only signature on the drawings is that of Francis Fox , the engineer of the B & ER . The curved wrought @-@ iron train shed over the new through platforms was 500 feet ( 150 m ) long on the platform wall . The goods depot was rebuilt with the inconvenient wagon hoists replaced by a steep incline from the east end of Temple Meads , which meant that the sidings in the goods shed were at right angles to their original alignment and the barge dock was filled in . 
 Trains on the Bristol and South Wales Union and the Midland routes operated from the terminal platforms while the GWR used the new through platforms . The capital costs of the new work were split 4 / 14 GWR / B & ER and 10 / 14 MR , operating costs were split GWR 3 / 8 , MR 3 / 8 and B & ER 2 / 8 . Hence when the GWR absorbed the B & ER in 1876 the split was GWR 5 / 8 and MR ( later LMS ) 3 / 8 , until nationalisation on 1 January 1948 . 
 = = = Twentieth century changes = = = 
 In 1924 the goods depot was rebuilt with 15 platforms , each 575 feet ( 175 m ) long . Large warehousing and cellar space was provided to store goods , although by this time another city centre goods depot had been opened at Canons Marsh . 
 Between 1930 and 1935 the through station was expanded under the direction of the GWR 's chief architect P E Culverhouse , in art deco style , both eastwards over the old cattle market and southwards on a new wider bridge across Cattle Market Road and the New Cut of the River Avon . This made room for the addition of five through @-@ platform faces , while the removal of the narrow island platforms in the middle of the train shed allowed the main Up and Down platforms to be both widened and lengthened . All the routes approaching Temple Meads were widened to four tracks to allow more flexibility . 
 As part of this work four manual signal boxes were replaced by three power signal boxes , and the semaphore signals and mechanical point linkages were replaced by colour light signals and point motors . The new Bristol Temple Meads East box was the largest on the GWR with 368 miniature levers operated by three signalmen assisted by a " booking boy " . The other two boxes were at Bristol Temple Meads West , and controlling the movements in and out of the new Bath Road Depot , which replaced the old B & ER locomotive works in 1934 . 
 During World War II the station was bombed , which led to the destruction of the wooden spire of the clock tower above the ticket office on 3 January 1941 . Gas lighting was replaced by fluorescent electric lights in 1960 . 
 Bristol Panel Signal Box was built on the site of the Platform 14 . When opened it controlled 280 multiple @-@ aspect signals and 243 motor @-@ worked points on 114 miles ( 183 km ) of route , the largest area controlled by a single signal box on British Rail at the time . 
 The construction of this signal box , completed in 1970 , involved the demolition of almost half of the 1870s extension to Brunel 's terminus and completely blocked rail access to the Old Station 
 A second main @-@ line station serving the city , Bristol Parkway , opened in 1972 . It is on the northern outskirts of the conurbation close to the M32 motorway and was designed as a park and ride facility for long @-@ distance travellers . 
 In the late 1960s the Royal Mail built a mail conveyor at the northern end of the station , with significant aesthetic impact . This was out of use for many years following the transfer of Royal Mail 's activities to the West of England Mail Centre at Filton and the opening of the short @-@ lived <unk> Hub next to Bristol Parkway station in May 2000 . It was finally dismantled in stages and removed between October and December 2014 . In 1990 / 91 , £ 2 million was spent by InterCity on a renovation of the main train shed and another £ 7 million on restoring some of the older areas of the station , including the refurbishment of the subway and construction of new retail outlets . The shorter of the two 1935 platform islands had been used only for parcels traffic since the 1960s but was temporarily brought back into passenger use during this work . It was fully restored for passenger use in 2001 . 
 In August 1998 , a 15 @-@ month , £ 7 million project commenced with work performed on the external facade , clocktower , roof and paving . As part of this work , the original quarry from which the dolomite stone had originally been extracted was reopened in Abbots Leigh . 
 = = = Closure of lines = = = 
 Passenger traffic on the old North Somerset line ceased on 2 November 1959 and many more closures followed after the publication of Dr Beeching 's The Reshaping of British Railways in 1963 . The connection to the Bristol Harbour Railway was closed on 6 January 1964 ; passenger trains to Portishead were withdrawn on 7 September 1964 ; and most local services in the north of the city were withdrawn on 23 November 1964 . The following year saw local services on the Midland route to Gloucester withdrawn and the Midland route to Bath Green Park via Mangotsfield was closed on 7 March 1966 . St Anne 's Park and Saltford on the line towards Bath survived until 5 January 1970 . 
 On 12 September 1965 the terminal platforms were closed . This allowed the platforms to be renumbered with the order reversed ( see list below ) . The redundant train shed became a covered car park in February the following year , but from 1989 until 1999 the original ( Brunel ) part was an interactive science centre known as The Exploratory and an exhibition space . It later housed the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum , until that closed in 2008 . 
 = = = Enterprise zone and station redevelopment = = = 
 Bristol Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone , an enterprise zone with an area of 70 hectares ( 170 acres ) centred on Temple Meads , was announced in 2011 , and launched in 2012 . Network Rail is a partner in coordinating development in the zone . In November 2012 , Network Rail announced a £ 100 million redevelopment of the station , with two unused platforms to be opened up . Station Approach Road will be turned into a public square and the station 's main entrance moved to the north side . A large bridge above the tracks at the east end of the station which was erected in the 1970s for postal traffic was demolished at Christmas 2014 . 
 Bristol and Exeter House has been redeveloped by TCN UK as a business hub for small and medium @-@ sized enterprises . Brunel 's Old Station has found a new use in a redevelopment by the city council and the University of Bristol . Opened in 2013 as the Engine Shed , it hosts business incubators for startups . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Approaches = = = 
 Although it is now possible to reach the station through the Temple Quay office development ( on the site of the goods shed ) or from the Bristol Ferry Boat Company landing stage on the Floating Harbour , the traditional and main approach is from Temple Gate . Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's Tudor @-@ style offices , later used by the former British Empire and Commonwealth Museum , face this road and are flanked on the north side by an archway that used to be the main station for departing passengers ; a matching arch on the other side was the arrivals gateway but was removed when the station was expanded in the 1870s . 
 Opposite these offices are the Grosvenor Hotel and the derelict George Railway Hotel , which were built in the 1870s , on either side of the site of the Bristol Harbour Railway bridge . A modern pub named The Reckless Engineer as a tribute to Brunel faces the approach road to the station . 
 On the right of the Station Approach but at a lower level is the B & ER office building designed by Samuel Fripp ; the 1930s offices known as " Collett House " ( named after Charles Collett ) and a disused parcels depot lie beyond . On the left is Brunel 's original station building . The train shed is 72 feet ( 22 m ) wide with a wooden box @-@ frame roof and cast iron columns disguised as <unk> above Tudor arches . It is believed to be the widest hammerbeam roof in England and , along with most of the station , is a Grade 1 listed building , and forms part of a proposed Great Western Railway World Heritage Site . At the top of the slope an entrance on the left to the covered car park marks the junction between the original terminus and Fox 's 1870s extension . 
 Ahead is the turreted main station building , and to the right a flat area marks the site of the B & ER station . The tunnel beneath this area was the route for passengers to and from the Down platform from 1878 until the station was enlarged in 1935 . 
 = = = Station = = = 
 Entering the main building , the ticket office and ticket machines are immediately ahead , and the route from Temple Quay and the ferry is on the left ; a bookshop is on the right , next to the platform entrance . Customer Information System screens by the entrance show arrival and departure information for all platforms , as do displays on each of the platforms . All platforms are signalled for trains in either direction and the flexible layout means that trains on any route can use any part of the station . Platforms with odd numbers are at the east end , even numbers at the west end ( geographically the south , due to the curvature of the platforms ) . 
 Entrance to the platforms is controlled by automatic ticket gates on Platform 3 , which is used by many northbound CrossCountry trains and local services to Bristol Parkway and Gloucester . The main station restaurant and bar is on the left and the short Platform 1 , a bay , is beyond this . This is most frequently used by Severn Beach Line trains but is long enough to handle any four @-@ car Diesel Multiple Unit ( DMU ) . Behind Platform 1 is a brick wall that forms part of the signal box and on this are some metal artworks created by artists with learning difficulties to celebrate Brunel 's 200th anniversary in 2006 ; an interpretation panel is nearby . The High Level Siding beyond Platform 1 is the rump of the Bristol Harbour Railway , and Barton Hill traction maintenance depot can be seen in the distance alongside Bristol East Junction ( formerly South Wales Junction ) where the lines to Bristol Parkway and Bath diverge . 
 On the right of the entrance is the subway that links all the platforms , reached either by steps or lift ; it houses the main public toilets , automated teller machines ( ATM ) and several catering outlets ( there is catering on all platform islands except 13 – 15 ) . A passenger information office and lounge are above the subway , the British Transport Police office and cycle racks are beyond , and at the western end is Platform 4 , used by only a few trains . Alongside this is Platform 2 , another bay platform but not signalled for passenger trains and used only for stabling empty trains , as is the former <unk> unloading bay alongside . At the far end of this track is the old Fish Dock , occasionally used for stabling engineers ' on @-@ track equipment . Beyond the end of the platform the tracks swing to the right ( the west ) and pass out of sight beneath Bath Road Bridge , a girder bridge that carries the A4 out of the city . 
 The first island platform comprises platforms 5 to 8 . Platform 5 is inside the main train shed while 6 is a southerly extension and 7 and 8 were added outside the supporting wall in the 1930s . Platform 5 is used by trains towards Cardiff and platform 7 to Portsmouth ; platforms 6 and 8 are the main platforms for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and stations to Penzance . Between platforms 5 and 7 are the two spur sidings that are long enough to stable a single Class 153 DMU . 
 The third island platform comprises platforms 9 to 12 and also dates from the 1930s . It is longer than platforms 5 – 8 but the rear of a High Speed Train on the west end platforms will block part of the east end platform . A wide variety of trains use these platforms , including to and from London Paddington and London Waterloo and Weymouth . 
 The final island platform is shorter and only has east @-@ end platforms 13 and 15 : 15 is used by most trains from Paddington that continue westwards to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare or beyond . Platform 13 is a terminus platform and is used by many trains from Paddington , some local services and occasionally by CrossCountry . There is another siding beyond platform 15 that used to be the In / Out Road for Bath Road Traction Maintenance Depot . This depot has been demolished . Between platforms 3 / 4 and 5 / 6 are the Up Through line and the Middle Siding , the latter is often used to stable Mark 1 carriages between Torbay Express duties in the summer months . The Down Through line runs between platforms 11 / 12 and 13 . 
 To the north of the station lies Arriva <unk> 's Barton Hill train maintenance depot that services Class 220 / 221 Voyagers for CrossCountry Class 66 locomotives for DB Schenker and during summer months steam locomotives operating the Torbay Express . To the south @-@ east of the station lies St Philip 's Marsh depot that services the Great Western Railway fleet . This is accessible from both ends of Temple Meads station . 
 Other facilities include pay phones , public Wi @-@ Fi , a post box , photo booth , and passenger assistance such as information points , waiting rooms , a lost property office , first aid room , and CCTV . 
 = = Passenger volume = = 
 Temple Meads is the busiest station in the Bristol area . Official statistics show it to have the 35th @-@ largest number of people entering or leaving any national rail station , the 14th busiest outside London . Comparing the year from April 2009 with the year from April 2002 , estimated passenger numbers increased by 52 % . 
 The statistics cover twelve @-@ month periods that start in April . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 The station is operated by Great Western Railway , along with main line services to London Paddington station , long distance services to Cardiff Central and the South Coast , local services to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , Taunton and Gloucester and a few services each day to / from Brighton . 
 An alternative route , to London Waterloo , is provided by South West Trains , while regular CrossCountry services run south to Paignton , Plymouth and Penzance , and north to Manchester , Leeds , Edinburgh , Glasgow and Aberdeen . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 Temple Meads is served by many buses operated by First Bristol including : 
 A1 : to Bristol Airport 
 1 : to Broomhill and Cribbs Causeway 
 2 : to Stockwood and Cribbs Causeway 
 8 , 9 : circular routes to Clifton and Redland 
 11 : to University of the West of England , Frenchay and Bower Ashton campuses 
 38 / 39 / <unk> : to Bath via Saltford 
 50 / 51 / 53 : to Hengrove and Bristol City Centre ( 50 / 51 ) 
 70 / 71 : to University of the West of England , Frenchay 
 178 : Bath via Keynsham and Radstock 
 376 : to Street via Wells 
 379 : to Bath via Pensford and Radstock 
 Wessex Bus operate one route via Temple Meads station : 
 506 : Southmead Hospital to Create Centre 
 = = = Ferry = = = 
 Harbour ferry services , operated by Bristol Ferry Boats and Number Seven Boat Trips , call at a landing stage in the Floating Harbour outside the station . The service links Bristol Bridge , St Augustine 's Reach in the City Centre , the SS Great Britain , and Hotwells . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western exercised a break clause in the Greater Western franchise thus avoiding large premium payments to the Department for Transport . With the franchise to now conclude in March 2013 , it was put out to tender , but the process was scrapped as part of the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . 
 Subsequently a new contract until September 2015 was negotiated between First Great Western and the Department for Transport and subsequently extended until March 2019 . The coming years will see the High Speed Trains replaced with new Class 800 / 801 Intercity Express Trains , capacity enhancements and smart ticketing . 
 The Great Western Main Line from London to Bristol is in the process of being electrified . The electrification will not extend beyond Bristol , so local services will continue to be provided using diesel trains , with Class 165 / <unk> cascaded from Thames Valley services scheduled to replace the 150 / 153 / <unk> . 
 The Portishead Branch Line , which runs along the south side of the River Avon from a junction just beyond Parson Street is proposed to be reopened . There is an aspiration of two trains per hour between Portishead and Temple Meads in peak periods , possibly calling at Bedminster and Parson Street . The line was built in the 1860s , but closed to passenger traffic in 1964 , leaving Portishead as one of Britain 's largest towns without a railway station . The line was reopened for freight traffic to serve Royal Portbury Docks in 2001 , and the restoration of passenger traffic is considered part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , which was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . 
 The Metro scheme could also see the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line to passengers , with the possibility of services from Temple Meads to Bristol Parkway via Clifton Down and Henbury . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however in July 2015 Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 The station roof is to be refurbished as part of a scheme to transform the station over the next 25 years . On 1 April 2014 , Network Rail took over management of the station from First Great Western . 
 = Tropical Depression Nineteen ( 1970 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Nineteen in 1970 was the wettest known tropical cyclone to affect the United States territory of Puerto Rico . The long @-@ lived depression formed on September 24 just off the west coast of Africa , and for several days maintained a general westward track . It passed through the Lesser Antilles on October 1 , and later stalled in the eastern Caribbean Sea . On October 8 , the depression crossed over the Dominican Republic , and subsequently it accelerated to the northeast . It was declassified as a tropical cyclone on October 12 , although its remnants persisted for another week before dissipating in the westerlies near the Azores . 
 The depression produced heavy rainfall in the Lesser Antilles , reaching 12 in ( 300 mm ) on Barbados ; it left three deaths and moderate damage on the island . Another death was reported in the United States Virgin Islands . Torrential rainfall on Puerto Rico inflicted heavy damage , totaling $ 65 million ( 1970 USD , $ 380 million 2016 USD ) . The highest precipitation total was 41 @.@ 68 in ( 1 @,@ 059 mm ) in Jayuya , of which 17 in ( 430 mm ) fell in a 24 ‑ hour period . Most of the damage can be attributed to damaged sugar cane and coffee crops . At least 18 people were killed on the island , and the system was considered one of the worst disasters in Puerto Rican history . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the depression were identified as a tropical wave on September 22 over western Africa . The system exited the west coast of Africa the next day , and on September 24 it developed into a tropical depression about 95 mi ( 153 km ) southwest of Conakry , Guinea . The depression moved generally westward , gradually intensifying to attain peak winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) by September 25 . A nearby upper @-@ level trough — an elongated area of low pressure — hindered further strengthening , and on October 1 the depression struck the island of Saint Lucia . As it crossed the Lesser Antilles , its winds and barometric pressure approached the values of a tropical storm . 
 In the Caribbean , the trough caused the depression to slow to a westward drift , resulting in several days of heavy rainfall in the region , particularly Puerto Rico . One forecast on October 5 anticipated a continued westward track toward Jamaica . Instead , the depression turned to the north the next day under the influence of the upper @-@ level westerlies . On October 7 , the depression attained its lowest pressure of 1000 mbar ( 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) , off the southern coast of Hispaniola . The next day , it made landfall in <unk> Province in the Dominican Republic . After crossing the country and exiting into the Atlantic Ocean , the depression accelerated to the northeast , followed by an eastward turn on October 10 before another turn to the northeast . By October 12 , the depression could no longer be classified as a tropical cyclone , although satellite imagery indicated that its remnants continued northeastward . On October 15 the system turned to the west , suppressed by a strong high @-@ pressure area to its north . It re @-@ intensified while crossing through the Azores , attaining a pressure of 994 mbar . It turned to the northwest and was absorbed into the westerlies on October 20 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Around October 3 , forecasters advised residents on islands from Barbados and St. Vincent through Guadeloupe to prepare for floods , high seas , and gale @-@ force gusts . On October 10 , a warning to be on guard against gusts was issued to owners of light aircraft in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands . As it crossed through the islands , the depression produced heavy rainfall , including 8 @.@ 90 in ( 226 mm ) on Saint Lucia , 2 @.@ 19 in ( 56 mm ) on Dominica , and 12 in ( 300 mm ) on Barbados . In the latter island , the depression left 200 people homeless , caused $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage , and killed three people . 
 Heavy rains impacted the U.S. Virgin Islands , including a total of 11 @.@ 4 in ( 290 mm ) recorded by the National Park Service on Saint John . The rains caused flooding across the territory , washing out roads and destroying several houses . One boy was swept away by the floodwaters , although he was rescued by two people . A girl was also swept by the floods and drowned . The desalination plant on Saint Croix was damaged during the floods , temporarily stopping the supply of drinking water ; water from Puerto Rico had to be shipped to provide the 700 @,@ 000 gallons needed daily . On St. Thomas , the main airport was closed for several days . 
 For six days , the depression dropped rainfall across the northern Caribbean , particularly in Puerto Rico . The highest overall rainfall total was 41 @.@ 68 in ( 1 @,@ 059 mm ) , recorded at a station near Jayuya in the center of the island . This was the highest rainfall total from a tropical cyclone on record in Puerto Rico , surpassing that of the deadly hurricanes of 1928 and 1899 , which produced 29 @.@ 6 in ( 750 mm ) and 23 @.@ 0 in ( 580 mm ) , respectively . The station at Jayuya also recorded 17 in ( 430 mm ) in 24 hours . Four other locations reported over 30 in ( 760 mm ) . Such heavy rainfall caused 20 rivers to swell above flood stages . 
 The depression left 10 @,@ 000 people homeless across Puerto Rico , with 3 @,@ 000 housed in emergency shelters in San Juan . At least 600 houses were destroyed and another 1 @,@ 000 damaged . Damage was particularly severe in Barceloneta , Aibonito , and Coamo . Across the island , the depression affected at least 40 state roads , with fifteen blocked by landslides , and eleven bridges destroyed . Flooding forced the closure of Puerto Rico Highway 2 between Manatí and Barceloneta . The depression left more than $ 40 million ( 1970 USD , $ 234 million 2016 USD ) in crop damage , primarily to sugarcane and coffee , as reported by William R. <unk> , the chair of the House Agricultural Committee . Throughout Puerto Rico , the depression caused damage estimated at $ 65 million ( 1970 USD , $ 380 million 2016 USD ) , as well as at least 18 confirmed fatalities . A reported six months after the depression indicated there were 34 people missing , although their status is unknown . 
 In the aftermath of the disaster , Luis A. Ferré , the Governor of Puerto Rico , declared a state of emergency over the whole island , asking for $ 10 million ( 1970 USD ) in federal aid . On October 12 , two days after the rains subsided , President Richard Nixon declared the territory as a disaster area . Ferre also appeared in a telethon to raise funds for the homeless . The National Guard , the Red Cross , and other volunteer groups helped the displaced persons . In all , the disaster was described as one of the worst in Puerto Rico history . The Governor of the Virgin Islands , Melvin Evans , requested aid similar to Puerto Rico , and that territory was also declared a federal disaster area about a week after the rains ended . The heavy rainfall in the Virgin Islands caused a marked dinoflagellate algal bloom in the days after the rains ended . 
 = Ealdred ( archbishop of York ) = 
 Ealdred ( or Aldred ; died 11 September 1069 ) was Abbot of Tavistock , Bishop of Worcester , and Archbishop of York in Anglo @-@ Saxon England . He was related to a number of other ecclesiastics of the period . After becoming a monk at the monastery at Winchester , he was appointed Abbot of Tavistock Abbey in around 1027 . In 1046 he was named to the Bishopric of Worcester . Ealdred , besides his episcopal duties , served Edward the Confessor , the King of England , as a diplomat and as a military leader . He worked to bring one of the king 's relatives , Edward the Exile , back to England from Hungary to secure an heir for the childless king . 
 In 1058 he undertook a pilgrimage to Jerusalem , the first bishop from England to do so . As administrator of the Diocese of Hereford , he was involved in fighting against the Welsh , suffering two defeats at the hands of raiders before securing a settlement with Gruffydd ap Llywelyn , a Welsh ruler . 
 In 1060 , Ealdred was elected to the archbishopric of York , but had difficulty in obtaining papal approval for his appointment , only managing to do so when he promised not to hold the bishoprics of York and Worcester simultaneously . He helped secure the election of Wulfstan as his successor at Worcester . During his archiepiscopate , he built and embellished churches in his diocese , and worked to improve his clergy by holding a synod which published regulations for the priesthood . 
 Some sources state that following King Edward the Confessor 's death in 1066 , it was Ealdred who crowned Harold Godwinson as King of England . Ealdred supported Harold as king , but when Harold was defeated at the Battle of Hastings , Ealdred backed Edgar the Ætheling and then endorsed King William the Conqueror , the Duke of Normandy and a distant relative of King Edward 's . Ealdred crowned King William on Christmas Day in 1066 . William never quite trusted Ealdred or the other English leaders , and Ealdred had to accompany William back to Normandy in 1067 , but he had returned to York by the time of his death in 1069 . Ealdred supported the churches and monasteries in his diocese with gifts and building projects . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ealdred was probably born in the west of England , and could be related to Lyfing , his predecessor as bishop of Worcester . His family , from Devonshire , may have been well @-@ to @-@ do . Another relative was <unk> or Wulfstan , who under Ealdred 's influence became Abbot of Gloucester . Ealdred was a monk in the cathedral chapter at Winchester Cathedral before becoming abbot of Tavistock Abbey about 1027 , an office he held until about 1043 . Even after leaving the abbacy of Tavistock , he continued to hold two properties from the abbey until his death . No contemporary documents relating to Ealdred 's time as abbot have been discovered . 
 Ealdred was made bishop of Worcester in 1046 , a position he held until his resignation in 1062 . He may have acted as suffragan , or subordinate bishop , to his predecessor Lyfing before formally assuming the bishopric , as from about 1043 Ealdred witnessed as an episcopus , or bishop , and a charter from 1045 or early 1046 names Sihtric as abbot of Tavistock . Lyfing died on 26 March 1046 , and Ealdred became bishop of Worcester shortly after . However , Ealdred did not receive the other two dioceses that Lyfing had held , Crediton and Cornwall ; King Edward the Confessor ( reigned 1043 – 1066 ) granted these to Leofric , who combined the two sees at Crediton in 1050 . 
 = = Bishop and royal advisor = = 
 Ealdred was an advisor to King Edward the Confessor , and was often involved in the royal government . He was also a military leader , and in 1046 he led an unsuccessful expedition against the Welsh . This was in retaliation for a raid led by the Welsh rulers Gruffydd ap Rhydderch , Rhys ap Rhydderch , and Gruffydd ap Llywelyn . Ealdred 's expedition was betrayed by some Welsh soldiers who were serving with the English , and Ealdred was defeated . 
 In 1050 , Ealdred went to Rome " on the king 's errand " , apparently to secure papal approval to move the seat , or centre , of the bishopric of Crediton to Exeter . It may also have been to secure the release of the king from a vow to go on pilgrimage , if sources from after the Norman Conquest of England are to be believed . While in Rome , he attended a papal council , along with his fellow English bishop Herman . That same year , as Ealdred was returning to England he met Sweyn , a son of Godwin , Earl of Wessex , and probably absolved Sweyn for having abducted the abbess of Leominster Abbey in 1046 . Through Ealdred 's intercession , Sweyn was restored to his earldom , which he had lost after abducting the abbess and murdering his cousin Beorn <unk> . Ealdred helped Sweyn not only because Ealdred was a supporter of Earl Godwin 's family but because Sweyn 's earldom was close to his bishopric . As recently as 1049 Irish raiders had allied with Gruffydd ap Rhydderch of Gwent in raiding along the River Usk . Ealdred unsuccessfully tried to drive off the raiders , but was again routed by the Welsh . This failure underscored Ealdred 's need for a strong earl in the area to protect against raids . Normally , the bishop of Hereford would have led the defence in the absence of an Earl of Hereford , but in 1049 the incumbent , Æthelstan , was blind , so Ealdred took on the role of defender . 
 = = Diplomatic travels = = 
 Earl Godwin 's rebellion against the king in 1051 came as a blow to Ealdred , who was a supporter of the earl and his family . Ealdred was present at the royal council at London that banished Godwin 's family . Later in 1051 , when he was sent to intercept Harold Godwinson and his brothers as they fled England after their father 's outlawing , Ealdred " could not , or would not " capture the brothers . The banishment of Ealdred 's patron came shortly after the death of Ælfric Puttoc , the Archbishop of York . York and Worcester had long had close ties , and the two sees had often been held in plurality , or at the same time . Ealdred probably wanted to become Archbishop of York after Ælfric 's death , but his patron 's eclipse led to the king appointing Cynesige , a royal chaplain , instead . In September 1052 , though , Godwin returned from exile and his family was restored to power . By late 1053 Ealdred was once more in royal favour . At some point , he was alleged to have accompanied Swein on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land , but proof is lacking . 
 In 1054 King Edward sent Ealdred to Germany to obtain Emperor Henry III 's help in returning Edward the Exile , son of Edmund Ironside , to England . Edmund ( reigned 1016 ) was an elder half @-@ brother of King Edward the Confessor , and Edmund 's son Edward was in Hungary with King Andrew I , having left England as an infant after his father 's death and the accession of Cnut as King of England . In this mission Ealdred was somewhat successful and obtained insight into the working of the German church during a stay of a year with Hermann II , the Archbishop of Cologne . He also was impressed with the buildings he saw , and later incorporated some of the German styles into his own constructions . The main objective of the mission , however , was to secure the return of Edward ; but this failed , mainly because Henry III 's relations with the Hungarians were strained , and the emperor was unable or unwilling to help Ealdred . Ealdred was able to discover that Edward was alive , and had a place at the Hungarian court . Although some sources state that Ealdred attended the coronation of Emperor Henry IV , this is not possible , as on the date that Henry was crowned , Ealdred was in England consecrating an abbot . 
 Ealdred had returned to England by 1055 , and brought with him a copy of the Pontificale Romano @-@ <unk> , a set of liturgies , with him . An extant copy of this work , currently manuscript Cotton <unk> E xii , has been identified as a copy owned by Ealdred . It appears likely that the Rule of Chrodegang , a continental set of ordinances for the communal life of secular canons , was introduced into England by Ealdred sometime before 1059 . Probably he brought it back from Germany , possibly in concert with Harold . 
 After Ealdred 's return to England he took charge of the sees of Hereford and Ramsbury . Ealdred also administered Winchcombe Abbey and Gloucester Abbey . The authors of the Handbook of British Chronology Third Edition say he was named bishop of Hereford in 1056 , holding the see until he resigned it in 1060 , but other sources say that he merely administered the see while it was vacant , or that he was bishop of Hereford from 1055 to 1060 . 
 Ealdred became involved with the see of Ramsbury after its bishop Herman got into a dispute with King Edward over the movement of the seat of his bishopric to Malmesbury Abbey . Herman wished to move the seat of his see , but Edward refused permission for the move . Ealdred was a close associate of Herman 's , and the historian H. R. <unk> called Herman " something of an alter ego " to Ealdred . According to the medieval chronicler John of Worcester , Ealdred was given the see of Ramsbury to administer while Herman remained outside England . Herman returned in 1058 , and resumed his bishopric . There is no contemporary documentary evidence of Ealdred 's administration of Ramsbury . 
 = = Welsh affairs , Jerusalem , and Worcester = = 
 The king again employed Ealdred as a diplomat in 1056 , when he assisted earls Harold and Leofric in negotiations with the Welsh . Edward sent Ealdred after the death in battle of Bishop <unk> of Hereford , who had attacked Gruffydd ap Llywelyn after encouragement from the king . However , <unk> lost the battle and his life , and Edward had to sue for peace . Although details of the negotiations are lacking , Gruffydd ap Llywelyn swore loyalty to King Edward , but the oath may not have had any obligations on Gruffydd 's part to Edward . The exact terms of the submission are not known in total , but Gruffydd was not required to assist Edward in war nor attend Edward 's court . Ealdred was rewarded with the administration of the see of Hereford , which he held until 1061 , and was appointed Archbishop of York . The diocese had suffered a serious raid from the Welsh in 1055 , and during his administration , Ealdred continued the rebuilding of the cathedral church as well as securing the cathedral chapter 's rights . Ealdred was granted the administration in order that the area might have someone with experience with the Welsh in charge . 
 In 1058 Ealdred made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem , the first English bishop to make the journey . He travelled through Hungary , and the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle stated that " he went to Jerusalem in such state as no @-@ one had done before him " . While in Jerusalem he made a gift of a gold chalice to the church of the Holy Sepulchre . It is possible that the reason Ealdred travelled through Hungary was to arrange the travel of Edward the Exile 's family to England . Another possibility is that he wished to search for other possible heirs to King Edward in Hungary . It is not known exactly when Edward the Exile 's family returned to England , whether they returned with Edward in 1057 , or sometime later , so it is only a possibility that they returned with Ealdred in 1058 . 
 Very little documentary evidence is available from Ealdred 's time as Bishop of Worcester . Only five leases that he signed survive , and all date from 1051 to 1053 . Two further leases exist in Hemming 's Cartulary as copies only . How the diocese of Worcester was administered when Ealdred was abroad is unclear , although it appears that Wulfstan , the prior of the cathedral chapter , performed the religious duties in the diocese . On the financial side , the Evesham Chronicle states that Æthelwig , who became abbot of Evesham Abbey in 1058 , administered Worcester before he became abbot . 
 = = Archbishop of York = = 
 Cynesige , the archbishop of York , died on 22 December 1060 , and Ealdred was elected Archbishop of York on Christmas Day , 1060 . Although a bishop was promptly appointed to Hereford , none was named to Worcester , and it appears that Ealdred intended to retain Worcester along with York , which several of his predecessors had done . There were a few reasons for this , one of which was political , as the kings of England preferred to appoint bishops from the south to the northern bishoprics , hoping to counter the northern tendency towards separatism . Another reason was that York was not a wealthy see , and Worcester was . Holding Worcester along with York allowed the archbishop sufficient revenue to support himself . 
 In 1061 Ealdred travelled to Rome to receive the pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority . Journeying with him was Tostig , another son of Earl Godwin , who was now earl of Northumbria . William of Malmesbury says that Ealdred , by " amusing the simplicity of King Edward and alleging the custom of his predecessors , had acquired , more by bribery than by reason , the archbishopric of York while still holding his former see . " On his arrival in Rome , however , charges of simony , or the buying of ecclesiastical office , and lack of learning were brought against him , and his elevation to York was refused by Pope Nicholas II , who also deposed him from Worcester . The story of Ealdred being deposed comes from the Vita Edwardi , a life of Edward the Confessor , but the Vita <unk> , an account of the life of Ealdred 's successor at Worcester , Wulfstan , says that Nicholas refused the pallium until a promise to find a replacement for Worcester was given by Ealdred . Yet another chronicler , John of Worcester , mentions nothing of any trouble in Rome , and when discussing the appointment of Wulfstan , says that Wulfstan was elected freely and unanimously by the clergy and people . John of Worcester also claims that at Wulfstan 's consecration , Stigand , the archbishop of Canterbury extracted a promise from Ealdred that neither he nor his successors would lay claim to any jurisdiction over the diocese of Worcester . Given that John of Worcester wrote his chronicle after the eruption of the Canterbury – York supremacy struggle , the story of Ealdred renouncing any claims to Worcester needs to be considered suspect . 
 For whatever reason , Ealdred gave up the see of Worcester in 1062 , when papal legates arrived in England to hold a council and make sure that Ealdred relinquished Worcester . This happened at Easter in 1062 . Ealdred was succeeded by Wulfstan , chosen by Ealdred , but John of Worcester relates that Ealdred had a hard time deciding between Wulfstan and Æthelwig . The legates had urged the selection of Wulfstan because of his saintliness . Because the position of Stigand , the archbishop of Canterbury , was irregular , Wulfstan sought and received consecration as a bishop from Ealdred . Normally , Wulfstan would have gone to the archbishop of Canterbury , as the see of Worcester was within Canterbury 's province . Although Ealdred gave up the bishopric , the appointment of Wulfstan was one that allowed Ealdred to continue his considerable influence on the see of Worcester . Ealdred retained a number of estates belonging to Worcester . Even after the Norman Conquest , Ealdred still controlled some events in Worcester , and it was Ealdred , not Wulfstan , who opposed Urse d 'Abetot 's attempt to extend the castle of Worcester into the cathedral after the Norman Conquest . 
 While archbishop , Ealdred built at Beverley , expanding on the building projects begun by his predecessor Cynesige , as well as repairing and expanding other churches in his diocese . He also built <unk> for the canons at York and Southwell . He also was the one bishop that published ecclesiastical legislation during Edward the Confessor 's reign , attempting to discipline and reform the clergy . He held a synod of his clergy shortly before 1066 . 
 = = After the death of Edward the Confessor = = 
 John of Worcester , a medieval chronicler , stated that Ealdred crowned King Harold II in 1066 , although the Norman chroniclers mention Stigand as the officiating prelate . Given Ealdred 's known support of Godwin 's family , John of Worcester is probably correct . Stigand 's position as archbishop was canonically suspect , and as earl Harold had not allowed Stigand to consecrate one of the earl 's churches , it is unlikely that Harold would have allowed Stigand to perform the much more important royal coronation . Arguments for Stigand having performed the coronation , however , rely on the fact that no other English source names the ecclesiastic who performed the ceremony ; all Norman sources name Stigand as the <unk> . In all events , Ealdred and Harold were close , and Ealdred supported Harold 's bid to become king . Ealdred perhaps accompanied Harold when the new king went to York and secured the support of the northern magnates shortly after Harold 's consecration . 
 According to the medieval chronicler Geoffrey Gaimar , after the Battle of Stamford Bridge Harold entrusted the loot gained from Harold Hardrada to Ealdred . Gaimar asserts that King Harold did this because he had heard of Duke William 's landing in England , and needed to rush south to counter it . After the Battle of Hastings , Ealdred joined the group who tried to elevate Edgar the Ætheling , Edward the Exile 's son , as king , but eventually he submitted to William the Conqueror at Berkhamsted . John of Worcester says that the group supporting Edgar vacillated over what to do while William ravaged the countryside , which led to Ealdred and Edgar 's submission to William . 
 Ealdred crowned William king on Christmas Day 1066 . An innovation in William 's coronation ceremony was that before the actual crowning , Ealdred asked the assembled crowd , in English , if it was their wish that William be crowned king . The Bishop of Coutances then did the same , but in Norman French . In March 1067 , William took Ealdred with him when William returned to Normandy , along with the other English leaders Earl Edwin of Mercia , Earl Morcar , Edgar the Ætheling , and Archbishop Stigand . Ealdred at Whitsun 1068 performed the coronation of Matilda , William 's wife . The Laudes Regiae , or song commending a ruler , that was performed at Matilda 's coronation may have been composed by Ealdred himself for the occasion . In 1069 , when the northern thegns rebelled against William and attempted to install Edgar the Ætheling as king , Ealdred continued to support William . He was the only northern leader to support William , however . Ealdred was back at York by 1069 ; he died there on 11 September 1069 , and was buried in his episcopal cathedral . He may have taken an active part in trying to calm the rebellions in the north in 1068 and 1069 . The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury records a story that when the new sheriff of Worcester , Urse d 'Abetot , encroached on the cemetery of the cathedral chapter for Worcester Cathedral , Ealdred pronounced a rhyming curse on him , saying " Thou are called Urse . May you have God 's curse . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Ealdred 's death , one of the restraints on William 's treatment of the English was removed . Ealdred was one of a few native Englishmen who William appears to have trusted , and his death led to fewer attempts to integrate Englishmen into the administration , although such efforts did not entirely stop . In 1070 , a church council was held at Westminster and a number of bishops were deposed . By 1073 there were only two Englishmen in episcopal sees , and by the time of William 's death in 1089 , there was only one , Wulfstan II of Worcester . 
 Ealdred did much to restore discipline in the monasteries and churches under his authority , and was liberal with gifts to the churches of his diocese . He built the monastic church of St Peter at Gloucester ( now Gloucester Cathedral , though nothing of his fabric remains ) , then part of his diocese of Worcester . He also repaired a large part of Beverley Minster in the diocese of York , adding a presbytery and an unusually splendid painted ceiling covering " all the upper part of the church from the choir to the tower ... intermingled with gold in various ways , and in a wonderful fashion " . He added a pulpit " in German style " of bronze , gold and silver , surmounted by an arch with a rood cross in the same materials ; these were examples of the lavish decorations added to important churches in the years before the conquest . 
 Ealdred encouraged Folcard , a monk of Canterbury , to write the Life Saint John of Beverley . This was part of Ealdred 's promotion of the cult of Saint John , who had only been canonised in 1037 . Along with the Pontificale , Ealdred may have brought back from Cologne the first manuscript of the Cambridge Songs to enter England , a collection of Latin <unk> songs which became famous in the Middle Ages . The historian Michael Lapidge suggests that the Laudes Regiae , which are included in Cotton Vitellius E xii , might have been composed by Ealdred , or a member of his household . Another historian , H. J. Cowdrey , argued that the laudes were composed at Winchester . These praise songs are probably the same performed at Matilda 's coronation , but might have been used at other court ceremonies before Ealdred 's death . 
 Historians have seen Ealdred as an " old @-@ fashioned prince @-@ bishop " . Others say that he " raised the see of York from its former rustic state " . He was known for his generosity and for his diplomatic and administrative abilities . After the Conquest , Ealdred provided a degree of continuity between the pre- and post @-@ Conquest worlds . One modern historian feels that it was Ealdred who was behind the compilation of the D version of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , and gives a date in the 1050s as its composition . Certainly , Ealdred is one of the leading figures in the work , and it is likely that one of his clerks compiled the version . 
 = 1976 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season = 
 The 1976 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season was the team ’ s first in the National Football League . The Buccaneers gained infamy as the first team to play an entire 14 @-@ game season without winning or tying a single game . They did not score until their third game and did not score a touchdown until their fourth . They lost by a touchdown 11 or more times . Colorful , maverick former USC coach John McKay , whose wisecracking remarks occasionally agitated fans and the league , led the team . Lee Roy Selmon , the Buccaneers ’ first Hall of Fame representative , made his rookie debut in an injury @-@ plagued season . 
 The expansion draft was largely made up of aging veterans , giving the Buccaneers little basis for success . The lack of medical information provided on players in the expansion draft contributed heavily to the team ’ s problems , as they finished the season with 17 players on injured reserve . They were last in the league in points scored , touchdowns , and rushing touchdowns . After a 19 @-@ point 4th @-@ quarter performance brought them within striking distance of a victory in week 8 against the Kansas City Chiefs , they were blown out of every game the rest of the season . Subsequent expansion teams were given a more generous allotment of draft picks and expansion draft opportunities , in part to avoid a repeat of the Buccaneers ’ difficulties . 
 = = John McKay = = 
 Owner Hugh Culverhouse , encouraged by recommendations from Vice President of Operations Ron Wolf and Alabama coaching legend Bear Bryant , chose John McKay , winner of four national championships with the USC Trojans , as the first Buccaneer head coach . Aided by a string of great tailbacks , including Heisman Trophy winners O. J. Simpson and Mike Garrett , McKay was credited with popularizing the I formation . Other candidates considered included Hank Stram , Ara Parseghian , and Joe Paterno . McKay was reportedly offered a five @-@ year contract worth $ 750 @,@ 000 , plus cars , insurance , and real estate , and turned down an offer from the Seattle Seahawks and a counter @-@ offer from USC to take the job . Critical of the NFL , he had turned down offers from professional teams in the past . McKay cited NCAA cutbacks in finances and recruiting as motivations for leaving the college ranks , saying simply that it was “ time to try something else ” . McKay ’ s only promise was that he would beat what he called “ Pittsburgh ’ s timetable ” , referencing the fact that it took the Steelers 41 years to win their first championship . Coach McKay would prove to be somewhat correct as Tampa Bay won the NFC 's Central Division in 1979 , the team 's third year of existence , though it would take the team 26 seasons to win its first championship , which occurred in the 2002 season . 
 = = = McKay quotes = = = 
 McKay had a natural sense of humor that helped him to cope with the pressures of the long losing streak , and it was not unusual for his press conferences to resemble comedy routines . While this may have helped cope with the on @-@ field frustrations , it also served to mask how difficult the experience was for him , a situation his son Rich compared to “ taking off in a jet airplane and finding out that neither engine works . " 
 On hearing about kicker Pete <unk> ’ s nervousness at playing in front of McKay : “ That ’ s unfortunate , as I plan on attending all the games ” . 
 At a postgame press conference : “ You guys don ’ t know the difference between a football and a bunch of bananas . " 
 At the following week ’ s press conference , after a member of the media left a case of bananas at his door : “ You guys don ’ t know the difference between a football and a Mercedes @-@ Benz . " 
 On John Brodie ’ s comment that Steve Spurrier throws one of three passes into the ground : “ That ’ s OK , we ’ ll just get shorter receivers . " 
 “ We ’ ve determined that we can ’ t win at home and we can ’ t win on the road . What we need is a neutral site . " 
 “ We didn ’ t block real good , but we made up for it by not tackling . " 
 When asked how he compared coaching in Tampa to coaching at USC : “ It ’ s a three @-@ hour time difference . " 
 “ Mr. Culverhouse has been a great owner . He hasn ’ t come to the dressing room yet to give me any suggestions . Well , I need some advice . I called the Baltimore owner , but he was busy ” . 
 To players planning on staying in Tampa over the offseason : “ Stop by my office tomorrow and pick up some fake noses and mustaches so no one recognizes your sorry asses ” . 
 “ We ’ ll be back . Maybe not in this century , but we ’ ll be back . " 
 Additionally , assistant coach Dennis <unk> , when the team was penalized for having 12 players on the field , asked a referee , “ Which one was it ? " And injured guard Ira Gordon reportedly told McKay , “ Coach , I got the x @-@ ray , but I don ’ t feel any better ” . 
 = = = McKay ’ s comments on coaching in the NFL = = = 
 I don ’ t know what this pro football mystique is . I ’ ve gone to the pro camps . They throw the ball , they catch the ball . Many of them are ex @-@ USC players . I ’ m not amazed at what they do . I ’ ve watched the pros play . They run traps , they pitch the ball , they sweep . What else is there ? 
 - John McKay , in Sports Illustrated 
 Coach McKay had won four national championships while coaching at USC , and he never hesitated to express his lack of awe at the NFL . He earned enemies in the league with his dismissive comments and nonchalant attitude . The league liked to promote the games as having life @-@ or @-@ death significance , and were undercut by a coach who would make statements such as , “ You draw Xs and Os on a blackboard and that ’ s not so difficult . I can even do it with my left hand ” . Such statements made the Buccaneers ’ road more difficult , as a feeling grew around the league that McKay was a newcomer who needed to be taught a lesson . Linebacker Richard “ Batman ” Wood echoed those sentiments : “ It was a brand @-@ new organization . Who cared about us ? They wanted to devastate us , beat us in the ground . And with coach McKay coming from college , they wanted to maybe even play us a little harder . " Examples given of opponents using McKay ’ s comments as an excuse to run up the score included the reverse that Denver ran late in a 48 – 10 victory , and the timeout that Chuck Fairbanks called at the end of the Patriots game to enable Steve Grogan to break the NFL record of season rushing touchdowns by a quarterback . One sports analyst had predicted that McKay ’ s lucrative contract would encourage opposing coaches to run up the score on the Buccaneers , to be able to demonstrate to their team owners that they were deserving of similar money . 
 Fed up with the attitude that he had to prove himself in the NFL , McKay once drunkenly needled Don Shula by saying , “ I think pro coaches should have to prove themselves by winning four national championships in the colleges ” . He later admitted to having ruffled some feathers in the NFL , but said , “ it wasn ’ t as if they didn ’ t deserve it ” . 
 = = Other winless teams = = 
 Five previous teams finished with a winless and <unk> season record , mostly during World War II : the 1934 Cincinnati Reds at 0 – 8 , the 1942 Detroit Lions at 0 – 11 , the 1943 Chicago Cardinals at 0 – 10 , and the 1944 Brooklyn Tigers and Chicago Cardinals / Pittsburgh Steelers at 0 – 10 ( the Cardinals and Steelers merged for the 1944 season and are commonly referred to as Card @-@ Pitt , or , derisively , as the “ carpet ” ) . 
 The 0 – 14 record was matched by the 1980 New Orleans Saints , who won their penultimate game to end the season 1 – 15 . The 1981 Baltimore Colts then won their opener and closer , but lost every game in between to equal the Buccaneers ’ and Saints ’ 14 @-@ game single @-@ season losing streak . The 1982 Colts were winless in a strike @-@ shortened season , but did get a tie in one game . The 1990 New England Patriots had a 1 – 1 record when several of the players sexually harassed a female reporter . The fallout from the scandal contributed to the team finishing 0 – 14 in its remaining games . Finally , and most recently , the 2013 Houston Texans have managed to match the Buccaneers ' single @-@ season losing streak after starting 2 @-@ 0 . 
 The Buccaneers ’ record for consecutive games lost in a single season would be surpassed twice ; by the 2001 Carolina Panthers , who lost fifteen consecutive games after winning their opener , and the 2008 Detroit Lions , the only winless team to have done so in a 16 @-@ game schedule . Ten NFL teams since the 1976 Buccaneers have lost 15 or 16 games in a season , but the Buccaneers ’ 26 @-@ game losing streak from 1976 to 1977 still stands as the longest in modern NFL history . The aforementioned Detroit Lions have come the closest to matching the Buccaneers ' losing streak , having lost 19 consecutive games between 2007 until finally winning in week 3 of the 2009 season . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 The Buccaneers signed their first @-@ ever free agents in January : former Birmingham Americans and Nebraska guard Tom Alward , Denver Broncos and Notre Dame defensive end Pete <unk> , and Chicago Bears wide receiver Wayne Wheeler . Having not selected a quarterback in the veteran allocation draft , they addressed that need in their first @-@ ever trade , a deal to get local favorite Steve Spurrier from the San Francisco 49ers . The former Heisman Trophy winner was obtained for a second @-@ round draft choice and two of the veteran draftees , Bruce Elia and Willie McGee . An earlier attempt to obtain a quarterback failed when the team sent a future draft pick to the Saints for backup quarterback Larry <unk> , only to waive him when he failed his physical . The Buccaneers also used a third @-@ round pick to obtain defensive back Mike Washington from the Baltimore Colts . 
 = = = Coaching Staff = = = 
 Ron Wolf , who had been the Oakland Raiders ’ Director of Player Personnel since 1963 and was credited with much of their success , was hired as Vice President of Operations . Los Angeles Rams general manager Don Klosterman and former Kansas City Chiefs head coach Hank Stram were early candidates for the job ; but Klosterman withdrew , and Stram was interested in a combined coach / general manager position . Wolf was directly responsible for the drafting of 20 of the Raiders ’ 22 starters , and his effectiveness at scouting talent was believed to be a major reason for the Raiders ’ being one of the few teams not to belong to a scouting combine . The Buccaneers quickly developed a Raiders flavor , choosing to hire a scouting staff rather than rely on the computerized scouting reports that almost all other teams were using , and hiring Raiders business manager Ken LaRue to serve in the same capacity . One of Wolf ’ s responsibilities was to assist in the hiring of a head coach . Wolf persuaded Culverhouse that it would be better for any prospect to gain a year of experience and knowledge in his present job , rather than be named at expansion time , when there was little or no advantage to having a coach in place . 
 Wolf named Tom Bass director of player personnel . Bass had previously served as head of scouting and defensive coordinator for the Cincinnati Bengals , the only team apart from the Buccaneers and Raiders that still maintained a human scouting staff instead of using the computerized services , and the team on whose model the Buccaneers ’ expansion strategy was patterned . Bass was Paul Brown ’ s first coaching hire with the expansion Bengals , and previously had been an assistant under Sid Gillman with the San Diego Chargers , and with Don Coryell at San Diego State . Former McKay assistant and Utah State head coach Phil Krueger was added to the staff , joined shortly thereafter by USC assistants Wayne Fontes and Willie Brown , as defensive backs and receivers coaches , respectively . Dennis <unk> , the last University of Tampa head coach , was added to handle special teams . Denver Broncos assistant Jerry Frei was hired as offensive line coach , becoming McKay ’ s first assistant hired from the professional ranks , and was followed by former New York Jets defensive coordinator Dick <unk> , hired initially as defensive line coach . Abe Gibron , former head coach of the Chicago Bears and college teammate of McKay at Purdue , was brought on board as a defensive assistant . The staff was completed with the addition of Atlanta Falcons assistant and former Oakland Raiders and Buffalo Bills head coach John Rauch as offensive coordinator . Tampa resident Harry Smith , a trainer with experience working with local college athletes such as John <unk> and Gary Huff , became the team ’ s strength and conditioning coach . 
 = = = Expansion Draft = = = 
 The list of available players was released only 72 hours before the draft , and included many medical rejects who did not even report to training camp . McKay initially felt that the draft included a higher @-@ than @-@ expected level of talent , joking that “ they ’ re in their late 30s . I couldn ’ t be happier ” . While the expansion draft did not include many well @-@ known starters , it included several players who had notoriety with previous professional and college teams : 
 Larry Ball and Doug Swift of the undefeated 1972 Miami Dolphins team . Swift was left unprotected by the Dolphins , and the Buccaneers drafted him , unaware of the previous day ’ s newspaper report that Swift had been accepted into medical school and would be retiring from football . 
 Joe <unk> , who played for the 1971 Nebraska Cornhuskers National Championship team and caught an interception in their Orange Bowl win over Alabama . 
 Former USC tailbacks Anthony Davis and Manfred Moore . Davis did not report immediately , as he was still under contract to the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League . 
 Starting San Diego Chargers guard Ira Gordon . 
 Howard Fest , a member of the Cincinnati Bengals 1968 expansion team . 
 Harold Hart , the Oakland Raiders running back who had led the AFC in kick returns the previous season . 
 Vince Kendrick , the former Florida Gators fullback who had been left unprotected by the Atlanta Falcons due to a knee injury . 
 Johnny McKay , former USC wide receiver and son of coach McKay . McKay and Anthony Davis also both played with the Southern California Sun of the World Football League before joining the NFL . 
 Dave Pear , who would become the first Buccaneer selected as an All @-@ Pro . 
 Pat Toomay , the Buffalo Bills ’ defensive line MVP and former Dallas Cowboy , who he believed was placed on the expansion list as a form of blackballing due to the publication of his novel The Crunch . 
 Mike Current and Ken Stone , who would go on to have productive careers with the Dolphins and Cardinals , respectively . 
 Mark Cotney and Dave Reavis , who went on to become key starters for the Buccaneers . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 The 1976 NFL Draft was considered to be the worst draft class in many years , with only eight high @-@ quality prospects , as compared to the normal 27 or 28 . The popularity of the wishbone offense among college teams left the draft devoid of quarterback prospects . A drawing held the previous December gave the Buccaneers the rights to the first overall selection . 
 = = = = Draft Trades = = = = 
 As an expansion team , the Buccaneers were given two extra picks in each of the 2nd – 5th rounds . Their second 2nd @-@ round pick was traded to the San Francisco 49ers for quarterback Steve Spurrier . Their first 3rd @-@ round pick was traded to Baltimore for cornerback Mike Washington . Their first 4th @-@ round pick and last 5th @-@ round picks were traded to the Los Angeles Rams for linebacker Jim Peterson . Their 8th @-@ round pick was traded to the New York Jets for linebacker Steve Reese . 
 = = = = Draft Selections = = = = 
 With the first selection in the draft , the Buccaneers picked Lee Roy Selmon , considered to be the best defensive tackle in Oklahoma history and described as “ one of the greatest defensive linemen I have ever watched ” by coach McKay . Shortly thereafter , with their second pick of the second round , they took his brother Dewey . The two , who were the two leading tacklers on the 1975 Oklahoma Sooners football team , were the third pair of brothers in NFL history to go to the same team in the same draft . They became the only pair of brothers to play for the same NFL team at the same time until Lyle Blackwood joined his brother Glenn on the Miami Dolphins ’ roster in 1981 . The move prompted brother Lucious Selmon to offer to come out of retirement if Tampa Bay would obtain his NFL rights . The Buccaneers spent their first second @-@ round pick on Florida fullback Jimmy DuBose , and took Colorado offensive tackle Steve Young in the third round . Later @-@ round picks who made the team included defensive back Curtis Jordan , quarterback Parnell Dickinson , and running back George Ragsdale . Carl Roaches , later a Pro Bowl return man for the Houston Oilers , and Tommy West , later the head coach of the University of Memphis , were selected by the Buccaneers but did not make the roster . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 The Buccaneers ’ first training camp began on July 6 , at the team ’ s training facility near Tampa International Airport , with a crew from NFL Films on hand to film the proceedings . Chicago Bears quarterback and Tampa native Gary Huff showed up to taunt the receivers . McKay noted that many of the players were out of shape , and expressed surprise at players who he felt were not taking advantage of a big opportunity . Ron Wolf , after seeing the team ’ s players in action , admitted disappointment at his own efforts in assembling the team . Defensive coordinator Abe Gibron , who promised to be honest with each player about his performance and told one that he had a chance of making the team , but that “ You ’ re built like Tarzan , but you run like Jane ” , assessed the defense as having the makings of a great front four . The team ’ s smallest , and perhaps fastest , player was Carl Roaches , who at 5 ' 6 ½ " and 165 pounds , could run the 100 @-@ yard dash in 9 @.@ 5 seconds . The team ’ s strongest player was fitness fanatic Dave Pear , who could bench press 10 repetitions at 400 pounds . McKay was unimpressed with the candidates at backup quarterback , saying of one injured contender , “ his hand is still bad , but his passing is worse ” . Middle linebacker soon proved to be a position for which there were no quality candidates in camp . Running back George Ragsdale impressed the coaches , but broke his wrist in training camp . Essex Johnson , the Cincinnati Bengals ’ all @-@ time leading rusher and one of three remaining original Bengals , was obtained for “ undisclosed considerations ” . 
 The ( as McKay liked to point out , undefeated ) team made their game debut against the Los Angeles Rams in an exhibition at the Los Angeles Coliseum on July 31 , losing 26 @-@ 3 . McKay called the players ’ performance “ unaggressive , uninspiring , lethargic , and unacceptable ” , and cut 15 players one day prior to the following Tuesday ’ s <unk> date . McKay was pleased with the following week ’ s improved performance against the Green Bay Packers , a 10 – 6 loss in which a late interception of a Parnell Dickinson pass prevented a likely Buccaneer victory . After the Packers referred to them as the “ Tampa Buccaneers ” , the Buccaneers threatened to introduce the “ Green Packers ” at their next meeting . The Buccaneers ’ first victory came in a 17 – 3 preseason win over the favored Atlanta Falcons , in which they scored on runs by Steve Spurrier and Essex Johnson , and a <unk> Roder field goal . Although the win had no official significance , it raised optimism among fans , particularly due to the team ’ s defensive performance . McKay himself was puzzled , unsure whether the win was due to a superior performance by Tampa Bay , or a lack of effort by the Falcons . Their home debut came in a 28 – 21 loss to the Miami Dolphins , in front of a crowd of 71 @,@ 718 , a crowd which Dolphins owner Joe Robbie said proved his longtime prediction that a Bay Area team would be a success . 
 The late preseason saw a wave of signings of players cut by other teams , particularly the Bengals and Colts . Signees included Isaac Hagins , Danny Reece , Dave Green , and Jack Novak , with Ira Gordon and camp standout Jim Cagle among those waived to make roster space for them . Running back Charlie Davis was also obtained via trade . The moves left the team with nine former Bengals on their roster , a situation they expected , as they knew that Bengals owner Paul Brown had more young talent than he would be able to keep on his team . Linebacker Richard Wood was obtained from the New York Jets for a future draft choice , with injury @-@ plagued running back Harold Hart placed on injured reserve to make roster space for him . Wood was the final roster addition of the preseason , and became the fifth ex @-@ USC player on the roster . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 According to coach McKay , the team ’ s progress was set back as they spent the preseason trying to find out which veterans would develop into regulars , but found that the younger players were better . This meant that the team started over from the beginning as the regular season began . The tone for the season seemed to be set as the team got lost in the Houston Astrodome when leaving the locker room to take the field for their opening game . They spent 20 minutes trying to find their way out , and barely made it to the field in time for the opening kickoff . The team started out with solid defensive play , ranking in the top 10 until injuries began to set in . They began to wear out as the Buccaneers ’ offensive ineptitude meant that the defense spent a lot of time on the field , over 100 plays in some games . Receiver Johnny McKay pointed out the tendency of the offense to feel pressured after a three @-@ and @-@ out possession , with the result that they would press even harder the next time , quickly going three @-@ and @-@ out again . Coach McKay said early on that controlling the ball for 40 percent of the game , as they were , was not long enough to win . Placekicker <unk> Roder was cut after missing three field goals in the first two games , in both of which the Buccaneers were shut out , giving their offense the nickname “ Zero Gang ” , which stuck with them through a total of eleven shutouts before their first victory as a franchise . 
 Roder was not replaced , with punter Dave Green taking over his duties . Rick Jennings spent the shortest amount of time with the club of all players that season ; picked up on waivers from the Raiders on a Tuesday , he was released the same Thursday . New uniforms had to be ordered for the team when it was discovered that the fans could not tell the players apart because the numerals on the white uniforms could not be seen from the stands . Many local Miami Dolphins fans were angered when the NFL upheld the Buccaneers ’ demand that Dolphin games not be broadcast in the Tampa Bay area on days that the Buccaneers play at home . The timing of the decision led to the firing of Director of Administration Curt Mosher after the season . 
 The team failed to throw a touchdown pass in any of their first five games , three of which were shutout losses . Offensive coordinator John Rauch walked out on the team during the week 5 game against Cincinnati , and gave ' personal differences ' as the reason for his resignation . His duties were taken over by McKay , who pointed to the increased effectiveness of the team ’ s “ simpler ” offense , saying that they were no longer “ trying to do all the things people said you have to do in this league ” . On a strange NFL weekend in which O.J. Simpson was ejected from a game for fighting , the Chicago Bears lost a game due to a referee ’ s inadvertent whistle , and Minnesota Vikings receiver Sammy White fumbled away a touchdown due to starting his celebration before entering the end zone , McKay launched an obscenity @-@ filled tirade against Denver Broncos coach John Ralston after a blowout loss . McKay admitted that his feelings dated back to their college rivalry , when McKay coached at USC and Ralston coached at Stanford University , but pointed to specific plays such as a reverse and a last @-@ minute punt return as evidence that Ralston was trying to run up the score . Third @-@ string running back Manfred Moore caught a lucky break when , waived after the week 13 game against the Pittsburgh Steelers , he was picked up by the Oakland Raiders as an injury replacement for ex @-@ Buccaneer Rick Jennings . He wound up going from an 0 – 13 team to the eventual Super Bowl champion . Players began to meet for postgame parties at Steve Spurrier ’ s house , in order to avoid having to show their faces in public . According to defensive end Pat Toomay , “ By the time we got to the last game of the season , we had so many injuries that we didn ’ t feel we had much of a chance . Everybody was so sick of the season that they showed up packed and ready to get out of town . It looked like a bunch of Okies fleeing the dust bowl . " McKay said that the week 4 game against the Baltimore Colts summed up the season : “ On one play I looked up and one of our guys was getting kicked out of the game , and two more were getting carried off ” . 
 The team did not score a touchdown until cornerback Danny Reece returned a fumble 44 yards in the fourth game . Running back Louis Carter threw their first touchdown pass in an “ Expansion Bowl ” loss to the Seattle Seahawks in which the two teams combined for 310 yards in penalties . They were outscored 412 – 125 , allowed 6 @.@ 7 yards per play , and allowed an average of 183 rushing yards per game . 
 Several factors contributed to the Buccaneers ’ record . One was the stinginess of owner Culverhouse , who went so far as to lease the team jet from McCullough ( the chainsaw manufacturer ) Airlines . At times Culverhouse had to pay for fuel with his own credit card , because of McCullough ’ s financial difficulties . The offense was able to move the ball freely at times , but had difficulty getting the ball into the end zone . McKay and Spurrier had a difficult relationship , with Spurrier at times taking public potshots at McKay . Frustrated by the lack of quality receivers , Spurrier criticized McKay for playing his own son Johnny ahead of receivers Spurrier considered more capable . Coach McKay , for his part , questioned ( rightly , according to Spurrier himself ) Spurrier ’ s drive , although he publicly defended Spurrier by terming fans who booed him “ idiots ” . Spurrier was not the only player angered over the younger McKay ’ s retention , and Pat Toomay later alleged that Spurrier would throw passes over the middle to McKay in an attempt to get him injured , but that McKay made no effort to catch them . Injuries were a large factor . Only five Buccaneers started all 14 games , and neither of the team ’ s projected starting running backs , Harold Hart and Vince Kendrick , ever played a regular @-@ season down for the team . The defense , who played the equivalent of two seasons in one due to the inability of the offense to mount sustained drives , was hit particularly hard by injuries . Toward the end of the year , the roster got so thin that the team signed undersized ex @-@ USC linebacker Jimmie “ Psycho ” Sims straight off the streets . With no time to learn the system , Sims was simply instructed to blitz on every down . Finally , the losing was in part by design : McKay was determined to give experience to young players who he felt could help the team in the future , rather than obtain veterans who might help the team win a few games in the short run , but who would no longer be around by the time the team would develop into a championship contender . 
 The 2008 NFL Network program “ 10 Worst Teams of All Time ” ( produced prior to the Lions ’ winless season ) recognized the 1976 Buccaneers as the worst NFL team ever , although it is disputed whether their record was not deceptive , as they were decimated by injuries and were a play away from victory several times . There is some opinion that the 1976 team was not even the worst in Buccaneers history , with the 2 – 14 1986 squad deserving of that distinction . 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 = = Standings = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 1 : at Houston Oilers = = = 
 September 12 , 1976 at The Astrodome , Houston , Texas 
 The Buccaneers , making their NFL debut against the Houston Oilers , averaged less than two yards per offensive play . They were unable to score despite being given good field position by two Oiler fumbles . Steve Spurrier completed 8 of 21 passes for 36 yards , and starting running backs Jimmy DuBose and Louis Carter rushed for 12 yards on 15 carries . Despite being outgained 169 to 8 by the second quarter , they were only behind 7 – 0 and missed a chance to tie the score when Lee McGriff dropped a Spurrier pass in the end zone . A later drive ended when Spurrier overthrew John McKay , Jr . , instead hitting defender C.L. Whittington . A third chance to tie the score was lost when Mark Cotney dropped an interception of a Dan <unk> pass with a clear path to the end zone . Whittington gave the Buccaneers the ball on the Oiler 11 @-@ yard line by fumbling a punt , but then killed the Buccaneers ’ scoring chances by intercepting another Spurrier pass . Ronnie Coleman ran 25 times for 142 yards for the Oilers . McKay expressed concern over the team ’ s offense after the defeat , and responded to a reporter ’ s taunt of “ I thought you said you were going to win some games ? ” by saying , “ Houston has been in the league 6 @,@ 000 years and still hasn ’ t won a championship . The Bucs will be heard from ” . It was a day with a bad beginning , middle , and ending for the Buccaneers . The day began with the Buccaneers getting lost in the maze @-@ like Astrodome interior , and ended with the team ’ s charter plane bouncing and rolling before righting itself on landing . In addition , starting tackle Dave Reavis was injured during pregame warmups and was lost for the season . 
 = = = Week 2 : vs San Diego Chargers = = = 
 September 19 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , <unk> San Diego Chargers got 16 first downs , compared to 5 for the Buccaneers . Chargers players and coaches praised the Buccaneers ’ defense , who held them to 9 points until the final three minutes of the game , saying that they played the equivalent of five quarters . Three Tampa Bay quarterbacks completed a combined 3 of 8 passes for − 4 yards . Buccaneers receiver Bob Moore said , “ We ’ re at rock bottom now ... but if we start pointing a finger , we ’ ll go 0 – 14 ” . The Chargers finished with 325 yards of offense to the Buccaneers ’ 125 . Inconsistent blocking was blamed for the offensive problems , a situation that was not helped by the injury to tackle Dave Reavis . Mercury Morris , who had been picked up on waivers by the Chargers from the Miami Dolphins after the Buccaneers ’ preseason game against the Dolphins , commented that the difference in Buccaneers ’ offensive line protection between the two games was like watching two different teams . The Buccaneers ’ lack of speed was also noticeable . The loss marked the first time since 1961 that a professional football team was shut out in the first two games of the season , when the Oakland Raiders were shut out by the same two teams in the same order . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs Buffalo Bills = = = 
 September 26 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Buccaneers scored their first points , but were not able to score enough to win , despite statistically outperforming the Buffalo Bills in most phases of the game . The Buccaneers had only three Dave Green field goals to show for seven possessions inside the Bills ’ 22 @-@ yard line . O.J. Simpson , who would rush for a season total of 1 @,@ 503 yards , was held to only 39 yards on twenty carries . The Bills , the highest @-@ scoring team in recent years , were 1 of 12 in third @-@ down conversions , and were surpassed in yardage , first downs , rushing average , and number of total plays . Buffalo took the lead on Bob Chandler ’ s 58 @-@ yard reception of a tipped pass . The Buccaneers ’ 338 yards of offense , a great improvement over their previous two games , coincided with coach McKay ’ s relenting to Steve Spurrier ’ s demands that he be able to call his own plays . Spurrier suffered a bone chip in his throwing hand that made his status questionable for the next week ’ s game . 
 = = = Week 4 : at Baltimore Colts = = = 
 October 3 , 1976 at Memorial Stadium , Baltimore , Maryland 
 After taking a 3 – 0 lead against one of the league ’ s better teams on a Dave Green field goal , the Buccaneers were overwhelmed by the Baltimore Colts in a disastrous second quarter . A Danny Reece interception of a Bert Jones pass was called back due to a roughing @-@ the @-@ passer penalty , and another was dropped by Richard Wood . Cornerback Mike Washington was thrown out of the game for fighting . Cal Peterson and Lee Roy Selmon went out with knee injuries . Film of the game appeared to indicate that the injury to Selmon was intentional . The Colts followed with 9 points in each of the next two quarters . The Buccaneers finally scored their first two touchdowns of the year , a fumble return by Danny Reece and a 1 @-@ yard Charlie Davis run . The Colts set team records with eight sacks , and with 124 penalty yards . They outgained Tampa Bay 458 yards to 89 and 31 first downs to 6 . The Buccaneers were only able to complete four passes ; wide receiver Lee McGriff was their leading passer with a 39 @-@ yard completion . Said McKay afterward , “ Field position hurt us badly , dropped passes hurt us badly , no blocking hurt us badly , injuries hurt us badly , and penalties hurt us badly . Otherwise , it was a perfect afternoon . " 
 = = = Week 5 : at Cincinnati Bengals = = = 
 October 10 , 1976 at Riverfront Stadium , Cincinnati , Ohio 
 With four defensive starters out with injuries , the Buccaneers spotted the Cincinnati Bengals a 14 – 0 first @-@ quarter lead . The defense came together for the last three quarters , with the only points coming from Tommy Casanova ’ s 25 @-@ yard fumble return for a touchdown . Ken Anderson , the AFC ’ s leading passer , was held to 98 yards passing . Lacking healthy linebackers , the Buccaneers abandoned their 3 – 4 defense in favor of a 4 – 3 . The Buccaneers held a 191 – 174 yardage advantage over the AFC Central @-@ leading Bengals in the final 45 minutes . The Bengals declined to hand out game balls to any of their players after the win . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs Seattle Seahawks = = = 
 October 17 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Seattle Seahawks linebacker Mike Curtis blocked a field goal that would have sent the game into overtime , guaranteeing a Seahawk victory in what was billed as the “ expansion bowl ” meeting between two winless , first @-@ year teams . The Buccaneers outgained the Seahawks , 285 yards to 253 , but the officials outgained both , with 310 yards in penalties . The 35 penalties ( accepted , 41 were thrown by the officials ) were two short of the 25 @-@ year @-@ old league record . Each team was penalized for holding eight times . Defensive tackle Pat Toomay complained that “ the officials made us look like a bunch of idiots ” . Dan Ryczek was the only Buccaneer lineman not to be called for holding . Tampa Bay running back Louis Carter , stuffed at the goal line , threw the ball to Morris Owens , who dived into the end zone for the first Buccaneer passing touchdown . A tackle by Seahawk punter Rick Engles prevented a touchdown return by Danny Reece that would have won the game for the Buccaneers . An earlier field goal try was blocked by Lyle Blackwood . The game ended with Dave Brown being helped from the field after being hit in the eye by the final penalty flag . 
 = = = Week 7 : vs Miami Dolphins = = = 
 October 24 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 A blocked field goal and extra @-@ point attempt provided the margin of victory for the Miami Dolphins . Ex @-@ Dolphin receiver Morris Owens came back to haunt his old team with three touchdown catches . Starting quarterback Parnell Dickinson threw the first , then was replaced by recently acquired quarterback Terry Hanratty after injuring his ankle . When Hanratty proved ineffective , Steve Spurrier , who had not practiced during the week due to a swollen knee , came off the bench to throw the final two touchdowns . It took a final @-@ minute , 55 @-@ yard Garo Yepremian field goal to clinch the game for the Dolphins , whose pass defense had been decimated by injuries . 192 of the Buccaneers ’ 334 total yards came through the air . John McKay would later point to this game as the high point of the Buccaneers ’ season . Dolphins linebacker Nick Buoniconti saw it differently , calling the narrow victory “ a disgrace ” and “ the low point in Miami Dolphins ’ history ” . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs Kansas City Chiefs = = = 
 October 30 , 1976 at Arrowhead Stadium , Kansas City , Missouri 
 The Kansas City Chiefs credited their defense with the win after holding the Buccaneers to 14 yards rushing . The Buccaneers managed only 2 first downs and 34 yards of total offense before exploding for three touchdowns in the final ten minutes . The Buccaneers were mistake @-@ prone and ineffective throughout the first three quarters . Ken Stone was penalized for roughing on a missed field goal in the first quarter , with the result that the Chiefs got a second chance to kick it . The special teams allowed Henry Marshall to return a punt 59 yards , setting up the Chiefs ’ second touchdown . They got 14 first downs and 162 yards in the final 15 minutes , scoring on an Essex Johnson run and passes from Steve Spurrier to Johnny McKay and Jack Novak . Coach McKay felt that the difference was that the team did not begin giving effort until the fourth quarter . McKay also felt that the Chiefs left themselves vulnerable by trying to run up the score . Bert Cooper , filling in at linebacker for an injured Steve Reese , was consistently exploited in the passing game . McKay later threatened to fire players who he felt were giving a slack effort , specifically referring to a Chiefs kickoff that rolled all the way to the 4 @-@ yard line , with no Buccaneers trying to recover it . Spectators booed the team , and one threw a dead bird at Spurrier as he returned to the locker room after the game . Buccaneer defenders found some consolation in having held the AFC ’ s top offensive team to only 13 points . Defensive end Council Rudolph played , despite the death of his father the previous evening . 
 = = = Week 9 : at Denver Broncos = = = 
 November 7 , 1976 at Mile High Stadium , Denver , Colorado 
 With the score tied 10 – 10 , Buccaneer linebacker Cal Peterson suffered a career @-@ ending injury untouched when his knee gave out while running in an interception for what would have been a touchdown . Lee Roy Selmon also suffered a season @-@ ending knee injury . After taking a 13 – 10 lead on a Dave Green field goal , the injury @-@ riddled Buccaneers were doomed by an 18 ½ minute span in which the Broncos scored 38 points . Coach McKay accused Broncos coach John Ralston of running up the score and stormed off of the field , refusing to shake hands with him after the game . He later referred to Ralston as a “ horse ’ s ass ” and said , “ I don ’ t like any part of him . His day is coming ” . Ralston responded by pointing out that most of the Broncos points came on fumble recoveries and interceptions . McKay later revealed his thoughts on the team ’ s likely high draft position , saying “ This team needs a catalyst . Ricky Bell can run through a wall ” . 
 = = = Week 10 : at New York Jets = = = 
 November 14 , 1976 at Shea Stadium , Flushing Meadows @-@ Corona Park , New York 
 In what was according to coach Lou Holtz a prearranged move , New York Jets rookie quarterback Richard Todd was replaced by Joe Namath late in the first quarter . Namath responded with a passing display that gave the Jets a 24 – 0 halftime lead . Saying that his players were “ polite ” to Namath , coach McKay compared the Buccaneers to a junior @-@ high team , and said that the only thing they did better than the Jets was to be the first team on the field after halftime . Clark Gaines rushed for 103 yards for the Jets . The Buccaneers ’ three quarterbacks combined for 171 yards passing , more than the Jets ’ quarterbacks , but the Buccaneers failed to score for the fourth time in the season . As the score rose , the press box announcer began calling out records set during the game , which included the Jets ’ first shutout in Shea Stadium . This was considered to be the Buccaneers ’ last good chance to win a game , with the next four opponents all in playoff contention . The Jets ’ 34 points were nearly a third of their season total of 110 after ten games , and a fifth of their season total of 169 . 
 = = = Week 11 : vs Cleveland Browns = = = 
 November 21 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Strong first @-@ half play left the Buccaneers tied 7 – 7 with the Cleveland Browns at halftime , but they failed to maintain the intensity for the second half of the game . A screen pass from Steve Spurrier to Essex Johnson caught the blitzing Cleveland linebackers out of position for a 13 @-@ yard touchdown . The solid blocking of the first half gave way to the Cleveland rush in the second half , and Spurrier was replaced with Parnell Dickinson in the fourth quarter . Dickinson wound up leaving the game with a season @-@ ending knee injury on a play in which he threw an interception to Terry Brown . Two Browns players were ejected for fighting , in a game in which several Buccaneers complained of cheap shots being taken . Dave Pear said , “ If I had a gun , I would have shot them both in the head ” , of two Cleveland players who tried to take out his knees . 
 = = = Week 12 : at Oakland Raiders = = = 
 November 28 , 1976 at Oakland @-@ Alameda County Coliseum , Oakland , California 
 The Oakland Raiders , with an NFL @-@ best 11 – 1 record , scored three touchdowns before the Buccaneers got their third first down . Mark van <unk> scored on two 1 @-@ yard runs . A 2 @-@ yard Ed Williams touchdown run tied the score at 7 – 7 after the Buccaneers recovered a fumble at the Oakland 14 @-@ yard line in the first quarter . A Dave Green field goal made the score 21 – 10 at halftime , but Ken Stabler threw for two third @-@ quarter touchdowns for the Raiders . Steve Spurrier finished the Buccaneers ’ scoring with a fourth @-@ quarter touchdown pass to Morris Owens . Dewey Selmon suffered a serious knee injury , the Buccaneers ’ 14th of the season , on the first play of the game . 
 = = = Week 13 : at Pittsburgh Steelers = = = 
 December 5 , 1976 at Three Rivers Stadium , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 
 John McKay gave ex @-@ Steelers quarterback Terry Hanratty the start against his former team , saying that Hanratty ’ s familiarity with the Steelers ’ schemes made him the best choice . “ I don ’ t know if I ’ m doing him a favor or not ” , said McKay , who compared the game to Custer ’ s last stand . Hanratty was pulled in favor of Steve Spurrier in the second half . McKay later told reporters critical of Hanratty ’ s performance , “ You guys should take a Sunday off and play behind our offensive line . They just poured in on us . " Rocky Bleier ran for 118 yards and three touchdowns , and Terry Bradshaw completed two touchdown passes to Lynn Swann . Franco Harris , with 55 yards rushing , became the fourth player both to rush for 5 @,@ 000 yards in four seasons , and to gain 1 @,@ 000 yards four or more times . The Steelers jumped out to a quick 21 – 0 lead , helped by two early Tampa Bay turnovers deep in their own territory . Pittsburgh players , some of whom could still remember having gone 0 – 13 after winning their opener in 1969 , described the game as “ strange ” , but declined to comment on the Buccaneers ’ play . The Buccaneers managed only 85 yards of offense against a Steeler team that needed the win to maintain their playoff chances . 
 This game had the distinction of being what is believed to be the largest points spread in NFL history , as Pittsburgh was favored by 24 . This record was surpassed in 2013 when the Denver Broncos were favored in a 28 point spread against the Jacksonville Jaguars . Though the Broncos won the game , they did not cover ( winning only 35 – 19 ) leaving Pittsburgh with the largest point spread covered by a favourite . This is the only game in NFL history in which a favourite has covered a spread of more than 20 points . 
 = = = Week 14 : vs New England Patriots = = = 
 December 12 , 1976 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Two fumbles deep in New England Patriots territory overcame a stubborn Buccaneer effort . The Patriots ’ 260 rushing yards stood for years as the most allowed in a game by the Buccaneers , while their total of four pass completions remains the least by a Tampa Bay opponent . New England came from behind twice on Andy Johnson touchdown runs , and took the lead for good on Sam Hunt ’ s 58 @-@ yard return of a Steve Spurrier interception . Johnson ’ s first touchdown run was a 69 @-@ yarder that set a club record . Patriots quarterback Steve Grogan set an NFL record with four seconds left , rushing for his 12th touchdown of the year . The Buccaneers also set an NFL record , by becoming the only team to go winless in a 14 @-@ game season . 
 = = Scores by quarter = = 
 = = Awards and Records = = 
 Steve Spurrier and Pat Toomay were named offensive and defensive MVPs , respectively . 
 Dave Pear was named team MVP by area <unk> 
 Morris Owens ’ three touchdowns against Miami on Oct. 24 stood for 9 years as the team record , and is still second @-@ place all @-@ time ( both for touchdowns and points scored in a single game ) . 
 The defense allowed 933 plays , the lowest until the 1998 team allowed 925 . 
 The 321 passing attempts and 180 completions are both the least ever allowed by the Buccaneers . 
 = Jadovno concentration camp = 
 The Jadovno concentration camp was a concentration and extermination camp in the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) during World War II . Commanded by <unk> <unk> , it was the first of twenty @-@ six concentration camps in the NDH during the war . Established in a secluded area about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from the town of Gospić , it held thousands of Serbs and Jews over a period of 122 days from May to August 1941 . Inmates were usually killed by being pushed into deep ravines located near the camp . Estimates of the number of deaths at Jadovno range from 10 @,@ 000 to 68 @,@ 000 , mostly Serbs . The camp was closed on 21 August 1941 , and the area where it was located was later handed over to the Kingdom of Italy and became part of Italian Zones II and III . <unk> was replaced by the greater sized Jasenovac concentration camp and its extermination facilities . 
 The camp site remained unexplored after the war due to the depth of the gorges where bodies were disposed and the fact that some of them had been filled with concrete by Yugoslavia 's Communist authorities . Additional sites containing the skeletal remains of camp victims were uncovered in the 1980s . Commemoration ceremonies honouring the victims of the camp have been organized by the Serb National Council ( <unk> ) , the Jewish community in Croatia , and local anti @-@ fascists since 2009 , and 24 June has since been designated as a " Day of Remembrance of the Jadovno Camp " in Croatia . A monument commemorating those killed in the camp was constructed in 1975 and stood for fifteen years before being removed in 1990 . A replica of the original monument was constructed and dedicated in 2010 , but disappeared within twenty @-@ four hours of its inauguration . As of 2013 , the construction of a new monument is planned . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On 6 April 1941 , Axis forces invaded the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . Poorly equipped and poorly trained , the Royal Yugoslav Army was quickly defeated . After the invasion , the extreme Croat nationalist and fascist Ante Pavelić , who had been in exile in Benito Mussolini 's Italy , was appointed Poglavnik ( " leader " ) of an Ustaše @-@ led Croatian state – the Independent State of Croatia ( often called the NDH , from the Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska ) . The NDH combined most of modern Croatia , all of modern Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of modern Serbia into an " Italian @-@ German quasi @-@ protectorate " . NDH authorities , led by the Ustaše militia , then implemented genocidal policies against the Serb , Jewish and Romani populations living in the new state . Aiming to exterminate the entire Serb population of the NDH , the Ustaše sought to murder one @-@ third of Serbs , convert one @-@ third to Roman Catholicism , and force the rest from the country . A series of massacres were committed by the Ustaše , and the degree of cruelty with which the Serb population was persecuted shocked even the Germans . The Cyrillic script was banned , Orthodox Christian church schools were closed , and Serbs were ordered to wear identifying armbands . Similar measures were enacted against Jews , who were required to wear a yellow armband with a black @-@ on @-@ yellow Star of David for identification . These armbands bore the word " Jew " in two languages : German ( " Jude " ) and Croatian ( " <unk> " ) . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Located in a secluded area about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from the town of Gospić , the Jadovno camp was formed during the early stages of the persecution of Serbs in the NDH and was placed under the command of the Ustaša <unk> <unk> . Intended as an extermination camp , it was established between 11 and 15 April 1941 and was the first of twenty @-@ six concentration camps located in the NDH during the war . 
 Most inmates at Ustaše camps – including Jadovno – were Croatian Serbs . Other victims included Jews and anti @-@ Ustaše Croats . Notable Jadovno inmates included the mayor of Koprivnica , Ivica <unk> , and Croatian Jewish Communist Aleksandar Savić . 
 Immediately , the Ustaše trucked several hundred detainees to a site intended almost exclusively for extermination near Gospić . Located on Mount Velebit , the town contained gorges – some up to 91 @.@ 5 metres ( 300 ft ) deep – that were used as dumping grounds . The Jadovno camp itself was surrounded by such <unk> ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> ) which were difficult to gain access to and characteristic of the karstic mountain range . The camp itself acted as a " way station " en route to these pits . Here , prisoners had to work the entire day with almost no food until exhaustion . The nearest pit to the camp was the <unk> pit , located 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) away , while the pit where inmates were executed and dumped was 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) from the camp . Here , inmates were bound together in a line and the first few victims were murdered with rifle butts or other objects . Afterwards , an entire row of inmates were pushed into the ravine . In some cases , inmates were also killed by gunfire , as well as with knives and blunt objects . Once inmates were thrown into the ravine , hand grenades were hurtled inside in order to kill off the victims . Dogs would also be thrown in to feed on the wounded and the dead . The pits in the vicinity of the camp were filled with the bodies of Jewish and later Serb inmates . However , killings were not confined to these two groups , and the bodies of some Croats and Roma were disposed of in this fashion as well . 
 By the end of June , the Ustaše transferred several hundred Jewish families from Zagreb to Jadovno . Afterwards , the camp was visited by Ustaše commander Vjekoslav Luburić , who opened his visit by cutting the throat of a two @-@ year @-@ old Jewish child . Luburić then forced a camp guard to murder and squash the skull of a second child with his foot . The last group of inmates at Jadovno were killed with machine guns . The camp was closed on 21 August 1941 , and the remaining Croat inmates were transferred to other NDH @-@ controlled camps , while the remaining Serbs and Jews were murdered . Work on the replacement Jasenovac concentration camp started in the same month . The area in which the Jadovno camp was located was later handed over to the Italians and became part of Italian Zones II and III . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The Jadovno camp site remained unexplored after the war due to the depth of the gorges where bodies were disposed of and the fact that some of these had been filled with concrete by Yugoslavia 's Communist authorities . Additional sites containing the skeletal remains of camp victims were uncovered in the 1980s . 
 The number of deaths at the camp is difficult to establish as many inmates often went unregistered as they were taken directly to the edge of ravines and murdered . Historian Paul Mojzes lists 38 @,@ 010 Serbs , 1 @,@ 998 Jews , 88 Croats and several " others " as being killed at Jadovno . 1 @,@ 000 children also perished in camp , as did 55 Serbian Orthodox priests . Mojzes states that the total number of deaths at the camp was 40 @,@ 123 . As it operated over a period of 122 days , this would suggest that an average of 329 people were killed there every day . Sources generally offer a range of 10 @,@ 000 – 68 @,@ 000 deaths at the camp . Estimates of the number of Jewish deaths range from several hundred to 2 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 800 . The Military Encyclopedia of Yugoslavia estimates that 72 @,@ 000 inmates perished in the camp . On the other hand , the Encyclopedia of Yugoslavia states that at least 35 @,@ 000 were killed in Jadovno , with a possible final death toll of 50 @,@ 000 – 60 @,@ 000 . The highest recorded estimate of Jadovno deaths was made in 1983 by Reverend <unk> Jevtić , when he claimed that 80 @,@ 000 inmates were killed . However , historian Jozo Tomasevich has referred to this claim as being " exaggerated " , stating that it is not based on any documentation or detailed investigation . 
 Franjo Tuđman , the President of Croatia from 1990 until his death in 1999 , denied that any deaths took place in Jadovno during the war . This claim was put forward in his 1989 book Horrors of War : Historical Reality and Philosophy . Tuđman has since been called a Holocaust denier by some , including the World Jewish Congress . Commemoration ceremonies honouring the victims of the camp have been organized by the Serb National Council ( <unk> ) , representatives of the Jewish community in Croatia , and local anti @-@ fascists since 2009 . 24 June has since been designated as a " Day of Remembrance of the Jadovno Camp " in Croatia . A monument commemorating those who perished was constructed in 1975 and stood for fifteen years before being removed in 1990 prior to the outbreak of ethnic violence during the Croatian War of Independence . A replica of the original monument was constructed and dedicated in 2010 , but disappeared within twenty @-@ four hours of its inauguration . The construction of a new monument is planned . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Muammar Gaddafi = 
 Muammar Mohammed Abu <unk> Gaddafi ( and numerous variants ) ( Arabic : <unk> محمد أبو <unk> <unk> ; / <unk> <unk> / ; audio ; c . 1942 – 20 October 2011 ) , commonly known as Colonel Gaddafi , was a Libyan revolutionary , politician , and political theorist . He governed Libya as Revolutionary Chairman of the Libyan Arab Republic from 1969 to 1977 and then as the " Brotherly Leader " of the Great Socialist People 's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from 1977 to 2011 . Initially ideologically committed to Arab nationalism and Arab socialism , he came to rule according to his own Third International Theory before embracing Pan @-@ Africanism . 
 The son of an impoverished Bedouin goat herder , Gaddafi became involved in politics while at school in Sabha , subsequently enrolling in the Royal Military Academy , Benghazi . Founding a revolutionary cell within the military , in 1969 they seized power from the absolute monarchy of King Idris in a bloodless coup . Becoming Chairman of the governing Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) , Gaddafi abolished the monarchy and proclaimed the Republic . Ruling by decree , he implemented measures to remove what he viewed as foreign imperialist influence from Libya , and strengthened ties to Arab nationalist governments . Intent on pushing Libya towards " Islamic socialism " , he introduced sharia as the basis for the legal system and nationalized the oil industry , using the increased revenues to bolster the military , implement social programs and fund revolutionary militants across the world . In 1973 he initiated a " Popular Revolution " with the formation of General People 's Committees ( <unk> ) , purported to be a system of direct democracy , but retained personal control over major decisions . He outlined his Third International Theory that year , publishing these ideas in The Green Book . 
 In 1977 , Gaddafi dissolved the Republic and created a new socialist state , the Jamahiriya ( " state of the masses " ) . Officially adopting a symbolic role in governance , he retained power as military commander @-@ in @-@ chief and head of the Revolutionary Committees responsible for policing and suppressing opponents . Overseeing unsuccessful border conflicts with Egypt and Chad , Gaddafi 's support for foreign militants and alleged responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing led to Libya 's label of " international pariah " . A particularly hostile relationship developed with the United States and United Kingdom , resulting in the 1986 U.S. bombing of Libya and United Nations @-@ imposed economic sanctions . Rejecting his earlier ideological commitments , from 1999 Gaddafi encouraged economic privatization and sought rapprochement with Western nations , also embracing Pan @-@ Africanism and serving as Chairperson of the African Union from 2009 – 10 . Amid the Arab Spring , in 2011 an anti @-@ Gaddafist uprising led by the National Transitional Council ( NTC ) broke out , resulting in the Libyan Civil War . NATO intervened militarily on the side of the NTC , bringing about the government 's downfall . Retreating to Sirte , Gaddafi was captured and killed by NTC militants . 
 Gaddafi was a controversial and highly divisive world figure . Supporters lauded his anti @-@ imperialist stance and his support for Pan @-@ Africanism and Pan @-@ Arabism , and he was decorated with various awards . Conversely , he was internationally condemned as a dictator and autocrat whose authoritarian administration violated the human rights of Libyan citizens , and supported irredentist movements , tribal warfare and terrorism in many other nations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1942 / 43 – 50 = = = 
 Muammar Gaddafi was born in a tent near Qasr Abu Hadi , a rural area outside the town of Sirte in the deserts of western Libya . His family came from a small , relatively un @-@ influential tribal group called the <unk> , who were Arabized Berber in heritage . His father , Mohammad Abdul Salam bin Hamed bin Mohammad , was known as Abu <unk> ( died 1985 ) , and his mother was named Aisha ( died 1978 ) ; Abu <unk> earned a meager subsistence as a goat and camel herder . Nomadic Bedouins , they were illiterate and kept no birth records . As such , Gaddafi 's date of birth is not known with certainty , and sources have set it in 1942 or in the spring of 1943 , although biographers Blundy and Lycett noted that it could have been pre @-@ 1940 . His parents ' only surviving son , he had three older sisters . Gaddafi 's upbringing in Bedouin culture influenced his personal tastes for the rest of his life . He repeatedly expressed a preference for the desert over the city and retreated to the desert to meditate . 
 From childhood , Gaddafi was aware of the involvement of European colonialists in Libya ; his nation was occupied by Italy , and during the North African Campaign of World War II it witnessed conflict between Italian and British troops . According to later claims , Gaddafi 's paternal grandfather , <unk> <unk> , was killed by the Italian Army during the Italian invasion of 1911 . At World War II 's end in 1945 , Libya was occupied by British and French forces . Although Britain and France intended on dividing the nation between their empires , the General Assembly of the United Nations ( UN ) declared that the country be granted political independence . In 1951 , the UN created the United Kingdom of Libya , a federal state under the leadership of a pro @-@ western monarch , Idris , who banned political parties and established an absolute monarchy . 
 = = = Education and political activism : 1950 – 63 = = = 
 Gaddafi 's earliest education was of a religious nature , imparted by a local Islamic teacher . Subsequently moving to nearby Sirte to attend elementary school , he progressed through six grades in four years . Education in Libya was not free , but his father thought it would greatly benefit his son despite the financial strain . During the week Gaddafi slept in a mosque , and at weekends walked 20 miles to visit his parents . Bullied for being a Bedouin , he was proud of his identity and encouraged pride in other Bedouin children . From Sirte , he and his family moved to the market town of Sabha in Fezzan , south @-@ central Libya , where his father worked as a caretaker for a tribal leader while Muammar attended secondary school , something neither parent had done . Gaddafi was popular at school ; some friends made there received significant jobs in his later administration , most notably his best friend Abdul Salam Jalloud . 
 Many teachers at Sabha were Egyptian , and for the first time Gaddafi had access to pan @-@ Arab newspapers and radio broadcasts , most notably the Cairo @-@ based Voice of the Arabs . Growing up , Gaddafi witnessed significant events rock the Arab world , including the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , the Egyptian Revolution of 1952 , the Suez Crisis of 1956 , and the short @-@ lived existence of the United Arab Republic between 1958 and 1961 . Gaddafi admired the political changes implemented in the Arab Republic of Egypt under his hero , President Gamal Abdel Nasser . Nasser argued for Arab nationalism ; the rejection of Western colonialism , neo @-@ colonialism , and Zionism ; and a transition from capitalism to socialism . Nasser 's book , Philosophy of the Revolution , was a key influence on Gaddafi ; outlining how to initiate a coup , it has been described as " the inspiration and blueprint of [ Gaddafi 's ] revolution . " 
 Gaddafi organized demonstrations and distributed posters criticizing the monarchy . In October 1961 , he led a demonstration protesting Syria 's secession from the United Arab Republic . During this they broke windows of a local hotel accused of serving alcohol . Catching the authorities ' attention , they expelled his family from Sabha . Gaddafi moved to Misrata , there attending Misrata Secondary School . Maintaining his interest in Arab nationalist activism , he refused to join any of the banned political parties active in the city – including the Arab Nationalist Movement , the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party , and the Muslim Brotherhood – claiming he rejected factionalism . He read voraciously on the subjects of Nasser and the French Revolution of 1789 , as well as the works of Syrian political theorist Michel Aflaq and biographies of Abraham Lincoln , Sun Yat @-@ sen , and Mustafa Kemal Atatürk . 
 = = = Military training : 1963 – 66 = = = 
 Gaddafi briefly studied History at the University of Libya in Benghazi , before dropping out to join the military . Despite his police record , in 1963 he began training at the Royal Military Academy , Benghazi , alongside several like @-@ minded friends from Misrata . The armed forces offered the only opportunity for upward social mobility for underprivileged Libyans , and Gaddafi recognised it as a potential instrument of political change . Under Idris , Libya 's armed forces were trained by the British military ; this angered Gaddafi , who viewed the British as imperialists , and accordingly he refused to learn English and was rude to the British officers , ultimately failing his exams . British trainers reported him for insubordination and abusive behaviour , stating their suspicion that he was involved in the assassination of the military academy 's commander in 1963 . Such reports were ignored and Gaddafi quickly progressed through the course . 
 With a group of loyal cadres , in 1964 Gaddafi founded the Central Committee of the Free Officers Movement , a revolutionary group named after Nasser 's Egyptian predecessor . Led by Gaddafi , they met clandestinely and were organised into a clandestine cell system , offering their salaries into a single fund . Gaddafi travelled around Libya gathering intelligence and developing connections with sympathisers , but the government 's intelligence services ignored him , considering him little threat . 
 Graduating in August 1965 , Gaddafi became a communications officer in the army 's signal corps . In April 1966 , he was assigned to the United Kingdom for further training ; over 9 months he underwent an English @-@ language course at Beaconsfield , Buckinghamshire , an Army Air Corps signal instructors course in Bovington Camp , Dorset , and an infantry signal instructors course at Hythe , Kent . Despite later rumours to the contrary , he did not attend the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst . 
 The Bovington signal course 's director reported that Gaddafi successfully overcame problems learning English , displaying a firm command of voice procedure . Noting that Gaddafi 's favourite hobbies were reading and playing football , he thought him an " amusing officer , always cheerful , hard @-@ working , and conscientious . " Gaddafi disliked England , claiming British Army officers racially insulted him and finding it difficult adjusting to the country 's culture ; asserting his Arab identity in London , he walked around Piccadilly wearing traditional Libyan robes . He later related that while he travelled to England believing it more advanced than Libya , he returned home " more confident and proud of our values , ideals and social character . " 
 = = Libyan Arab Republic = = 
 = = = Coup d 'etat : 1969 = = = 
 Idris ' government was increasingly unpopular by the latter 1960s ; it had exacerbated Libya 's traditional regional and tribal divisions by centralising the country 's federal system in order to take advantage of the country 's oil wealth , while corruption and entrenched systems of patronage were widespread throughout the oil industry . Arab nationalism was increasingly popular , and protests flared up following Egypt 's 1967 defeat in the Six @-@ Day War with Israel ; allied to the western powers , Idris ' administration was seen as pro @-@ Israeli . Anti @-@ western riots broke out in Tripoli and Benghazi , while Libyan workers shut down oil terminals in solidarity with Egypt . By 1969 , the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency was expecting segments of Libya 's armed forces to launch a coup . Although claims have been made that they knew of Gaddafi 's Free Officers Movement , they have since claimed ignorance , stating that they were monitoring Abdul Aziz <unk> 's Black Boots revolutionary group . 
 In mid @-@ 1969 , Idris travelled abroad to spend the summer in Turkey and Greece . Gaddafi 's Free Officers recognized this as their chance to overthrow the monarchy , initiating " Operation Jerusalem " . On 1 September , they occupied airports , police depots , radio stations and government offices in Tripoli and Benghazi . Gaddafi took control of the <unk> barracks in Benghazi , while Omar <unk> occupied Tripoli barracks and Jalloud seized the city 's anti @-@ aircraft batteries . <unk> <unk> was sent to arrest crown prince Sayyid Hasan ar @-@ Rida al @-@ Mahdi as @-@ <unk> , and force him to relinquish his claim to the throne . They met no serious resistance , and wielded little violence against the monarchists . 
 Having removed the monarchical government , Gaddafi proclaimed the foundation of the Libyan Arab Republic . Addressing the populace by radio , he proclaimed an end to the " reactionary and corrupt " regime , " the stench of which has sickened and horrified us all . " Due to the coup 's bloodless nature , it was initially labelled the " White Revolution " , although was later renamed the " One September Revolution " after the date on which it occurred . Gaddafi insisted that the Free Officers ' coup represented a revolution , marking the start of widespread change in the socio @-@ economic and political nature of Libya . He proclaimed that the revolution meant " freedom , socialism , and unity " , and over the coming years implemented measures to achieve this . 
 = = = Consolidating leadership : 1969 – 73 = = = 
 The 12 member central committee of the Free Officers proclaimed themselves the Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) , the government of the new republic . Gaddafi became RCC Chairman , and therefore the de facto head of state , also appointing himself to the rank of Colonel and becoming commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces . Jalloud became Prime Minister , while a civilian Council of Ministers headed by Sulaiman Maghribi was founded to implement RCC policy . 
 Although theoretically a collegial body operating through consensus building , Gaddafi dominated the RCC , although some of the others attempted to constrain what they saw as his excesses . Gaddafi remained the government 's public face , with the identities of the other RCC members only being publicly revealed on 10 January 1970 . All young men from ( typically rural ) working and middle @-@ class backgrounds , none had university degrees ; in this way they were distinct from the wealthy , highly educated conservatives who previously governed the country . 
 The coup completed , the RCC proceeded with their intentions of consolidating the revolutionary government and modernizing the country . They purged monarchists and members of Idris ' Senussi clan from Libya 's political world and armed forces ; Gaddafi believed this elite were opposed to the will of the Libyan people and had to be expunged . " People 's Courts " were founded to try various monarchist politicians and journalists , and though many were imprisoned , none were executed . Idris was sentenced to execution in absentia . 
 In May 1970 , the Revolutionary Intellectuals Seminar was held to bring intellectuals in line with the revolution , while that year 's Legislative Review and Amendment united secular and religious law codes , introducing sharia into the legal system . Ruling by decree , the RCC maintained the monarchy 's ban on political parties , in May 1970 banned trade unions , and in 1972 outlawed workers ' strikes and suspended newspapers . In September 1971 , Gaddafi resigned , claiming to be dissatisfied with the pace of reform , but returned to his position within a month . In February 1973 , he resigned again , once more returning the following month . 
 = = = = Economic and social reform = = = = 
 With crude oil as the country 's primary export , Gaddafi sought to improve Libya 's oil sector . In October 1969 , he proclaimed the current trade terms unfair , benefiting foreign corporations more than the Libyan state , and by threatening to reduce production , in December Jalloud successfully increased the price of Libyan oil . In 1970 , other OPEC states followed suit , leading to a global increase in the price of crude oil . The RCC followed with the Tripoli Agreement , in which they secured income tax , back @-@ payments and better pricing from the oil corporations ; these measures brought Libya an estimated $ 1 billion in additional revenues in its first year . 
 Increasing state control over the oil sector , the RCC began a program of nationalization , starting with the expropriation of British Petroleum 's share of the British Petroleum @-@ N.B. Hunt Sahir Field in December 1971 . In September 1973 , it was announced that all foreign oil producers active in Libya were to be nationalized . For Gaddafi , this was an important step towards socialism . It proved an economic success ; while gross domestic product had been $ 3 @.@ 8 billion in 1969 , it had risen to $ 13 @.@ 7 billion in 1974 , and $ 24 @.@ 5 billion in 1979 . In turn , the Libyans ' standard of life greatly improved over the first decade of Gaddafi 's administration , and by 1979 the average per @-@ capita income was at $ 8 @,@ 170 , up from $ 40 in 1951 ; this was above the average of many industrialized countries like Italy and the U.K. 
 The RCC attempted to suppress regional and tribal affiliation , replacing it with a unified pan @-@ Libyan identity . In doing so , they tried discrediting tribal leaders as agents of the old regime , and in August 1971 a Sabha military court tried many of them for counter @-@ revolutionary activity . Long @-@ standing administrative boundaries were re @-@ drawn , crossing tribal boundaries , while pro @-@ revolutionary modernizers replaced traditional leaders , but the communities they served often rejected them . Realizing the failures of the modernizers , Gaddafi created the Arab Socialist Union ( ASU ) , a mass mobilization vanguard party of which he was president . The ASU recognized the RCC as its " Supreme Leading Authority " , and was designed to further revolutionary enthusiasm throughout the country . 
 The RCC implemented measures for social reform , adopting sharia as a basis . The consumption of alcohol was banned , night clubs and Christian churches were shut down , traditional Libyan dress was encouraged , while Arabic was decreed as the only language permitted in official communications and on road signs . From 1969 to 1973 , the RCC introduced social welfare programs funded with oil money , which led to house @-@ building projects and improved healthcare and education . In doing so , they greatly expanded the public sector , providing employment for thousands . 
 Compulsory education was expanded from 6 to 9 years old , while adult literacy programs and free university education were implemented ; Beida University was founded , while Tripoli University and Benghazi University were expanded . These early social programs proved popular within Libya . This popularity was partly due to Gaddafi 's personal charisma , youth and underdog status as a Bedouin , as well as his rhetoric emphasizing his role as the successor to the anti @-@ Italian fighter Omar Mukhtar . 
 = = = = Foreign relations = = = = 
 The influence of Nasser 's Arab nationalism over the RCC was immediately apparent . The administration was instantly recognized by the neighbouring Arab nationalist regimes in Egypt , Syria , Iraq and Sudan , with Egypt sending experts to aid the inexperienced RCC . Gaddafi propounded Pan @-@ Arab ideas , proclaiming the need for a single Arab state stretching across North Africa and the Middle East . In December 1969 , Libya founded the Arab Revolutionary Front with Egypt and Sudan as a step towards political unification , and in 1970 Syria stated its intention to join . 
 After Nasser died in November 1970 , his successor , Anwar Sadat , suggested that rather than a unified state , they create a political federation , implemented in April 1971 ; in doing so , Egypt , Syria and Sudan got large grants of Libyan oil money . In February 1972 , Gaddafi and Sadat signed an unofficial charter of merger , but it was never implemented as relations broke down the following year . Sadat became increasingly wary of Libya 's radical direction , and the September 1973 deadline for implementing the Federation passed by with no action taken . 
 After the 1969 coup , representatives of the Four Powers – France , the United Kingdom , the United States and the Soviet Union – were called to meet RCC representatives . The U.K. and U.S. quickly extended diplomatic recognition , hoping to secure the position of their military bases in Libya and fearing further instability . Hoping to ingratiate themselves with Gaddafi , in 1970 the U.S. informed him of at least one planned counter @-@ coup . Such attempts to form a working relationship with the RCC failed ; Gaddafi was determined to reassert national sovereignty and expunge what he described as foreign colonial and imperialist influences . His administration insisted that the U.S. and U.K. remove their military bases from Libya , with Gaddafi proclaiming that " the armed forces which rose to express the people 's revolution [ will not ] tolerate living in their shacks while the bases of imperialism exist in Libyan territory . " The British left in March and the Americans in June 1970 . 
 Moving to reduce Italian influence , in October 1970 all Italian @-@ owned assets were expropriated and the 12 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Italian community expelled from Libya alongside a smaller number of Jews . The day became a national holiday . Aiming to reduce NATO power in the Mediterranean , in 1971 Libya requested that Malta cease to allow NATO to use its land for a military base , in turn offering them foreign aid . Compromising , Malta 's government continued allowing NATO use of the island , but only on the condition that they would not use it for launching attacks on Arab territory . <unk> a military build @-@ up , the RCC began purchasing weapons from France and the Soviet Union . The commercial relationship with the latter led to an increasingly strained relationship with the U.S. , who were then engaged in the Cold War with the Soviets . 
 Gaddafi was especially critical of the U.S. due to their support for Israel . Gaddafi supported the Palestinians in the Israeli – Palestinian conflict , viewing the 1948 creation of Israel as a Western colonial occupation forced on the Arab world . Calling on the Arab states to wage " continuous war " against Israel , in 1970 he initiated a Jihad Fund to finance anti @-@ Israeli militants . In June 1972 Gaddafi created the First Nasserite Volunteers Centre to train anti @-@ Israeli guerrillas . 
 His relationship with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat of Fatah was strained , with Gaddafi considering him too moderate and calling for more violent action . Instead he supported militia like the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine , Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command , the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine , As @-@ Sa 'iqa , the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front , and the Abu Nidal Organization . He funded the Black September Organization who perpetrated the 1972 Munich massacre of Israeli athletes in West Germany , and had the killed militants ' bodies flown to Libya for a hero 's funeral . Gaddafi also welcomed the three surviving attackers in Tripoli following their release in exchange for the hostages of hijacked Lufthansa Flight 615 a few weeks later and allowed them to go into hiding . 
 Gaddafi financially supported other militant groups across the world , including the Black Panther Party , Nation of Islam , <unk> , 19th of April Movement and Sandinista National Liberation Front in the Americas , the ANC among other liberation movements in the fight against Apartheid in South Africa , the Provisional Irish Republican Army , ETA , Sardinian nationalists , Action <unk> , the Red Brigades , and the Red Army Faction in Europe , and the Armenian Secret Army , Japanese Red Army , Free Aceh Movement , and Moro National Liberation Front in Asia . Gaddafi was indiscriminate in the causes he funded , sometimes switching from supporting one side in a conflict to the other , as in the Eritrean War of Independence . Throughout the 1970s these groups received financial support from Libya , which came to be seen as a leader in the Third World 's struggle against colonialism and neocolonialism . Though many of these groups were labelled " terrorists " by critics of their activities , Gaddafi rejected such a characterisation , instead considering them revolutionaries engaged in liberation struggles . 
 = = = The " Popular Revolution " : 1973 – 77 = = = 
 On 16 April 1973 , Gaddafi proclaimed the start of a " Popular Revolution " in a Zuwarah speech . He initiated this with a 5 @-@ point plan , the first point of which dissolved all existing laws , to be replaced by revolutionary enactments . The second point proclaimed that all opponents of the revolution had to be removed , while the third initiated an administrative revolution that Gaddafi proclaimed would remove all traces of bureaucracy and the bourgeoisie . The fourth point announced that the population must form People 's Committees and be armed to defend the revolution , while the fifth proclaimed the beginning of a cultural revolution to expunge Libya of " poisonous " foreign influences . He began to lecture on this new phase of the revolution in Libya , Egypt , and France . 
 As part of this Popular Revolution , Gaddafi invited Libya 's people to found General People 's Committees as conduits for raising political consciousness . Although offering little guidance for how to set up these councils , Gaddafi claimed that they would offer a form of direct political participation that was more democratic than a traditional party @-@ based representative system . He hoped that the councils would mobilize the people behind the RCC , erode the power of the traditional leaders and the bureaucracy , and allow for a new legal system chosen by the people . 
 The People 's Committees led to a high percentage of public involvement in decision making , within the limits permitted by the RCC , but exacerbated tribal divisions . They also served as a surveillance system , aiding the security services in locating individuals with views critical of the RCC , leading to the arrest of Ba 'athists , Marxists and Islamists . Operating in a pyramid structure , the base form of these Committees were local working groups , who sent elected representatives to the district level , and from there to the national level , divided between the General People 's Congress and the General People 's Committee . Above these remained Gaddafi and the RCC , who remained responsible for all major decisions . 
 = = = = Third Universal Theory and The Green Book = = = = 
 In June 1973 , Gaddafi created a political ideology as a basis for the Popular Revolution . Third International Theory considered the U.S. and the Soviet Union as imperialist , thus rejected Western capitalism as well as Eastern bloc communism 's atheism . In this respect it was similar to the Three Worlds Theory developed by China 's political leader Mao Zedong . As part of this theory , Gaddafi praised nationalism as a progressive force and advocated the creation of a pan @-@ Arab state which would lead the Islamic and Third Worlds against imperialism . 
 Gaddafi saw Islam as having a key role in this ideology , calling for an Islamic revival that returned to the origins of the Qur 'an , rejecting scholarly interpretations and the Hadith ; in doing so , he angered many Libyan clerics . During 1973 and 1974 , his government deepened the legal reliance on sharia , e.g. introducing flogging as punishment for those convicted of adultery or homosexual activity . 
 Gaddafi summarized Third International Theory in three short volumes published between 1975 and 1979 , collectively known as The Green Book . Volume one was devoted to the issue of democracy , outlining the flaws of representative systems in favour of direct , participatory <unk> . The second dealt with Gaddafi 's beliefs regarding socialism , while the third explored social issues regarding the family and the tribe . While the first two volumes advocated radical reform , the third adopted a socially conservative stance , proclaiming that while men and women were equal , they were biologically designed for different roles in life . During the years that followed , <unk> adopted quotes from The Green Book , such as " Representation is Fraud " , as slogans . Meanwhile , in September 1975 , Gaddafi implemented further measures to increase popular mobilization , introducing objectives to improve the relationship between the Councils and the ASU . 
 These radical reforms led to discontent , furthered by widespread opposition to the RCC 's decision to spend oil money on foreign causes . In 1974 , Libya saw its first civilian attack on Gaddafi 's government when a Benghazi army building was bombed . In 1975 two RCC members , Bashir Saghir al @-@ <unk> and Omar <unk> , launched a failed coup against Gaddafi , and in the aftermath only five RCC members remained . This led to the RCC 's official abolition in March 1977 . 
 In September 1975 , Gaddafi purged the army , arresting around 200 senior officers , and in October he founded the clandestine Office for the Security of the Revolution . In 1976 , student demonstrations broke out in Tripoli and Benghazi , and were attacked by police and Gaddafist students . The RCC responded with mass arrests , and introduced compulsory national service for young people . Dissent also arose from conservative clerics and the Muslim Brotherhood , who were persecuted as anti @-@ revolutionary . In January 1977 , two dissenting students and a number of army officers were publicly hanged ; Amnesty International condemned it as the first time in Gaddafist Libya that dissenters had been executed for purely political crimes . 
 = = = = Foreign relations = = = = 
 Following Anwar Sadat 's ascension to the Egyptian presidency , Libya 's relations with Egypt deteriorated . Sadat was perturbed by Gaddafi 's unpredictability and insistence that Egypt required a cultural revolution . In February 1973 , Israeli forces shot down Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114 , which had strayed from Egyptian airspace into Israeli @-@ held territory during a sandstorm . Gaddafi was infuriated that Egypt had not done more to prevent the incident , and in retaliation planned to destroy the RMS Queen Elizabeth 2 , a British ship chartered by American Jews to sail to Haifa for Israel 's 25th anniversary . Gaddafi ordered an Egyptian submarine to target the ship , but Sadat cancelled the order , fearing a military escalation . 
 Gaddafi was later infuriated when Egypt and Syria planned the Yom Kippur War against Israel without consulting him , and was angered when Egypt conceded to peace talks rather than continuing the war . Gaddafi become openly hostile to Egypt 's leader , calling for Sadat 's overthrow , and when Sudanese President <unk> Nimeiry took Sadat 's side , Gaddafi by 1975 sponsored the Sudan People 's Liberation Army to overthrow Nimeiry . Focusing his attention elsewhere in Africa , in late 1972 and early 1973 , Libya invaded Chad to annex the uranium @-@ rich Aouzou Strip . Offering financial incentives , he successfully convinced 8 African states to break off diplomatic relations with Israel in 1973 . Intent on propagating Islam , in 1973 Gaddafi founded the Islamic Call Society , which had opened 132 centres across Africa within a decade . In 1973 he converted Gabonese President Omar Bongo , an action which he repeated three years later with Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa , president of the Central African Republic . 
 Gaddafi sought to develop closer links in the Maghreb ; in January 1974 Libya and Tunisia announced a political union , the Arab Islamic Republic . Although advocated by Gaddafi and Tunisian President Habib <unk> , the move was deeply unpopular in Tunisia and soon abandoned . <unk> , Gaddafi sponsored anti @-@ government militants in Tunisia into the 1980s . Turning his attention to Algeria , in 1975 Libya signed the Hassi <unk> defence agreement allegedly to counter " Moroccan expansionism " , also funding the Polisario Front of Western Sahara in their independence struggle against Morocco . Seeking to diversify Libya 's economy , Gaddafi 's government began purchasing shares in major European corporations like Fiat as well as buying real estate in Malta and Italy , which would become a valuable source of income during the 1980s oil slump . 
 = = Great Socialist People 's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya = = 
 = = = Foundation : 1977 = = = 
 On 2 March 1977 the General People 's Congress adopted the " Declaration of the Establishment of the People 's Authority " at Gaddafi 's behest . Dissolving the Libyan Arab Republic , it was replaced by the Great Socialist People 's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , al @-@ <unk> al- ‘ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ash @-@ Sha ‘ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) , a " state of the masses " conceptualized by Gaddafi . Officially , the Jamahiriya was a direct democracy in which the people ruled themselves through the 187 Basic People 's Congresses , where all adult Libyans participated and voted on national decisions . These then sent members to the annual General People 's Congress , which was broadcast live on television . In principle , the People 's Congresses were Libya 's highest authority , with major decisions proposed by government officials or with Gaddafi himself requiring the consent of the People 's Congresses . 
 Debate remained limited , and major decisions regarding the economy and defence were avoided or dealt with cursorily ; the GPC largely remained " a rubber stamp " for Gaddafi 's policies . On rare occasions , the GPC opposed Gaddafi 's suggestions , sometimes successfully ; notably , when Gaddafi called on primary schools to be abolished , believing that home schooling was healthier for children , the GPC rejected the idea . In other instances , Gaddafi pushed through laws without the GPC 's support , such as when he desired to allow women into the armed forces . Gaddafi proclaimed that the People 's Congresses provided for Libya 's every political need , rendering other political organizations unnecessary ; all non @-@ authorized groups , including political parties , professional associations , independent trade unions and women 's groups , were banned . 
 With preceding legal institutions abolished , Gaddafi envisioned the Jamahiriya as following the Qur 'an for legal guidance , adopting sharia law ; he proclaimed " man @-@ made " laws unnatural and dictatorial , only permitting Allah 's law . Within a year he was backtracking , announcing that sharia was inappropriate for the Jamahiriya because it guaranteed the protection of private property , contravening The Green Book 's socialism . His emphasis on placing his own work on a par with the Qur 'an led conservative clerics to accuse him of shirk , furthering their opposition to his regime . In July , a border war broke out with Egypt , in which the Egyptians defeated Libya despite their technological inferiority . The conflict lasted one week before both sides agreed to sign a peace treaty that was brokered by several Arab states . That year , Gaddafi was invited to Moscow by the Soviet government in recognition of their increasing commercial relationship . 
 = = = Revolutionary Committees and furthering socialism : 1978 – 80 = = = 
 In December 1978 , Gaddafi stepped down as Secretary @-@ General of the GPC , announcing his new focus on revolutionary rather than governmental activities ; this was part of his new emphasis on separating the apparatus of the revolution from the government . Although no longer in a formal governmental post , he adopted the title of " Leader of the Revolution " and continued as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces . He continued exerting considerable influence over Libya , with many critics insisting that the structure of Libya 's direct democracy gave him " the freedom to manipulate outcomes " . 
 Libya began to turn towards socialism . In March 1978 , the government issued guidelines for housing redistribution , attempting to ensure the population that every adult Libyan owned his own home and that nobody was enslaved to paying their rent . Most families were banned from owning more than one house , while former rental properties were seized and sold to the tenants at a heavily subsidized price . In September , Gaddafi called for the People 's Committees to eliminate the " bureaucracy of the public sector " and the " dictatorship of the private sector " ; the People 's Committees took control of several hundred companies , converting them into worker cooperatives run by elected representatives . 
 On 2 March 1979 , the GPC announced the separation of government and revolution , the latter being represented by new Revolutionary Committees , who operated in tandem with the People 's Committees in schools , universities , unions , the police force and the military . Dominated by revolutionary zealots , the Revolutionary Committees were led by Mohammad <unk> and a Central Coordinating Office , and met with Gaddafi annually . Publishing a weekly magazine The Green March ( al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Akhdar ) , in October 1980 they took control of the press . Responsible for perpetuating revolutionary fervour , they performed ideological surveillance , later adopting a significant security role , making arrests and putting people on trial according to the " law of the revolution " ( qanun al @-@ thawra ) . With no legal code or safeguards , the administration of revolutionary justice was largely arbitrary and resulted in widespread abuses and the suppression of civil liberties : the " Green Terror . " 
 In 1979 , the committees began the redistribution of land in the <unk> plain , continuing through 1981 . In May 1980 , measures to redistribute and equalize wealth were implemented ; anyone with over 1000 dinar in his bank account saw that extra money expropriated . The following year , the GPC announced that the government would take control of all import , export and distribution functions , with state supermarkets replacing privately owned businesses ; this led to a decline in the availability of consumer goods and the development of a thriving black market . 
 The Jamahiriya 's radical direction earned the government many enemies . In February 1978 , Gaddafi discovered that his head of military intelligence was plotting to kill him , and began to increasingly entrust security to his <unk> tribe . Many who had seen their wealth and property confiscated turned against the administration , and a number of western @-@ funded opposition groups were founded by exiles . Most prominent was the National Front for the Salvation of Libya ( <unk> ) , founded in 1981 by Mohammed <unk> , which orchestrated militant attacks against Libya 's government , while another , al @-@ <unk> , began killing Libyan diplomats abroad . Following Gaddafi 's command to kill these " stray dogs " , under Colonel Younis <unk> 's leadership , the Revolutionary Committees set up overseas branches to suppress counter @-@ revolutionary activity , assassinating various dissidents . Although nearby nations like Syria also used hit squads , Gaddafi was unusual in publicly bragging about his administration 's use of them ; in June 1980 , he ordered all dissidents to return home or be " liquidated wherever you are . " 
 In 1979 , the U.S. placed Libya on its list of " State Sponsors of Terrorism " , while at the end of the year a demonstration torched the U.S. embassy in Tripoli in solidarity with the perpetrators of the Iran hostage crisis . The following year , Libyan fighters began intercepting U.S. fighter jets flying over the Mediterranean , signalling the collapse of relations between the two countries . Libyan relations with Lebanon and Shi 'ite communities across the world also deteriorated due to the August 1978 disappearance of imam Musa al @-@ Sadr when visiting Libya ; the Lebanese accused Gaddafi of having him killed or imprisoned , a charge he denied . Relations with Syria improved , as Gaddafi and Syrian President Hafez al @-@ Assad shared an enmity with Israel and Egypt 's Sadat . In 1980 , they proposed a political union , with Libya paying off Syria 's £ 1 billion debt to the Soviet Union ; although pressures led Assad to pull out , they remained allies . Another key ally was Uganda , and in 1979 , Gaddafi sent 2 @,@ 500 troops into Uganda to defend the regime of President Idi Amin from Tanzanian invaders . The mission failed ; 400 Libyans were killed and they were forced to retreat . Gaddafi later came to regret his alliance with Amin , openly criticising him . 
 = = = Conflict with the USA and its allies : 1981 – 86 = = = 
 The early and mid @-@ 1980s saw economic trouble for Libya ; from 1982 to 1986 , the country 's annual oil revenues dropped from $ 21 billion to $ 5 @.@ 4 billion . Focusing on irrigation projects , 1983 saw construction start on " Gaddafi 's Pet Project " , the Great Man @-@ Made River ; although designed to be finished by the end of the decade , it remained incomplete at the start of the 21st century . Military spending increased , while other administrative budgets were cut back . Libya had long supported the FROLINAT militia in neighbouring Chad , and in December 1980 , re @-@ invaded Chad at the request of the <unk> @-@ controlled GUNT government to aid in the civil war ; in January 1981 , Gaddafi suggested a political merger . The Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) rejected this , and called for a Libyan withdrawal , which came about in November 1981 . The civil war resumed , and so Libya sent troops back in , clashing with French forces who supported the southern Chadian forces . Many African nations had tired of Libya 's policies of interference in foreign affairs ; by 1980 , nine African states had cut off diplomatic relations with Libya , while in 1982 the OAU cancelled its scheduled conference in Tripoli in order to prevent Gaddafi gaining chairmanship . Proposing political unity with Morocco , in August 1984 , Gaddafi and Moroccan monarch Hassan II signed the <unk> Treaty , forming the Arab @-@ African Union ; such a union was considered surprising due to the strong political differences and longstanding enmity that existed between the two governments . Relations remained strained , particularly due to Morocco 's friendly relations with the U.S. and Israel ; in August 1986 , Hassan abolished the union . Domestic threats continued to plague Gaddafi ; in May 1984 , his Bab al @-@ Azizia home was unsuccessfully attacked by a joint <unk> – Muslim Brotherhood militia , and in the aftermath 5000 dissidents were arrested . 
 In 1981 , the new US President Ronald Reagan pursued a hard line approach to Libya , erroneously considering it a puppet regime of the Soviet Union . In turn , Gaddafi played up his commercial relationship with the Soviets , visiting Moscow again in April 1981 and 1985 , and threatening to join the Warsaw Pact . The Soviets were nevertheless cautious of Gaddafi , seeing him as an unpredictable extremist . Beginning military exercises in the Gulf of Sirte – an area of sea that Libya claimed as a part of its territorial waters – in August 1981 the U.S. shot down two Libyan Su @-@ 22 planes monitoring them . Closing down Libya 's embassy in Washington , D.C. , Reagan advised U.S. companies operating in the country to reduce the number of American personnel stationed there . In March 1982 , the U.S. implemented an embargo of Libyan oil , and in January 1986 ordered all U.S. companies to cease operating in the country , although several hundred workers remained . Diplomatic relations also broke down with the U.K. , after Libyan diplomats were accused in the shooting death of Yvonne Fletcher , a British policewoman stationed outside their London embassy , in April 1984 . In Spring 1986 , the U.S. Navy again began performing exercises in the Gulf of Sirte ; the Libyan military retaliated , but failed as the U.S. sank several Libyan ships . 
 After the U.S. accused Libya of orchestrating the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing , in which two American soldiers died , Reagan decided to retaliate militarily . The Central Intelligence Agency were critical of the move , believing that Syria were a greater threat and that an attack would strengthen Gaddafi 's reputation ; however Libya was recognised as a " soft target . " Reagan was supported by the U.K. but opposed by other European allies , who argued that it would contravene international law . In Operation El Dorado Canyon , orchestrated on 15 April 1986 , U.S. military planes launched a series of air @-@ strikes on Libya , bombing military installations in various parts of the country , killing around 100 Libyans , including several civilians . One of the targets had been Gaddafi 's home . Himself unharmed , two of Gaddafi 's sons were injured , and he claimed that his four @-@ year @-@ old adopted daughter Hanna was killed , although her existence has since been questioned . In the immediate aftermath , Gaddafi retreated to the desert to meditate , while there were sporadic clashes between <unk> and army officers who wanted to overthrow the government . Although the U.S. was condemned internationally , Reagan received a popularity boost at home . Publicly lambasting U.S. imperialism , Gaddafi 's reputation as an anti @-@ imperialist was strengthened both domestically and across the Arab world , and in June 1986 , he ordered the names of the month to be changed in Libya . 
 = = = " Revolution within a Revolution " : 1987 – 98 = = = 
 The late 1980s saw a series of liberalising economic reforms within Libya designed to cope with the decline in oil revenues . In May 1987 , Gaddafi announced the start of the " Revolution within a Revolution " , which began with reforms to industry and agriculture and saw the re @-@ opening of small business . Restrictions were placed on the activities of the Revolutionary Committees ; in March 1988 , their role was narrowed by the newly created Ministry for Mass Mobilization and Revolutionary Leadership to restrict their violence and judicial role , while in August 1988 Gaddafi publicly criticised them , asserting that " they deviated , harmed , tortured " and that " the true revolutionary does not practise repression . " In March , hundreds of political prisoners were freed , with Gaddafi falsely claiming that there were no further political prisoners in Libya . In June , Libya 's government issued the Great Green Charter on Human Rights in the Era of the Masses , in which 27 articles laid out goals , rights and guarantees to improve the situation of human rights in Libya , restricting the use of the death penalty and calling for its eventual abolition . Many of the measures suggested in the charter would be implemented the following year , although others remained inactive . Also in 1989 , the government founded the Al @-@ Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights , to be awarded to figures from the Third World who had struggled against colonialism and imperialism ; the first year 's winner was South African anti @-@ apartheid activist Nelson Mandela . From 1994 through to 1997 , the government initiated cleansing committees to root out corruption , particularly in the economic sector . 
 In the aftermath of the 1986 U.S. attack , the army was purged of perceived disloyal elements , and in 1988 , Gaddafi announced the creation of a popular militia to replace the army and police . In 1987 , Libya began production of mustard gas at a facility in Rabta , although publicly denying it was stockpiling chemical weapons , and unsuccessfully attempted to develop nuclear weapons . The period also saw a growth in domestic Islamist opposition , formulated into groups like the Muslim Brotherhood and the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group . A number of assassination attempts against Gaddafi were foiled , and in turn , 1989 saw the security forces raid mosques believed to be centres of counter @-@ revolutionary preaching . In October 1993 , elements of the increasingly marginalised army initiated a failed coup in Misrata , while in September 1995 , Islamists launched an insurgency in Benghazi , and in July 1996 an anti @-@ Gaddafist football riot broke out in Tripoli . The Revolutionary Committees experienced a resurgence to combat these Islamists . 
 In 1989 , Gaddafi was overjoyed by the foundation of the Arab Maghreb Union , uniting Libya in an economic pact with Mauritania , Morocco , Tunisia and Algeria , viewing it as beginnings of a new Pan @-@ Arab union . Meanwhile , Libya stepped up its support for anti @-@ western militants such as the Provisional IRA , and in 1988 , Pan Am Flight 103 was blown up over Lockerbie in Scotland , killing 243 passengers and 16 crew members , plus 11 people on the ground . British police investigations identified two Libyans – Abdelbaset al @-@ Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah <unk> – as the chief suspects , and in November 1991 issued a declaration demanding that Libya hand them over . When Gaddafi refused , citing the Montreal Convention , the United Nations ( UN ) imposed Resolution 748 in March 1992 , initiating economic sanctions against Libya which had deep repercussions for the country 's economy . The country suffered an estimated $ 900 million financial loss as a result . Further problems arose with the west when in January 1989 , two Libyan warplanes were shot down by the U.S. off the Libyan coast . Many African states opposed the UN sanctions , with Mandela criticising them on a visit to Gaddafi in October 1997 , when he praised Libya for its work in fighting apartheid and awarded Gaddafi the Order of Good Hope . They would only be suspended in 1998 when Libya agreed to allow the extradition of the suspects to the Scottish Court in the Netherlands , in a process overseen by Mandela . 
 = = = Pan @-@ Africanism , reconciliation and privatization : 1999 – 2011 = = = 
 As the 20th century came to a close , Gaddafi increasingly rejected Arab nationalism , frustrated by the failure of his Pan @-@ Arab ideals ; instead he turned to Pan @-@ Africanism , emphasising Libya 's African identity . From 1997 to 2000 , Libya initiated cooperative agreements or bilateral aid arrangements with 10 African states , and in 1999 joined the Community of Sahel @-@ Saharan States . In June 1999 , Gaddafi visited Mandela in South Africa , and the following month attended the OAU summit in Algiers , calling for greater political and economic integration across the continent and advocating the foundation of a United States of Africa . He became one of the founders of the African Union ( AU ) , initiated in July 2002 to replace the OAU ; at the opening ceremonies , he proclaimed that African states should reject conditional aid from the developed world , a direct contrast to the message of South African President Thabo Mbeki . At the third AU summit , held in Libya in July 2005 , he called for a greater level of integration , advocating a single AU passport , a common defence system and a single currency , utilising the slogan : " The United States of Africa is the hope . " In June 2005 , Libya joined the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa ( <unk> ) , and in August 2008 Gaddafi was proclaimed " King of Kings " by an assembled committee of traditional African leaders . On 1 February 2009 , his " coronation ceremony " was held in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , coinciding with Gaddafi 's election as AU chairman for a year . 
 The era saw Libya 's return to the international arena . In 1999 , Libya began secret talks with the British government to normalise relations . In 2001 , Gaddafi condemned the September 11 attacks on the U.S. by al @-@ Qaeda , expressing sympathy with the victims and calling for Libyan involvement in the War on Terror against militant Islamism . His government continued suppressing domestic Islamism , at the same time as Gaddafi called for the wider application of sharia law . Libya also cemented connections with China and North Korea , being visited by Chinese President Jiang Zemin in April 2002 . Influenced by the events of the Iraq War , in December 2003 , Libya renounced its possession of weapons of mass destruction , decommissioning its chemical and nuclear weapons programs . Relations with the U.S. improved as a result , while UK Prime Minister Tony Blair met with Gaddafi in the Libyan desert in March 2004 . The following month , Gaddafi travelled to the headquarters of the European Union ( EU ) in Brussels , signifying improved relations between Libya and the EU , the latter ending its remaining sanctions in October . In October 2010 , the EU paid Libya € 50 million to stop African migrants passing into Europe ; Gaddafi encouraged the move , saying that it was necessary to prevent the loss of European cultural identity to a new " Black Europe " . Removed from the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism in 2006 , Gaddafi nevertheless continued his anti @-@ western rhetoric , and at the Second Africa @-@ South America Summit in Venezuela in September 2009 , joined Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez in calling for an " anti @-@ imperialist " front across Africa and Latin America . Gaddafi proposed the establishment of a South Atlantic Treaty Organization to rival NATO . That month he also addressed the United Nations General Assembly in New York for the first time , using it to condemn " western aggression " . In Spring 2010 , Gaddafi proclaimed jihad against Switzerland after Swiss police accused two of his family members of criminal activity in the country , resulting in the breakdown of bilateral relations . 
 Libya 's economy witnessed increasing privatization ; although rejecting the socialist policies of nationalized industry advocated in The Green Book , government figures asserted that they were forging " people 's socialism " rather than capitalism . Gaddafi welcomed these reforms , calling for wide @-@ scale privatization in a March 2003 speech . In 2003 , the oil industry was largely sold to private corporations , and by 2004 , there was $ 40 billion of direct foreign investment in Libya , a sixfold rise over 2003 . Sectors of Libya 's population reacted against these reforms with public demonstrations , and in March 2006 , revolutionary hard @-@ liners took control of the GPC cabinet ; although scaling back the pace of the changes , they did not halt them . In 2010 , plans were announced that would have seen half the Libyan economy privatized over the following decade . While there was no accompanying political liberalization , with Gaddafi retaining predominant control , in March 2010 , the government devolved further powers to the municipal councils . Rising numbers of reformist technocrats attained positions in the country 's governance ; best known was Gaddafi 's son and heir apparent Saif al @-@ Islam Gaddafi , who was openly critical of Libya 's human rights record . He led a group who proposed the drafting of the new constitution , although it was never adopted , and in October 2009 was appointed to head the <unk> . Involved in encouraging tourism , Saif founded several privately run media channels in 2008 , but after criticising the government they were nationalised in 2009 . In October 2010 , Gaddafi apologized to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the African slave trade . 
 = = Libyan Civil War = = 
 = = = Origins : February – March 2011 = = = 
 Following the start of the Arab Spring in 2011 , Gaddafi spoke out in favour of Tunisian President Zine El <unk> Ben Ali , then threatened by the Tunisian Revolution . He suggested that Tunisia 's people would be satisfied if Ben Ali introduced a Jamahiriyah system there . Fearing domestic protest , Libya 's government implemented preventative measures , reducing food prices , purging the army leadership of potential defectors and releasing several Islamist prisoners . They proved ineffective , and on 17 February 2011 , major protests broke out against Gaddafi 's government . Unlike Tunisia or Egypt , Libya was largely religiously homogenous and had no strong Islamist movement , but there was widespread dissatisfaction with the corruption and entrenched systems of patronage , while unemployment had reached around 30 % . 
 Accusing the rebels of being " drugged " and linked to al @-@ Qaeda , Gaddafi proclaimed that he would die a martyr rather than leave Libya . As he announced that the rebels would be " hunted down street by street , house by house and wardrobe by wardrobe " , the army opened fire on protests in Benghazi , killing hundreds . Shocked at the government 's response , a number of senior politicians resigned or defected to the protesters ' side . The uprising spread quickly through Libya 's less economically developed eastern half . By February 's end , eastern cities like Benghazi , Misrata , al @-@ Bayda and Tobruk were controlled by rebels , and the Benghazi @-@ based National Transitional Council ( NTC ) had been founded to represent them . 
 In the conflict 's early months it appeared that Gaddafi 's government – with its greater firepower – would be victorious . Both sides disregarded the laws of war , committing human rights abuses , including arbitrary arrests , torture , extrajudicial executions and revenge attacks . On 26 February the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1970 , suspending Libya from the UN Human Rights Council , implementing sanctions and calling for an International Criminal Court ( ICC ) investigation into the killing of unarmed civilians . In March , the Security Council declared a no fly zone to protect the civilian population from aerial bombardment , calling on foreign nations to enforce it ; it also specifically prohibited foreign occupation . Ignoring this , Qatar sent hundreds of troops to support the dissidents , and along with France and the United Arab Emirates provided the NTC with weaponry and training . 
 = = = NATO intervention : March – August 2011 = = = 
 A week after the implementation of the no @-@ fly zone , NATO announced that it would be enforced . On 30 April a NATO airstrike killed Gaddafi 's sixth son and three of his grandsons in Tripoli , though Gaddafi and his wife were unharmed . Western officials remained divided over whether Gaddafi was a legitimate military target under the U.N. Security Council resolution . U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said that NATO was " not targeting Gaddafi specifically " but that his command @-@ and @-@ control facilities were legitimate targets — including a facility inside his sprawling Tripoli compound that was hit with airstrikes on 25 April . 
 On 27 June , the ICC issued arrest warrants for Gaddafi , his son Saif al @-@ Islam , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Abdullah Senussi , head of state security , for charges concerning crimes against humanity . Libyan officials rejected the ICC , claiming that it had " no legitimacy whatsoever " and highlighting that " all of its activities are directed at African leaders " . That month , Amnesty International published their findings , in which they asserted that many of the accusations of mass human rights abuses made against Gaddafist forces lacked credible evidence , and were instead fabrications of the rebel forces which had been readily adopted by the western media . Amnesty International did however still accuse Gaddafi forces of numerous war crimes . On 15 July 2011 , at a meeting in Istanbul , over 30 governments recognised the NTC as the legitimate government of Libya . Gaddafi responded to the announcement with a speech on Libyan national television , in which he called on supporters to " <unk> on those recognitions , trample on them under your feet ... They are worthless " . 
 Now with NATO support in the form of air cover , the rebel militia pushed westward , defeating loyalist armies and securing control of the centre of the country . Gaining the support of Amazigh ( Berber ) communities of the <unk> Mountains , who had long been persecuted as non @-@ Arabic speakers under Gaddafi , the NTC armies surrounded Gaddafi loyalists in several key areas of western Libya . In August , the rebels seized <unk> and Tripoli , ending the last vestiges of Gaddafist power . On 25 August , the Arab League recognised the NTC to be " the legitimate representative of the Libyan state " , on which basis Libya would resume its membership in the League . 
 = = = Capture and death : September – October 2011 = = = 
 Only a few towns in western Libya — such as Bani Walid , <unk> and Sirte — remained Gaddafist strongholds . Retreating to Sirte after Tripoli 's fall , Gaddafi announced his willingness to negotiate for a handover to a transitional government , a suggestion rejected by the NTC . Surrounding himself with bodyguards , he continually moved residences to escape NTC shelling , devoting his days to prayer and reading the Qur 'an . On 20 October , Gaddafi broke out of Sirte 's District 2 in a joint civilian @-@ military convoy , hoping to take refuge in the <unk> Valley . At around <unk> , NATO bombers attacked , destroying at least 14 vehicles and killing at least 53 . The convoy scattered , and Gaddafi and those closest to him fled to a nearby villa , which was shelled by rebel militia from Misrata . Fleeing to a construction site , Gaddafi and his inner cohort hid inside drainage pipes while his bodyguards battled the rebels ; in the conflict , Gaddafi suffered head injuries from a grenade blast while defence minister Abu @-@ Bakr Yunis Jabr was killed . 
 A <unk> militia took Gaddafi prisoner , beating him , causing serious injuries ; the events were filmed on a mobile phone . A video appears to picture Gaddafi being poked or stabbed in the rear end " with some kind of stick or knife " or possibly a bayonet . Pulled onto the front of a pick @-@ up truck , he fell off as it drove away . His semi @-@ naked , lifeless body was then placed into an ambulance and taken to Misrata ; upon arrival , he was found to be dead . Official NTC accounts claimed that Gaddafi was caught in a cross @-@ fire and died from his bullet wounds . Other eye @-@ witness accounts claimed that rebels had fatally shot Gaddafi in the stomach ; a rebel identifying himself as <unk> el @-@ Sadik el @-@ <unk> later claimed responsibility . Gaddafi 's son Mutassim , who had also been among the convoy , was also captured , and found dead several hours later , most probably from an extrajudicial execution . Around 140 Gaddafi loyalists were rounded up from the convoy ; tied up and abused , the corpses of 66 were found at the nearby Mahari Hotel , victims of extrajudicial execution . Libya 's chief forensic pathologist , Dr. Othman al @-@ <unk> , carried out the autopsies of Gaddafi , his son and Jabr in the days following their deaths ; although the pathologist initially told the press that Gaddafi had died from a gunshot wound to the head , the autopsy report was not made public . 
 On the afternoon of Gaddafi 's death , NTC Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril publicly revealed the news . Gaddafi 's corpse was placed in the freezer of a local market alongside the corpses of Yunis Jabr and Mutassim ; the bodies were publicly displayed for four days , with Libyans from all over the country coming to view them . In response to international calls , on 24 October Jibril announced that a commission would investigate Gaddafi 's death . On 25 October , the NTC announced that Gaddafi had been buried at an unidentified location in the desert ; Al Aan TV showed amateur video footage of the funeral . Seeking vengeance for the killing , Gaddafist sympathisers fatally wounded one of those who had captured Gaddafi , <unk> Shaaban , near Bani Walid in September 2012 . 
 = = Personal and public life = = 
 = = = Ideology = = = 
 As a schoolboy , Gaddafi adopted the ideologies of Arab nationalism and Arab socialism , influenced in particular by Nasserism , the thought of Egyptian revolutionary and president Gamal Abdel Nasser , whom Gaddafi adopted as his hero . During the early 1970s , Gaddafi formulated his own particular approach to Arab nationalism and socialism , known as Third International Theory , which has been described as a combination of " utopian socialism , Arab nationalism , and the Third World revolutionary theory that was in vogue at the time " . He laid out the principles of this Theory in the three volumes of The Green Book , in which he sought to " explain the structure of the ideal society . " His Arab nationalist views led him to believe that there needed to be unity across the Arab world , combining the Arab nation under a single nation @-@ state . He described his approach to economics as " Islamic socialism " , although biographers Blundy and Lycett noted that Gaddafi 's socialism had a " curiously Marxist undertone " , with political scientist Sami Hajjar arguing that Gaddafi 's model of socialism offered a simplification of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels ' theories . Gaddafi saw his socialist Jamahiriyah as a model for the Arab , Islamic , and non @-@ aligned worlds to follow . 
 Gaddafi 's ideological worldview was moulded by his environment , namely his Islamic faith , his Bedouin upbringing , and his disgust at the actions of European colonialists in Libya . He was driven by a sense of " divine mission " , believing himself a conduit of Allah 's will , and thought that he must achieve his goals " no matter what the cost " . Raised within the Sunni branch of Islam , Gaddafi called for the implementation of sharia within Libya . He desired unity across the Islamic world , and encouraged the propagation of the faith elsewhere . On a 2010 visit to Italy , he paid a modelling agency to find 200 young Italian women for a lecture he gave urging them to convert . He also funded the construction and renovation of two mosques in Africa , including Uganda 's Kampala Mosque . He nevertheless clashed with conservative Libyan clerics as to his interpretation of Islam . Many criticised his attempts to encourage women to enter traditionally male @-@ only sectors of society , such as the armed forces . Gaddafi was keen to improve women 's status , though saw the sexes as " separate but equal " and therefore felt women should usually remain in traditional roles . 
 A fundamental part of Gaddafi 's ideology was anti @-@ Zionism . He believed that the state of Israel should not exist , and that any Arab compromise with the Israeli government was a betrayal of the Arab people . In large part due to their support of Israel , Gaddafi despised the United States , considering the country to be imperialist and lambasting it as " the embodiment of evil . " Rallying against Jews in many of his speeches , his anti @-@ Semitism has been described as " almost <unk> " by Blundy and Lycett . From the late 1990s onward , his view seemed to become more moderate . In 2007 , he advocated the <unk> single @-@ state solution to the Israeli – Palestinian conflict , stating that " the [ Israel @-@ Palestine ] solution is to establish a democratic state for the Jews and the Palestinians ... This is the fundamental solution , or else the Jews will be annihilated in the future , because the Palestinians have [ strategic ] depth . " Two years later he argued that a single @-@ state solution would " move beyond old conflicts and look to a unified future based on shared culture and respect . " 
 = = = Personal and family life = = = 
 Gaddafi was a very private individual , who described himself as a " simple revolutionary " and " pious Muslim " called upon by Allah to continue Nasser 's work . Reporter Mirella Bianco found that his friends considered him particularly loyal and generous , and asserted that he adored children . She was told by Gaddafi 's father that even as a child he had been " always serious , even taciturn " , a trait he also exhibited in adulthood . His father said that he was courageous , intelligent , pious , and family oriented . 
 Other sources describe Gaddafi as " extraordinarily vain " and a womaniser . Blundy and Lycett note Gaddafi had a large wardrobe , and sometimes changed his outfit multiple times a day . He saw himself as a fashion icon , stating " Whatever I wear becomes a fad . I wear a certain shirt and suddenly everyone is wearing it . " 
 In the 1970s and 1980s there were reports of his making sexual advances toward female reporters and members of his entourage . After the civil war , more serious charges came to light . Annick <unk> , a journalist for Le Monde , wrote in her book , Gaddafi 's Harem that Gaddafi had raped , tortured , performed urolagnia , and imprisoned hundreds or thousands of women , usually very young . Another source — Libyan psychologist Seham Sergewa — reported that several of his female bodyguards claim to have been raped by Gaddafi and senior officials . After the civil war , Luis Moreno Ocampo , prosecutor for the International Criminal Court , said there was evidence that Gaddafi told soldiers to rape women who had spoken out against his regime . In 2011 Amnesty International questioned this and other claims used to justify NATO 's war in Libya . 
 According to a Brazilian plastic surgeon , Gaddafi had been his patient in 1995 . The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency believed that Gaddafi had suffered from clinical depression , while the Israeli authorities claimed that he had been afflicted by epilepsy and hemorrhoids . He was a fan of Beethoven , and said his favourite novels were Uncle Tom 's Cabin , Roots , and Colin Wilson 's The Outsider . He was also a football enthusiast . 
 Following his ascension to power , Gaddafi moved into the Bab al @-@ Azizia barracks , a six @-@ mile long fortified compound located two miles from the center of Tripoli . His home and office at Azizia was a bunker designed by West German engineers , while the rest of his family lived in a large two @-@ story building . Within the compound were also two tennis courts , a soccer field , several gardens , camels , and a Bedouin tent in which he entertained guests . In the 1980s , his lifestyle was considered modest in comparison to those of many other Arab leaders . Gaddafi allegedly worked for years with Swiss banks to launder international banking transactions . In November 2011 , The Sunday Times identified property worth £ 1 billion in the UK that Gaddafi allegedly owned . Gaddafi had an Airbus A340 private jet , which he bought from Prince Al @-@ Waleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia for $ 120 million in 2003 . Operated by Tripoli @-@ based Afriqiyah Airways and decorated externally in their colours , it had various luxuries including a jacuzzi . 
 Gaddafi married his first wife , Fatiha al @-@ Nuri , in 1969 . She was the daughter of General Khalid , a senior figure in King Idris ' administration , and was from a middle @-@ class background . Although they had one son , Muhammad Gaddafi ( b . 1970 ) , their relationship was strained , and they divorced in 1970 . Gaddafi 's second wife was Safia Farkash , née el @-@ <unk> , a former nurse from <unk> tribe born in Bayda . They met in 1969 , following his ascension to power , when he was hospitalized with appendicitis ; he claimed that it was love at first sight . The couple remained married until his death . Together they had seven biological children : Saif al @-@ Islam Gaddafi ( b . 1972 ) , Al @-@ Saadi Gaddafi ( b . 1973 ) , Mutassim Gaddafi ( 1974 – 2011 ) , Hannibal Muammar Gaddafi ( b . 1975 ) , Ayesha Gaddafi ( b . 1976 ) , Saif al @-@ Arab Gaddafi ( 1982 – 2011 ) , and Khamis Gaddafi ( 1983 – 2011 ) . He also adopted two children , Hanna Gaddafi and Milad Gaddafi . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 A cult of personality devoted to Gaddafi existed in Libya . His face appeared on a wide variety of items , including postage stamps , watches , and school satchels . Quotations from The Green Book appeared on a wide variety of places , from street walls to airports and pens , and were put to pop music for public release . Gaddafi claimed that he disliked this personality cult , but that he tolerated it because Libya 's people adored him . 
 Biographers Blundy and Lycett believed that he was " a populist at heart . " Throughout Libya , crowds of supporters would turn up to public events at which he appeared ; described as " spontaneous demonstrations " by the government , there are recorded instances of groups being coerced or paid to attend . He was typically late to public events , and would sometimes not show up at all . Although Bianco thought he had a " gift for oratory " , he was considered a poor orator by biographers Blundy and Lycett . Biographer Daniel Kawczynski noted that Gaddafi was famed for his " lengthy , wandering " speeches , which typically involved criticising Israel and the U.S. 
 Gaddafi was notably confrontational in his approach to foreign powers , and generally shunned western ambassadors and diplomats , believing them to be spies . He once said that HIV was " a peaceful virus , not an aggressive virus " and assured attendees at the African Union that " if you are straight you have nothing to fear from AIDS " . He also said that the H1N1 influenza virus was a biological weapon manufactured by a foreign military , and he assured Africans that the tsetse fly and mosquito were " God 's armies which will protect us against colonialists " . Should these ' enemies ' come to Africa , " they will get malaria and sleeping sickness " . 
 Gaddafi was preoccupied with his own security , regularly changing where he slept and sometimes grounding all other planes in Libya when he was flying . He made very particular requests when traveling to foreign nations . During his trips to Rome , Paris , Madrid , Moscow , and New York City , he resided in a bulletproof tent , following his Bedouin traditions . 
 Starting in the 1980s , he travelled with his all @-@ female Amazonian Guard , who were allegedly sworn to a life of celibacy . However , according to psychologist Seham Sergewa , after the civil war several of the guards told her they had been pressured into joining and raped by Gaddafi and senior officials . He hired several Ukrainian nurses to care for him and his family 's health , and traveled everywhere with his trusted Ukrainian nurse Halyna <unk> . <unk> 's daughter denied the suggestion that the relationship was anything but professional . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Gaddafi remained a controversial and divisive figure on the world stage throughout his life and after death . Supporters praised Gaddafi 's administration for the creation of an almost classless society through domestic reform . They stress the regime 's achievements in combating homelessness and ensuring access to food and safe drinking water . Highlighting that under Gaddafi , all Libyans enjoyed free education to a university level , they point to the dramatic rise in literacy rates after the 1969 revolution . Supporters have also applauded achievements in medical care , praising the universal free healthcare provided under the Gaddafist administration , with diseases like cholera and typhoid being contained and life expectancy raised . Biographers Blundy and Lycett believed that under the first decade of Gaddafi 's leadership , life for most Libyans " undoubtedly changed for the better " as material conditions and wealth drastically improved , while Libyan studies specialist Lillian Craig Harris remarked that in the early years of his administration , Libya 's " national wealth and international influence soared , and its national standard of living has risen dramatically . " Such high standards declined during the 1980s , as a result of economic stagnation . Gaddafi claimed that his Jamahiriya was a " concrete utopia " , and that he had been appointed by " popular assent " , with some Islamic supporters believing that he exhibited <unk> . His opposition to Western governments earned him the respect of many in the Euro @-@ American far right . 
 Critics labelled Gaddafi " despotic , cruel , arrogant , vain and stupid " , with western governments and press presenting him as the " vicious dictator of an oppressed people " . During the Reagan administration , the United States regarded him as " Public Enemy No. 1 " and Reagan famously dubbed him the " mad dog of the Middle East " . According to critics , the Libyan people lived in a climate of fear under Gaddafi 's administration , due to his government 's pervasive surveillance of civilians . Gaddafi 's Libya was typically described by western commentators as " a police state " . Opponents were critical of Libya 's human rights abuses ; according to Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) and others , hundreds of arrested political opponents often failed to receive a fair trial , and were sometimes subjected to torture or extrajudicial execution , most notably in the Abu Salim prison , including an alleged massacre on 29 June 1996 in which HRW estimated that 1 @,@ 270 prisoners were massacred . Dissidents abroad or " stray dogs " were also publicly threatened with death and sometimes killed by government hit squads . His government 's treatment of non @-@ Arab Libyans has also came in for criticism from human rights activists , with native Berbers , Italians , Jews , refugees , and foreign workers all facing persecution in Gaddafist Libya . According to journalist Annick <unk> and psychologist Seham Sergewa , Gaddafi and senior officials raped and imprisoned hundreds or thousands of young women and reportedly raped several of his female bodyguards . Gaddafi 's government was frequently criticized for not being democratic , with Freedom House consistently giving Libya under Gaddafi the " Not Free " ranking for civil liberties and political rights . 
 International reactions to Gaddafi 's death were divided . U.S. President Barack Obama stated that it meant that " the shadow of tyranny over Libya has been lifted , " while UK Prime Minister David Cameron stated that he was " proud " of his country 's role in overthrowing " this brutal dictator " . Contrastingly , former Cuban President Fidel Castro commented that in defying the rebels , Gaddafi would " enter history as one of the great figures of the Arab nations " , while Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez described him as " a great fighter , a revolutionary and a martyr . " Nelson Mandela expressed sadness at the news , praising Gaddafi for his anti @-@ apartheid stance , remarking that he backed the African National Congress during " the darkest moments of our struggle " . Gaddafi was mourned by many as a hero across Sub @-@ Saharan Africa , for instance , a vigil was held by Muslims in Sierra Leone . The Daily Times of Nigeria stated that while undeniably a dictator , Gaddafi was the most benevolent in a region that only knew dictatorship , and that he was " a great man that looked out for his people and made them the envy of all of Africa . " The Nigerian newspaper Leadership reported that while many Libyans and Africans would mourn Gaddafi , this would be ignored by western media and that as such it would take 50 years before historians decided whether he was " martyr or villain . " 
 Following his defeat in the civil war , Gaddafi 's system of governance was dismantled and replaced under the interim government of the NTC , who legalised trade unions and freedom of the press . In July 2012 , elections were held to form a new General National Congress ( GNC ) , who officially took over governance from the NTC in August . The GNC proceeded to elect Mohammed <unk> as president of the chamber , and then voted Mustafa A.G. <unk> as Prime Minister ; when <unk> failed to gain congressional approval , the GNC instead elected Ali Zeidan to the position . In January 2013 , the GNC officially renamed the Jamahiriyah as the " State of Libya " . 
 = Lamentation ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Lamentation " is the eighteenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on April 18 , 1997 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter and directed by Winrich Kolbe . " Lamentation " featured guest appearances by Bill Smitrovich and Alex Diakun , and introduced Sarah @-@ Jane Redmond as Lucy Butler . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) searches for an escaped convict he had helped to catch , believing that the criminal 's new wife Lucy Butler ( Redmond ) may be helping him . However , Butler may instead be a much greater threat to Black and his family than he had anticipated . 
 " Lamentation " marked the death of recurring character Bob Bletcher , played by Smitrovich . Smitrovich had appeared intermittently since " Pilot " . The episode has been well @-@ received critically , described as a " pivotal point " in the series . It was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 5 million households in its original broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Seattle Police Department detective Bob Bletcher ( Bill Smitrovich ) are hiking across the North Cascades when Black receives an urgent page from the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Travelling to the Behavioral Sciences Unit , Black learns that serial killer Ephraim Fabricant ( Alex Diakun ) has escaped from a hospital while donating a kidney to his sister . Fabricant was arrested and convicted due to the profile constructed by Black ; although he was spared execution when Black asked for leniency in order to allow Fabricant 's mind to be studied . 
 Fellow Millennium Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) informs Black that , before his escape , Fabricant had married a correspondent he met through a prison pen @-@ pal service . Watts and Black interview the woman , Lucy Butler ( Sarah @-@ Jane Redmond ) , at her home . Butler is adamant she has not seen or heard from Fabricant since his escape . However , Black finds information on Butler 's computer which he believes is linked to his own home address ; and photographs of a judge who he recognizes as having been murdered . 
 Elsewhere , Fabricant is being operated on by a nurse whose face is hidden ; she removes the staples from his surgical incision . Black and Watts return to Butler 's home with a search warrant , having discovered that Butler 's young son had been killed with cyanide , and she had been suspected of the murder ; the judge had also been poisoned with the same substance . 
 Fabricant is found in a hospital emergency room , collapsing from his injuries . A doctor examines him and discovers his second kidney has been removed — without anaesthesia . Black 's home telephone number is found on Fabricant 's hospital bracelet . Back at Black 's home , his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) finds a human kidney in her refrigerator . A strange man appears at the top of her staircase , and she runs to find her husband 's gun , which is missing . Bletcher arrives , letting Catherine know that her daughter Jordan is safe outside with a colleague of his . He searches the house for the intruder , finding Butler instead . As a bolt of lightning illuminates the scene , her face has distorted into that of a demon . Giebelhouse ( Stephen J. Lang ) later discovers Bletcher 's body hanging from a ceiling post , with his throat cut . 
 Meanwhile , Fabricant warns Black that he was taken from the hospital and operated on by the " sum of all evil " ; Fabricant also warns that this entity knows who Black is and what he is capable of . Returning home , Black discovers that Butler was arrested elsewhere for a motoring offence , but was released without charge . Black takes his daughter Jordan hiking over the same North Cascades trail he and Bletcher had visited earlier . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lamentation " was the third of four episodes helmed by director Winrich Kolbe , who had previously worked on " Force Majeure " and " Kingdom Come " , and would return later in the first season for " Broken World " . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter . Beyond creating the concept for Millennium , Carter would write a total of six other episodes for the series in addition to " Lamentation " — three in the first season , and a further three in the third season . 
 The character Ephraim Fabricant was named for real @-@ life murderer Valery <unk> , a mechanical engineering professor who shot dead four of his colleagues in what became known as the Concordia University massacre . In addition , the character 's back @-@ story and demise were both intended to echo the case of Jack the Ripper — both were believed to be medically trained , while the use of Fabricant 's kidney to send a message is based on the From Hell letter , sent to the police by the Ripper along with one of his victims ' kidneys . 
 The episode features the death of the character Bob Bletcher . Smitrovich had first portrayed Bletcher in " Pilot " , appearing intermittently throughout the first season . Smitrovich 's final appearance would be in the following episode , " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " . 
 " Lamentation " also introduces the character Lucy Butler , who would return in " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " , as well as in the second season episode " A Room with No View " , and the third season episodes " Antipas " and " Saturn Dreaming of Mercury " . Redmond , admittedly a fan of Carter and recurring series director David Nutter , had initially auditioned for another episode of the first season , set to be directed by Nutter . Redmond did not get the part she auditioned for but was instead contacted about portraying a minor recurring role instead , which led to her casting as Butler . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Lamentation " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on April 18 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 7 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 7 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented 6 @.@ 5 million households , and left the episode the fifty @-@ seventh most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an A , describing it as " an episode where the show crystallizes and clarifies its central mission " . VanDerWerff felt that episode 's first half was " bland " and " fairly staid " , but that its second half compensated for this , becoming " one of the best episodes of horror TV I ’ ve ever seen " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 5 out of 5 , calling it " one of the scariest , creepiest installments of the entire first season " . Gibron felt that " with the unexpected shock ending and a wonderfully suspenseful sequence in the Black home , this is one of the best episodes of Millennium " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Lamentation " five stars out of five , finding its first act to be " a classic piece of misdirection " . Shearman felt that " Lamentation " was " an intentional jolt to the show " , describing it as " a pivotal point " in a series which had been " radically redefining itself " . 
 = Poet Laureate of New Jersey = 
 The Poet Laureate of New Jersey ( statutorily known as New Jersey William Carlos Williams Citation of Merit ) was an honor presented biennially by the Governor of New Jersey to a distinguished New Jersey poet . Created in 1999 , this position existed for less than four years and was abolished by the legislature effective July 2 , 2003 . When the New Jersey State Legislature created the laureate position , the bill provided specifically for the creation of an award named in honor of twentieth @-@ century poet and physician William Carlos Williams ( 1883 – 1963 ) who resided in Rutherford , New Jersey . However , the legislature recognized that the award 's recipient would " be considered the poet laureate of the State of New Jersey for a period of two years . Before the position was abolished , only two poets , Gerald Stern and Amiri Baraka , had been appointed as the state 's poet laureate . 
 The legislature 's bill was signed into law by Governor Christine Todd Whitman . It was expected that the award 's recipient — the poet laureate — would " engage in activities to promote and encourage poetry within the State and shall give no fewer than two public readings within the State each year . " In this respect , New Jersey 's poet laureate was similar to the position of Poet laureate in other American states and in several other countries . However , a public reading in September 2002 by the state 's second laureate , Newark @-@ based poet Amiri Baraka of his poem " Somebody Blew Up America " was met with harsh criticism by the public and news media . The poem which explores terrorist attacks on September 11 , 2001 was considered to be violent , incendiary and anti @-@ Semitic , and the ensuing controversy ignited a political firestorm . Because of Baraka 's defiant refusals to apologize or resign as poet laureate and that there was no mechanism within the law to remove him , the position was abolished by the legislature and Governor James E. McGreevey in 2003 . 
 = = Establishing the position ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = 
 On December 10 , 1998 , Assemblyman Richard H. Bagger and Assemblyman Leonard Lance introduced legislation in the New Jersey General Assembly to establish an award called the New Jersey William Carlos Williams Citation of Merit , " which the Governor will present biennially to a distinguished New Jersey poet . " The award was named to honour William Carlos Williams ( 1883 – 1963 ) , a National Book Award and Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning poet and physician who practiced medicine in his birthplace of Rutherford , New Jersey . According to the bill , the person receiving this award would receive a $ 10 @,@ 000 honorarium and be considered the poet laureate of the State of New Jersey . This legislation , designed as Assembly Bill No. <unk> , passed the General Assembly on March 29 , 1999 with 72 votes in favour , 2 votes opposed . The bill was passed by the New Jersey State Senate on June 21 , 1999 with a vote of 39 in favour and none opposed . The bill was signed into law by Governor Christine Todd Whitman on October 4 , 1999 . 
 The statute provided that every two years , a panel of four persons from New Jersey " who are either distinguished poets or persons who represent a range of stylistic approaches in the field of poetry " and chosen by " the New Jersey Council for the Humanities , in consultation with the New Jersey State Council on the Arts " would convene to select candidates for the position for the consideration of the state 's governor . An incumbent poet laureate would be the fifth member of the panel that selected his successor . The governor alone would appoint the poet laureate by presenting him or her with the New Jersey William Carlos Williams Citation of Merit . 
 Pursuant to statute , the state 's poet laureate would serve for a term of two years in which the person appointed would be required to " engage in activities to promote and encourage poetry within the State and shall give no fewer than two public readings within the State each year . " 
 = = First poet laureate ( 2000 – 02 ) = = 
 Poet Gerald Stern ( born 1925 ) , from Lawrenceville , New Jersey , was appointed as the state 's first poet laureate by Governor Christine Todd Whitman on April 17 , 2000 . At the time of his appointment , Stern had been the author of twelve books of poetry and won the National Book Award for his 1998 collection This Time : New and Selected Poems . Stern had been a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1991 for his collection Leaving Another Kingdom . Poet and Drew University literature professor Ross Gay described Stern 's work , saying that his poems " feel to me , often , a bit like that story , or rather , his manner of telling it : here is my pain , here is my sorrow , here is the song I ’ ve made of it . " Stern 's last public reading as poet laureate was held on June 27 , 2002 at a Summer Writer 's Conference held at Rutgers University 's Camden campus . 
 = = Second poet laureate ( 2002 – 03 ) = = 
 = = = Appointment of Amiri Baraka = = = 
 Governor Jim McGreevey had announced the appointment of Newark @-@ born poet Amiri Baraka ( 1934 – 2014 ) as the state 's second poet laureate on August 28 , 2002 although his selection was expected at least two months earlier . Baraka , born Everett Leroy Jones , is an African @-@ American poet , playwright , and author of fiction , essays and music criticism . Baraka 's poetry and writing has attracted both acclaim and condemnation . Within the African @-@ American community , critics compare him to James Baldwin and call Baraka one of the most respected and most widely published Black writers of his generation . Others have said that his work often ventures into expressions of violence , racism , homophobia , and misogyny — particularly his advocacy of rape , hate , and violence towards women , homosexuals , Caucasians , and Jews . 
 The previous poet laureate , Gerald Stern , said that he advocated for Baraka 's selection because he " thought it was important for the black community to get recognition . " Slate.com political reporter David Weigel said that McGreevey 's selection of Baraka " was a no @-@ brainer — he was a sort of icon , and a major figure within a constituency McGreevey counted on " . At a ceremony in August 2002 , Baraka warned McGreevey that the decision to appoint him as poet laureate might be a mistake because of his controversial views , saying " You 're gonna catch hell for this " . After Baraka 's death in January 2014 , McGreevey said , " I named him poet laureate because I appreciated his art , his intelligence and his creative energy . I ’ ve always had great personal affect ( ion ) for him and recognized him as a gifted creative force . " 
 = = = Controversy over " Somebody Blew Up America " = = = 
 On September 20 , 2002 , Baraka incited a public controversy with a public reading of his poem " Somebody Blew Up America " in front of 2 @,@ 000 people at the September 2002 Geraldine R. Dodge Poetry Festival held in Stanhope , New Jersey . He was briefly booed by the audience . This poem , written in October 2001 , was read at the festival — held one year after the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center — and was later published in his 2003 collection Somebody Blew Up America and Other Poems . This poem , and the collection in which it was included , is described by one critic as " one more mark in modern Black radical and revolutionary cultural reconstruction . " Princeton University poetry professor Craig Dworkin , said that he did not like the poem , but added " I do like the sense that a poet can be disturbing and not necessarily comforting or consensus @-@ building . " Immediately after its public reading , the poem met with harsh criticism by literary critics , politicians , and the public . The poem is highly critical of racism in America , and includes angry depictions of public figures such as Rudolph Giuliani , Trent Lott , Clarence Thomas , Condoleezza Rice , Colin Powell and Ward Connerly . It was also considered anti @-@ Semitic because of lines claiming Israel 's involvement in the World Trade Center attacks , and supporting the theory that the United States government knew about the 9 / 11 attacks in advance . 
 In comments a week after this reading , Baraka was quoted by New Jersey 's largest newspaper The Star @-@ Ledger : " The Israelis knew about it just like Bush knew about it , just like the Germans knew about it , just like the French knew about it . Bush couldn ’ t hope for a better legitimization of his trying to make the Middle East a gas station . " Despite this , Baraka denies that his poem is anti @-@ Semitic pointing to the accusation in the poem 's text which he claims is directed only against Israelis rather than Jews as a people . The Anti @-@ Defamation League denounced the poem as antisemitic and have pointed to several examples of a long pattern of anti @-@ Semitism in his work and public statements though Baraka and his defenders defined his position as Anti @-@ Zionism . 
 Commenting on Baraka 's poem and the resulting controversy , the state 's first poet laureate Gerald Stern stated that he was " shocked at the stupidity of it " and remarked that the response to it was difficult to weigh — that although " we don 't censor poets ... lies never serve good , and there was hate in it . " 
 After Baraka 's public reading , Governor McGreevey sought to remove Baraka from the poet laureate post . Baraka refused to resign and defied the state 's right to remove him . On October 2 , Baraka posting a defiant statement on his website stating in capital letters " I WILL NOT ' <unk> ' , I WILL NOT ' <unk> ! ' " McGreevey and state officials learned that there was no legal way to remove Baraka in the law authorizing and defining the position . However , the city of Newark supported Baraka and his work , and responded to the attempts to remove him as poet laureate by appointing him to be the poet laureate of the Newark Public Schools in December 2002 . 
 = = = Repeal and aftermath = = = 
 On October 17 , 2002 , legislation was introduced in the General Assembly to abolish the post . It was one of several bills offered to amend the law , make a declarative legislative statement in support of Baraka 's resignation , or abolish the post . This bill sought to abolish the post and offered only two brief provisions to effect that goal : 
