 The common features of passive solar architecture are orientation relative to the Sun , compact proportion ( a low surface area to volume ratio ) , selective shading ( overhangs ) and thermal mass . When these features are tailored to the local climate and environment they can produce well @-@ lit spaces that stay in a comfortable temperature range . Socrates ' <unk> House is a classic example of passive solar design . The most recent approaches to solar design use computer modeling tying together solar lighting , heating and ventilation systems in an integrated solar design package . Active solar equipment such as pumps , fans and switchable windows can complement passive design and improve system performance . 
 Urban heat islands ( UHI ) are metropolitan areas with higher temperatures than that of the surrounding environment . The higher temperatures result from increased absorption of solar energy by urban materials such as asphalt and concrete , which have lower albedos and higher heat capacities than those in the natural environment . A straightforward method of counteracting the UHI effect is to paint buildings and roads white , and to plant trees in the area . Using these methods , a hypothetical " cool communities " program in Los Angeles has projected that urban temperatures could be reduced by approximately 3 ° C at an estimated cost of US $ 1 billion , giving estimated total annual benefits of US $ 530 million from reduced air @-@ conditioning costs and healthcare savings . 
 = = Agriculture and horticulture = = 
 Agriculture and horticulture seek to optimize the capture of solar energy in order to optimize the productivity of plants . Techniques such as timed planting cycles , tailored row orientation , staggered heights between rows and the mixing of plant varieties can improve crop yields . While sunlight is generally considered a plentiful resource , the exceptions highlight the importance of solar energy to agriculture . During the short growing seasons of the Little Ice Age , French and English farmers employed fruit walls to maximize the collection of solar energy . These walls acted as thermal masses and accelerated ripening by keeping plants warm . Early fruit walls were built perpendicular to the ground and facing south , but over time , sloping walls were developed to make better use of sunlight . In 1699 , Nicolas Fatio de Duillier even suggested using a tracking mechanism which could pivot to follow the Sun . Applications of solar energy in agriculture aside from growing crops include pumping water , drying crops , brooding chicks and drying chicken manure . More recently the technology has been embraced by vintners , who use the energy generated by solar panels to power grape presses . 
 Greenhouses convert solar light to heat , enabling year @-@ round production and the growth ( in enclosed environments ) of specialty crops and other plants not naturally suited to the local climate . Primitive greenhouses were first used during Roman times to produce cucumbers year @-@ round for the Roman emperor Tiberius . The first modern greenhouses were built in Europe in the 16th century to keep exotic plants brought back from explorations abroad . Greenhouses remain an important part of horticulture today , and plastic transparent materials have also been used to similar effect in <unk> and row covers . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Development of a solar @-@ powered car has been an engineering goal since the 1980s . The World Solar Challenge is a biannual solar @-@ powered car race , where teams from universities and enterprises compete over 3 @,@ 021 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 877 mi ) across central Australia from Darwin to Adelaide . In 1987 , when it was founded , the winner 's average speed was 67 kilometres per hour ( 42 mph ) and by 2007 the winner 's average speed had improved to 90 @.@ 87 kilometres per hour ( 56 @.@ 46 mph ) . The North American Solar Challenge and the planned South African Solar Challenge are comparable competitions that reflect an international interest in the engineering and development of solar powered vehicles . 
 Some vehicles use solar panels for auxiliary power , such as for air conditioning , to keep the interior cool , thus reducing fuel consumption . 
 In 1975 , the first practical solar boat was constructed in England . By 1995 , passenger boats incorporating PV panels began appearing and are now used extensively . In 1996 , Kenichi Horie made the first solar @-@ powered crossing of the Pacific Ocean , and the <unk> catamaran made the first solar @-@ powered crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in the winter of 2006 – 2007 . There were plans to circumnavigate the globe in 2010 . 
 In 1974 , the unmanned <unk> Sunrise airplane made the first solar flight . On 29 April 1979 , the Solar Riser made the first flight in a solar @-@ powered , fully controlled , man @-@ carrying flying machine , reaching an altitude of 40 feet ( 12 m ) . In 1980 , the Gossamer Penguin made the first piloted flights powered solely by photovoltaics . This was quickly followed by the Solar Challenger which crossed the English Channel in July 1981 . In 1990 Eric Scott Raymond in 21 hops flew from California to North Carolina using solar power . Developments then turned back to unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAV ) with the Pathfinder ( 1997 ) and subsequent designs , culminating in the Helios which set the altitude record for a non @-@ rocket @-@ propelled aircraft at 29 @,@ 524 metres ( 96 @,@ 864 ft ) in 2001 . The Zephyr , developed by BAE Systems , is the latest in a line of record @-@ breaking solar aircraft , making a 54 @-@ hour flight in 2007 , and month @-@ long flights were envisioned by 2010 . As of 2016 , Solar Impulse , an electric aircraft , is currently circumnavigating the globe . It is a single @-@ seat plane powered by solar cells and capable of taking off under its own power . The design allows the aircraft to remain airborne for several days . 
 A solar balloon is a black balloon that is filled with ordinary air . As sunlight shines on the balloon , the air inside is heated and expands causing an upward buoyancy force , much like an artificially heated hot air balloon . Some solar balloons are large enough for human flight , but usage is generally limited to the toy market as the surface @-@ area to payload @-@ weight ratio is relatively high . 
 = = Fuel production = = 
 Solar chemical processes use solar energy to drive chemical reactions . These processes offset energy that would otherwise come from a fossil fuel source and can also convert solar energy into storable and transportable fuels . Solar induced chemical reactions can be divided into thermochemical or photochemical . A variety of fuels can be produced by artificial photosynthesis . The multielectron catalytic chemistry involved in making carbon @-@ based fuels ( such as methanol ) from reduction of carbon dioxide is challenging ; a feasible alternative is hydrogen production from protons , though use of water as the source of electrons ( as plants do ) requires mastering the multielectron oxidation of two water molecules to molecular oxygen . Some have envisaged working solar fuel plants in coastal metropolitan areas by 2050 – the splitting of sea water providing hydrogen to be run through adjacent fuel @-@ cell electric power plants and the pure water by @-@ product going directly into the municipal water system . Another vision involves all human structures covering the earth 's surface ( i.e. , roads , vehicles and buildings ) doing photosynthesis more efficiently than plants . 
 Hydrogen production technologies have been a significant area of solar chemical research since the 1970s . Aside from electrolysis driven by photovoltaic or photochemical cells , several thermochemical processes have also been explored . One such route uses concentrators to split water into oxygen and hydrogen at high temperatures ( 2 @,@ 300 – 2 @,@ 600 ° C or 4 @,@ 200 – 4 @,@ 700 ° F ) . Another approach uses the heat from solar concentrators to drive the steam reformation of natural gas thereby increasing the overall hydrogen yield compared to conventional reforming methods . <unk> cycles characterized by the decomposition and regeneration of reactants present another avenue for hydrogen production . The <unk> process under development at the Weizmann Institute of Science uses a 1 MW solar furnace to decompose zinc oxide ( ZnO ) at temperatures above 1 @,@ 200 ° C ( 2 @,@ 200 ° F ) . This initial reaction produces pure zinc , which can subsequently be reacted with water to produce hydrogen . 
 = = Energy storage methods = = 
 Thermal mass systems can store solar energy in the form of heat at domestically useful temperatures for daily or <unk> durations . Thermal storage systems generally use readily available materials with high specific heat capacities such as water , earth and stone . Well @-@ designed systems can lower peak demand , shift time @-@ of @-@ use to off @-@ peak hours and reduce overall heating and cooling requirements . 
 Phase change materials such as paraffin wax and Glauber 's salt are another thermal storage medium . These materials are inexpensive , readily available , and can deliver domestically useful temperatures ( approximately 64 ° C or 147 ° F ) . The " Dover House " ( in Dover , Massachusetts ) was the first to use a Glauber 's salt heating system , in 1948 . Solar energy can also be stored at high temperatures using molten salts . Salts are an effective storage medium because they are low @-@ cost , have a high specific heat capacity and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems . The Solar Two project used this method of energy storage , allowing it to store 1 @.@ 44 terajoules ( 400 @,@ 000 kWh ) in its 68 m ³ storage tank with an annual storage efficiency of about 99 % . 
 Off @-@ grid PV systems have traditionally used rechargeable batteries to store excess electricity . With grid @-@ tied systems , excess electricity can be sent to the transmission grid , while standard grid electricity can be used to meet shortfalls . Net metering programs give household systems a credit for any electricity they deliver to the grid . This is handled by ' rolling back ' the meter whenever the home produces more electricity than it consumes . If the net electricity use is below zero , the utility then rolls over the kilowatt hour credit to the next month . Other approaches involve the use of two meters , to measure electricity consumed vs. electricity produced . This is less common due to the increased installation cost of the second meter . Most standard meters accurately measure in both directions , making a second meter unnecessary . 
 Pumped @-@ storage hydroelectricity stores energy in the form of water pumped when energy is available from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher elevation one . The energy is recovered when demand is high by releasing the water , with the pump becoming a hydroelectric power generator . 
 = = Development , deployment and economics = = 
 Beginning with the surge in coal use which accompanied the Industrial Revolution , energy consumption has steadily transitioned from wood and biomass to fossil fuels . The early development of solar technologies starting in the 1860s was driven by an expectation that coal would soon become scarce . However , development of solar technologies stagnated in the early 20th century in the face of the increasing availability , economy , and utility of coal and petroleum . 
 The 1973 oil embargo and 1979 energy crisis caused a reorganization of energy policies around the world and brought renewed attention to developing solar technologies . Deployment strategies focused on incentive programs such as the Federal Photovoltaic Utilization Program in the U.S. and the Sunshine Program in Japan . Other efforts included the formation of research facilities in the U.S. ( <unk> , now NREL ) , Japan ( <unk> ) , and Germany ( Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE ) . 
 Commercial solar water heaters began appearing in the United States in the 1890s . These systems saw increasing use until the 1920s but were gradually replaced by cheaper and more reliable heating fuels . As with photovoltaics , solar water heating attracted renewed attention as a result of the oil crises in the 1970s but interest subsided in the 1980s due to falling petroleum prices . Development in the solar water heating sector progressed steadily throughout the 1990s and annual growth rates have averaged 20 % since 1999 . Although generally underestimated , solar water heating and cooling is by far the most widely deployed solar technology with an estimated capacity of 154 GW as of 2007 . 
 The International Energy Agency has said that solar energy can make considerable contributions to solving some of the most urgent problems the world now faces : 
 The development of affordable , inexhaustible and clean solar energy technologies will have huge longer @-@ term benefits . It will increase countries ’ energy security through reliance on an indigenous , inexhaustible and mostly import @-@ independent resource , enhance sustainability , reduce pollution , lower the costs of mitigating climate change , and keep fossil fuel prices lower than otherwise . These advantages are global . Hence the additional costs of the incentives for early deployment should be considered learning investments ; they must be wisely spent and need to be widely shared . 
 In 2011 , a report by the International Energy Agency found that solar energy technologies such as photovoltaics , solar hot water and concentrated solar power could provide a third of the world ’ s energy by 2060 if politicians commit to limiting climate change . The energy from the sun could play a key role in de @-@ <unk> the global economy alongside improvements in energy efficiency and imposing costs on greenhouse gas emitters . " The strength of solar is the incredible variety and flexibility of applications , from small scale to big scale " . 
 We have proved ... that after our stores of oil and coal are exhausted the human race can receive unlimited power from the rays of the sun . 
 = = ISO standards = = 
 The International Organization for Standardization has established several standards relating to solar energy equipment . For example , ISO <unk> relates to glass in building while ISO <unk> relates to the materials used in solar water heaters . 
 = The Garden of Earthly Delights = 
 The Garden of Earthly Delights is the modern title given to a triptych painted by the Early Netherlandish master Hieronymus Bosch , housed in the Museo del Prado in Madrid since 1939 . It dates from between 1490 and 1510 , when Bosch was between about 40 and 60 years old , and is his best @-@ known and most ambitious surviving work . 
 The triptych is painted in oil on oak and is formed from a square middle panel flanked by two other oak rectangular wings that close over the center as shutters . The outer wings , when folded , show a grisaille painting of the earth during the biblical narrative of Creation . The three scenes of the inner triptych are probably ( but not necessarily ) intended to be read chronologically from left to right . The left panel depicts God presenting Eve to Adam , the central panel is a broad panorama of socially engaged nude figures , fantastical animals , oversized fruit and hybrid stone formations . The right panel is a hellscape and portrays the torments of damnation . 
 Art historians frequently interpret the painting as a didactic warning on the perils of life 's temptations . However , the intricacy of its symbolism , particularly that of the central panel , has led to a wide range of scholarly interpretations over the centuries . Twentieth @-@ century art historians are divided as to whether the triptych 's central panel is a moral warning or a panorama of paradise lost . American writer Peter S. Beagle describes it as an " erotic derangement that turns us all into voyeurs , a place filled with the intoxicating air of perfect liberty " . 
 Bosch painted three large triptychs ( the others are The Last Judgment of c . 1482 and The Haywain Triptych of c . 1516 ) that can be read from left to right and in which each panel was essential to the meaning of the whole . Each of these three works presents distinct yet linked themes addressing history and faith . Triptychs from this period were generally intended to be read sequentially , the left and right panels often portraying Eden and the Last Judgment respectively , while the main subject was contained in the center piece . It is not known whether " The Garden " was intended as an altarpiece , but the general view is that the extreme subject matter of the inner center and right panels make it unlikely that it was intended to function in a church or monastery , but was instead commissioned by a lay patron . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 When the triptych 's wings are closed , the design of the outer panels becomes visible . Rendered in a green – gray grisaille , these panels lack colour , probably because most Netherlandish triptychs were thus painted , but possibly indicating that the painting reflects a time before the creation of the sun and moon , which were formed , according to Christian theology , to " give light to the earth " . It was common for the outer panels of Netherlandish altarpieces to be in grisaille , such that their blandness highlighted the splendid colour inside . 
 The outer panels are generally thought to depict the creation of the world , showing greenery beginning to clothe the still @-@ pristine Earth . God , wearing a crown similar to a papal tiara ( a common convention in Netherlandish painting ) , is visible as a tiny figure at the upper left . Bosch shows God as the father sitting with a Bible on his lap , creating the Earth in a passive manner by divine fiat . Above him is inscribed a quote from Psalm 33 reading " <unk> dixit , et <unk> sunt : ipse <unk> , et <unk> sunt " — For he spake and it was done ; he commanded , and it stood fast . The Earth is encapsulated in a transparent sphere recalling the traditional depiction of the created world as a crystal sphere held by God or Christ . It hangs suspended in the cosmos , which is shown as an impermeable darkness , whose only other inhabitant is God himself . 
 Despite the presence of vegetation , the earth does not yet contain human or animal life , indicating that the scene represents the events of the biblical Third Day . Bosch renders the plant life in an unusual fashion , using uniformly gray tints which make it difficult to determine whether the subjects are purely vegetable or perhaps include some mineral formations . Surrounding the interior of the globe is the sea , partially illuminated by beams of light shining through clouds . The exterior wings have a clear position within the sequential narrative of the work as a whole . They show an unpopulated earth composed solely of rock and plants , contrasting sharply with the inner central panel which contains a paradise teeming with lustful humanity . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Scholars have proposed that Bosch used the outer panels to establish a Biblical setting for the inner elements of the work , and the exterior image is generally interpreted as set in an earlier time than those in the interior . As with Bosch 's Haywain triptych , the inner centerpiece is flanked by heavenly and hellish imagery . The scenes depicted in the triptych are thought to follow a chronological order : flowing from left @-@ to @-@ right they represent Eden , the garden of earthly delights , and Hell . God appears as the creator of humanity in the left hand wing , while the consequences of humanity 's failure to follow his will are shown in the right . 
 However , in contrast to Bosch 's two other complete triptychs , The Last Judgment ( around 1482 ) and The Haywain ( after 1510 ) , God is absent from the central panel . Instead , this panel shows humanity acting with apparent free will as naked men and women engage in various pleasure @-@ seeking activities . According to some interpretations , the right hand panel is believed to show God 's penalties in a hellscape . 
 Art historian Charles de Tolnay believed that , through the seductive gaze of Adam , the left panel already shows God 's waning influence upon the newly created earth . This view is reinforced by the rendering of God in the outer panels as a tiny figure in comparison to the immensity of the earth . According to Belting , the three inner panels seek to broadly convey the Old Testament notion that , before the Fall , there was no defined boundary between good and evil ; humanity in its innocence was unaware of consequence . 
 = = = = Left panel = = = = 
 The left panel ( 220 × 97 @.@ 5 cm , 87 × 38 @.@ 4 in ) ( sometimes known as the Joining of Adam and Eve ) depicts a scene from the paradise of the Garden of Eden commonly interpreted as the moment when God presents Eve to Adam . The painting shows Adam waking from a deep sleep to find God holding Eve by her wrist and giving the sign of his blessing to their union . God is younger @-@ looking than on the outer panels , blue @-@ eyed and with golden curls . His youthful appearance may be a device by the artist to illustrate the concept of Christ as the incarnation of the Word of God . God 's right hand is raised in blessing , while he holds Eve 's wrist with his left . According to the work 's most controversial interpreter , the 20th @-@ century folklorist and art historian Wilhelm Fraenger : 
 ... " As though enjoying the pulsation of the living blood and as though too he were setting a seal on the eternal and immutable communion between this human blood and his own . This physical contact between the Creator and Eve is repeated even more noticeably in the way Adam 's toes touch the Lord 's foot . Here is the stressing of a rapport : Adam seems indeed to be stretching to his full length in order to make contact with the Creator . And the billowing out of the cloak around the Creator 's heart , from where the garment falls in marked folds and contours to Adam 's feet , also seems to indicate that here a current of divine power flows down , so that this group of three actually forms a closed circuit , a complex of magical energy " ... 
 Eve avoids Adam 's gaze , although , according to art historian Walter S. Gibson , she is shown " seductively presenting her body to Adam " . Adam 's expression is one of amazement , and Fraenger has identified three elements to his seeming astonishment . Firstly , there is surprise at the presence of the God . Secondly , he is reacting to an awareness that Eve is of the same nature as himself , and has been created from his own body . Finally , from the intensity of Adam 's gaze , it can be concluded that he is experiencing sexual arousal and the primal urge to reproduce for the first time . 
 The surrounding landscape is populated by hut @-@ shaped forms , some of which are made from stone , while others are at least partially organic . Behind Eve rabbits , symbolising fecundity , play in the grass , and a dragon tree opposite is thought to represent eternal life . The background reveals several animals that would have been exotic to contemporaneous Europeans , including a giraffe , an elephant and a lion that has killed and is about to devour his prey . In the foreground , from a large hole in the ground , emerge birds and winged animals , some of which are realistic , some fantastic . Behind a fish , a person clothed in a short @-@ sleeved hooded jacket and with a duck 's beak holds an open book as if reading . To the left of the area a cat holds a small lizard @-@ like creature in its jaws . Belting observes that , despite the fact that the creatures in the foreground are fantastical imaginings , many of the animals in the mid and background are drawn from contemporary travel literature , and here Bosch is appealing to " the knowledge of a humanistic and aristocratic readership " . Erhard <unk> 's pictures for Bernhard von <unk> 's 1486 Pilgrimages to the Holy Land were long thought to be the source for both the elephant and the giraffe , though more recent research indicates the mid @-@ 15th @-@ century humanist scholar <unk> of Ancona 's travelogues served as Bosch 's exposure to these exotic animals . 
 According to art historian Virginia Tuttle , the scene is " highly unconventional [ and ] cannot be identified as any of the events from the Book of Genesis traditionally depicted in Western art " . Some of the image 's details seem to contradict the innocence that might be expected in the Garden of Eden before the expulsion . Tuttle and other critics have interpreted the gaze of Adam upon his wife as lustful , and indicative of the Christian belief that humanity was doomed from the beginning . Gibson believes that Adam 's facial expression betrays not just surprise but also expectation . According to a belief common in the Middle Ages , before the Fall Adam and Eve would have copulated without lust , solely to reproduce . Many believed that the first sin committed after Eve tasted the forbidden fruit was carnal lust . On a tree to the right a snake curls around a tree trunk , while to its right a mouse creeps ; according to Fraenger , both animals are universal phallic symbols . 
 = = = = Center panel = = = = 
 The skyline of the center panel ( 220 × 195 cm , 87 × 77 in ) matches exactly with that of the left wing , while the positioning of its central pool and the lake behind it echoes the lake in the earlier scene . The center image depicts the expansive " garden " landscape which gives the triptych its name . The panel shares a common horizon with the left wing , suggesting a spatial connection between the two scenes . The garden is teeming with male and female nudes , together with a variety of animals , plants and fruit . The setting is not the paradise shown in the left panel , but neither is it based in the terrestrial realm . Fantastic creatures mingle with the real ; otherwise ordinary fruits appear engorged to a gigantic size . The figures are engaged in diverse amorous sports and activities , both in couples and in groups . Gibson describes them as behaving " overtly and without shame " , while art historian <unk> Dixon writes that the human figures exhibit " a certain adolescent sexual curiosity " . 
 Many of the numerous human figures revel in an innocent , self @-@ absorbed joy as they engage in a wide range of activities : some appear to enjoy sensory pleasures , others play unselfconsciously in the water , and yet others cavort in meadows with a variety of animals , seemingly at one with nature . In the middle of the background , a large blue globe resembling a fruit pod rises in the middle of a lake . Visible through its circular window is a man holding his right hand close to his partner 's genitals , and the bare buttocks of yet another figure hover in the vicinity . According to Fraenger , the eroticism of the center frame could be considered either as an allegory of spiritual transition or a playground of corruption . 
 On the right @-@ hand side of the foreground stand a group of three fair and one black @-@ skinned figures . The fair @-@ skinned figures , two males and one female , are covered from head to foot in light @-@ brown body hair . Scholars generally agree that these hirsute figures represent wild or primeval humanity but disagree on the symbolism of their inclusion . Art historian Patrik <unk> , for example , posits that they may be seen as " the noble savage " who represents " an imagined alternative to our civilized life " , imbuing the panel with " a more clear @-@ cut primitivistic note " . Writer Peter <unk> , in contrast , sees the figures as intrinsically connected with whoredom and lust . 
 In a cave to their lower right a male figure points towards a reclining female who is also covered in hair . ( image ) The pointing man is the only clothed figure in the panel , and as Fraenger observes , " he is clothed with emphatic austerity right up to his throat " . In addition , he is one of the few human figures with dark hair . According to Fraenger : 
 The way this man 's dark hair grows , with the sharp dip in the middle of his high forehead , as though concentrating there all the energy of the masculine M , makes his face different from all the others . His coal @-@ black eyes are rigidly focused in a gaze that expresses compelling force . The nose is unusually long and boldly curved . The mouth is wide and sensual , but the lips are firmly shut in a straight line , the corners strongly marked and tightened into final points , and this strengthens the impression — already suggested by the eyes — of a strong controlling will . It is an extraordinarily fascinating face , reminding us of faces of famous men , especially of Machiavelli 's ; and indeed the whole aspect of the head suggests something Mediterranean , as though this man had acquired his frank , searching , superior air at Italian academies . 
 The pointing man has variously been described as either the patron of the work ( Fraenger in 1947 ) , as an advocate of Adam denouncing Eve ( Dirk Bax in 1956 ) , as Saint John the Baptist in his camel 's skin ( Isabel Mateo <unk> in 1963 ) , or as a self @-@ portrait . The woman below him lies within a <unk> transparent shield , while her mouth is sealed , devices implying that she bears a secret . To their left , a man crowned by leaves lies on top of what appears to be an actual but gigantic strawberry , and is joined by a male and female who contemplate another equally huge strawberry . ( image ) 
 There is no perspectival order in the foreground ; instead it comprises a series of small motifs wherein proportion and terrestrial logic are abandoned . Bosch presents the viewer with gigantic ducks playing with tiny humans under the cover of oversized fruit ; ( image ) fish walking on land while birds dwell in the water ; a passionate couple encased in an amniotic fluid bubble ; and a man inside of a red fruit staring at a mouse in a transparent cylinder . 
 The pools in the fore and background contain bathers of both sexes . In the central circular pool , the sexes are mostly segregated , with several females adorned by peacocks and fruit . Four women carry cherry @-@ like fruits on their heads , perhaps a symbol of pride at the time , as has been deduced from the contemporaneous saying : " Don 't eat cherries with great lords — they 'll throw the pits in your face . " The women are surrounded by a parade of naked men riding horses , donkeys , unicorns , camels and other exotic or fantastic creatures . Several men show acrobatics while riding , apparently acts designed to gain the females ' attention , which highlights the attraction felt between the two sexes as groups . The two outer springs also contain both men and women cavorting with abandon . Around them , birds infest the water while winged fish crawl on land . Humans inhabit giant shells . All are surrounded by oversized fruit pods and eggshells , and both humans and animals feast on strawberries and cherries . 
 The impression of a life lived without consequence , or what art historian Hans Belting describes as " unspoilt and pre @-@ moral existence " , is underscored by the absence of children and old people . According to the second and third chapters of Genesis , Adam and Eve 's children were born after they were expelled from Eden . This has led some commentators , in particular Belting , to theorise that the panel represents the world if the two had not been driven out " among the thorns and thistles of the world " . In Fraenger 's view , the scene illustrates " a utopia , a garden of divine delight before the Fall , or — since Bosch could not deny the existence of the dogma of original sin — a millennial condition that would arise if , after expiation of Original Sin , humanity were permitted to return to Paradise and to a state of tranquil harmony embracing all Creation . " 
 In the high distance of the background , above the hybrid stone formations , four groups of people and creatures are seen in flight . On the immediate left a human male rides on a chthonic solar eagle @-@ lion . The human carries a triple @-@ branched tree of life on which perches a bird ; according to Fraenger " a symbolic bird of death " . Fraenger believes the man is intended to represent a genius , " he is the symbol of the extinction of the duality of the sexes , which are resolved in the ether into their original state of unity " . To their right a knight with a dolphin tail sails on a winged fish . The knight 's tail curls back to touch the back of his head , which references the common symbol of eternity : the snake biting its own tail . On the immediate right of the panel , a winged youth soars upwards carrying a fish in his hands and a falcon on his back . According to Belting , in these passages Bosch 's " imagination triumphs ... the ambivalence of [ his ] visual syntax exceeds even the enigma of content , opening up that new dimension of freedom by which painting becomes art . " Fraenger titled his chapter on the high background " The Ascent to Heaven " , and wrote that the airborne figures were likely intended as a link between " what is above " and " what is below " , just as the left and right hand panels represent " what was " and " what will be " . 
 = = = = Right panel = = = = 
 The right panel ( 220 × 97 @.@ 5 cm , 87 × 38 @.@ 4 in ) illustrates Hell , the setting of a number of Bosch paintings . Bosch depicts a world in which humans have succumbed to temptations that lead to evil and reap eternal damnation . The tone of this final panel strikes a harsh contrast to those preceding it . The scene is set at night , and the natural beauty that adorned the earlier panels is noticeably absent . Compared to the warmth of the center panel , the right wing possesses a chilling quality — rendered through cold colourisation and frozen waterways — and presents a tableau that has shifted from the paradise of the center image to a spectacle of cruel torture and retribution . In a single , densely detailed scene , the viewer is made witness to cities on fire in the background ; war , torture chambers , infernal taverns , and demons in the midground ; and mutated animals feeding on human flesh in the foreground . The nakedness of the human figures has lost all its eroticism , and many now attempt to cover their genitalia and breasts with their hands . 
 Large explosions in the background throw light through the city gate and spill forth onto the water in the midground ; according to writer Walter S. Gibson , " their fiery reflection turning the water below into blood " . The light illuminates a road filled with fleeing figures , while hordes of tormentors prepare to burn a neighbouring village . A short distance away , a rabbit carries an impaled and bleeding corpse , while a group of victims above are thrown into a burning lantern . The foreground is populated by a variety of distressed or tortured figures . Some are shown vomiting or excreting , others are crucified by harp and lute , in an allegory of music , thus sharpening the contrast between pleasure and torture . A choir sings from a score inscribed on a pair of buttocks , part of a group that has been described as the " Musicians ' Hell " . 
 The focal point of the scene is the " Tree @-@ Man " , whose cavernous torso is supported by what could be contorted arms or rotting tree trunks . His head supports a disk populated by demons and victims parading around a huge set of bagpipes — often used as a dual sexual symbol — reminiscent of human scrotum and penis . The tree @-@ man 's torso is formed from a broken eggshell , and the supporting trunk has thorn @-@ like branches which pierce the fragile body . A grey figure in a hood bearing an arrow jammed between his buttocks climbs a ladder into the tree @-@ man 's central cavity , where nude men sit in a tavern @-@ like setting . The tree @-@ man gazes outwards beyond the viewer , his conspiratorial expression a mix of wistfulness and resignation . Belting wondered if the tree @-@ man 's face is a self @-@ portrait , citing the figure 's " expression of irony and the slightly sideways gaze [ which would ] then constitute the signature of an artist who claimed a bizarre pictorial world for his own personal imagination " . 
 Many elements in the panel incorporate earlier iconographical conventions depicting hell . However , Bosch is innovative in that he describes hell not as a fantastical space , but as a realistic world containing many elements from day @-@ to @-@ day human life . 
 Animals are shown punishing humans , subjecting them to nightmarish torments that may symbolise the seven deadly sins , matching the torment to the sin . Sitting on an object that may be a toilet or a throne , the panel 's centerpiece is a gigantic bird @-@ headed monster feasting on human corpses , which he excretes through a cavity below him , into the transparent chamber pot on which he sits . The monster is sometimes referred to as the " Prince of Hell " , a name derived from the cauldron he wears on his head , perhaps representing a debased crown . To his feet a female has her face reflected on the buttocks of a demon . Further to the left , next to a hare @-@ headed demon , a group of naked persons around a toppled gambling table are being massacred with swords and knives . Other brutal violence is shown by a knight torn down and eaten up by a pack of wolves to the right of the tree @-@ man . 
 During the Middle Ages , sexuality and lust were seen , by some , as evidence of humanity 's fall from grace , and the most foul of the seven deadly sins . In the eyes of some viewers , this sin is depicted in the left @-@ hand panel through Adam 's , allegedly lustful , gaze towards Eve , and it has been proposed that the center panel was created as a warning to the viewer to avoid a life of sinful pleasure . According to this view , the penalty for such sins is shown in the right panel of the triptych . In the lower right @-@ hand corner , a man is approached by a pig wearing the veil of a nun . The pig is shown trying to seduce the man to sign legal documents . Lust is further said to be symbolised by the gigantic musical instruments and by the choral singers in the left foreground of the panel . Musical instruments often carried erotic connotations in works of art of the period , and lust was referred to in moralising sources as the " music of the flesh " . There has also been the view that Bosch 's use of music here might be a rebuke against traveling minstrels , often thought of as purveyors of bawdy song and verse . 
 = = Dating and provenance = = 
 The dating of The Garden of Earthly Delights is uncertain . Ludwig von Baldass ( 1917 ) considered the painting to be an early work by Bosch . However , since De Tolnay ( 1937 ) consensus among 20th @-@ century art historians placed the work in 1503 – 1504 or even later . Both early and late datings were based on the " archaic " treatment of space . Dendrochronology dates the oak of the panels between the years 1460 and 1466 , providing a terminus post quem for the work . Wood used for panel paintings during this period customarily underwent a lengthy period of storage for seasoning purposes , so the age of the oak might be expected to predate the actual date of the painting by several years . Internal evidence , specifically the depiction of a pineapple ( a " New World " fruit ) , suggests that the painting itself postdates Columbus ' voyages to the Americas , between 1492 and 1504 . The dendrochronological research brought <unk> to reconsider an early dating and , consequently , to dispute the presence of any " New World " objects , stressing the presence of African ones instead . He considers De Tolnay 's idea of Bosch developing towards more archaism as an anachronism , based on the development of modern art and suggests that the triptych was ordered by Engelbrecht II of Nassau , in or shortly after 1481 , when he attended the Chapter of the Order of the Golden Fleece in ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch . 
 The Garden was first documented in 1517 , one year after the artist 's death , when Antonio de Beatis , a canon from <unk> , Italy , described the work as part of the decoration in the town palace of the Counts of the House of Nassau in Brussels . The palace was a high @-@ profile location , a house often visited by heads of state and leading court figures . The prominence of the painting has led some to conclude that the work was commissioned , and not " solely ... a flight of the imagination " . A description of the triptych in 1605 called it the " strawberry painting " , because the fruit of the strawberry tree ( <unk> in Spanish ) features prominently in the center panel . Early Spanish writers referred to the work as La <unk> ( " Lust " ) . 
 The aristocracy of the Burgundian Netherlands , influenced by the humanist movement , were the most likely collectors of Bosch 's paintings , but there are few records of the location of his works in the years immediately following his death . It is probable that the patron of the work was Engelbrecht II of Nassau , who died in 1504 , or his successor Henry III of Nassau @-@ Breda , the governor of several of the Habsburg provinces in the Low Countries . De Beatis wrote in his travel journal that " there are some panels on which bizarre things have been painted . They represent seas , skies , woods , meadows , and many other things , such as people crawling out of a shell , others that bring forth birds , men and women , white and blacks doing all sorts of different activities and poses . " Because the triptych was publicly displayed in the palace of the House of Nassau , it was visible to many , and Bosch 's reputation and fame quickly spread across Europe . The work 's popularity can be measured by the numerous surviving copies — in oil , engraving and tapestry — commissioned by wealthy patrons , as well as by the number of forgeries in circulation after his death . Most are of the central panel only and do not deviate from the original . These copies were usually painted on a much smaller scale , and they vary considerably in quality . Many were created a generation after Bosch , and some took the form of wall tapestries . 
 The De Beatis description , only rediscovered by Steppe in the 1960s , cast new light on the commissioning of a work that was previously thought — since it has no central religious image — to be an atypical altarpiece . Many Netherlandish diptychs intended for private use are known , and even a few triptychs , but the Bosch panels are unusually large compared with these and contain no donor portraits . Possibly they were commissioned to celebrate a wedding , as large Italian paintings for private houses frequently were . Nevertheless , The Garden 's bold depictions do not rule out a church commission , such was the contemporaneous fervor to warn against immorality . In 1566 , the triptych served as the model for a tapestry that hangs at El Escorial monastery near Madrid . 
 Upon the death of Henry III , the painting passed into the hands of his nephew William the Silent , the founder of the House of Orange @-@ Nassau and leader of the Dutch Revolt against Spain . In 1568 , however , the Duke of Alba confiscated the picture and brought it to Spain , where it became the property of one Don Fernando , the Duke 's illegitimate son and heir and the Spanish commander in the Netherlands . Phillip II acquired the painting at auction in 1591 ; two years later he presented it to El Escorial . A contemporaneous description of the transfer records the gift on 8 July 1593 of a " painting in oils , with two wings depicting the variety of the world , illustrated with grotesqueries by Hieronymus Bosch , known as ' Del <unk> ' " . After an unbroken 342 years at El Escorial , the work moved to the Museo del Prado in 1939 , along with other works by Bosch . The triptych is not particularly well @-@ preserved ; the paint of the middle panel especially has flaked off around joints in the wood . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Because only bare details are known of Bosch 's life , biographical interpretation of his work becomes extremely difficult for academics , who must largely rely on conjecture . Individual motifs and elements of symbolism may be explained , but so far relating these to each other and to his work as a whole has remained elusive . The enigmatic scenes depicted on the panels of the inner triptych of The Garden of Earthly Delights have been studied by many scholars , who have often arrived at contradictory interpretations . Analyses based on symbolic systems ranging from the alchemical , astrological , and heretical to the folkloric and subconscious have all attempted to explain the complex objects and ideas presented in the work . Until the early 20th century , Bosch 's paintings were generally thought to incorporate attitudes of Medieval didactic literature and sermons . Charles De Tolnay wrote : 
 The oldest writers , <unk> <unk> and Karel van Mander , attached themselves to his most evident side , to the subject ; their conception of Bosch , inventor of fantastic pieces of devilry and of infernal scenes , which prevails today ( 1937 ) in the public at large , and prevailed with historians until the last quarter of the 19th century . 
 = = = Warning against sin = = = 
 Some critics have interpreted the triptych as a warning on the transience of earthly pleasure . In 1960 art historian Ludwig von Baldass wrote that Bosch shows " how sin came into the world through the Creation of Eve , how fleshly lusts spread over the entire earth , promoting all the Deadly Sins , and how this necessarily leads straight to Hell " . Charles De Tolnay wrote that the center panel represents " the nightmare of humanity " , where " the artist 's purpose above all is to show the evil consequences of sensual pleasure and to stress its ephemeral character " . Supporters of this view see the painting as a sequential narrative , with the left @-@ hand panel showing humanity 's innocence in Eden , the central panel the corruption of that innocence , and finally humanity 's punishment in Hell . At various times in its history , the triptych was known as La <unk> ( Lust ) , The Sins of the World and The Wages of Sin . 
 = = = Woman 's temptation = = = 
 Proponents of this idea point out that moralists during Bosch 's era believed that it was woman 's — ultimately Eve 's — temptation that drew men into a life of lechery and sin . This would explain why the women in the center panel are very much among the active participants in bringing about the Fall . At the time , the power of femininity was often rendered by showing a female surrounded by a circle of males . A late 15th @-@ century engraving by <unk> van <unk> shows a group of men prancing ecstatically around a female figure . The Master of the <unk> 's 1460 work the Pool of Youth similarly shows a group of females standing in a space surrounded by admiring figures . Here in Bosch 's center panel the image of males circulating around females has grown into fully grotesque dimensions . The 31 females in the central pool are surrounded by about 100 males performing stunts while riding on fancy animals in an endless , circular caravan . 
 = = = A false paradise = = = 
 This line of reasoning is consistent with interpretations of Bosch 's other major moralising works which hold up the folly of humans , e.g. , the Death and the Miser and the Haywain Triptych . The rendering of each of these works is such that , according to the art historian Walter <unk> , it is difficult to believe " Bosch intended to condemn what he painted with such visually enchanting forms and colors " . <unk> concluded however that a medieval mindset was naturally suspicious of material beauty , in any form , and that the <unk> of Bosch 's description may have been intended to convey a false paradise , teeming with transient beauty . 
 = = = Rebirth of a joyous world = = = 
 In 1947 , Wilhelm Fraenger argued that the triptych 's center panel portrays a joyous world when humanity will experience a rebirth of the innocence enjoyed by Adam and Eve before their fall . In his book The Millennium of Hieronymus Bosch , Fraenger wrote that Bosch was a member of the heretical sect known as the <unk> — who were also known as the <unk> <unk> and Brethren and Sisters of the Free Spirit . This radical group , active in the area of the Rhine and the Netherlands , strove for a form of spirituality immune from sin even in the flesh and imbued the concept of lust with a paradisical innocence . 
 Fraenger believed The Garden of Earthly Delights was commissioned by the order 's Grand Master . Later critics have agreed that , because of their obscure complexity , Bosch 's " altarpieces " may well have been commissioned for non @-@ devotional purposes . The <unk> <unk> cult sought to regain the innocent sexuality enjoyed by Adam and Eve before the Fall . Fraenger writes that the figures in Bosch 's work " are peacefully frolicking about the tranquil garden in vegetative innocence , at one with animals and plants and the sexuality that inspires them seems to be pure joy , pure bliss . " Fraenger argued against the notion that the hellscape shows the retribution handed down for sins committed in the center panel . Fraenger saw the figures in the garden as peaceful , naïve , and innocent in expressing their sexuality , and at one with nature . In contrast , those being punished in Hell comprise " musicians , gamblers , <unk> of judgment and punishment " . 
 Examining the symbolism in Bosch 's art — " the freakish riddles ... the irresponsible phantasmagoria of an ecstatic " — Fraenger concluded that his interpretation applied to Bosch 's three ( fully survived ) triptychs only : The Garden of Earthly Delights , Temptation of Saint Anthony , and The Haywain Triptych . Fraenger distinguished these pieces from the artist 's other works and argued that despite their anti @-@ cleric polemic they were nevertheless all altarpieces , probably commissioned for the devotional purposes of a mystery cult . While commentators accept Fraenger 's analysis as astute and broad in scope , they have often questioned his final conclusions . These are regarded by many scholars as hypothesis only , and built on an unstable foundation and what can only be conjecture . Critics argue that artists during this period painted not for their own pleasure but for commission , while the language and secularization of a post @-@ Renaissance mind @-@ set projected onto Bosch would have been alien to the late @-@ medieval painter . 
 = = = Humanity on the eve of the Flood = = = 
 Fraenger 's thesis stimulated others to examine The Garden more closely . Writer Carl Linfert also senses the joyfulness of the people in the center panel , but rejects Fraenger 's assertion that the painting is a " doctrinaire " work espousing the " guiltless sexuality " of the <unk> sect . While the figures engage in amorous acts without any suggestion of the forbidden , Linfert points to the elements in the center panel suggesting death and temporality : some figures turn away from the activity , seeming to lose hope in deriving pleasure from the passionate frolicking of their cohorts . Writing in 1969 , art historian E. H. Gombrich drew on a close reading of Genesis and the Gospel According to Saint Matthew to suggest that the central panel is , according to Linfert , " the state of mankind on the eve of the Flood , when men still pursued pleasure with no thought of the morrow , their only sin the unawareness of sin " . 
 = = = Irony and anachronisms = = = 
 In recent years several art historians have emphasized the ironic elements of The Garden . Erwin Pokorny concluded after many years of research on the complete work of Bosch , including the drawings , that in The Garden Bosch presented " a moralizing ironical wisdom that is sometimes reminiscent of Sebastian Brant ( 1457 – 1521 ) or Erasmus of Rotterdam ( 1465 – 1536 ) " . He pointed out that literature and art of Bosch 's time reflected not only the belief in hell after life , but also the belief in paradise after life . But then he listed many examples from the center panel showing that Bosch presented a new perspective by ridiculing this longing for paradise . Examples are fantastic acrobatics , equivalence of fruits and body parts , the parade of 100 males riding around the pool of females , and women signaling boredom by holding their heads in their hands . 
 Art historian Guido <unk> arrived at a similar conclusion concerning the two side panels . Adam and Eve are created within a mockery of a paradise that is already polluted by ugly and hideous creatures . About the hellscape he writes : " [ A ] gruesome comedy pervades the whole panel " . While the " Prince of Hell " ( see above ) clearly alluded to earlier devil images , he can no longer be taken seriously here because of the many ridiculous attributes that he is equipped with . <unk> concludes that " Bosch does not present a clear , but an ambiguous world . ... It can be understood as a moral insight into the <unk> of human folly , whose ridiculousness only becomes endurable by laughing . " 
 Bosch 's ironic intention is also conspicuous in the three anachronisms in the lower right corner of each of the three panels . During the creation of Adam and Eve there is already a book in the hands of a fantastic creature . In The Garden a clothed person appears ; and in the hell , objects from the real world of contracts and business — pen , paper , and seal — enter the scene . " Bosch 's innovative concept of vice allusions in the Garden of Delights " thus can be viewed both as a grim warning and as an entertaining satire . These two contrasting interpretations are documented already in 1605 ( José de <unk> ) and 1627 ( Francisco de Quevedo ) , respectively . 
 = = = The corrupt gardens of Coudenberg = = = 
 Following this perspective , the triptych allegorically represents the gardens of the old Palace of Coudenberg ( Brussels ) , which were actually often depicted as an expression of the luxurious and corrupting headquarters of the Habsburg domination . 
 In brief , the first panel represents the once heavenly Burgundian Netherlands starting to be defiled ( after the death of Charles the Bold ) . The large central panel expresses the current situation , with the local Flemish @-@ Dutch elites being completely corrupted . The last panel anticipates the tragic fate of the region under the imperial government . 
 All details were carefully planned and are meaningful . For instance , the so @-@ called " Tree @-@ Man " symbolizes Bosch ( e.g. , " forest " , " wood " ) in the role of an eternal hangover ( the consequence of the dissolute party ) . By this way the artist punished himself because he was receiving well @-@ paid commissions from both the Habsburgs and the Nassau ( at that time , the imperial mais courtiers ) . In this context , Bosch systematically selected Maximilian Habsburg ( the Holy Roman Emperor ) to be his nemesis , whose anthropomorphic head is even shaped into the right limb of the " Tree @-@ Man " , aggravating the expiatory punishment of the artist . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Because Bosch was such a unique and visionary artist , his influence has not spread as widely as that of other major painters of his era . However , there have been instances of later artists incorporating elements of The Garden of Earthly Delights into their own work . Pieter Bruegel the Elder ( c . 1525 – 1569 ) in particular directly acknowledged Bosch as an important influence and inspiration , and incorporated many elements of the inner right panel into several of his most popular works . Bruegel 's Mad Meg depicts a peasant woman leading an army of women to pillage Hell , while his The Triumph of Death ( c . 1562 ) echoes the monstrous <unk> of The Garden , and utilizes , according to the Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp , the same " unbridled imagination and the fascinating colours " . 
 While the Italian court painter Giuseppe <unk> ( c . 1527 – 1593 ) did not create <unk> , he painted a body of strange and " fantastic " vegetable portraits — generally heads of people composed of plants , roots , webs and various other organic matter . These strange portraits rely on and echo a motif that was in part inspired by Bosch 's willingness to break from strict and faithful representations of nature . 
 David Teniers the Younger ( c . 1610 – 1690 ) was a Flemish painter who quoted both Bosch and Bruegel throughout his career in such works as his versions of the Temptation of St Anthony , the Rich Man in Hell and his version of Mad Meg . 
 During the early 20th century , Bosch 's work enjoyed a popular resurrection . The early surrealists ' fascination with dreamscapes , the autonomy of the imagination , and a free @-@ flowing connection to the unconscious brought about a renewed interest in his work . Bosch 's imagery struck a chord with Joan Miró and Salvador Dalí in particular . Both knew his paintings firsthand , having seen The Garden of Earthly Delights in the Museo del Prado , and both regarded him as an art @-@ historical mentor . Miró 's The <unk> Field contains several parallels to Bosch 's Garden : similar flocks of birds ; pools from which living creatures emerge ; and oversize disembodied ears all echo the Dutch master 's work . Dalí 's 1929 The Great <unk> is similar to an image on the right side of the left panel of Bosch 's Garden , composed of rocks , bushes and little animals resembling a face with a prominent nose and long eyelashes . 
 When André Breton wrote his first Surrealist Manifesto in 1924 , his historical precedents as inclusions named only Gustave Moreau , Georges Seurat and Uccello . However , the Surrealist movement soon rediscovered Bosch and <unk> , who quickly became popular among the Surrealist painters . René Magritte and Max Ernst both were inspired by Bosch 's The Garden of Earthly Delights . 
 The triptych has also been the inspiration for works of fiction , among them Ian Watson 's science fiction novel The Garden of Delights , based around the discovery of a planet which resembles Bosch 's painting . 
 = 1994 Gator Bowl = 
 The 1994 Gator Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Tennessee Volunteers at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium in Gainesville , Florida on December 30 , 1994 . The game was the final contest of the 1994 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season for both teams , and ended in a 45 @-@ 23 victory for Tennessee . 
 The 1994 Gator Bowl saw 17th @-@ ranked Virginia Tech face off against regional rival Tennessee at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium on the campus of the University of Florida . The game was moved to Gainesville in 1994 due to renovations to the Gator Bowl for the Jacksonville Jaguars . Virginia Tech came into the game with an 8 – 3 regular @-@ season record that included a record of 5 – 2 in Big East Conference competition . The Tennessee Volunteers came entered the game with a regular @-@ season record of 7 – 4 under head coach Phillip Fulmer that included a 5 – 3 record in Southeastern Conference competition . 
 The game kicked off on December 30 , 1994 in Gainesville , Florida . From the start , Tennessee 's high @-@ scoring offense dominated . The Volunteers scored two touchdowns in the first quarter and three in the second , while Virginia Tech was able to muster a lone touchdown and field goal in the second quarter . At halftime , Tennessee had a commanding 35 – 10 lead , behind the strong play of Freshman QB Peyton Manning . 
 The Hokies struggled back in the third quarter , scoring six unanswered points to close the score to 35 – 16 . In the fourth quarter , however , Tennessee answered Virginia Tech 's effort with 10 points , putting the game out of reach for the Hokies , who managed only a single touchdown in the fourth quarter . The Hokies fumbled the ball five times — losing it once — and threw two interceptions , allowing Tennessee to cruise to an easy victory , 45 – 23 . Tennessee running back James Stewart was named the game 's most valuable player . 
 = = Renovations = = 
 In early 1994 , Jacksonville Mayor Ed Austin proposed $ 49 million in renovations to Jacksonville 's aging Gator Bowl Stadium in order to keep the stadium up to date for the annual Florida @-@ Georgia rivalry game . After Florida and Georgia accepted the renovations , agreeing to play the rivalry game in Athens , Georgia during the renovations , Jacksonville investors proposed expanding the renovation plan in order to attract a National Football League team . The price tag was revised upward — to $ 121 million — and the city successfully attracted a team . Shortly after Jacksonville was awarded its new franchise — the Jacksonville Jaguars — the final plans were unveiled . The stadium would have additional luxury boxes , expanded seating , and upgraded facilities for teams and fans . 
 The renovations were much more extensive than had initially been proposed , and required more time to be completed . Instead of beginning in early 1995 , work would have to begin in 1994 , leaving the site of the 1994 Gator Bowl ( played on Dec. 30 ) in doubt . By the end of January 1994 , as the Gator Bowl was being demolished , that doubt was also demolished when a deal was struck to host the Gator Bowl at the University of Florida , in that school 's Ben Hill Griffin Stadium . The game 's title sponsor , Outback Steakhouse , and its television sponsor , TBS , would remain constant , and both were in their final year of contracts with the Gator Bowl . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 Prior to the start of the 1994 @-@ 1995 college football season , the Gator Bowl was snubbed by the newly formed Bowl Alliance , a group of football conferences , bowl games , and television networks created to match up the No. 1 and No. 2 college football teams at the conclusion of each season . Though the Gator Bowl offered to pay $ 115 million for the right to become a Bowl Alliance game , the Orange Bowl was selected in place of the Gator Bowl . This event had repercussions at the end of the season , when the bowl was passed over by high @-@ ranked teams that elected to accept bids to bowls in the new Bowl Alliance . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 During the annual preseason poll of media members covering the Big East conference , Virginia Tech was picked to finish second among Big East teams , behind only Miami . The Hokies entered the 1994 college football season having finished the 1993 season with a win in the 1993 Independence Bowl , and hopes were high that they would return to a bowl game again in 1994 . 
 The Hokies started the season well , winning their first four games in succession and culminating with a victory against West Virginia in the annual battle for the Black Diamond Trophy . The Hokies , who had begun the season ranked No. 21 in the country , rose to No. 14 by their fifth game of the season , a trip to Syracuse , New York , to play the Syracuse Orange . There , Virginia Tech suffered its first loss of the season , permitting 100 @-@ yard rushing games from Syracuse 's Malcolm Thomas and Kirby Dar Dar , the last time the Hokies allowed two hundred @-@ yard rushers in the same game . Tech responded to the loss by reeling off another three wins in succession . That winning streak ended at No. 6 Miami , when Tech lost its second game of the season , a loss that was followed by a season @-@ ending defeat to perennial rival Virginia . The Hokies concluded the regular season with an 8 – 4 record overall and a 5 – 2 record in the Big East . Ironically , despite their season @-@ ending loss to Virginia , the Hokies were awarded an invitation to the Gator Bowl over the Cavaliers , who lost to North Carolina State in their season @-@ ending game . In addition to that loss , Gator Bowl officials later stated they were reluctant to invite an Atlantic Coast Conference team for a fourth straight year , thus opening the door for the Hokies from the Big East . 
 = = = Tennessee = = = 
 The Tennessee Volunteers had finished the 1993 season with a 10 – 2 record and a season @-@ ending loss to the Penn State Nittany Lions under first @-@ year head coach Phillip Fulmer in the Citrus Bowl . Hopes were high that Tennessee 's second year under Fulmer 's command would end better than its first . 
 Tennessee was ranked No. 13 in the Associated Press preseason poll at the start of the season , but won just one game in its first four of the season , causing the Volunteers to drop out of the top 25 for the first time since 1989 , breaking a streak of 84 consecutive weeks in the poll . To make matters worse , Tennessee 's two starting quarterbacks suffered season @-@ ending injuries during that four @-@ game span . In the Volunteers ' season @-@ opener against UCLA , Jerry Colquitt suffered a knee injury . Backup quarterback Todd Helton was hurt in the fourth game of the season , a loss to Mississippi State . In response to the poor start , Fulmer overhauled his defense and coped with the loss of his first- and second @-@ string quarterbacks by bringing in acclaimed freshman Peyton Manning , son of National Football League star Archie Manning . 
 Manning 's first start , a Tennessee homecoming game against Washington State , resulted in a 10 – 9 win . Things got progressively better for the Volunteers after Manning assumed the starting role , as they won six of their final regular @-@ season games . The sole loss was a 13 – 17 defeat at the hands of then @-@ No. 10 Alabama in Knoxville . The loss was merely a bump in the road , however , as Tennessee won all four regular @-@ season games that followed , ending the regular season with a 65 – 0 drubbing of in @-@ state rival Vanderbilt . In response to Fulmer 's success at turning the team around from a slow start , he was awarded with a one @-@ year contract extension by the university . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 The matchup of Virginia Tech and Tennessee was the first game between the two teams since 1937 , an unusual fact since both teams are located in the Appalachian Mountains and the two schools are just 3 @.@ 5 hours by car apart . This proximity generated multiple news stories about towns lying between the two schools and the divided loyalties of their fans . In Washington County , Virginia , which lies along the Tennessee border , the county supervisor — a Virginia Tech graduate — proclaimed the week of the Gator Bowl to be " Hokie Week " over the objections of the county attorney , who graduated from Tennessee . This natural rivalry was amplified by a basketball game held the day prior to the Gator Bowl that pitted the two schools ' varsity teams against each other . In exchange for participating in the game , each team received $ 1 @.@ 5 million from the Gator Bowl Association . 
 Ticket sales were brisk in the month between the announcement of the Tech @-@ Tennessee matchup and the day of the game . By December 14 , two weeks after the initial announcement , Virginia Tech had sold 16 @,@ 000 tickets to Tennessee 's 9 @,@ 000 . On December 23 , one week before the game , Tech had sold 17 @,@ 653 tickets . By the day of the game , the two teams had combined to sell approximately 33 @,@ 000 tickets . Two days prior to the game , spread bettors favored Tennessee to win by seven points . 
 = = = Tennessee offense = = = 
 The Tennessee offense was led by freshman quarterback Peyton Manning , son of NFL great Archie Manning , who had played against the Hokies in the 1968 Liberty Bowl . During the regular season , Peyton played in seven games , winning six of them and completing 86 of his 139 pass attempts for 1 @,@ 114 yards , 11 touchdowns , and six interceptions . Manning 's passer rating of 145 @.@ 2 was the third @-@ highest among starting quarterbacks in the SEC . In recognition of his achievements , Manning was named the Southeastern Conference Freshman of the Year . One of Manning 's more prominent passing targets was Billy Williams , who , despite suffering a stress fracture in the first game of the season , recovered to catch 20 passes for 217 yards and two touchdowns . He also returned 17 kickoffs for an average of 20 @.@ 8 yards per return . Manning 's favorite target was Joey Kent , who caught 36 passes for 470 yards during the regular season , but slightly injured his ankle in a pre @-@ Gator Bowl practice . 
 The Volunteers ' rushing offense had been led by Aaron Hayden during the regular season , but Hayden broke his leg during Tennessee 's final regular season game . Due to the injury , James Stewart was forecast to start the game at running back for the Volunteers . During the regular season , Tennessee was ranked No. 13 in rushing , accumulating an average of 231 @.@ 2 rushing yards per game . Stewart accounted for 93 @.@ 5 yards of that total , having carried the ball 170 times for 1 @,@ 028 yards and 11 touchdowns during the regular season . One of Tennessee 's other backup running backs , Jay Graham , was predicted to be kept out of the game due to an injury , but played after undergoing surgery . Graham , who rushed 61 times for 275 yards during the regular season , suffered a broken jaw after being punched in the face by a teammate . Because of the injury to Graham , fourth @-@ string running back Ronnie Pillow , who had carried the ball just five times during the regular season , was predicted to back up Stewart during the game . 
 Prior to the game , Tennessee coach Fulmer pronounced himself unsatisfied with the Vols ' performance in opponents ' red zone during the regular season . Tennessee scored on just 36 of 52 possessions inside the opposition 's 20 @-@ yard line , a conversion rate of 69 @.@ 2 percent . Fulmer vowed to raise that percentage to what it had been the previous season , when Tennessee converted 41 of 46 possessions , or 89 @.@ 1 percent . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 On offense , the Virginia Tech Hokies were led by quarterback Maurice DeShazo , who completed 164 of his 296 pass attempts during the regular season for 2 @,@ 110 yards , 13 touchdowns , and 13 interceptions . DeShazo 's success during the season helped him become the No. 4 all @-@ time passing leader in Virginia Tech history , finishing his career with 5 @,@ 720 passing yards . DeShazo 's favorite passing target was wide receiver Antonio Freeman , who finished the season having caught 38 passes for 586 yards and five touchdowns . The Gator Bowl was Freeman 's final collegiate game , just as it was DeShazo 's . Freeman finished his career as the No. 1 receiver in Virginia Tech history in terms of yardage ( bowl games were not counted in statistics until 2003 ) with 2 @,@ 207 receiving yards . Freeman also was the team 's leading punt returner , having returned 39 kicks for 467 yards and a touchdown , and received second @-@ team All @-@ Big East honors . 
 On the ground , Virginia Tech 's rushing offense was led by running back Dwayne Thomas , who carried the ball 142 times for 642 yards and five touchdowns . Backing up Thomas was Tommy Edwards , son of former Virginia Tech player Ken Edwards , who played with the Hokies from 1967 to 1969 , including the Hokies ' trip to the 1968 Liberty Bowl . By participating in the Gator Bowl and in the previous season 's Independence Bowl , the Edwardses became the first father @-@ son combo in Virginia Tech history to have competed in a bowl game . 
 At the beginning of December , Virginia Tech 's offensive preparations for the Gator Bowl were disrupted when offensive coordinator Gary Tranquill abruptly quit the team in order to join friend Nick Saban , who had been hired as the head coach at Michigan State . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer announced simultaneous with Tranquill 's departure that assistant head coach Billy Hite would control the offense during the Gator Bowl . Shortly after the announcement of Tranquill 's departure , Virginia Tech announced that former offensive coordinator Ricky Bustle would be returning to the team to fill the position after the Gator Bowl . Though he was not able to actively coach the team during the Gator Bowl , Bustle offered advice and strategy to Beamer during the weeks before the game . 
 Virginia Tech receiver Cornelius White fractured his patella while playing pick @-@ up basketball . 
 = = = Tennessee defense = = = 
 During the regular season , the Volunteers ' scoring defense was ranked the second @-@ best in the SEC , allowing an average of just 16 @.@ 82 points per game . Tennessee also allowed just eight passing touchdowns and 20 touchdowns overall . One of Tennessee 's defensive leaders was defensive end Steve White , who led the Volunteers in sacks and tackles for loss with seven and eight , respectively . Tennessee 's leader in interceptions was Ronald Davis , who had two during the regular season . Scott <unk> had the most tackles on the team , with 93 . 
 Strong safety Ray Austin , who had been named most valuable player in the Volunteers ' loss to Penn State during the 1993 Citrus Bowl , had 50 tackles — second @-@ best among Tennessee defensive backs — two fumble recoveries , a sack , and two tackles for loss despite playing in only six games . The Volunteers ' defense also featured a cornerback named Tony Edge , a player from Virginia 's Phoebus High School who had been heavily recruited by both Virginia Tech and Tennessee . Edge suffered a dislocated shoulder in the Volunteers ' last regular @-@ season game , but pledged he would play against the Hokies despite doctors ' disapproval . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 Defensively , the Virginia Tech Hokies allowed an average of 308 yards per game and 18 @.@ 4 points per game . During the last two games of the regular season , however , the Hokies permitted 34 points and 42 points to Rutgers and Virginia , respectively . The Virginia Tech defense was led by two strong performers in the defensive secondary . Safety Torrian Gray intercepted four passes during the regular season , returning one of the catches for a touchdown . He tied with cornerback William Yarborough for the most interceptions on the team during the regular season . Neither player was the team 's leading tackler , however . That honor went to linebacker George <unk> , who had 130 tackles during the regular season . 
 Fellow linebacker Ken Brown was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Big East selection , signifying his status as one of the best players at his position in the conference . He finished the season with 93 tackles , including six for loss and two sacks , enough for No. 3 on the team in tackles . Despite that success , Brown suffered a pulled hamstring before Virginia Tech 's final regular @-@ season game and his presence in the Gator Bowl was doubtful . Virginia Tech sophomore defensive end Cornell Brown was named the best defensive college player in the state of Virginia by the Roanoke Times after earning 20 tackles for loss , including 11 sacks , and 35 quarterback hurries during the regular season . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 1994 Gator Bowl kicked off on December 30 , 1994 at 8 p.m. EST at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium in Gainesville , Florida . An estimated 62 @,@ 200 fans were in attendance , and millions more people watched the game on television . TBS televised the game in the United States , and Gary Bender , Pat Haden , and Craig Sager were the broadcasters . Tennessee won the ceremonial pre @-@ game coin toss and elected to kick off to Virginia Tech to begin the game . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's Tommy Edwards fielded the opening kickoff , which was returned to the Tech 29 @-@ yard line , where the Hokies ' offense began the first play of the game , an incomplete pass by Virginia Tech quarterback Maurice DeShazo . On the second play of the game , DeShazo again attempted a forward pass . This time , however , the ball was intercepted by Tennessee linebacker Tyrone Hines . Hines returned the ball to the Tech 28 @-@ yard line , allowing the Volunteers ' offense to begin the game already in scoring position . Tennessee 's first play was a run up the middle by James Stewart , who gained three yards . On the second play , Tennessee quarterback Peyton Manning completed a nine @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Nilo Silvan . During the play , Silvan suffered a broken ankle and did not return to the game . Now at the 16 @-@ yard line , Tennessee continued its drive with a rush by Stewart , who wasn 't able to advance the ball . On the next play , the Volunteers were penalized 10 yards for a block in the back of a Virginia Tech player . Despite the penalty and an incomplete pass on a subsequent play , Tennessee was able to gain a first down to the five @-@ yard line with a pass from Manning to Joey Kent . Two plays later , the Volunteers scored on a one @-@ yard touchdown run by Stewart . The extra point kick was successful , and Tennessee took a 7 – 0 lead with 11 : 41 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Following Tennessee 's touchdown , the two teams traded possessions , each going three and out . Virginia Tech regained the ball after a Tennessee punt to its 20 @-@ yard line with 7 : 31 remaining in the quarter . After a Tech fumble that was recovered by the Hokies , Tech running back Dwayne Thomas ran nine yards for the first Tech first down of the game . After an incomplete pass , DeShazo and Thomas connected on an eight @-@ yard pass before Thomas broke free for an 11 @-@ yard run and another first down . Thomas continued advancing the ball , picking up eight yards on two rushing plays . DeShazo then completed a four @-@ yard pass for a first down at the Tennessee 39 @-@ yard line . There , however , Tennessee 's defense stiffened and did not allow the Hokies another first down . The Tech punt was downed at the Tennessee 7 @-@ yard line , where the Volunteers began their third possession of the game . 
 On the first play of the drive , Tennessee committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty , pushing the Volunteers back toward their goal line . A Tennessee rush was stopped for no gain , then Stewart picked up eight yards on a running play . Needing eight yards for a first down , Manning threw an 11 @-@ yard pass to Kent for the first down . On the next play , Manning completed a 43 @-@ yard toss to Kent , driving the Volunteers into the Virginia Tech half of the field . Manning 's next throw was a 35 @-@ yard touchdown throw to Marcus Nash . The extra point was good , and Tennessee took a 14 – 0 lead with 1 : 08 remaining in the quarter . 
 Tennessee 's kickoff went out of bounds , allowing Tech 's offense to start at its 35 @-@ yard line . DeShazo threw an incomplete pass , then completed one for a nine @-@ yard gain . Needing one yard for a first down , Tech fullback Bryan Edwards was stopped for a loss and the Hokies were forced to punt . Tennessee fair caught the ball at their 20 @-@ yard line , where the Volunteers ' offense again began to work . A five @-@ yard penalty pushed the Volunteers backward , but running back Jay Graham regained the lost five yards with a run on the next play and the clock ran out in the quarter . At the end of the first quarter , Tennessee led , 14 – 0 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 At the beginning of the second quarter , Tennessee had the ball at its 19 @-@ yard line , facing a second down and ten . On the first play of the quarter , Tennessee ran an end @-@ around to Kendrick Jones , who ran the ball for 76 yards , giving the Volunteers a first down at the Virginia Tech five @-@ yard line . Three plays later , running back Jay Graham crossed the goal line for the first Tennessee touchdown of the second quarter . The extra point was good , and with 13 : 23 remaining in the first half , Tennessee took a 21 – 0 lead . 
 Following Tennessee 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff and a short kick return , the Virginia Tech offense began at its 24 @-@ yard line . The first Tech play of the quarter , a run up the middle by Edmonds , resulted in a 17 @-@ yard gain and a first down . Dwayne Thomas followed Edmonds ' run with one of his own , advancing the ball to the 50 @-@ yard line . He pushed into Tennessee territory on the next play , a five @-@ yard run that gave the Hokies a first down at the Tennessee 45 @-@ yard line . DeShazo then ran nine yards , and Tech gained a first down on the next play . Inside the Tennessee 35 @-@ yard line , however , the Volunteers ' defense stiffened . DeShazo passed for a seven @-@ yard gain , but the Hokies were unable to gain a first down until DeShazo scrambled for a 13 @-@ yard gain on fourth down . The run kept the Tech drive alive as the Hokies now had a first down at the Tennessee 14 @-@ yard line . Tennessee forced another third @-@ down play , but the Hokies gained a first down at the Tennessee three @-@ yard line with a pass from DeShazo to Thomas . Four plays later , the Hokies scored their first points of the game as Thomas dove across the goal line on fourth down . The subsequent extra point was good , and the Hokies cut Tennessee 's lead to 21 – 7 with 5 : 17 remaining in the first half . 
 Virginia Tech 's kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 26 @-@ yard line , and the Volunteers ' offense returned to the field . Instead of Peyton Manning , backup quarterback Branndon Stewart came on the field to lead Tennessee . On the second play of the Tennessee drive , Stewart gained 24 yards on a quarterback scramble , giving the Volunteers a first down at the Tennessee 49 @-@ yard line . On the next play , he completed a 27 @-@ yard pass to Kent for another first down . Two plays later , James Stewart broke free for an 18 @-@ yard run that gave Tennessee a first down at the Virginia Tech one @-@ yard line . One play later , Stewart crossed the goal line for Tennessee 's second touchdown of the quarter . The extra point was good , and Tennessee 's lead was again 21 points , 28 – 7 , with 3 : 22 remaining in the quarter . 
 The Volunteers ' kickoff was returned to the Tech 22 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began another drive . On the first play of the drive , however , Maurice DeShazo scrambled for a ten @-@ yard gain but fumbled the ball . The loose ball was recovered by a Tennessee defender , and the Volunteers took over on offense from the Tech 32 @-@ yard line . Branndon Stewart came out onto the field in place of Manning , and completed an eight @-@ yard pass to James Stewart to begin the drive . James Stewart then ran to the 20 @-@ yard line for a first down . On the next play , Tennessee executed a trick play in which James Stewart received the ball via a hand @-@ off , imitating a running play , but threw the ball instead . The pass was caught by James Kendrick for a touchdown , and after the extra point , Tennessee had a 35 – 7 lead with 2 : 08 remaining in the first half . 
 The kickoff was returned to the Tech 27 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began the final drive of the second quarter . Antonio Freeman caught a six @-@ yard pass from DeShazo , then DeShazo completed a five @-@ yard pass to Shawn Scales . DeShazo completed a four @-@ yard pass , then Ken Oxendine had a seven @-@ yard catch from DeShazo at the Tech 49 @-@ yard line . On the next play , Oxendine caught a short pass that pushed the Hokies to the Tennessee 45 @-@ yard line , then DeShazo threw his first incomplete pass of the drive . The incompletion stopped the clock with 37 seconds remaining , allowing time for DeShazo to complete a 26 @-@ yard pass to Bryan Still on the next play . Now inside the Tennessee red zone , the Hokies continued to move the ball via short passes . Tech gained a first down at the Tennessee six @-@ yard line , and used a timeout to stop the clock in order to have a chance to earn a touchdown before halftime . On a subsequent play , however , Tech committed a five @-@ yard penalty , and Tech head coach Frank Beamer ordered kicker Ryan Williams into the game . Williams ' 27 @-@ yard field goal attempt was good , and Tech cut Tennessee 's lead to 35 – 10 at the end of the first half . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the game , Tennessee received the ball to begin the second half . Tech 's kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 13 @-@ yard line , and Peyton Manning returned to the field to lead the Volunteers ' offense . The first play of the second half was an eight @-@ yard run by James Stewart , which was followed by a six @-@ yard run by Stewart for a first down at the Tennessee 27 @-@ yard line . Another Stewart run was followed by two short completions from Manning , and the Volunteers had another first down at the 37 @-@ yard line . Tennessee 's next play was negated by an offensive pass interference penalty against the Volunteers , who were pushed back to the 22 @-@ yard line by the penalty . Though Manning gained 22 yards with a third @-@ down pass , Tennessee was unable to gain enough yards for a first down and punted . During the kick , Tennessee committed a penalty and had to kick again after the five @-@ yard penalty was assessed . The punt was fair caught at the Tech 25 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began their first offensive possession of the second half with 10 : 14 remaining in the third quarter . 
 On the first play , DeShazo completed an 18 @-@ yard pass to Still , who gave the Hokies a first down at their 43 @-@ yard line . On the next play , Tech wide receiver Antonio Freeman committed a pass interference penalty , pushing the Hokies back 15 yards . Dwayne Thomas made good the penalty by gaining 16 yards on an option run , which was followed by a 17 @-@ yard pass from DeShazo to Freeman , who kept the Hokies ' drive going with a first down at the Tennessee 39 @-@ yard line . After an incomplete pass , Thomas broke free for a 27 @-@ yard run along the left side of the field , giving Tech a first down at the Tennessee 13 @-@ yard line . Tennessee 's defense held for three plays , forcing a fourth down . Instead of kicking a field goal , the Hokies attempted to convert the fourth down by running the ball . DeShazo scrambled , broke free of the defense , and crossed the goal line for the first Tech touchdown of the second half . Williams missed the extra point kick , however , and Tech cut Tennessee 's lead to 35 – 16 with 7 : 03 remaining in the quarter . 
 The kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 17 @-@ yard line , and Tennessee 's offense began work . The Volunteers were aided by a five @-@ yard offsides penalty against Virginia Tech on the first play of the drive , but the Hokies stopped the Tennessee offense for losses or no gain until Manning threw a 14 @-@ yard pass on third down , pushing Tennessee to the 34 @-@ yard line . After two incomplete passes , Manning scrambled 27 yards for another first down , this time at the Tech 39 @-@ yard line . Once there , however , the Virginia Tech defense stiffened and did not allow another first down during the drive . Tennessee kicker John <unk> came into the game , seemingly to attempt a 48 @-@ yard field goal . The kick turned out to be a trick play — an attempted pass by the kick holder — but Hokie defender Mike Williams tackled the holder for a loss . 
 After the failed trick play , the Hokies ' offense started at their 44 @-@ yard line . The first Tech play of the drive was a 15 @-@ yard pass from DeShazo to Still for a first down . A three @-@ yard run by Thomas was followed by a seven @-@ yard reverse by Still for another first down at the Tennessee 29 @-@ yard line . On first down , Thomas pushed the Hokies eight yards forward with a run up the middle . This was followed by two incomplete passes , bringing up fourth down . Again , Tech head coach Frank Beamer elected to try to convert the fourth down rather than kick a field goal . Unlike Tech 's previous fourth down , however , the try was unsuccessful after DeShazo mishandled the snap and was tackled for a loss . Virginia Tech turned the ball over on downs , and Tennessee 's offense returned to the game with 1 : 31 remaining in the quarter . 
 The Volunteers started at their 27 @-@ yard line to begin the drive , but went three and out and punted back to the Hokies without gaining a first down . The kick was returned to the Tech 39 @-@ yard line , where the Hokies ' offense started with 31 seconds remaining in the quarter . On the first play of the drive , wide receiver Bryan Still broke away from the Tennessee defense and was wide open for a pass . Maurice DeShazo threw the ball to Still , but Still dropped the pass after it bounced off his chest , thus denying the Hokies a touchdown . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer later cited the dropped pass as a critical turning point in the game , saying , " I think if he could have made that catch , we could have gotten back in the game . " Tech player Torrian Gray agreed , saying , " When he dropped the ball , that took a lot out of us . " After Still 's dropped pass , DeShazo threw two incomplete passes and Virginia Tech punted back to Tennessee . The kick was caught by near the Tennessee 10 @-@ yard line , and returned all the way to the Virginia Tech 37 @-@ yard line . At the end of the third quarter , Tennessee still led , 35 – 16 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Tennessee in possession of the ball and facing a first @-@ and @-@ 10 at the Virginia Tech 37 @-@ yard line after a long punt return . Stewart ran twice for six yards , then Manning completed a pass to Kent at the 20 @-@ yard line for a first down . Manning then completed a pass to Nash for another first down at the Tech five @-@ yard line . Two plays later , Stewart scored his third touchdown of the game with a five @-@ yard run to the right side of the field . The extra point was good , and with 13 : 17 remaining in the game , Tennessee took a 42 – 16 lead . 
 Bryan Still fielded the Tennessee kickoff and returned it to the 19 @-@ yard line of Virginia Tech . After a short pass , DeShazo threw his second interception of the game . Tennessee defender John Summers returned the catch to the Tech 19 @-@ yard line , and backup quarterback Branndon Stewart returned to the game for Tennessee 's offense . James Stewart took the first play of the Volunteers ' drive , an eight @-@ yard gain , then backup Jay Graham entered the game and ran to the five @-@ yard line for a first down . After the next play — , a two @-@ yard run by Graham — Tennessee committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty , pushing the Volunteers back to the 17 @-@ yard line . Branndon Stewart completed a pass to tight end David Horn , pushing Tennessee back to the three @-@ yard line , but not gaining enough for a first down . Tennessee kicker John <unk> returned to the game , and his 19 @-@ yard field goal attempt was good , giving the Volunteers a 45 – 16 lead with 9 : 41 to go in the game . 
 Following the kickoff and return , backup Virginia Tech quarterback Jim Druckenmiller entered the game to guide the Hokies ' offense . The first play of the drive , however , was a run by backup running back Ken Oxendine , who gained five yards . Two more runs by Oxendine failed to gain a first down , however , and Virginia Tech punted . Tennessee 's Sean Summers returned the kick to the Volunteers ' 40 @-@ yard line , and the Volunteers continued trying to run out the clock . Tennessee failed to gain a first down , and the resulting punt rolled into the end zone for a touchback . 
 From the Tech 20 @-@ yard line , Druckenmiller completed a 13 @-@ yard pass to Still for a first down at the Tech 33 @-@ yard line . On the next play , Druckenmiller completed a long pass to tight end Bryan Jennings , who carried the ball 41 yards . Following the play , the Volunteers completed a penalty , advancing the ball to the Tennessee 22 @-@ yard line . Two short runs advanced the Hokies to the 19 @-@ yard line , then Druckenmiller completed a 10 @-@ yard pass to Freeman for a first down . On the next play , Druckenmiller connected with Still for a nine @-@ yard touchdown pass . The extra point was good , and Tennessee 's lead was cut to 45 – 23 , but with only 4 : 13 remaining in the game , the game seemed out of reach for the Hokies . 
 Virginia Tech 's kickoff was recovered in the end zone for a touchback , and the Volunteers started at their 20 @-@ yard line . Tennessee resumed running out the clock via short runs up the middle of the field that kept the game clock ticking down . After not gaining a first down , Tennessee punted to the Hokies with less than two minutes remaining in the game . Tech wide receiver Antonio Freeman returned the kick to the Tech 42 @-@ yard line , and on the first play of the Hokie drive , Druckenmiller completed a 17 @-@ yard pass to the Tennessee 41 @-@ yard line . That completion was followed by a nine @-@ yard pass to Jermaine Holmes . After an incomplete pass that almost was intercepted , Druckenmiller threw an incomplete pass before Oxendine failed to gain enough yards for a first down and Tech turned the ball over on downs . With less than a minute remaining , Tennessee 's offense ran out the remaining seconds on the clock and secured a 45 – 23 victory . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of their performances during the game , Tennessee 's James Stewart and Virginia Tech 's Maurice DeShazo were named the game 's most valuable players . Stewart finished the game having carried the ball 22 times for 85 yards and three rushing touchdowns . Stewart also caught one pass for seven yards and threw a touchdown pass for 19 yards . On the other side , DeShazo completed 17 of his 30 passes for 140 yards and two interceptions . He also ran the ball 11 times for 39 yards and a rushing touchdown . 
 Though Stewart was named the most valuable player for the Volunteers , multiple Tennessee players had statistically significant games . Volunteer quarterback Peyton Manning finished the game having completed 12 of his 19 pass attempts for 189 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . Backup Tennessee quarterback Brandon Stewart completed all three of his pass attempts , accumulating 49 yards in the process . Tennessee receiver Joey Kent was the primary beneficiary of the Volunteer passing attack , leading all receivers during the game with six receptions for 116 yards . Tennessee 's passing touchdowns went to Kendrick Jones , who also had 37 receiving yards and 76 rushing yards ; and Marcus Nash , who caught three passes for 54 yards . 
 Virginia Tech 's offense , though far less successful than Tennessee 's , also had some high performers . Running Back Dwayne Thomas finished the game with 19 carries for 102 yards and a touchdown , becoming the game 's leading rusher in terms of yardage , if not points scored . The Hokies ' leading receiver , Bryan Still , caught five passes for 79 yards and a touchdown . The touchdown pass came from Tech backup quarterback Jim Druckenmiller , who finished the game having completed six of his eight pass attempts for 97 yards and the touchdown . 
 The 68 points scored in the game were a Gator Bowl record at the time , and Tennessee 's 35 first @-@ half points also were a Gator Bowl record . Kendrick Jones ' 76 @-@ yard run on the first play of the second quarter was the longest in Gator Bowl history at the time . Stewart 's three touchdowns and the Volunteers ' six touchdowns were Tennessee bowl game records at the time , and the Volunteers also set Tennessee bowl @-@ game records for most points and offensive yardage . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 With the win , Tennessee finished the 1994 college football season with an overall record of 8 – 4 . In the final Associated Press poll of the year , the Volunteers were ranked No. 22 . Virginia Tech 's also took it to a final record of 8 – 4 , and the Hokies fell from their No. 17 spot in the AP poll to being unranked . In the USA Today Coaches ' Poll , Tech dropped to No. 24 . This game was also the final meeting of the Hokies and the Volunteers until the 2009 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl . Despite their regional proximity to each other , there were numerous failed attempts at scheduling a game between the universities . These efforts finally paid off in October 2013 when the two schools announced the Battle at Bristol , which will be at the Bristol Motor Speedway in Bristol , Tennessee , on September 10 , 2016 . The game will feature the largest crowd in history to see a football game , i.e. approximately 150 @,@ 000 fans over the current record of 115 @,@ 109 fans who saw Michigan play Notre Dame in September 2013 . 
 This was the last appearance of an SEC team in the Gator Bowl until 2011 . Conversely , it was the last Gator Bowl which did not feature a team from the ACC ( which admitted Virginia Tech in 2004 ) for the same period . After this game , the Gator Bowl entered into exclusive tie @-@ in contracts with the ACC and the Big East until 2010 ( with the addition of the Big 12 and Notre Dame from 2006 @-@ 2010 ) . 
 = Baggage ( U.S. game show ) = 
 Baggage is an American dating game show hosted by Jerry Springer and broadcast by Game Show Network . The original series premiered on April 19 , 2010 , airing for four seasons . A spin @-@ off series , entitled Baggage on the Road , aired for one season , which debuted January 7 , 2015 . The show has earned high ratings by GSN 's standards ; despite this , it has also received mixed critical reception . 
 The series gives three contestants the chance to win the eye of a prospective date . The contestants carry three suitcases onstage : a small , medium , and large one . Each suitcase contains an embarrassing , gross , unique , or weird proposition the contestant may have . These cases represent the " baggage " to which they will confess and defend . The bigger the suitcase , the bigger the secret . Once the three contestants are pared down to one , the potential dater must admit to a fault of his or her own . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is played by first introducing the central character . Three contestants are then introduced , each accompanied by three pieces of baggage : a small one , a medium one , and a large one , with each one containing a corresponding secret . The central contestant also has a piece of baggage of his or her own , which is only revealed at the end of the show . During the show , three possible secrets about the central contestant are given , one of which is the actual secret contained in their baggage . These secrets can include bad habits , strange relationship preferences , issues with one 's past , or strange hobbies . After the three other contestants are introduced , they each open the smallest piece of baggage , and explain the secrets they contain . 
 In the second segment , Springer reveals the second piece of baggage , contained in the medium @-@ sized suitcase . The three contestants are placed on the other side of the stage , along with the central contestant . Only the three contestants know which piece of baggage belongs to whom . The main contestant chooses the one piece of baggage which is the " deal breaker " ( i.e. , the one secret that they cannot accept ) . After stating this , the contestants then return to the other side of the stage and reveal which suitcase belongs to them . The person who claims the deal breaker baggage is immediately eliminated , and reveals the largest piece of baggage that would have been shown in the final round . The central contestant and two remaining contestants discuss the secrets in the medium pieces of baggage ; the two contestants then plead their cases as to why they should be the central contestant 's choice . The two remaining contestants , one at a time , are then asked a few questions ( usually five or six each ) by Springer about their personal lives . 
 The two remaining contestants open their largest pieces of baggage and reveal the secrets they contain . Each contestant makes one final statement , and the main contestant eliminates a second contestant . The main contestant 's own baggage is then opened and the contents revealed to the remaining contestant . If the contestant accepts the secret belonging to the central character , the couple is given an expense @-@ covered evening together . However , if the contestant can not accept the secret , the pair part ways . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was officially announced on March 23 , 2010 , with Jerry Springer being confirmed as the host . The original series was produced by Comcast Entertainment Group ; Jay James and Tim <unk> served as executive producers . On July 26 , GSN announced plans to renew the show for a second season , which began airing on August 16 , 2010 . A syndication test run was shown on a select group of Sinclair Broadcast Group 's stations January 10 , 2011 . The series began airing in syndication in the United States in September 2012 , becoming to first original program the network 's history to achieve such a feat . 
 A third season began airing on June 6 , 2011 . During season three , a half @-@ hour special entitled Baggage First Dates aired during a five @-@ hour " Best of Baggage Marathon . " The special followed a couple who had previously appeared on the show talking to Springer about what happened on their first date following their appearance . A fourth season of the show premiered on March 14 , 2012 . 
 With GSN ’ s Executive Vice President of Programming , Amy <unk> @-@ Davis , citing that the series continued to remain " extremely popular " in reruns , GSN announced plans to order twenty episodes of a traveling version of the series . The spin @-@ off , entitled Baggage on the Road , follows an identical format to its predecessor while traveling to tape episodes in various U.S. cities . Prior to the spin @-@ off , a one @-@ hour special entitled Baggage : Most Outrageous Moments aired on January 1 , 2015 , featuring highlights from the original series ' run . The spin @-@ off premiered on January 7 , 2015 ; Wilshire Studios produced the revival with Lisa Tucker serving as executive producer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The show quickly became a ratings success for GSN , becoming the highest @-@ rated weekday series in the network 's history . The original series averaged 473 @,@ 000 viewers during its first season , while the 2015 version saw a season @-@ high of 524 @,@ 000 viewers for its only season . Despite earning respectable ratings by GSN 's standards , Baggage has received mixed critical reviews . Carrie Grosvenor of About Entertainment argued that the series " isn 't exactly must @-@ see TV , but it 's entertaining enough to catch an episode here and there . " Additionally , Josef Adalian of The Wrap gave a negative pre @-@ review of the show , calling it and Springer " GSN 's latest bad idea . " In 2012 , however , Baggage appeared in Entertainment Weekly as a " top guilty pleasure , " and was also featured in the HBO television series Girls . Writing for Yahoo ! , Gabrielle Rice called the series " very entertaining , " and argued Springer to be " the perfect host for the show . " June Thomas , writing for Slate , opened her review by calling the series " real , and ... spectacular . " Additionally , Jordan Carr of The Awl titled his review , " Jerry Springer 's Baggage Is The Greatest TV Show Ever . " Carr called the formula of the show " brilliant " despite it being " predictable and not that exciting . " 
 The series has also spawned Australian and British versions under the same title . The British series , hosted by Gok Wan , aired on Channel 4 in 2012 . 
 = Churchill War Rooms = 
 The Churchill War Rooms is a museum in London and one of the five branches of the Imperial War Museum . The museum comprises the Cabinet War Rooms , a historic underground complex that housed a British government command centre throughout the Second World War , and the Churchill Museum , a biographical museum exploring the life of British statesman Winston Churchill . 
 Construction of the Cabinet War Rooms , located beneath the Treasury building in the Whitehall area of Westminster , began in 1938 . They became operational in August 1939 , shortly before the outbreak of war in Europe . They remained in operation throughout the Second World War , before being abandoned in August 1945 after the surrender of Japan . After the war the historic value of the Cabinet War Rooms was recognised . Their preservation became the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and later the Department for the Environment , during which time very limited numbers of the public were able to visit by appointment . In the early 1980s the Imperial War Museum was asked to take over the administration of the site , and the Cabinet War Rooms were opened to the public in April 1984 . The museum was reopened in 2005 following a major redevelopment as the Churchill Museum and Cabinet War Rooms , but in 2010 this was shortened to the Churchill War Rooms . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1936 the Air Ministry , the British government department responsible for the Royal Air Force , believed that in the event of war enemy aerial bombing of London would cause up to 200 @,@ 000 casualties per week . British government commissions under Warren Fisher and Sir James Rae in 1937 and 1938 considered that key government offices should be dispersed from central London to the suburbs , and non @-@ essential offices to the Midlands or North West . Pending this dispersal , in May 1938 Sir Hastings Ismay , then Deputy Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , ordered an Office of Works survey of Whitehall to identify a suitable site for a temporary emergency government centre . The Office concluded the most suitable site was the basement of the New Public Offices , a government building located on the corner of Horse Guards Road and Great George Street , near Parliament Square . The building now accommodates HM Treasury . 
 Work to convert the basement of the New Public Offices began , under the supervision of Ismay and Sir Leslie Hollis , in June 1938 . The work included installing communications and broadcasting equipment , sound @-@ proofing , ventilation and reinforcement . Meanwhile , by the summer of 1938 the War Office , Admiralty and Air Ministry had developed the concept of a Central War Room that would facilitate discussion and decision @-@ making between the Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces . As ultimate authority lay with the civilian government the Cabinet , or a smaller War Cabinet , would require close access to senior military figures . This implied accommodation close to the armed forces ' Central War Room . In May 1939 it was decided that the Cabinet would be housed within the Central War Room . In August 1939 , with war imminent and protected government facilities in the suburbs not yet ready , the War Rooms became operational on 27 August 1939 , only days before the invasion of Poland on 1 September , and Britain 's declaration of war on Germany on 3 September . 
 = = Wartime use = = 
 During its operational life two of the Cabinet War Rooms were of particular importance . Once operational , the facility 's Map Room was in constant use and manned around the clock by officers of the Royal Navy , British army and Royal Air Force . These officers were responsible for producing a daily intelligence summary for the King , Prime Minister and the military Chiefs of Staff . 
 The other key room was the Cabinet Room . Until the opening of the Battle of France , which began on 10 May 1940 , Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain 's war cabinet met at the War Rooms only once , in October 1939 . Following Winston Churchill 's appointment as Prime Minister , Churchill visited the Cabinet Room in May 1940 and declared : ' This is the room from which I will direct the war ' . In total 115 Cabinet meetings were held at the Cabinet War Rooms , the last on 28 March 1945 , when the German V @-@ weapon bombing campaign came to an end . 
 On 22 October 1940 , during the Blitz bombing campaign against Britain , it was decided to increase the protection of the Cabinet War Rooms by the installation of a massive layer of concrete known as ' the Slab ' . Up to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 metres ) thick , the Slab was progressively extended and by spring 1941 the increased protection had enabled the Cabinet War Rooms to expand to three times their original size . While the usage of many of the War Rooms ' individual rooms changed over the course of the war , the facility included dormitories for staff , private bedrooms for military officers and senior ministers , and rooms for typists or telephone switchboard operators . 
 Two other notable rooms include the Transatlantic Telephone Room and Churchill 's office @-@ bedroom . From 1943 , a <unk> code @-@ scrambling encrypted telephone was installed in the basement of Selfridges , Oxford Street connected to a similar terminal in the Pentagon building . This enabled Churchill to speak securely with American President Roosevelt in Washington , with the first conference taking place on 15 July 1943 . Later extensions were installed to both 10 Downing Street and the specially constructed Transatlantic Telephone Room within the Cabinet War Rooms . Churchill 's office @-@ bedroom included BBC broadcasting equipment ; Churchill made four wartime broadcasts from the Cabinet War Rooms . Although the office room was also fitted out as a bedroom , Churchill rarely slept underground , preferring to sleep at 10 Downing Street or the No.10 Annexe , a flat in the New Public Offices directly above the Cabinet War Rooms . His daughter Mary Soames often slept in the bedroom allocated to Mrs Churchill . 
 = = Abandonment and preservation = = 
 After the end of the war , the Cabinet War Rooms became redundant and were abandoned . Their maintenance became the responsibility of the Ministry of Works . In March 1948 the question of public access to the War Rooms was raised in Parliament and the Minister responsible , Charles Key MP , considered that ' it would not be practicable to throw open for inspection by the general public accommodation which forms part of an office where confidential work is carried on ' . Even so , a tour was organised for journalists on 17 March , with members of the press being welcomed by Lord Ismay and shown around the Rooms by their custodian , Mr. George Rance . 
 While the Rooms were not open to the general public , they could be accessed by appointment , with access being restricted to small groups . Even so , by the 1970s ( with responsibility for the Rooms having passed to the Department for the Environment in 1975 ) tens of thousands of requests to visit the Rooms were being received every year , of which only 5 @,@ 000 were successful . Meanwhile , the atmospheric conditions of the site , being dry and dusty , were having a detrimental effect on the rooms ' furnishings and historic maps and other documents . The prospect was raised of <unk> the contents of the Rooms to an established museum , with the National Army Museum and Imperial War Museum being suggested as candidates . In the event , £ 7 @,@ 000 was secured to conserve the material in situ . 
 = = Opening and redevelopment = = 
 In 1974 the Imperial War Museum was approached by the government and asked to consider taking over the administration of the site . A feasibility study was prepared but came to nothing , the museum feeling it did not have sufficient resources to commit to the War Rooms . In 1981 Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , known as an admirer of Winston Churchill , expressed the hope that the Rooms could be opened before the next general election . The Imperial War Museum was again approached . Initially still reluctant , the museum 's trustees decided in January 1982 that the museum would take over the site , on the understanding that the government would make the necessary resources available . The initial costs were to be met by the Department for the Environment , and the War Rooms intended to be self @-@ supporting thereafter . The Rooms were opened to the public by Thatcher on 4 April 1984 , in a ceremony attended by Churchill family members and former Cabinet War Rooms staff . At first the Rooms were administered by the museum on behalf of Department for the Environment ; in 1989 responsibility was transferred to the Imperial War Museum . 
 Following a major expansion in 2003 , a suite of rooms , used as accommodation by Churchill , his wife and close associates , was added to the museum . The restoration of these rooms , which since the war had been stripped out and used for storage , cost £ 7 @.@ 5 million . In 2005 the War Rooms were rebranded as the Churchill Museum and Cabinet War Rooms , with <unk> of the site redeveloped as a biographical museum exploring Churchill 's life . The museum , the development of which cost a further £ 6 million raised from private fundraising , makes extensive use of audiovisual technology . The centrepiece is a 15 @-@ metre interactive table that enables visitors to access digitised material , particularly from the Churchill Archives Centre , via an ' electronic filing cabinet ' . The Churchill Museum won the 2006 Council of Europe Museum Prize . During 2009 @-@ 2011 the museum received over 300 @,@ 000 visitors a year . In May 2010 the name of the museum was shortened to Churchill War Rooms . 
 In June 2012 the museum 's entrance was redesigned by Clash Architects with consulting engineers Price & Myers . Intended to act as a ' beacon ' for the museum , the new external design included a faceted bronze entranceway , while the interior showed the cleaned and restored Portland stone walls of the Treasury building and Clive Steps . The design was described as ' appropriately martial and bulldog @-@ like ' and as ' a fusion of architecture and sculpture ' . 
 = Plitvice Lakes incident = 
 The Plitvice Lakes incident ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> na <unk> or <unk> <unk> <unk> , both translating as " Plitvice Bloody Easter " ) was an armed clash at the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence . It was fought between Croatian police and armed forces from the Croatian Serb @-@ established SAO Krajina at the Plitvice Lakes in Croatia , on 31 March 1991 . The fighting followed the SAO Krajina 's takeover of the Plitvice Lakes National Park and resulted in Croatia recapturing the area . The clash resulted in one killed on each side and contributed to the worsening ethnic tensions . 
 The fighting prompted the Presidency of Yugoslavia to order the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) to step in and create a buffer zone between the opposing forces . The JNA arrived at the scene the following day and presented Croatia with an ultimatum requesting the police to withdraw . Even though the special police units which captured the Plitvice Lakes area did pull out on 2 April , a newly established Croatian police station , staffed by 90 officers , remained in place . The police station was blockaded by the JNA three months later , and captured in late August 1991 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and eastern Croatia . They established a Serbian National Council in July 1990 , to coordinate opposition to Croatian President Franjo Tuđman 's policy of pursuing independence for Croatia . Milan Babić , a dentist from the southern town of Knin , was elected president . Knin 's police chief , Milan Martić , established paramilitary militias . The two men eventually became the political and military leaders of the SAO Krajina , a self @-@ declared state incorporating the Serb @-@ inhabited areas of Croatia . 
 In the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . In an effort to bolster its defence , Croatia doubled the size of its police force to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the force was the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police that were deployed in 12 battalions adopting military organisation . In addition there were 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 regionally organised reserve police . The reserve police were set up in 16 battalions and 10 companies , but they lacked weapons . 
 In an effort to consolidate territory under their control , Croatian Serb leaders organised a political rally at the Plitvice Lakes on 25 March 1991 , demanding the area be annexed to the SAO Krajina . Three days later , on 28 March , SAO Krajina special police seized the area , and with the help of armed civilians , removed the Croatian management of the Plitvice Lakes National Park . The force deployed by the SAO Krajina to the Plitvice Lakes was estimated to be approximately 100 @-@ strong . The region was relatively sparsely populated and there was no obvious threat to Serbs there . Journalist Tim Judah suggests that the move may have been motivated by a desire to control a strategic road that ran north @-@ south through the park , linking the Serb communities in the Lika and Banovina regions . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Croatia deployed special police forces , specifically the Lučko , <unk> and <unk> special police units based in and around Zagreb , supported by additional police forces drawn from Karlovac and Gospić to retake the Plitvice Lakes area . The Croatian police force , commanded by Josip <unk> , used several buses and passenger cars , as well as an armoured personnel carrier to approach the Plitvice Lakes area . The main 180 @-@ strong group of the <unk> Special Police Unit ( SPU ) , directly commanded by <unk> , arrived in dense fog , along the main road from Zagreb via the Korana River bridge . The bridge was secured by the Lučko unit shortly before midnight on 30 / 31 March 1991 . An auxiliary force approached the Plitvice Lakes via Ličko Petrovo Selo , while the Kumrovec SPU was deployed in the area between the lakes and Gospić , where it captured the Ljubovo Pass to secure the right flank of the main effort . The total attacking force comprised approximately 300 troops . 
 The approaching convoy was ambushed at a barricade set up by the SAO Krajina force near Plitvice Lakes before 7 : 00 in the morning of Easter Sunday , 31 March 1991 . The SAO Krajina force attacked the vehicles carrying the Croatian police and held their position until they fell back to the national park post office two and a half hours later . The Croatian advance , additionally hindered by deep snow , was achieved at a cost of six wounded . The attacking force secured its objectives by 11 : 00 am . As the attacking operation reached its completion , the Croatian military sustained its first combat fatality of the Croatian War of Independence , when Josip Jović was killed by a machine gun covering retreating SAO Krajina troops . Shortly afterwards , the Yugoslav Air Force dispatched a Mil Mi @-@ 8 helicopter to attend to wounded on both sides , and it left the area after an hour and a half . The helicopter was dispatched by Colonel General Anton Tus , head of the Yugoslav Air Force at the time , following a request by Josip Boljkovac , Interior Minister of Croatia . As the fighting around Plitvice ended , sporadic gunfire was reported near Titova Korenica , to the south . The same afternoon , a Croatian police station was established at the Plitvice Lakes and Tomislav <unk> was appointed its commanding officer . The station was staffed by approximately 90 police officers who were redeployed from Gospić . 
 The Presidency of Yugoslavia met in an emergency session the same evening to discuss the clash . At the insistence of Serbia 's representative on the Presidency , Borisav Jović , the JNA was ordered to intervene , gain control in the area and prevent further combat . The Serbian parliament also met in an emergency session , treating the clashes as a virtual casus belli and voting to offer the Krajina Serbs " all necessary help " in their conflict with Zagreb . The following day , the SAO Krajina adopted a resolution to the effect that the territory was incorporated into Serbia , whose constitution and laws were adopted for use in the Serb @-@ held areas of Croatia . Croatian authorities accused Serbia 's president , Slobodan Milošević , of stage @-@ managing the unrest in order to break Croatia 's resolve to declare independence unless Yugoslavia was transformed into a loose confederation . They also accused him of attempting to coax the JNA to overthrow Croatian government . 
 = = = JNA intervention = = = 
 On 1 April , the JNA established a buffer zone to separate the belligerents at Plitvice Lakes , deploying elements of the 1st and the 5th Military Districts . Those were an armoured battalion of the 329th Armoured Brigade based in Banja Luka , a battalion of the 6th Mountain Brigade based in Delnice , a reconnaissance company and a mechanised battalion of the 4th Armoured Brigade based in Jastrebarsko and Karlovac , a battalion of the 306th Light Anti @-@ Aircraft Artillery Regiment based in Zagreb , a signals company of the 367th Signals Regiment based in Samobor , a company of the 13th Military Police Battalion based in Rijeka and an anti @-@ aircraft artillery battery drawn from the 13th Proletarian Motorised Brigade based in Rijeka . Finally , the 5th Military District set up a forward command post at the Plitvice Lakes . The JNA force at the Plitvice Lakes was commanded by Colonel Ivan Štimac . 
 The commanding officer of the 5th Military District , Major General Andrija Rašeta , in overall command of the JNA intervention , told the media that his men were not protecting either side and were there only to prevent ethnic confrontations for an indeterminate period . However , the Croatian government reacted furiously to the JNA move . Tuđman 's aide , Mario <unk> , claimed that the JNA had told Croatian officials that it would engage the police if they did not leave Plitvice . In a radio address , Tuđman said that the JNA would be regarded as a hostile army of occupation if its course of action remained unchanged . On 2 April , the JNA handed the Croatian authorities an ultimatum , requesting the police leave Plitvice . The special police left Plitvice the same day , but the 90 officers staffing the newly established police station remained in place . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Police officer Josip Jović was the only Croatian fatality in the incident . The SAO Krajina force also suffered one killed in the fighting — Rajko <unk> , who was the first Croatian Serb combat fatality in the war . A total of 20 people were wounded , seven of whom were the Croatian police . The Croatian forces captured 29 SAO Krajina troops , 18 of whom were formally charged with insurgency . Among the prisoners was Goran Hadžić , later to become the President of the Republic of Serbian Krajina , although he was quickly released . Hadžić 's release was explained as a goodwill gesture by the authorities , but Boljkovac claims he was released because he was collaborating with the Croatian authorities in 1991 . Approximately 400 tourists , most of them Italian , were evacuated from the Plitvice Lakes after the fighting . 
 The clash at the Plitvice Lakes worsened the overall situation in Croatia and led to an escalation of the conflict . Even though the Croatian and Serb forces were separated by the JNA at the Plitvice Lakes , the situation in the area continued to deteriorate following the clash . In nearby Plaški , Croatian police personnel left the local police station and were replaced by Serb officers . Both SAO Krajina and Croatian forces set up several roadblocks on the Saborsko – Lička Jasenica – Ogulin road . By summer , the blockades were extended to the north of Plaški and south of Saborsko , where Croatian authorities established another 30 @-@ strong police station on 2 April . Only JNA vehicles were permitted to pass the roadblocks , and that brought about a shortage of food , medicine and electricity in the area . 
 On 2 May , the Serb Democratic Party , the ruling party in the SAO Krajina , organised a protest march to the Plitvice Lakes and a political rally demanding the Croatian police withdraw from Plitvice . The march , led by Babić and Vojislav Šešelj , was prevented from reaching the Plitvice Lakes by the JNA and forced to return to Titova Korenica . The JNA imposed a blockade of the Plitvice Lakes police station on 1 July , on the pretext that the Croatian police had abducted and imprisoned two JNA officers . By 6 July , the SAO Krajina forces and the JNA commenced attacks on the Ljubovo Pass southeast of the Plitvice Lakes , on the Titova Korenica – Gospić road , driving the Croatian National Guard back and capturing the pass by the end of the month . Throughout the summer , the JNA continued to engage Croatian forces in Lika using the units deployed to the Plitvice Lakes in April . The fighting escalated further on 30 August , when the JNA captured the Plitvice Lakes police station and the following day when the Battle of Gospić began . 
 Jović is largely viewed in Croatia as the first casualty of the Croatian War of Independence . A monument dedicated to him was erected in his birthplace of <unk> in 1994 . After the war , a monument was erected at the site of his death , where annual commemorations of the clash are held . The clash and Jović 's death are commemorated annually at the Plitvice Lakes . 
 = Silky sifaka = 
 The silky sifaka ( Propithecus candidus ) , or silky simpona , is a large lemur characterized by long , silky , white fur . It has a very restricted range in northeastern Madagascar , where it is known locally as the simpona . It is one of the rarest mammals on Earth , and is listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) as one of the world 's 25 most critically endangered primates . The silky sifaka is one of nine sifaka species ( genus Propithecus ) , and one of four former subspecies of diademed sifaka ( P. diadema ) . Studies in 2004 and 2007 compared external proportions , genetics , and cranio @-@ dental anatomy supporting full species status , which has generally been accepted . 
 The silky sifaka has a variable social structure , and lives in groups of two to nine individuals . It spends most of its day feeding and resting , though it also devotes a considerable amount of time to social behaviors , such as playing and grooming , as well as traveling . Females occasionally take priority over males during feeding . Like other eastern sifakas , it consumes mainly leaves and seeds , but also fruit , flowers , and even soil on occasion . It is a seasonal breeder and only mates one day a year during the start of the rainy season . As with other sifaka species , non @-@ maternal infant care is common . Group members of all ages and both sexes will often groom , play with , occasionally carry , and even nurse infants that are not their own . The silky sifaka vocalizes frequently despite its moderately sized vocal repertoire consisting of seven adult calls . Like all lemurs , it relies strongly on scent for communication . Males will frequently scent @-@ mark on top of scent @-@ marks made by other group members , particularly females . Males also gouge trees with their toothcomb ( a special arrangement of the bottom , front teeth ) prior to chest scent @-@ marking . This chest marking results in males having brown @-@ stained chests , the only visible trait that can be used to distinguish between adult males and adult females . 
 The species is only found within a few protected areas in the rainforests of northeastern Madagascar , with the majority of the remaining population in Marojejy National Park and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Special Reserve . A few groups have also been found in the Makira Forest Protected Area , the Betaolana Corridor , and some unprotected forest fragments . The silky sifaka is hunted throughout its range as there is no local fady ( taboo ) against eating this species . Habitat disturbance , such as slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture ( tavy ) , illegal logging of precious woods ( particularly , rosewood ) and fuel @-@ wood , also occurs within the protected areas where it is found . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " sifaka " is a reference to a common general alarm vocalization given by western dry forest sifakas in which they emit an explosive , hiss @-@ like " shee @-@ <unk> " call several times in succession . On the east coast , local residents refer to the larger bodied diademed sifaka as simpona , a name which refers to the species ' sneeze @-@ like " zzuss " alarm vocalizations . The calls are emitted in a variety of stressful circumstances such as presence of humans , falling trees , terrestrial predators , and after aggression between group members . The specific name , candidus , is Latin for " white " , while the specific name of the taxonomic synonym sericeus is derived from the Greek word for " silk " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The silky sifaka was initially described in 1871 by French naturalist Alfred Grandidier in a formally published letter to French zoologist Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards . Grandidier 's description was based on his own observations north of Antongil Bay in the last few months of 1870 . He then named the species Propithecus candidus due to its white color , which he likened to that of the Verreaux 's sifaka ( Propithecus verreauxi ) , but without the dark fur on its head or the ash @-@ colored spot on the back . The first specimen was obtained in 1872 and provided by " Monsieur <unk> " , a planter from Sambava . The specimen allowed both Grandidier and Milne @-@ Edwards to more thoroughly describe the species based on its skin , coat , and skull . Upon those findings , they changed the name to P. sericeus . Upon further review in 1875 , Grandidier demoted the silky sifaka to a variety or " race " of the diademed sifaka . By the time German zoologist Ernst Schwarz standardized lemur taxonomy in 1931 , P. sericeus had become a taxonomic synonym for the species , with the original name , Propithecus candidus , taking priority . 
 Schwarz placed all sifakas into two species , the larger diademed sifaka from the eastern rainforests and the smaller Verreaux 's sifaka from the dry forests and spiny forests of the west and south . At the time , both species comprised four subspecies , and the silky sifaka was listed as P. diadema candidus , a subspecies of the diademed sifaka . In his 1982 book Primates of Madagascar , anthropologist Ian Tattersall upheld this classification . When anthropologist Colin Groves reviewed the taxonomy in his book Primate Taxonomy in 2001 , he also upheld the subspecies status of the silky sifaka because variations in fur coloration between the available specimens suggested converging similarities with the diademed sifaka 's coloration . Groves later noted that the coloration of the two species did not overlap , suggesting that the populations were distinct . 
 In 2004 , Mayor et al. showed that despite having a similar karyotype ( the number and appearance of chromosomes ) of 42 chromosomes ( 2n = 42 ) , the silky sifaka was distinct from the diademed sifaka . This was shown through genetic tests ( D @-@ loop sequencing ) and by comparing external proportions . For example , the silky sifaka has a shorter tail . Their analysis indicated a closer relationship with Perrier 's sifaka ( Propithecus <unk> ) . Russell Mittermeier and colleagues followed by adopting the full species status of the silky sifaka for the 2nd edition of Lemurs of Madagascar in 2006 . Although Groves maintained the silky sifaka as a subspecies in the 3rd edition of Mammal Species of the World in 2005 , he recognized it as a distinct species in 2007 by acknowledging the work of Mayor et al. and also noting the additional distinction that the silky sifaka has relatively long molar teeth compared to the length of its toothrow . Despite the promotion to full species status , the silky sifaka is still considered to be a member of the P. diadema group , a group of four closely related , large @-@ bodied , eastern rainforest sifakas . The other three members of this group are the diademed sifaka , Perrier 's sifaka , and Milne @-@ Edwards ' sifaka ( Propithecus edwardsi ) . The species status of the silky sifaka , as well as other sifakas , does not have universal support : in 2007 , Tattersall argued against species distinctions within Propithecus , claiming the decisions were made prematurely . 
 In 1974 , Tattersall spotted what he thought was a color variant of the silky sifaka north of Vohemar in northeast Madagascar . Describing it as such eight years later in The Primates of Madagascar , he not only cited its mostly white fur , but also uncharacteristic traits such as a patch of orange on its crown and tufted ears . It was not observed again until 1986 , when a team led by paleoanthropologist Elwyn L. Simons captured specimens for captive breeding and identified it as a new species , named as the golden @-@ crowned sifaka ( Propithecus tattersalli ) in 1988 . 
 = = Geographic range and habitat = = 
 The silky sifaka is confined to a small region of northeastern Madagascar within a strip of humid forest stretching from Maroantsetra in the south to the Andapa Basin and the Marojejy Massif in the north . Marojejy National Park represents the northern limit of its current distribution , although historical sifaka range maps created by Grandidier and Milne @-@ Edwards in the late 19th century show the silky sifaka as far north as the <unk> River , north of Sambava . The <unk> River may represent the northwestern range limit within the Tsaratanana Corridor . The southern limit of its range appears to be the Antainambalana River , within the Makira Conservation Site . It is not known if the silky sifaka has ever ranged as far south as the Masoala Peninsula . As of 2009 , new observations of a few groups of the silky sifaka in unprotected forest fragments adjacent to northeastern Makira ( <unk> Lava and <unk> ) may slightly enlarge the known geographic range of this species . The presence of the silky sifaka has been documented within Marojejy National Park , Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Special Reserve , the Makira Forest Protected Area , the Betaolana Corridor , and the Tsaratanana Corridor . In 2008 , 16 groups were discovered in western Marojejy near <unk> . 
 The silky sifaka tends to be found at higher elevations than any of the other sifaka species and also occupies the greatest range of elevations for the group . In Marojejy National Park and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Special Reserve , where most of the remaining groups exist , it is not found below 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) of elevation and not above 1 @,@ 875 m ( 6 @,@ 152 ft ) . However , at its southernmost location in Makira ( <unk> ) , several groups inhabit forest fragments at an unusually low elevation of 300 m ( 980 ft ) . The silky sifaka inhabits three types of elevation @-@ specific habitats : primary montane rainforest , sclerophyllous forest , and the most elevated portions of low ericoid bush . It is unknown how sensitive the silky sifaka is to disturbance or whether it avoids habitat edges ( " edge @-@ intolerant " ) or is more edge @-@ tolerant like the diademed sifaka . Like other rainforest sifaka species , it seldom crosses unforested regions between forest fragments . 
 In the Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Special Reserve , the silky sifaka is sympatric ( shares the same geographic range ) with the white @-@ fronted brown lemur ( Eulemur albifrons ) and an all @-@ black population of indri ( Indri indri ) . In Marojejy National Park , it is sympatric with the white @-@ fronted brown lemur . In 2008 , it was suggested that the silky sifaka may be sympatric with the red ruffed lemur ( Varecia rubra ) near <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The silky sifaka is one of the larger sifaka species , with a head @-@ body length of 48 – 54 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 ft ) , a tail length of 45 – 51 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 7 ft ) , a total length of 93 – 105 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 4 ft ) , and a weight of 5 – 6 @.@ 5 kg ( 11 – 14 lb ) . As its common English name suggests , its long , white fur has a silky texture . Not all individuals are completely white : some have silver @-@ gray or black tints on the crown , back , and limbs . The base of the tail ( " <unk> region " ) can be yellow . The ears and face are hairless , and the skin may be a mix of pink and black , completely black , or completely pink . The tips of the ears protrude slightly above the fur on the rest of the head . Its eyes have a deep orange @-@ red coloration . Its appearance is distinctive , and since no other sifakas share its range , it is not easily confused with other lemur species . 
 While it is difficult to distinguish adult males and females in other eastern rainforest sifakas , such as the Perrier 's sifaka and Milne @-@ Edwards ' sifaka , gender in the silky sifaka is easily discerned due to differences in fur coloration of the upper chest . Females have white fur , while males have a large brown patch of fur that results from scent marking with a gland on the chest and throat ( the sternal gular gland ) . During mating season , the size of the " chest patch " increases to cover both the chest and abdomen as a result of increased scent marking . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Until the 21st century , brief observations and lemur surveys had merely documented the presence of the silky sifaka in special reserves and national parks . More recently , a 14 @-@ month study and two short @-@ term studies in Marojejy National Park have revealed previously unknown details about its behavioral biology , communication , and feeding ecology . The silky sifaka has a variable social structure and is known to live in male @-@ female pairs , one @-@ male groups , and multi @-@ male / multi @-@ female groups . Group sizes range from two to nine individuals , while the home ranges are estimated to range from 34 to 47 ha ( 0 @.@ 13 to 0 @.@ 18 sq mi ) , varying in size by location . 
 According to some studies , the silky sifaka spends most of its day resting and feeding ( approximately 44 @.@ 4 % and 25 % respectively ) . It also devotes approximately 16 @.@ 8 % of the day to social behavior , such as personal grooming , social grooming ( allogrooming ) , and play . The rest of the day is spent traveling and sleeping . Other sources report that the species divides half of the day between traveling and foraging , while the rest is spent resting . Daily foraging usually starts at dawn unless delayed by rain . Group movement is usually led by females , and groups usually travel 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) per day , and may climb 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) along vertical slopes . Although the species spends its time in the trees , terrestrial play is not uncommon , even among adults , with play sessions lasting 30 minutes or more . Like other sifakas , it uses a type of arboreal locomotion known as vertical clinging and leaping . Dominance hierarchies have not been documented among female sifakas , including the silky sifaka , although seasonal hierarchies are known to occur . Aggression , which is generally infrequent , occurs primarily during feeding , where females take priority over males , although submissive signals are not always obvious . 
 The silky sifaka 's diet is similar to that of other eastern rainforest sifakas , consisting primarily of leaves ( folivory ) and seeds ( seed predation ) . It is highly varied and includes many plant species . A two @-@ month study from the mid @-@ 2000s showed that the silky sifaka can feed on as many as 76 species of plant from 42 families . Its favorites included primarily tree species , but also some lianas . The most prominent plant families in the diet were Moraceae ( 20 @.@ 30 % ) , Fabaceae ( 12 @.@ 87 % ) , Myrtaceae ( 12 @.@ 65 % ) , Clusiaceae ( 10 @.@ 13 % ) and Apocynaceae ( 9 @.@ 49 % ) . In the study , feeding upon these four plant families took up as much as 37 @.@ 06 % of the total feeding time for the silky sifaka : 16 @.@ 09 % on the fruit of <unk> <unk> , 8 @.@ 43 % on the seeds of Senna sp . , 6 @.@ 52 % on the young leaves of <unk> <unk> , and 6 @.@ 02 % on the fruit of Eugenia sp . In sum , folivory accounted for 52 % of the feeding time , while frugivory ( fruit @-@ eating ) accounted for 34 % , and seed predation made up 11 % . The consumption of flowers , as well as soil ( geophagy ) , was rarely observed in this study . Prior to this , preliminary studies had reported that folivory account for 75 % of the diet , while fruits and 15 % was seed predation , 7 % was flower consumption , and bark and soil made up the remainder . 
 Like all other lemurs , the silky sifaka is a seasonal breeder , and it is thought that it mates only one day a year during the start of the rainy season sometime in December or January . Infants are born six months later in June or July . Females typically give birth to a single infant once every two years , although births in consecutive years have been observed . Infants initially cling to the fur of their mother 's chest for nearly four weeks and then switch to riding on her back . As with other eastern rainforest sifakas , the infants of this species develop rapidly . This may be due to assistance in the care of infants by all group members ( known as alloparental care ) — a trait typical among all sifakas . Non @-@ maternal care usually takes the form of allogrooming , but also playing , occasional carrying , and in rare cases , nursing . The dispersal of offspring is thought to be similar to that of other eastern rainforest sifakas , with both males and females transferring out of the group at sexual maturity . However , dispersal has only been observed once with a young adult male , who left its natal group and proceeded to oust an older male from a group in which he had been a member for seven years . Female dispersal and group transfer has not yet been observed . 
 The only documented predator of the silky sifaka , other than humans , is the fossa , a cat @-@ like carnivore found only on Madagascar . Although no aerial predators are known , the silky sifaka often watch the sky and emit loud " aerial disturbance " roars at the sight of the large Madagascar buzzard ( Buteo brachypterus ) and other small birds . Another more general alarm call is the loud , sneeze @-@ like " zzuss " vocalization , which are emitted in response to terrestrial disturbances , calls from lost group members , and aggression by other group members . Acoustic analyses of the " zzuss " vocalization have shown that the call 's acoustic structure differs between individuals and by gender . 
 Adult eastern sifakas have a moderately sized vocal repertoire of about seven call types . It is uncertain if their vocalizations have specific or varied contexts , and as with other primates , arousal level may play a role in the acoustic structure of its calls . Despite the limited size of the silky sifaka 's vocal repertoire , it does exhibit high call rates of seven calls per hour , on average . Even infants are known to have several specialized vocalizations . The most frequently emitted silky sifaka vocalizations are low @-@ amplitude , low @-@ frequency , tonal " hum " and " mum " vocalizations . These contact calls are used in a variety of circumstances including group movement , affiliation , foraging , and while resting . 
 The silky sifaka uses well @-@ developed olfactory ( smell @-@ based ) communication , as with all other strepsirrhine primates . Like other eastern rainforest sifakas , it has several specialized glands for scent @-@ marking , including a sebaceous gland on the chest , found only in males , and mixed apocrine @-@ sebaceous glands on the genitals in both sexes . Unlike the true lemurs of the genus Eulemur , the silky sifaka does not directly scent @-@ mark its conspecifics ( <unk> ) , although it does scent @-@ mark its territory . Both sexes will often urinate while scent @-@ marking . Males and females scent @-@ mark in different ways : females rub their genital glands in an up @-@ and @-@ down motion against trees , while males may use their chest gland , genital glands , or a combination of both . Males will also use their specialized toothcomb to gouge trees before scent @-@ marking with their chest — a behavior that leaves long @-@ lasting visible marks . The gouging is thought to serve a role in communication and has no dietary component , since males do not eat the bark or tree gum . 
 Males scent @-@ mark more frequently than females , as much as two or three times as often . Males also respond to female scent @-@ marking by <unk> with their own scent glands , usually by combining chest and genital marking . They will also <unk> other males , although less quickly and less often . In a one @-@ year study , males responded to 71 % of the marks made by females within an average of 61 seconds while only 17 % of male marks received a response from other group members . Because males <unk> frequently , this results in " totem @-@ tree marking " , where certain trees become covered by male scent and gouge marks . However , no observations of widespread home range border scent @-@ marking have been reported . Scent @-@ marks are usually left on trees in the core area of the home range , as opposed to the territorial boundaries . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 According to the most recent IUCN Red List assessment , the silky sifaka is Critically Endangered . It is one of the rarest and most critically endangered lemurs . The silky sifaka is one of five lemurs listed as one of " The World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates " and has been on the list all five times since its inception in 2000 . Its population size is estimated to range between 100 and 1 @,@ 000 individuals , while the number of mature individuals is thought to be less than 250 . There are no silky sifakas in captivity , such as in zoos . 
 The silky sifaka is the flagship species for the protected areas in which it is found , particularly for Marojejy , which has recently been inaugurated as part of a World Heritage Site cluster known as the Rainforests of the Atsinanana . Habitat disturbance , such as slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture ( known locally as tavy ) , logging of precious woods ( e.g. , rosewood ) and fuel @-@ wood , also occurs within the protected areas where it is found . Unlike the golden @-@ crowned sifaka ( Propithecus tattersalli ) , there is no local taboo ( fady ) against eating this species , and the hunting of bushmeat is a known issue within its range . It is most heavily hunted in the northern and western parts of Marojejy , as well as other areas around the Andapa Basin . The species is restricted to 90 @,@ 000 ha ( 350 sq mi ) of protected areas , although this may be an overestimation because in much of its range the silky sifaka is not found below 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) in altitude , possibly due to either hunting pressure or habitat preference . 
 Illegal logging of precious hardwoods , such as rosewood and ebony , has become one of the greatest threats to the silky sifaka 's habitat , especially since the 2009 Malagasy political crisis . Its two largest protected areas , Masoala National Park and Marojejy National Park , have been the hardest hit . The disturbance caused by selective logging increases the likelihood of forest fires , helps invasive species take root , impairs habitat , and causes the loss of genetic diversity . 
 Local villages adjacent to its remaining protected areas adopted a two @-@ pronged strategy towards silky sifaka conservation education . First , a " cognitive component " was implemented to increase knowledge and awareness through radio interviews , slide presentations , and the disbursement of literature in twelve primary and secondary schools . Additionally , an " emotional component " was begun to link silky sifaka conservation with positive emotional experiences , with the goal of establishing a psychological connection between the children and the lemur . To do this , groups of children were taken on three @-@ day educational eco @-@ tours in Marojejy National Park . Both the teachers and the students showed interest and genuine concern about the plight of the silky sifaka . 
 Plans are being made to both expand Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Special Reserve and link existing parks and reserves in the region with wildlife corridors . These corridors include the Betaolana Corridor between Marojejy and <unk> @-@ Sud and Makira , which will connect <unk> @-@ Sud with Masoala National Park to the south . In addition to providing additional habitat for the silky sifaka , the corridors would promote genetic exchange between currently isolated populations . 
 = = = Books cited = = = 
 = Transformer = 
 A transformer is an electrical device that transfers electrical energy between two or more circuits through electromagnetic induction . Electromagnetic induction produces an electromotive force within a conductor which is exposed to time varying magnetic fields . Transformers are used to increase or decrease the alternating voltages in electric power applications . 
 A varying current in the transformer 's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the transformer core and a varying field impinging on the transformer 's secondary winding . This varying magnetic field at the secondary winding induces a varying electromotive force ( EMF ) or voltage in the secondary winding due to electromagnetic induction . Making use of Faraday 's Law ( discovered in 1831 ) in conjunction with high magnetic permeability core properties , transformers can be designed to efficiently change AC voltages from one voltage level to another within power networks . 
 Since the invention of the first constant potential transformer in 1885 , transformers have become essential for the transmission , distribution , and utilization of alternating current electrical energy . A wide range of transformer designs is encountered in electronic and electric power applications . Transformers range in size from RF transformers less than a cubic centimeter in volume to units interconnecting the power grid weighing hundreds of tons . 
 = = Basic principles = = 
 = = = Ideal transformer = = = 
 For simplification or approximation purposes , it is very common to analyze the transformer as an ideal transformer model as presented in the two images . An ideal transformer is a theoretical , linear transformer that is lossless and perfectly coupled ; that is , there are no energy losses and flux is completely confined within the magnetic core . Perfect coupling implies infinitely high core magnetic permeability and winding inductances and zero net <unk> force . 
 A varying current in the transformer 's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the core and a varying magnetic field impinging on the secondary winding . This varying magnetic field at the secondary induces a varying electromotive force ( EMF ) or voltage in the secondary winding . The primary and secondary windings are wrapped around a core of infinitely high magnetic permeability so that all of the magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings . With a voltage source connected to the primary winding and load impedance connected to the secondary winding , the transformer currents flow in the indicated directions . ( See also Polarity . ) 
 According to Faraday 's Law , since the same magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings in an ideal transformer , a voltage is induced in each winding , according to eq . ( 1 ) in the secondary winding case , according to eq . ( 2 ) in the primary winding case . The primary EMF is sometimes termed counter EMF . This is in accordance with Lenz 's law , which states that induction of EMF always opposes development of any such change in magnetic field . 
 The transformer winding voltage ratio is thus shown to be directly proportional to the winding turns ratio according to eq . ( 3 ) . 
 According to the law of conservation of energy , any load impedance connected to the ideal transformer 's secondary winding results in conservation of apparent , real and reactive power consistent with eq . ( 4 ) . 
 The ideal transformer identity shown in eq . ( 5 ) is a reasonable approximation for the typical commercial transformer , with voltage ratio and winding turns ratio both being inversely proportional to the corresponding current ratio . 
 By Ohm 's law and the ideal transformer identity : 
 the secondary circuit load impedance can be expressed as eq . ( 6 ) 
 the apparent load impedance referred to the primary circuit is derived in eq . ( 7 ) to be equal to the turns ratio squared times the secondary circuit load impedance . 
 = = = = Polarity = = = = 
 A dot convention is often used in transformer circuit diagrams , nameplates or terminal markings to define the relative polarity of transformer windings . Positively increasing instantaneous current entering the primary winding 's dot end induces positive polarity voltage at the secondary winding 's dot end . 
 = = = Real transformer = = = 
 = = = = Deviations from ideal = = = = 
 The ideal transformer model neglects the following basic linear aspects in real transformers . 
 Core losses , collectively called magnetizing current losses , consist of 
 Hysteresis losses due to nonlinear application of the voltage applied in the transformer core , and 
 Eddy current losses due to joule heating in the core that are proportional to the square of the transformer 's applied voltage . 
 Whereas windings in the ideal model have no resistances and infinite inductances , the windings in a real transformer have finite non @-@ zero resistances and inductances associated with : 
 Joule losses due to resistance in the primary and secondary windings 
 Leakage flux that escapes from the core and passes through one winding only resulting in primary and secondary reactive impedance . 
 = = = = Leakage flux = = = = 
 The ideal transformer model assumes that all flux generated by the primary winding links all the turns of every winding , including itself . In practice , some flux traverses paths that take it outside the windings . Such flux is termed leakage flux , and results in leakage inductance in series with the mutually coupled transformer windings . Leakage flux results in energy being alternately stored in and discharged from the magnetic fields with each cycle of the power supply . It is not directly a power loss , but results in inferior voltage regulation , causing the secondary voltage not to be directly proportional to the primary voltage , particularly under heavy load . Transformers are therefore normally designed to have very low leakage inductance . 
 In some applications increased leakage is desired , and long magnetic paths , air gaps , or magnetic bypass shunts may deliberately be introduced in a transformer design to limit the short @-@ circuit current it will supply . Leaky transformers may be used to supply loads that exhibit negative resistance , such as electric arcs , mercury vapor lamps , and neon signs or for safely handling loads that become periodically short @-@ circuited such as electric arc welders . 
 Air gaps are also used to keep a transformer from saturating , especially audio @-@ frequency transformers in circuits that have a DC component flowing in the windings . 
 Knowledge of leakage inductance is also useful when transformers are operated in parallel . It can be shown that if the percent impedance and associated winding leakage reactance @-@ to @-@ resistance ( X / R ) ratio of two transformers were hypothetically exactly the same , the transformers would share power in proportion to their respective volt @-@ ampere ratings ( e.g. 500 kVA unit in parallel with 1 @,@ 000 kVA unit , the larger unit would carry twice the current ) . However , the impedance tolerances of commercial transformers are significant . Also , the Z impedance and X / R ratio of different capacity transformers tends to vary , corresponding 1 @,@ 000 kVA and 500 kVA units ' values being , to illustrate , respectively , Z ≈ 5 @.@ 75 % , X / R ≈ 3 @.@ 75 and Z ≈ 5 % , X / R ≈ 4 @.@ 75 . 
 = = = = Equivalent circuit = = = = 
 Referring to the diagram , a practical transformer 's physical behavior may be represented by an equivalent circuit model , which can incorporate an ideal transformer . 
 Winding joule losses and leakage reactances are represented by the following series loop impedances of the model : 
 Primary winding : RP , XP 
 Secondary winding : RS , XS . 
 In normal course of circuit equivalence transformation , RS and XS are in practice usually referred to the primary side by multiplying these impedances by the turns ratio squared , ( NP / NS ) 2 = a2 . 
 Core loss and reactance is represented by the following shunt leg impedances of the model : 
 Core or iron losses : RC 
 <unk> reactance : XM . 
 RC and XM are collectively termed the magnetizing branch of the model . 
 Core losses are caused mostly by hysteresis and eddy current effects in the core and are proportional to the square of the core flux for operation at a given frequency . The finite permeability core requires a magnetizing current IM to maintain mutual flux in the core . <unk> current is in phase with the flux , the relationship between the two being non @-@ linear due to saturation effects . However , all impedances of the equivalent circuit shown are by definition linear and such non @-@ linearity effects are not typically reflected in transformer equivalent circuits . With sinusoidal supply , core flux lags the induced EMF by 90 ° . With open @-@ circuited secondary winding , magnetizing branch current <unk> equals transformer no @-@ load current . 
 The resulting model , though sometimes termed ' exact ' equivalent circuit based on linearity assumptions , retains a number of approximations . Analysis may be simplified by assuming that magnetizing branch impedance is relatively high and relocating the branch to the left of the primary impedances . This introduces error but allows combination of primary and referred secondary resistances and reactances by simple summation as two series impedances . 
 Transformer equivalent circuit impedance and transformer ratio parameters can be derived from the following tests : open @-@ circuit test , short @-@ circuit test , winding resistance test , and transformer ratio test . 
 = = Basic transformer parameters and construction = = 
 = = = Effect of frequency = = = 
 By Faraday 's Law of induction shown in eq . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , transformer <unk> vary according to the derivative of flux with respect to time . The ideal transformer 's core behaves linearly with time for any non @-@ zero frequency . Flux in a real transformer 's core behaves non @-@ linearly in relation to magnetization current as the instantaneous flux increases beyond a finite linear range resulting in magnetic saturation associated with increasingly large magnetizing current , which eventually leads to transformer overheating . 
 The EMF of a transformer at a given flux density increases with frequency . By operating at higher frequencies , transformers can be physically more compact because a given core is able to transfer more power without reaching saturation and fewer turns are needed to achieve the same impedance . However , properties such as core loss and conductor skin effect also increase with frequency . Aircraft and military equipment employ 400 Hz power supplies which reduce core and winding weight . Conversely , frequencies used for some railway electrification systems were much lower ( e.g. 16 @.@ 7 Hz and 25 Hz ) than normal utility frequencies ( 50 – 60 Hz ) for historical reasons concerned mainly with the limitations of early electric traction motors . Consequently , the transformers used to step @-@ down the high overhead line voltages ( e.g. 15 kV ) were much larger and heavier for the same power rating than those required for the higher frequencies . 
 Operation of a transformer at its designed voltage but at a higher frequency than intended will lead to reduced magnetizing current . At a lower frequency , the magnetizing current will increase . Operation of a transformer at other than its design frequency may require assessment of voltages , losses , and cooling to establish if safe operation is practical . For example , transformers may need to be equipped with ' volts per hertz ' over @-@ excitation relays to protect the transformer from <unk> at higher than rated frequency . 
 One example is in traction transformers used for electric multiple unit and high @-@ speed train service operating across regions with different electrical standards . The converter equipment and traction transformers have to accommodate different input frequencies and voltage ( ranging from as high as 50 Hz down to 16 @.@ 7 Hz and rated up to 25 kV ) while being suitable for multiple AC asynchronous motor and DC converters and motors with varying harmonics mitigation filtering requirements . 
 Large power transformers are vulnerable to insulation failure due to transient voltages with high @-@ frequency components , such as caused in switching or by lightning . 
 At much higher frequencies the transformer core size required drops dramatically : a physically small and cheap transformer can handle power levels that would require a massive iron core at mains frequency . The development of switching power semiconductor devices and complex integrated circuits made switch @-@ mode power supplies viable , to generate a high frequency from a much lower one ( or DC ) , change the voltage level with a small transformer , and , if necessary , rectify the changed voltage . 
 = = = Energy losses = = = 
 Real transformer energy losses are dominated by winding resistance joule and core losses . Transformers ' efficiency tends to improve with increasing transformer capacity . The efficiency of typical distribution transformers is between about 98 and 99 percent . 
 As transformer losses vary with load , it is often useful to express these losses in terms of no @-@ load loss , full @-@ load loss , half @-@ load loss , and so on . Hysteresis and eddy current losses are constant at all load levels and dominate overwhelmingly without load , while variable winding joule losses dominating increasingly as load increases . The no @-@ load loss can be significant , so that even an idle transformer constitutes a drain on the electrical supply . Designing energy efficient transformers for lower loss requires a larger core , good @-@ quality silicon steel , or even amorphous steel for the core and thicker wire , increasing initial cost . The choice of construction represents a trade @-@ off between initial cost and operating cost . 
 Transformer losses arise from : 
 Winding joule losses 
 Current flowing through a winding 's conductor causes joule heating . As frequency increases , skin effect and proximity effect causes the winding 's resistance and , hence , losses to increase . 
 Core losses 
 Hysteresis losses 
 Each time the magnetic field is reversed , a small amount of energy is lost due to hysteresis within the core . According to Steinmetz 's formula , the heat energy due to hysteresis is given by 
 <formula> , and , 
 hysteresis loss is thus given by 
 <formula> 
 where , f is the frequency , η is the hysteresis coefficient and <unk> is the maximum flux density , the empirical exponent of which varies from about 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 8 but is often given as 1 @.@ 6 for iron . 
 Eddy current losses 
 <unk> materials are also good conductors and a core made from such a material also constitutes a single short @-@ circuited turn throughout its entire length . Eddy currents therefore circulate within the core in a plane normal to the flux , and are responsible for resistive heating of the core material . The eddy current loss is a complex function of the square of supply frequency and inverse square of the material thickness . Eddy current losses can be reduced by making the core of a stack of plates electrically insulated from each other , rather than a solid block ; all transformers operating at low frequencies use laminated or similar cores . 
 <unk> related transformer hum 
 Magnetic flux in a ferromagnetic material , such as the core , causes it to physically expand and contract slightly with each cycle of the magnetic field , an effect known as magnetostriction , the frictional energy of which produces an audible noise known as mains hum or transformer hum . This transformer hum is especially objectionable in transformers supplied at power frequencies and in high @-@ frequency flyback transformers associated with television CRTs . 
 Stray losses 
 Leakage inductance is by itself largely lossless , since energy supplied to its magnetic fields is returned to the supply with the next half @-@ cycle . However , any leakage flux that intercepts nearby conductive materials such as the transformer 's support structure will give rise to eddy currents and be converted to heat . There are also radiative losses due to the oscillating magnetic field but these are usually small . 
 Mechanical vibration and audible noise transmission 
 In addition to magnetostriction , the alternating magnetic field causes fluctuating forces between the primary and secondary windings . This energy incites vibration transmission in interconnected metalwork , thus amplifying audible transformer hum . 
 = = = Core form and shell form transformers = = = 
 Closed @-@ core transformers are constructed in ' core form ' or ' shell form ' . When windings surround the core , the transformer is core form ; when windings are surrounded by the core , the transformer is shell form . Shell form design may be more prevalent than core form design for distribution transformer applications due to the relative ease in stacking the core around winding coils . Core form design tends to , as a general rule , be more economical , and therefore more prevalent , than shell form design for high voltage power transformer applications at the lower end of their voltage and power rating ranges ( less than or equal to , nominally , 230 kV or 75 MVA ) . At higher voltage and power ratings , shell form transformers tend to be more prevalent . Shell form design tends to be preferred for extra @-@ high voltage and higher MVA applications because , though more labor @-@ intensive to manufacture , shell form transformers are characterized as having inherently better kVA @-@ to @-@ weight ratio , better short @-@ circuit strength characteristics and higher immunity to transit damage . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Cores = = = 
 = = = = Laminated steel cores = = = = 
 Transformers for use at power or audio frequencies typically have cores made of high permeability silicon steel . The steel has a permeability many times that of free space and the core thus serves to greatly reduce the magnetizing current and confine the flux to a path which closely couples the windings . Early transformer developers soon realized that cores constructed from solid iron resulted in prohibitive eddy current losses , and their designs mitigated this effect with cores consisting of bundles of insulated iron wires . Later designs constructed the core by stacking layers of thin steel laminations , a principle that has remained in use . Each lamination is insulated from its neighbors by a thin non @-@ conducting layer of insulation . The universal transformer equation indicates a minimum cross @-@ sectional area for the core to avoid saturation . 
 The effect of laminations is to confine eddy currents to highly elliptical paths that enclose little flux , and so reduce their magnitude . Thinner laminations reduce losses , but are more laborious and expensive to construct . Thin laminations are generally used on high @-@ frequency transformers , with some of very thin steel laminations able to operate up to 10 kHz . 
 One common design of laminated core is made from interleaved stacks of E @-@ shaped steel sheets capped with I @-@ shaped pieces , leading to its name of ' E @-@ I transformer ' . Such a design tends to exhibit more losses , but is very economical to manufacture . The cut @-@ core or C @-@ core type is made by winding a steel strip around a rectangular form and then bonding the layers together . It is then cut in two , forming two C shapes , and the core assembled by binding the two C halves together with a steel strap . They have the advantage that the flux is always oriented parallel to the metal grains , reducing reluctance . 
 A steel core 's <unk> means that it retains a static magnetic field when power is removed . When power is then reapplied , the residual field will cause a high inrush current until the effect of the remaining magnetism is reduced , usually after a few cycles of the applied AC waveform . <unk> protection devices such as fuses must be selected to allow this harmless inrush to pass . On transformers connected to long , overhead power transmission lines , induced currents due to geomagnetic disturbances during solar storms can cause saturation of the core and operation of transformer protection devices . 
 Distribution transformers can achieve low no @-@ load losses by using cores made with low @-@ loss high @-@ permeability silicon steel or amorphous ( non @-@ crystalline ) metal alloy . The higher initial cost of the core material is offset over the life of the transformer by its lower losses at light load . 
 = = = = Solid cores = = = = 
 Powdered iron cores are used in circuits such as switch @-@ mode power supplies that operate above mains frequencies and up to a few tens of kilohertz . These materials combine high magnetic permeability with high bulk electrical resistivity . For frequencies extending beyond the VHF band , cores made from non @-@ conductive magnetic ceramic materials called ferrites are common . Some radio @-@ frequency transformers also have movable cores ( sometimes called ' slugs ' ) which allow adjustment of the coupling coefficient ( and bandwidth ) of tuned radio @-@ frequency circuits . 
 = = = = Toroidal cores = = = = 
 Toroidal transformers are built around a ring @-@ shaped core , which , depending on operating frequency , is made from a long strip of silicon steel or <unk> wound into a coil , powdered iron , or ferrite . A strip construction ensures that the grain boundaries are optimally aligned , improving the transformer 's efficiency by reducing the core 's reluctance . The closed ring shape eliminates air gaps inherent in the construction of an E @-@ I core . The cross @-@ section of the ring is usually square or rectangular , but more expensive cores with circular cross @-@ sections are also available . The primary and secondary coils are often wound concentrically to cover the entire surface of the core . This minimizes the length of wire needed and provides screening to minimize the core 's magnetic field from generating electromagnetic interference . 
 Toroidal transformers are more efficient than the cheaper laminated E @-@ I types for a similar power level . Other advantages compared to E @-@ I types , include smaller size ( about half ) , lower weight ( about half ) , less mechanical hum ( making them superior in audio amplifiers ) , lower exterior magnetic field ( about one tenth ) , low off @-@ load losses ( making them more efficient in standby circuits ) , single @-@ bolt mounting , and greater choice of shapes . The main disadvantages are higher cost and limited power capacity ( see Classification parameters below ) . Because of the lack of a residual gap in the magnetic path , toroidal transformers also tend to exhibit higher inrush current , compared to laminated E @-@ I types . 
 <unk> toroidal cores are used at higher frequencies , typically between a few tens of kilohertz to hundreds of megahertz , to reduce losses , physical size , and weight of inductive components . A drawback of toroidal transformer construction is the higher labor cost of winding . This is because it is necessary to pass the entire length of a coil winding through the core aperture each time a single turn is added to the coil . As a consequence , toroidal transformers rated more than a few kVA are uncommon . Small distribution transformers may achieve some of the benefits of a toroidal core by splitting it and forcing it open , then inserting a bobbin containing primary and secondary windings . 
 = = = = Air cores = = = = 
 A physical core is not an absolute requisite and a functioning transformer can be produced simply by placing the windings near each other , an arrangement termed an ' air @-@ core ' transformer . The air which comprises the magnetic circuit is essentially lossless , and so an air @-@ core transformer eliminates loss due to hysteresis in the core material . The leakage inductance is inevitably high , resulting in very poor regulation , and so such designs are unsuitable for use in power distribution . They have however very high bandwidth , and are frequently employed in radio @-@ frequency applications , for which a satisfactory coupling coefficient is maintained by carefully overlapping the primary and secondary windings . They 're also used for resonant transformers such as Tesla coils where they can achieve reasonably low loss in spite of the high leakage inductance . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The conducting material used for the windings depends upon the application , but in all cases the individual turns must be electrically insulated from each other to ensure that the current travels throughout every turn . For small power and signal transformers , in which currents are low and the potential difference between adjacent turns is small , the coils are often wound from enamelled magnet wire , such as <unk> wire . Larger power transformers operating at high voltages may be wound with copper rectangular strip conductors insulated by oil @-@ impregnated paper and blocks of <unk> . 
 High @-@ frequency transformers operating in the tens to hundreds of kilohertz often have windings made of braided <unk> wire to minimize the skin @-@ effect and proximity effect losses . Large power transformers use multiple @-@ stranded conductors as well , since even at low power frequencies non @-@ uniform distribution of current would otherwise exist in high @-@ current windings . Each strand is individually insulated , and the strands are arranged so that at certain points in the winding , or throughout the whole winding , each portion occupies different relative positions in the complete conductor . The transposition <unk> the current flowing in each strand of the conductor , and reduces eddy current losses in the winding itself . The stranded conductor is also more flexible than a solid conductor of similar size , aiding manufacture . 
 The windings of signal transformers minimize leakage inductance and stray capacitance to improve high @-@ frequency response . <unk> are split into sections , and those sections interleaved between the sections of the other winding . 
 Power @-@ frequency transformers may have taps at intermediate points on the winding , usually on the higher voltage winding side , for voltage adjustment . Taps may be manually reconnected , or a manual or automatic switch may be provided for changing taps . Automatic on @-@ load tap changers are used in electric power transmission or distribution , on equipment such as arc furnace transformers , or for automatic voltage regulators for sensitive loads . Audio @-@ frequency transformers , used for the distribution of audio to public address loudspeakers , have taps to allow adjustment of impedance to each speaker . A center @-@ tapped transformer is often used in the output stage of an audio power amplifier in a push @-@ pull circuit . Modulation transformers in AM transmitters are very similar . 
 Dry @-@ type transformer winding insulation systems can be either of standard open @-@ wound ' dip @-@ and @-@ bake ' construction or of higher quality designs that include vacuum pressure impregnation ( VPI ) , vacuum pressure encapsulation ( <unk> ) , and cast coil encapsulation processes . In the VPI process , a combination of heat , vacuum and pressure is used to thoroughly seal , bind , and eliminate entrained air voids in the winding polyester resin insulation coat layer , thus increasing resistance to corona . <unk> windings are similar to VPI windings but provide more protection against environmental effects , such as from water , dirt or corrosive <unk> , by multiple dips including typically in terms of final epoxy coat . 
 = = = Cooling = = = 
 To place the cooling problem in perspective , the accepted rule of thumb is that the life expectancy of insulation in all electrics , including all transformers , is halved for about every 7 ° C to 10 ° C increase in operating temperature , this life expectancy halving rule holding more narrowly when the increase is between about 7 ° C to 8 ° C in the case of transformer winding cellulose insulation . 
 Small dry @-@ type and liquid @-@ immersed transformers are often self @-@ cooled by natural convection and radiation heat dissipation . As power ratings increase , transformers are often cooled by forced @-@ air cooling , forced @-@ oil cooling , water @-@ cooling , or combinations of these . Large transformers are filled with transformer oil that both cools and insulates the windings . Transformer oil is a highly refined mineral oil that cools the windings and insulation by circulating within the transformer tank . The mineral oil and paper insulation system has been extensively studied and used for more than 100 years . It is estimated that 50 % of power transformers will survive 50 years of use , that the average age of failure of power transformers is about 10 to 15 years , and that about 30 % of power transformer failures are due to insulation and overloading failures . Prolonged operation at elevated temperature degrades insulating properties of winding insulation and dielectric coolant , which not only shortens transformer life but can ultimately lead to catastrophic transformer failure . With a great body of empirical study as a guide , transformer oil testing including dissolved gas analysis provides valuable maintenance information . This underlines the need to monitor , model , forecast and manage oil and winding conductor insulation temperature conditions under varying , possibly difficult , power loading conditions . 
 Building regulations in many jurisdictions require indoor liquid @-@ filled transformers to either use dielectric fluids that are less flammable than oil , or be installed in fire @-@ resistant rooms . Air @-@ cooled dry transformers can be more economical where they eliminate the cost of a fire @-@ resistant transformer room . 
 The tank of liquid filled transformers often has radiators through which the liquid coolant circulates by natural convection or fins . Some large transformers employ electric fans for forced @-@ air cooling , pumps for forced @-@ liquid cooling , or have heat exchangers for water @-@ cooling . An oil @-@ immersed transformer may be equipped with a Buchholz relay , which , depending on severity of gas accumulation due to internal arcing , is used to either alarm or de @-@ energize the transformer . Oil @-@ immersed transformer installations usually include fire protection measures such as walls , oil containment , and fire @-@ suppression sprinkler systems . 
 <unk> biphenyls have properties that once favored their use as a dielectric coolant , though concerns over their environmental persistence led to a widespread ban on their use . Today , non @-@ toxic , stable silicone @-@ based oils , or fluorinated hydrocarbons may be used where the expense of a fire @-@ resistant liquid offsets additional building cost for a transformer vault . PCBs for new equipment were banned in 1981 and in 2000 for use in existing equipment in United Kingdom Legislation enacted in Canada between 1977 and 1985 essentially bans PCB use in transformers manufactured in or imported into the country after 1980 , the maximum allowable level of PCB contamination in existing mineral oil transformers being 50 ppm . 
 Some transformers , instead of being liquid @-@ filled , have their windings enclosed in sealed , pressurized tanks and cooled by nitrogen or sulfur hexafluoride gas . 
 Experimental power transformers in the 500 ‐ to ‐ 1 @,@ 000 kVA range have been built with liquid nitrogen or helium cooled superconducting windings , which eliminates winding losses without affecting core losses . 
 = = = Insulation drying = = = 
 Construction of oil @-@ filled transformers requires that the insulation covering the windings be thoroughly dried of residual moisture before the oil is introduced . Drying is carried out at the factory , and may also be required as a field service . Drying may be done by circulating hot air around the core , or by vapor @-@ phase drying ( VPD ) where an evaporated solvent transfers heat by condensation on the coil and core . 
 For small transformers , resistance heating by injection of current into the windings is used . The heating can be controlled very well , and it is energy efficient . The method is called low @-@ frequency heating ( <unk> ) since the current used is at a much lower frequency than that of the power grid , which is normally 50 or 60 Hz . A lower frequency reduces the effect of inductance , so the voltage required can be reduced . The <unk> drying method is also used for service of older transformers . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Larger transformers are provided with high @-@ voltage insulated bushings made of polymers or porcelain . A large bushing can be a complex structure since it must provide careful control of the electric field gradient without letting the transformer leak oil . 
 = = Classification parameters = = 
 Transformers can be classified in many ways , such as the following : 
 Power capacity : From a fraction of a volt @-@ ampere ( VA ) to over a thousand MVA . 
 Duty of a transformer : Continuous , short @-@ time , intermittent , periodic , varying . 
 Frequency range : Power @-@ frequency , audio @-@ frequency , or radio @-@ frequency . 
 Voltage class : From a few volts to hundreds of kilovolts . 
 Cooling type : Dry and liquid @-@ immersed – self @-@ cooled , forced air @-@ cooled ; liquid @-@ immersed – forced oil @-@ cooled , water @-@ cooled . 
 Circuit application : Such as power supply , impedance matching , output voltage and current stabilizer or circuit isolation . 
 Utilization : Pulse , power , distribution , rectifier , arc furnace , amplifier output , etc .. 
 Basic magnetic form : Core form , shell form . 
 Constant @-@ potential transformer descriptor : Step @-@ up , step @-@ down , isolation . 
 General winding configuration : By EIC vector group – various possible two @-@ winding combinations of the phase designations delta , wye or star , and zigzag or interconnected star ; other – <unk> , Scott @-@ T , zigzag grounding transformer winding . 
 <unk> phase @-@ shift winding configuration : 2 @-@ winding , 6 @-@ pulse ; 3 @-@ winding , 12 @-@ pulse ; . . . n @-@ winding , [ n @-@ 1 ] * 6 @-@ pulse ; polygon ; etc .. 
 = = Types = = 
 Various specific electrical application designs require a variety of transformer types . Although they all share the basic characteristic transformer principles , they are customize in construction or electrical properties for certain installation requirements or circuit conditions . 
 <unk> : Transformer in which part of the winding is common to both primary and secondary circuits . 
 Capacitor voltage transformer : Transformer in which capacitor divider is used to reduce high voltage before application to the primary winding . 
 Distribution transformer , power transformer : International standards make a distinction in terms of distribution transformers being used to distribute energy from transmission lines and networks for local consumption and power transformers being used to transfer electric energy between the generator and distribution primary circuits . 
 Phase angle regulating transformer : A specialised transformer used to control the flow of real power on three @-@ phase electricity transmission networks . 
 Scott @-@ T transformer : Transformer used for phase transformation from three @-@ phase to two @-@ phase and vice versa . 
 <unk> transformer : Any transformer with more than one phase . 
 Grounding transformer : Transformer used for grounding three @-@ phase circuits to create a neutral in a three wire system , using a wye @-@ delta transformer , or more commonly , a zigzag grounding winding . 
 Leakage transformer : Transformer that has loosely coupled windings . 
 Resonant transformer : Transformer that uses resonance to generate a high secondary voltage . 
 Audio transformer : Transformer used in audio equipment . 
 Output transformer : Transformer used to match the output of a valve amplifier to its load . 
 Instrument transformer : Potential or current transformer used to accurately and safely represent voltage , current or phase position of high voltage or high power circuits . 
 Pulse transformer : Specialized small @-@ signal transformer used to transmit digital signaling while providing electrical isolation , commonly used in Ethernet computer networks as <unk> @-@ T , <unk> @-@ T and <unk> @-@ T. 
 = = Applications = = 
 Transformers are used to increase ( or step @-@ up ) voltage before transmitting electrical energy over long distances through wires . Wires have resistance which loses energy through joule heating at a rate corresponding to square of the current . By transforming power to a higher voltage transformers enable economical transmission of power and distribution . Consequently , transformers have shaped the electricity supply industry , permitting generation to be located remotely from points of demand . All but a tiny fraction of the world 's electrical power has passed through a series of transformers by the time it reaches the consumer . 
 Transformers are also used extensively in electronic products to decrease ( or step @-@ down ) the supply voltage to a level suitable for the low voltage circuits they contain . The transformer also electrically isolates the end user from contact with the supply voltage . 
 Signal and audio transformers are used to couple stages of amplifiers and to match devices such as microphones and record players to the input of amplifiers . Audio transformers allowed telephone circuits to carry on a two @-@ way conversation over a single pair of wires . A <unk> transformer converts a signal that is referenced to ground to a signal that has balanced voltages to ground , such as between external cables and internal circuits . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery of induction = = = 
 Electromagnetic induction , the principle of the operation of the transformer , was discovered independently by Michael Faraday in 1831 , Joseph Henry in 1832 , and others . The relationship between EMF and magnetic flux is an equation now known as Faraday 's law of induction : 
 <formula> . 
 where <formula> is the magnitude of the EMF in Volts and <unk> is the magnetic flux through the circuit in <unk> . 
 Preceded by Francesco <unk> in 1830 , Faraday performed early experiments on induction between coils of wire , including winding a pair of coils around an iron ring , thus creating the first toroidal closed @-@ core transformer . However he only applied individual pulses of current to his transformer , and never discovered the relation between the turns ratio and EMF in the windings . 
 = = = Induction coils = = = 
 The first type of transformer to see wide use was the induction coil , invented by Rev. Nicholas Callan of Maynooth College , Ireland in 1836 . He was one of the first researchers to realize the more turns the secondary winding has in relation to the primary winding , the larger the induced secondary EMF will be . Induction coils evolved from scientists ' and inventors ' efforts to get higher voltages from batteries . Since batteries produce direct current ( DC ) rather than AC , induction coils relied upon vibrating electrical contacts that regularly interrupted the current in the primary to create the flux changes necessary for induction . Between the 1830s and the 1870s , efforts to build better induction coils , mostly by trial and error , slowly revealed the basic principles of transformers . 
 = = = First alternating current transformers = = = 
 By the 1870s , efficient generators producing alternating current ( AC ) were available , and it was found AC could power an induction coil directly , without an interrupter . 
 In 1876 , Russian engineer Pavel <unk> invented a lighting system based on a set of induction coils where the primary windings were connected to a source of AC . The secondary windings could be connected to several ' electric candles ' ( arc lamps ) of his own design . The coils <unk> employed functioned essentially as transformers . 
 In 1878 , the Ganz factory , Budapest , Hungary , began equipment for electric lighting and , by 1883 , had installed over fifty systems in Austria @-@ Hungary . Their AC systems used arc and incandescent lamps , generators , and other equipment . 
 Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs first exhibited a device with an open iron core called a ' secondary generator ' in London in 1882 , then sold the idea to the Westinghouse company in the United States . They also exhibited the invention in Turin , Italy in 1884 , where it was adopted for an electric lighting system . However , the efficiency of their open @-@ core bipolar apparatus remained very low . 
 = = = Early series circuit transformer distribution = = = 
 Induction coils with open magnetic circuits are inefficient at transferring power to loads . Until about 1880 , the paradigm for AC power transmission from a high voltage supply to a low voltage load was a series circuit . Open @-@ core transformers with a ratio near 1 : 1 were connected with their primaries in series to allow use of a high voltage for transmission while presenting a low voltage to the lamps . The inherent flaw in this method was that turning off a single lamp ( or other electric device ) affected the voltage supplied to all others on the same circuit . Many adjustable transformer designs were introduced to compensate for this problematic characteristic of the series circuit , including those employing methods of adjusting the core or bypassing the magnetic flux around part of a coil . Efficient , practical transformer designs did not appear until the 1880s , but within a decade , the transformer would be instrumental in the War of Currents , and in seeing AC distribution systems triumph over their DC counterparts , a position in which they have remained dominant ever since . 
 = = = Closed @-@ core transformers and parallel power distribution = = = 
 In the autumn of 1884 , Károly <unk> , Ottó Bláthy and Miksa <unk> ( ZBD ) , three engineers associated with the Ganz factory , had determined that open @-@ core devices were impracticable , as they were incapable of reliably regulating voltage . In their joint 1885 patent applications for novel transformers ( later called ZBD transformers ) , they described two designs with closed magnetic circuits where copper windings were either a ) wound around iron wire ring core or b ) surrounded by iron wire core . The two designs were the first application of the two basic transformer constructions in common use to this day , which can as a class all be termed as either core form or shell form ( or alternatively , core type or shell type ) , as in a ) or b ) , respectively ( see images ) . The Ganz factory had also in the autumn of 1884 made delivery of the world 's first five high @-@ efficiency AC transformers , the first of these units having been shipped on September 16 , 1884 . This first unit had been manufactured to the following specifications : 1 @,@ 400 W , 40 Hz , 120 : 72 V , 11 @.@ 6 : 19 @.@ 4 A , ratio 1 @.@ 67 : 1 , one @-@ phase , shell form . 
 In both designs , the magnetic flux linking the primary and secondary windings traveled almost entirely within the confines of the iron core , with no intentional path through air ( see Toroidal cores below ) . The new transformers were 3 @.@ 4 times more efficient than the open @-@ core bipolar devices of Gaulard and Gibbs . The ZBD patents included two other major interrelated innovations : one concerning the use of parallel connected , instead of series connected , utilization loads , the other concerning the ability to have high turns ratio transformers such that the supply network voltage could be much higher ( initially 1 @,@ 400 to 2 @,@ 000 V ) than the voltage of utilization loads ( 100 V initially preferred ) . When employed in parallel connected electric distribution systems , closed @-@ core transformers finally made it technically and economically feasible to provide electric power for lighting in homes , businesses and public spaces . Bláthy had suggested the use of closed cores , <unk> had suggested the use of parallel shunt connections , and <unk> had performed the experiments ; 
 Transformers today are designed on the principles discovered by the three engineers . They also popularized the word ' transformer ' to describe a device for altering the EMF of an electric current , although the term had already been in use by 1882 . In 1886 , the ZBD engineers designed , and the Ganz factory supplied electrical equipment for , the world 's first power station that used AC generators to power a parallel connected common electrical network , the steam @-@ powered Rome @-@ <unk> power plant . 
 Although George Westinghouse had bought Gaulard and Gibbs ' patents in 1885 , the Edison Electric Light Company held an option on the US rights for the ZBD transformers , requiring Westinghouse to pursue alternative designs on the same principles . He assigned to William Stanley the task of developing a device for commercial use in United States . Stanley 's first patented design was for induction coils with single cores of soft iron and adjustable gaps to regulate the EMF present in the secondary winding ( see image ) . This design was first used commercially in the US in 1886 but Westinghouse was intent on improving the Stanley design to make it ( unlike the ZBD type ) easy and cheap to produce . 
 Westinghouse , Stanley and associates soon developed an easier to manufacture core , consisting of a stack of thin ' E ‑ shaped ' iron plates , insulated by thin sheets of paper or other insulating material . <unk> copper coils could then be slid into place , and straight iron plates laid in to create a closed magnetic circuit . Westinghouse applied for a patent for the new low @-@ cost design in December 1886 ; it was granted in July 1887 . 
 = = = Other early transformer designs = = = 
 In 1889 , Russian @-@ born engineer Mikhail <unk> @-@ <unk> developed the first three @-@ phase transformer at the Allgemeine <unk> @-@ Gesellschaft ( ' General Electricity Company ' ) in Germany . 
 In 1891 , Nikola Tesla invented the Tesla coil , an air @-@ cored , dual @-@ tuned resonant transformer for producing very high voltages at high frequency . 
 = Jeff Hanneman = 
 Jeffrey John " Jeff " Hanneman ( January 31 , 1964 – May 2 , 2013 ) was an American musician , best known as a founding member of the American thrash metal band Slayer . Hanneman contributed both lyrical and musical material to every Slayer album and wrote the songs " Raining Blood " , " War Ensemble , " " South of Heaven , " " Seasons in the Abyss , " and " Angel of Death , " all of which have been played at almost every live Slayer performance after their respective compositions . He had his own signature guitar , the ESP Jeff Hanneman Signature model . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hanneman was born January 31 , 1964 , in Oakland , California , and grew up in Long Beach in a family containing several war veterans : his father fought in Normandy during World War II and his brothers in Vietnam , making warfare a common conversation topic at the dinner table . War films were popular on TV at the time , and Hanneman often joined his brothers in constructing and coloring tank and plane models . His interest in warfare and military history has been attributed to his upbringing . 
 In a 2009 interview with Decibel magazine , he stated his father is German , but fought for the Allied side in World War II . In the same interview , he also goes into detail of what district of Germany his father and grandparents hail from . His grandfather was fluent in German . 
 Hanneman was introduced to heavy metal music as a child through his older sister Mary , when she was listening to Black Sabbath at her house . Once he reached high school , he discovered hardcore punk , which had a significant influence on his style and attitude . 
 = = = Slayer = = = 
 In 1981 Hanneman , who was working as a telemarketer at the time , met Kerry King , when King was auditioning for a southern rock band called " Ledger " . King remembered : " As I was leaving , I saw Jeff just kinda standing around playing guitar , and he was playing stuff that I was into , like Def Leppard 's ' Wasted ' and AC / DC and Priest " . After the try @-@ out session , the two guitarists started talking and playing Iron Maiden and Judas Priest songs . Slayer was born when King asked " Why don 't we start our own band ? " , to which Hanneman replied " ... Fuck yeah ! " . 
 Hanneman stated that he was playing guitar " for like a month " by the time he met King and put an effort into improving his skills after watching him play . Hanneman , who was heavily influenced by hardcore punk music , got the other members into the genre , leading Slayer into a faster and more aggressive approach . The band 's drummer Dave Lombardo asserted that his hardcore influences pushed him to play faster , contributing to shape his drumming style . 
 In 1984 , Hanneman , Lombardo and Suicidal Tendencies guitarist Rocky George had a brief hardcore punk side project called " Pap Smear " – the band had many tracks and was due to start recording when Hanneman was advised to avoid the side project by Slayer 's producer , Rick Rubin , who is quoted as saying " Ahhhh , don 't do it , man – this is the kind of thing that breaks bands up ! " and Hanneman took Rubin 's advice . Only a demo was recorded , consisting of Hanneman on vocals and bass , Lombardo on drums and George on guitar . Later two of the songs were re @-@ recorded on Slayer 's 1996 album Undisputed Attitude . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 In early 2011 , Hanneman contracted necrotizing fasciitis . Reports linked this illness with a spider bite he claimed to have received while in a friend 's hot tub . 
 In light of his illness and Slayer 's upcoming participation in the Australian Soundwave Festival tour that was set to begin on February 26 , 2011 , the band made the decision to play the dates without Hanneman , and on February 16 , 2011 , brought on Gary Holt ( guitarist of the band Exodus ) to fill in for him . Pat O 'Brien joined as Slayer 's temporary second guitarist when Holt left the tour to play with Exodus . In 2012 , bandmate Tom Araya announced a recovery from the disease . However , later in February 2013 , Kerry King revealed continuing health problems that kept Hanneman from working . 
 Hanneman died of liver failure on May 2 , 2013 , in a Southern California hospital near his home . On May 9 , 2013 , the official cause of death was announced as alcohol @-@ related cirrhosis . Hanneman and his family had apparently been unaware of the extent of the condition until shortly before his death . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1989 , Hanneman married Kathryn in Las Vegas . They had met in 1983 before the release of the debut album Show No Mercy , during a Slayer show in Buena Park , California . The couple had no children and lived in Los Angeles . Kathryn stayed at home when Slayer toured ; Hanneman claimed to prefer this , having said that when he came home , she was " all brand new again . " Kathryn only toured with the band twice in twenty years . 
 Hanneman was a reserved person when he was offstage . Unlike the other members , he was very selective in socializing and rarely gave interviews . As vocalist / bassist Araya said : " If he didn 't like you , he wouldn 't hang with you . " Hanneman was a reformed cocaine and pill abuser , much like Araya . They decided to quit when they realized " this can lead to only death or something , this is going too far . " Hanneman was a long @-@ time fan of the Oakland Raiders and the Los Angeles Kings . 
 = = German history = = 
 Hanneman 's interest in German war medals and Nazi Germany was illustrated by many of his lyrics . Those interests in the Wehrmacht and Waffen @-@ SS began with medals given to him by his father , including some taken from a dead German soldier . His most prized medal was his Knight 's Cross , which he had bought from a Slayer fan for $ 1000 . While touring with Motörhead , Hanneman discovered Motörhead vocalist Lemmy 's interest in medals , and the two discussed medal designs , weapons and tactics used by the Wehrmacht . 
 Hanneman 's lyrics for the song " Angel of Death " led to accusations of Slayer being Nazi sympathizers . Hanneman defended himself with " nothing I put in the lyrics that says necessarily he ( Josef Mengele ) was a bad man , because to me – well , isn 't that obvious ? I shouldn 't have to tell you that . " The band has stated numerous times that they are not Nazis and do not condone Nazism . 
 = = Influences and style = = 
 Hanneman 's major influences included hard rock and heavy metal bands like Led Zeppelin , Iron Maiden , Judas Priest , Black Sabbath , Aerosmith and hardcore punk acts such as Wasted Youth , Minor Threat , Dead Kennedys , Black Flag , T.S.O.L. , which led to Slayer 's 1996 album Undisputed Attitude . Hanneman 's and King 's dual guitar solos have been called " wildly chaotic , " and " twisted genius " . Early albums , such as Hell Awaits and Reign in Blood , featured a " wailing style " and " demented soloing often mimicking the screams of the song 's victims . " South of Heaven featured " more technical " guitar riffs , utilizing the aforementioned tremolo picking and down @-@ picked notes , improving musicianship while retaining a melodic sense . Both Hanneman and King were ranked # 10 in Guitar World 's " 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Guitarists of All Time . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Hanneman 's guitar work had a notable impact on the heavy metal scene . Musicians like Robb Flynn ( Machine Head ) , Dino Cazares ( Fear Factory , Divine Heresy ) , Mille <unk> ( Kreator ) , Andreas Kisser ( Sepultura ) , Dan <unk> ( Anthrax , Nuclear Assault ) , Eric Hoffman ( Deicide , Amon ) , Trevor Peres ( Obituary ) , Mark Morton ( Lamb of God ) and Kelly Shaefer ( Atheist ) cited him as an influence on their playing and songwriting . Jeff Walker said that " Hanneman 's playing and riff writing and attitude has had a big impact on Carcass " . <unk> <unk> declared that " without Jeff Hanneman , there would be no System of a Down " . 
 John <unk> of Terrorizer magazine noted : " without Jeff Hanneman , Slayer certainly would not have created some of the most famous riffs in metal , which undoubtedly changed the entire genre " . According to Jeff Kitts of Guitar World , he " influenced a generation and changed the course of metal forever " . Alex Webster of Cannibal Corpse , who considers Hanneman his major influence as a composer , regarded him as " one of the greatest musicians and songwriters in metal " and Alexi Laiho of Children of Bodom described him as " one of the fathers of metal " . 
 Alex Skolnick of Testament asserted that he " wrote some of the best riffs of all @-@ time " and " he impacted music in such a way that an entire genre will never be the same " . According to Corey Taylor of Slipknot and Stone Sour , Hanneman is " one of the most underrated writers and underrated players that ever was " while Slash of Guns n ' Roses and Velvet Revolver defined him " the king of thrash / speed metal guitar " . 
 = = Lyrics and music = = 
 Hanneman wrote the music for most of the band 's fan favorites , songs such as " Angel of Death " , " Raining Blood " , " Die by the Sword " , " South of Heaven " , " War Ensemble " , " Postmortem " , " Dead Skin Mask " and " Seasons in the Abyss " , which have all become staples for live performance at Slayer shows . Hanneman 's favorite album was Reign in Blood , and he enjoyed performing the songs " Raining Blood " and " Angel of Death . " He contributed lyrics and music to every Slayer album , having formed a music and lyric writing partnership with Araya , which sometimes overshadowed King 's creative input . 
 When writing new material , the band writes the music before the lyrics . Hanneman often composed riffs at his house , using a 24 @-@ track and a drum machine and then by gathering opinions from the other band members ; King and Lombardo made suggestions of alterations . The band will play the riff to get the basic song structure , and then figure out where the lyrics and solos go . Hanneman stated that writing lyrics and music is a " free for all " ; " It 's all just whoever comes up with what . Sometimes I 'll be more on a roll and I 'll have more stuff , same with Kerry – it 's whoever 's hot , really . Anybody can write anything ; if it 's good we use it , if not we don 't . " 
 = = Equipment = = 
 In Slayer 's early days , Hanneman used a black Gibson Les Paul modified with a Kahler Pro tremolo and a Joe Barden Two / Tone <unk> bridge pickup during the Show No Mercy and Hell Awaits era . In mid 1985 he began playing B.C. Rich , notably a Rich Bich model he bought off his band colleague Kerry King , he subsequently applied various graphics to . His first Bich had a 3x3 headstock , chrome hardware ( including the Kahler Pro bridge ) and the pickups were DiMarzio Super Distortions . He and King can both also be seen with a second set of BC Rich 's around 1986 @-@ 1987 , which had 6 @-@ in @-@ line <unk> , black hardware and DiMarzio pickups . More rarely he also used a BC Rich <unk> model . From 1987 he was seen using a custom made BC Rich Gunslinger with similar specs as his ' <unk> ' 87 era Bich , he shortly after had the pickups replaced with two active EMG @-@ 81 <unk> . In 1988 he began playing the famous Jackson Soloist that he would use constantly as his main guitar for songs played in E @-@ flat tuning until 2001 . It originally shipped to him with passive Jackson pickups ( probably a J @-@ 50 and J @-@ 80 ) and a JE @-@ 1200 mid @-@ boost circuit , but were soon changed for EMG @-@ 81 pickups as well . Around 1990 @-@ 1991 Hanneman began using ESP guitars , he mostly used as backup for this Jackson Soloist and other tunings . He had his own signature model made , based on the specs of his original Jackson Soloist . When touring , Hanneman carried six guitars due to the different tunings he utilized . Most albums such as Haunting the Chapel – Divine Intervention and World Painted Blood have E @-@ flat tuning . However , albums such as Diabolus in Musica – Christ Illusion feature alternate tunings such as Drop B and utilizing seven string guitars . The first album , Show No Mercy , was recorded in standard tuning , while live performances of those songs were played in E @-@ flat since about 1984 . 
 = = = Guitars = = = 
 ESP Jeff Hanneman Signature model 
 Jackson Custom Shop Soloist 
 EMG 81 / 85 Pickups with EMG SPC Mid @-@ Boost circuit 
 Kahler Pro bridges 
 Dunlop <unk> Strings 
 D 'Addario <unk> Strings ( earlier ) 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Shure Wireless System 
 Eventide <unk> <unk> 
 Yamaha SPX @-@ 90 Effects Processor 
 <unk> Super C <unk> 
 MXR Smart Gate 
 BOSS <unk> @-@ 10 ( 10 band EQ ) 
 = = = Amplification = = = 
 Marshall <unk> <unk> amplifiers 
 Marshall <unk> 1960 Cabinets , later <unk> Speaker Cabinet , supposedly loaded with <unk> <unk> @-@ 75 Speakers 
 = = Discography = = 
 1983 : Show No Mercy 
 1984 : Haunting the Chapel 
 1985 : Hell Awaits 
 1986 : Reign in Blood 
 1988 : South of Heaven 
 1990 : Seasons in the Abyss 
 1994 : Divine Intervention 
 1996 : Undisputed Attitude 
 1998 : Diabolus in Musica 
 2001 : God Hates Us All 
 2006 : Christ Illusion 
 2009 : World Painted Blood 
 2015 : Repentless ( writing credit " Piano Wire " ) 
 = Robert McLachlan ( cinematographer ) = 
 Robert McLachlan is a Canadian cinematographer . A successful cyclist in his youth , McLachlan quit the sport to take up cinematography , and entered the field after studying at Simon Fraser University , McLachlan was mentored by Richard <unk> . His professional career began with documentary work for Greenpeace , before he became involved in both television and feature films ; his work has subsequently earned him several industry awards and award nominations . 
 McLachlan , who was inspired by both his father 's photography and his own appreciation for the films Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and Walkabout to choose his career path , would go on to find recognition as the chief cinematographer for the television series Millennium , for which he was scouted specifically . McLachlan 's style on this series led to several industry awards and briefly became popular in the medium , as well as leading him directly to future work on Game of Thrones . He founded the documentary production company Omni Film Productions in the 1970s , later selling his share of the company . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 In his youth , McLachlan was an avid cyclist , accrediting this to the fact that his home town Vancouver was not cold enough for ponds to freeze over to play ice hockey on . During his teenage years , he trained upwards of six hours a day , and won several national championships in the sport . He qualified to represent Canada in the 1976 Summer Olympics , but the lack of funding for cycling in North America at the time would have necessitated him funding his own journey and leaving school to do so ; McLachlan opted instead to remain in education and focus on his interest in photography . 
 McLachlan first became interested in cinematography after viewing the 1969 film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid ; Nicolas Roeg 's work on the 1971 film Walkabout further cemented his interest in the field . McLachlan was also motivated by his father , who was an avid photographer . An early school assignment to create a Super 8 film project , for which he received an A grade , also proved a formative influence . 
 McLachlan studied fine art at the University of British Columbia for a year , before changing courses to attend classes at Simon Fraser University 's film department . McLachlan 's education focussed on the documentary style of John Grierson ; however , when he began work in 1987 , he was mentored by Richard <unk> . McLachlan also cites influences outside the field of cinematography , drawing influence from the chiaroscuro , Dutch art and pre @-@ Raphaelite movements of visual art , and the works of Andrew Wyeth and Georges de La Tour in particular . 
 = = Career = = 
 Having graduated , McLachlan and Michael <unk> founded the production company Omni Film Productions in 1979 , and began to work with Greenpeace , filming documentary footage on a range of subjects . McLachlan narrowly avoided trouble on several of these shoots , finding himself arrested for filming too close to an Exxon oil tanker and scarcely missing being assaulted by trophy hunters in British Columbia . McLachlan would later sell his stake in Omni , but remains proud of their documentary work . At the time , McLachlan was unsuccessful in joining an industry union , relegating his work to advertising and small @-@ scale productions ; his first union @-@ backed project was on the revival of the television series Sea Hunt . 
 McLachlan found success on the Fox television series Millennium , earning several awards for his work on the show . He was head @-@ hunted for the series by its creator Chris Carter , who had seen his work on the series Strange Luck . McLachlan was initially offered a position shooting Carter 's other active series , The X @-@ Files , then in its third season , but was unable to start work in time . He developed a distinctive style for the series , shooting it with desaturated colours and lighting scenes as though they were to be filmed in black and white ; he also made use of high @-@ intensity strobe lighting usually employed for advertising and macro cinematography . McLachlan has noted that this style briefly became popular after the series ' broadcast but that other cinematographers had difficulty adjusting to it . 
 Having worked on Millennium with director David Nutter , McLachlan was able to parley this connection into a role on the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones . McLachlan has called working on the show 's ten @-@ person cinematography team " a major logistical challenge " , noting the complexity of its out @-@ of @-@ sequence filming schedules as something unseen on a television series before . McLachlan has also worked on the programme Ray Donovan , and has based that series ' cinematography on both film noir aesthetics and <unk> of 1970s cinema , specifically citing The Long Goodbye , The Parallax View and All the President 's Men , as well as the work of Gordon Willis . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 McLachlan has been nominated for , and won , several awards over the course of his career . He has been nominated four times for the American Society of Cinematographers awards , three times for his work on the television series Millennium and once for the television film High Noon . He has also won several Canadian Society of Cinematographers awards , including wins for the films Willard and <unk> , as well as for several episodes of Millennium and The Lone Gunmen . McLachlan 's work on Game of Thrones received Emmy Award nominations in 2013 and 2015 , and a Canadian Society of Cinematographers award nomination in 2015 ; he was also nominated by the latter society for his cinematography on the series Ray Donovan . 
 = = Partial filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Otto Julius Zobel = 
 Otto Julius Zobel ( October 20 , 1887 – January 1970 ) was an electrical engineer who worked for the American Telephone & Telegraph Company ( AT & T ) in the early part of the 20th century . Zobel 's work on filter design was revolutionary and led , in conjunction with the work of John R. Carson , to significant commercial advances for AT & T in the field of frequency division multiplex ( FDM ) telephone transmissions . 
 Although much of Zobel 's work has been superseded by more modern filter designs , it remains the basis of filter theory and his papers are still referenced today . Zobel invented the m @-@ derived filter and the constant @-@ resistance filter , which remains in use . 
 Zobel and Carson helped to establish the nature of noise in electric circuits , concluding that — contrary to mainstream belief — it is not even theoretically possible to filter out noise entirely and that noise will always be a limiting factor in what is possible to transmit . Thus , they anticipated the later work of Claude Shannon , who showed how the theoretical information rate of a channel is related to the noise of the channel . 
 = = Life = = 
 Otto Julius Zobel was born on October 20 , 1887 in Ripon , Wisconsin . He first studied at Ripon College , where he received his BA in 1909 with a thesis on Theoretical and experimental treatment of electrical condensers . He later received a Distinguished Alumnus Award from Ripon . He then went to the University of Wisconsin and graduated with an MA in physics in 1910 . Zobel stayed at the University of Wisconsin as a physics instructor from 1910 to 1915 , and graduated with his PhD in 1914 ; his dissertation concerned " Thermal Conduction and Radiation " . This followed his 1913 co @-@ authoring of a book on the subject of geophysical thermodynamics . From 1915 to 1916 he taught physics at the University of Minnesota . Having moved to Maplewood , New Jersey , he joined AT & T in 1916 , where he worked on transmission techniques . In 1926 , still with the company , he moved to New York and in 1934 , he transferred to Bell Telephone Laboratories ( Bell Labs ) , the research organisation created jointly by AT & T and Western Electric a few years earlier . 
 The last of his prolific list of patents occurred for Bell Labs in the 1950s , by which time he was residing in Morristown , New Jersey . He died there in January 1970 . 
 = = Thermal conduction = = 
 Zobel 's early work on heat conduction was not pursued in his later career . There are , however , some interesting connections . Lord Kelvin in his early work on the transmission line derived the properties of the electric line by analogy with heat conduction . This is based on Fourier 's law and the Fourier conduction equation . Ingersoll and Zobel describe the work of Kelvin and Fourier in their book and Kelvin 's approach to the representation of transmission functions would consequently have been very familiar to Zobel . It is therefore no surprise that in Zobel 's paper on the electric wave filter a very similar representation is found for the transmission function of filters . 
 Solutions to the Fourier equation can be provided by Fourier series . Ingersoll and Zobel state that in many cases the calculation involved makes the solution " well @-@ nigh impossible " by analytical means . With modern technology such a calculation is trivially easy , but Ingersoll and Zobel recommend the use of harmonic analysers , which are the mechanical counterpart of today 's spectrum analysers . These machines add together mechanical oscillations of various frequencies , phases and amplitudes by combining them through a set of pulleys or springs ; one for each oscillator . The reverse process is also possible , driving the machine with the function and measuring the Fourier components as output . 
 = = Background to AT & T research = = 
 After the work of John R. Carson in 1915 it became clear that multiplexed telephone transmissions could be greatly improved by the use of single sideband suppressed carrier ( SSB ) transmission . Compared to basic amplitude modulation ( AM ) SSB has the advantage of half the bandwidth and a fraction of the power ( one sideband can have no more than 1 / 6 of the total power and would typically be a lot less ) . AM analysed in the frequency domain consists of a carrier and two sidebands . The carrier wave in AM represents the majority of the transmitted power but contains no information whatsoever . The two sidebands both contain identical information so only one is required , at least from an information transmission point of view . Up to this point filtering had been by simple tuned circuits . However , SSB required a flat response over the sideband of interest and maximum rejection of the other sideband with a very sharp transition between the two . As the idea was to put another ( completely different ) signal in the slot vacated by the unwanted sideband it was important that all traces of it were removed to prevent crosstalk . At the same time minimum distortion ( i.e. flat response ) is obviously desirable for the sideband being retained . This requirement led to a big research effort in the design of electric wave filters . 
 George A. Campbell and Zobel worked on this problem of extracting a single sideband from an amplitude @-@ modulated composite wave for use in multiplexing telephone channels and the related problem of extracting ( de @-@ multiplexing ) the signal at the far end of the transmission . 
 Initially , the <unk> pass range used was 200 Hz to 2500 Hz but later the International Telecommunication Union set a standard of 300 Hz to 3 @.@ 4 kHz with 4 kHz spacing . Thus the filtering was required to go from fully pass to fully stop in the space of 900 Hz . This standard in telephony is still in use today and had remained widespread until it began to be supplanted by digital techniques from the 1980s onwards . 
 Campbell had previously utilised the condition discovered in the work of Oliver Heaviside for lossless transmission to improve the frequency response of transmission lines using lumped component inductors ( loading coils ) . When Campbell started investigating electric wave filter design from 1910 , this previous work naturally led him to filters using ladder network topology using capacitors and inductors . Low @-@ pass , high @-@ pass and band @-@ pass filters were designed . Sharper cut @-@ offs and higher stop @-@ band rejection to any arbitrary design specification could be achieved merely by increasing the length of the ladder . The filter designs used by Campbell were described by Zobel as constant k filters although this was not a term used by Campbell himself . 
 = = Innovations = = 
 After Zobel arrived at the Engineering Department of AT & T he used his mathematical skills to further improve the design of electric wave filters . Carson and Zobel developed the mathematical method of analyzing the behavior of filters now known as the image method whereby the impedance and transmission parameters of each section are calculated as if it is part of an infinite chain of identical sections . 
 = = = Wave filters = = = 
 Zobel invented the m @-@ derived ( or m @-@ type ) filter section in 1920 , the distinguishing feature of this design being a pole of attenuation close to the filter cut @-@ off frequency . The result of this design is a filter response which falls very rapidly past the cut @-@ off frequency . To use a well known quaint engineer 's expression it " goes off like the side of a house " . A fast transition between pass @-@ band and stop @-@ band was , of course , one of the primary requirements for cramming as many telephone channels as possible into one cable . 
 One disadvantage of the m @-@ type section was that at frequencies past the pole of attenuation , the response of the filter started to increase again , reaching a peak somewhere in the stop @-@ band and then falling again . Zobel overcame this problem by designing hybrid filters using a mixture of constant k and m @-@ type sections . This gave Zobel the advantages of both : the fast transition of the m @-@ type and good stop @-@ band rejection of the constant k . 
 By 1921 Zobel had further perfected his composite filter designs . He was now using , in addition , m @-@ type half sections at the ends of his composite filters to improve the impedance matching of the filter to the source and the load , a technique in which he held a patent . The difficulty that he was trying to overcome was that the image impedance techniques being used to design filter sections only gave the mathematically predicted response if they were terminated in their respective image impedances . Technically , this was easy to do within the filter as it could always be arranged that adjacent filter sections had matching image impedances ( one of the characteristics of m @-@ type sections is that one side or the other of the m @-@ type section will have an image impedance identical to the equivalent constant k section ) . However , the terminating impedances are a different story . These are normally required to be resistive but the image impedance will be complex . Even worse , it is not even mathematically possible to construct a filter image impedance out of discrete components . The result of impedance mismatch is reflections and a degraded filter performance . Zobel found that a value of m = 0 @.@ 6 for the end half sections , while not mathematically exact , gave a good match to resistive terminations in the pass @-@ band . 
 Around 1923 , Zobel 's filter designs were reaching the peak of their complexity . He now had a filter section to which he had doubly applied the m @-@ derivation process resulting in filter sections which he called the mm ' -type . This had all the advantages of the previous m @-@ type , but more so . An even faster transition into the stop @-@ band and an even more constant characteristic impedance in the pass @-@ band . At the same time one side would match into the old m @-@ type , just as the m @-@ type could match into the k @-@ type . Because there were now two arbitrary parameters ( m and m ' ) that the filter designer could adjust , much better end matching half @-@ sections could be designed . A composite filter using these sections would have been the very best that could have been achieved at that time . However , the mm ' -type sections never became as widespread and well known as the m @-@ type sections , possibly because their greater complexity has deterred designers . They would have been inconvenient to implement with microwave technology and the increased count of components , especially wound components , made them more expensive to implement with conventional LC technology . Certainly , it is hard to find a textbook from any period which covers their design . 
 = = = Transmission line simulation = = = 
 Zobel directed much of his effort in the 1920s to constructing networks which could simulate transmission lines . These networks were derived from filter sections , which themselves had been derived from transmission line theory and the filters were used on transmission line signals . In turn , these artificial lines were used to develop and test better filter sections . Zobel used a design technique based on his theoretical discovery that the impedance looking into the end of a filter chain was practically the same ( within the limits of component tolerances ) as the theoretical impedance of an infinite chain after only a small number of sections had been added to the chain . These " image " impedances have a mathematical characterization impossible to construct simply out of discrete components , and can only ever be approximated . Zobel found that using these impedances constructed out of small filter chains as components in a greater network allowed him to build realistic line simulators . These were not in any sense intended as practical filters in the field , but rather the intention was to construct good controllable line simulators without having the inconvenience of miles of cable to contend with . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Zobel invented several filters whose defining characteristic was a constant resistance as the input impedance . The resistance remained constant through the pass band and the stop band . With these designs Zobel had completely solved the impedance matching problem . The main application of these sections has been not so much for filtering out unwanted frequencies , the k @-@ type and m @-@ type filters remained best for this , but rather to equalize the response in the pass band to a flat response . 
 Perhaps one of Zobel 's most fascinating inventions is the lattice filter section . This section is both constant resistance and flat response zero attenuation across the band , yet it is constructed out of inductors and capacitors . The only signal parameter it modifies is the phase of the signal at different frequencies . 
 = = = Impedance matching = = = 
 A common theme throughout Zobel 's work is the issue of impedance matching . The obvious approach to filter design is to design directly for the attenuation characteristics desired . With modern computing power , a brute force approach is possible and easy , simply incrementally adjusting each component while <unk> in an iterative process until the desired response is achieved . However , Zobel developed a more indirect line of attack . He realized very early on that mismatched impedances inevitably meant reflections , and reflections meant a loss of signal . Improving the impedance match , conversely , would automatically improve a filter 's pass @-@ band response . 
 This impedance matching approach not only led to better filters but the techniques developed could be used to construct circuits whose sole purpose was to match together two disparate impedances . Zobel continued to invent impedance matching networks throughout his career . During World War II he moved on to waveguide filters for use in the newly developed radar technology . Little was published during the war for obvious reasons but towards the end with Bell Labs in the 1950s , Zobel designs for sections to match physically different waveguide sizes appear . However , the circuit noted above which still bears Zobel 's name today , the constant @-@ resistance network , can be viewed as an impedance matching circuit and remains Zobel 's finest achievement in this regard . 
 = = Loudspeaker equalisation = = 
 The name of Zobel is , perhaps , most well known with regard to impedance compensation networks for loudspeakers . Clearly , his designs have applications in this field . However , none of Zobel 's patents or articles appear to discuss this topic . It is unclear whether he actually designed anything specifically for loudspeakers . The closest we get to this is where he speaks of impedance matching into a transducer , but here he is discussing a circuit to equalize a submarine cable , or in another instance where clearly he has in mind the hybrid transformer which terminates a line going into a telephone instrument on a phantom circuit . 
 = = Noise = = 
 While Carson led the way theoretically , Zobel was involved in the design of filters for the purpose of noise reduction on transmission systems . 
 = = = Background = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1920s and through to the 1930s , the thinking on noise was dominated by the radio engineers ' concern with external static . In modern terminology , this would include random ( thermal and shot ) noise but those concepts were relatively unknown and little understood at the time despite an early paper by Schottky in 1918 on shot noise . To the radio engineers of the time , static meant externally generated interference . The line of attack against noise from the radio engineers included developing directional antennae and moving to higher frequencies where the problem was known not to be so severe . 
 For telephone engineers , what was then called " fluctuating noise " , and would now be described as random noise , i.e. shot and thermal noise , was much more noticeable than with early radio systems . Carson broadened the radio engineers ' concept of signal @-@ to @-@ static ratio to a more general signal @-@ to @-@ noise ratio and introduced a figure of merit for noise . 
 = = = Impossibility of noise cancellation = = = 
 The radio engineers ' preoccupation with static and the techniques being used to reduce it led to the idea that noise could be totally eliminated by , in some way , compensating for it or canceling it out . The culmination of this viewpoint was expressed in a 1928 paper by Edwin Armstrong . This led to a famous retort by Carson in a subsequent paper , " Noise , like the poor , will always be with us " . Armstrong was technically in the wrong in this exchange , but in 1933 , ironically and paradoxically , went on to invent wide @-@ band FM which enormously improved the noise performance of radio by increasing the bandwidth . 
 Carson and Zobel in 1923 had conclusively shown that filtering cannot remove noise to the same degree as , say , interference from another station could be removed . To do this they had analyzed random noise in the frequency domain and postulated that it contains all frequencies in its spectrum . This was the first use of Fourier analysis to describe random noise and hence described it in terms of a spread of frequencies . Also first published in this paper was the concept of what we would now call band @-@ limited white noise . For Zobel this meant that characteristics of the receiving filter completely determine the figure of merit in the presence of white noise and that the filter design was key to achieving the optimum noise performance . 
 Although this work by Carson and Zobel was very early , it was not universally accepted that noise could be analyzed in the frequency domain in this way . For this reason , the aforementioned exchange between Carson and Armstrong was still possible years later . The precise mathematical relationship between noise power and bandwidth for random noise was finally determined by Harry Nyquist in 1928 thus giving a theoretical limit to what could be achieved by filtering . 
 This work on noise produced the concept , and led Zobel to pursue the design , of matched filters . This is the concept that the noise performance of the equipment is optimal when the filter is perfectly matched to the signal one is attempting to transmit and is the culmination of theoretical research into the application of removing noise by means of linear filters . This became important in the development of radar during the Second World War in which Zobel played a part . 
 = = Use of work in genetic programming research = = 
 Zobel 's work has recently found an application in research into genetic programming . The purpose of this research is to attempt to demonstrate that the results obtained from genetic programming are comparable to human achievements . Two of the measures that are used to determine whether a genetic programming result is human @-@ competitive are : 
 The result is a patented invention . 
 The result is equal to or better than a result that was considered an achievement in its field at the time of discovery . 
 One such problem set as a task for a genetic program was to design a crossover filter for woofer and tweeter loudspeakers . The output design was identical in topology to a design found in a patent of Zobel 's for a filter to separate multiplexed low and high frequencies on a transmission line . This was judged to be human @-@ comparable , not only because of the patent , but also because the high @-@ pass and low @-@ pass sections were " decomposed " as in Zobel 's design , but not specifically required to be so in the programs parameters . Whether or not Zobel 's filter design would be good for a hi @-@ fi system is another question . The design does not actually cross over , but rather , there is a gap between the two pass @-@ bands where the signal is not transmitted to either output . Essential for multiplexing , but not so desirable for sound reproduction . 
 A later genetic programming experiment produced a filter design which consisted of a chain of constant k sections terminated in an m @-@ type half section . This was also determined to have been a design patented by Zobel . 
 = The M + M 's Tour = 
 The M + M 's Tour was the sixth concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears , consisting of six brief shows at clubs in the United States . Spears expressed interested to tour again as early as February 2006 . She started rehearsing for a show at House of Blues venues in secret , and pulled out of a surprise performance on April 25 , 2007 , at Los Angeles nightclub Forty Deuce . After a marquee reading " The M + M 's " at the House of Blues in San Diego , California , appeared in late April 2007 , media sources identified the act as Spears , and the show quickly sold out . The tour marked the first time Spears performed live since The Onyx Hotel Tour in June 2004 . 
 The show , which ran 12 – 16 minutes in length , featured Spears accompanied by four female back @-@ up dancers performing choreographed dance numbers to shortened versions of five songs , including hits such as " ... Baby One More Time " and " Toxic " . During the performance of one song , a male audience member participated onstage . Spears ' vocals during the performance were lip @-@ synched . The shows received mixed reviews from critics and fans . Some said that Spears looked happy and in great shape , while others deemed the show as subpar . <unk> outside the San Diego venue sold tickets with a face value of $ 35 for prices between $ 200 and $ 500 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The shows took place against a backdrop of Spears ' life struggles the previous few years that had made her fodder for tabloid reports . These included a two @-@ day marriage , a stormy two @-@ year marriage and divorce and having two children , shaving her head , entering rehabilitation for substance abuse , and various run @-@ ins with the paparazzi . 
 In an interview with People in February 2006 , Spears explained that she was anxious to resume her career , saying , " This may sound weird , but I miss traveling . I miss the road , seeing different places and being with the dancers and having fun . That feeling of being on the stage , knowing it 's your best — I love that . I needed a break . I needed to be hungry again . " On April 26 , 2007 , Ivan Kane , the owner of Los Angeles nightclub Forty Deuce , told E ! News that Spears had pulled out of a surprise performance at the venue the previous night . Kane stated that during rehearsal , she was " looking very hot , with four backup dancers and [ she ] sang three songs . They ran through the set several times , the choreography was smokin ' , and she sounded great . " Marc Malkin of E ! News said that Spears thought she might need more time to prepare . He also reported that she was planning to tour House of Blues venues in the United States . Spears wanted to keep the rehearsals a secret , and did not even inform the owners of the different dance studios the reason for the preparation . In late April 2007 , a marquee reading " The M + M 's " appeared at the House of Blues in San Diego . Several gossip websites and local media sources identified the act as Spears , prompting the show to quickly sell out . On May 1 , 2007 , a front @-@ page story on The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune fueled the speculation . The same day , the doors opened at 19 : 00 PST ( 03 : 00 UTC ) , and Spears took the stage at 22 : 00 PST ( 06 : 00 UTC ) . It marked the first time Spears was on stage since her knee injury caused The Onyx Hotel Tour to be canceled in June 2004 . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The concert opened with Spears taking the stage accompanied by four blonde female dancers to perform a short version of " ... Baby One More Time " , wearing a silver beaded bra , a pleated white skirt and white boots . She wore a long brown wig to cover the head she had shaved two and a half months previously and appeared in physically good shape . ( By now her hair was about an inch long , and one of her dancers said of her hair without the wig , " It '  s getting longer and she looks beautiful . "  ) The show then segued into a flashy shortened version of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . Though while Spears performed the original choreography to " Slave " , the performance was compared to the style of the Pussycat Dolls . The dancers then left Spears alone onstage to perform a chair routine of " Breathe on Me " . They re @-@ entered with a male fan from the audience with them and Spears giving him a lap dance . Half way through the lap dance , Spears disappeared for a costume change leaving her dancers to continue the performance . She then reappeared in a hot pink bra , white fur coat and jean skirt to perform " Do Somethin ' " with Spears throwing air guitars to the crowd . The show then concluded with " Toxic " , which featured Spears and her dancers performing in a mix of Spears and Shakira dance styles . As the performance came to an end , Spears said " Thank you so much . These are my dancers " – her only words during the show – and left the stage . The show lasted around 12 – 16 minutes . 
 The first show in San Diego began two hours after the stated time . There was no live band for the shows ; Spears and the dancers performed to recorded tracks . Spears ' vocals during the show were also not live but rather were lip @-@ synched to the recording . At some points , she was chewing gum while performing . The lack of live singing became most prominent during the Orlando stop of the tour , when the CD to which Spears was miming began skipping during " Do Somethin ' " , reportedly caused some in the audience to start booing . By the Florida shows , Spears was up to four costume changes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Teri <unk> of MTV said that with " Her body newly toned and her smile beaming , she looked every bit like a woman who had emerged from her quarter @-@ life crisis stronger than yesterday . " She also said Spears performed with " a naughty , free @-@ spirited attitude " , as though she " had invited 900 friends to her dirty little dance party , and too bad for you if you couldn 't roll with the fun . " <unk> Pak , also from MTV stated the show was " no huge revelation " , explaining , " It was not the kind of show that says : ' She 's back . She 's going to come out with the biggest album of her career . ' Nor did it say that she 's lost forever and we 'll never see the old Britney back again . These are all really tiny baby steps . " Thomas K. Arnold of USA Today said the show " turned out to be more rehearsal than comeback " , although " all those post @-@ rehab workouts were worth the effort . " On May 2 , 2007 , scalpers outside the House of Blues in San Diego were selling tickets with a face value of $ 35 for prices between $ 200 and $ 500 . Chris Lee of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " her ' comeback ' – if you want to call it that – cemented Spears ' place as pop music 's reigning drama queen , capable of capturing worldwide tabloid headlines with a bare minimum of creative expenditure . " 
 Most of the shows sold out , although there were some empty seats for the Las Vegas one despite tickets being available cheaply on the secondary market . Fan reaction to the show was generally divided . Some fans attending the show were dissatisfied with its short length , with one quoted afterward as saying , " That was so disappointing . " Some fans were also disappointed by the performance quality , with one quoted as saying , " It looked like she lip @-@ synched her way through the whole thing . " Other fans were more accommodating , pleased to be seeing her in good health and appearance and with one quoted as saying , " Whatever , we love her . She 's amazing . " One group of female fans wore matching pink tops that said " Bald Ambition " on one side and " The Comeback 2007 " on the other . Jim Abbott of the Orlando Sentinel summed up some of the reaction by writing that fans at the tail end of the tour " knew that the show would be short . ... They also knew that she would be lip @-@ synching , but this wasn 't about music as much as it was about celebrity , loyalty and beating adversity . " 
 = = Setlist = = 
 " ... Baby One More Time " 
 " I 'm A Slave 4 U " 
 " Breathe on Me " 
 " Do Somethin ' " 
 " Toxic " 
 = = Shows = = 
 = Gateway Protection Programme = 
 The Gateway Protection Programme is a scheme operated by the British government in partnership with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) and co @-@ funded by the European Union ( EU ) , offering a legal route for a quota of UNHCR @-@ identified refugees to be resettled in the United Kingdom . Following a proposal by the British Home Secretary , David Blunkett , in October 2001 , the legal basis was established by the Nationality , Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the programme itself launched in March 2004 . Since its inception , the programme has enjoyed broad support from the UK 's main political parties . 
 The Gateway Protection Programme initially had a quota of 500 refugees per year , which was later increased to 750 , but the actual number of refugees resettled in most years has been fewer than the quota permitted . Liberian , Congolese , Sudanese , Burmese , Ethiopian , Mauritanian , Iraqi , Bhutanese , Eritrean , Palestinian , Sierra Leonean and Somali refugees have been resettled under the programme . Refugees have been resettled to a number of locations in England and Scotland . Of the 18 local authorities participating as resettlement locations by 2012 , eight are in the North West region of England and three in Yorkshire and Humberside . Evaluations of the programme have praised it as having a positive impact on the reception of refugees by local communities , but have also noted the difficulties these refugees have faced in securing employment . 
 = = Programme details = = 
 The programme is the UK 's " quota refugee " resettlement scheme . Refugees designated as particularly vulnerable by the UNHCR are assessed by the Home Office for eligibility under the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees . If they meet the eligibility criteria they are then brought to the UK and granted indefinite leave to remain . The International Organization for Migration ( IOM ) helps facilitate pre @-@ departure medical screening , counselling , dossier preparation , transport and immediate arrival assistance . Once in the UK , refugees are entered into a 12 @-@ month support programme intended to aid their integration . The programme has involved local authorities and NGOs including the British Red Cross , the International Rescue Committee , Migrant Helpline , Refugee Action , the Refugee Arrivals Project , the Refugee Council , Scottish Refugee Council and Refugee Support . These organisations formed the Resettlement Inter @-@ Agency Partnership at the planning stage of the programme , in order to pool their resources and form a partnership for the delivery of services to the resettled refugees . 
 The programme is distinct from and in addition to ordinary provisions for claiming asylum in the United Kingdom . Since 2008 , it has been co @-@ funded by the European Union , first through the European Refugee Fund and then through its successor , the Asylum , Migration and Integration Fund ( <unk> ) . Over the period 2009 – 14 , the Home Office provided £ 29 @.@ 97 million in funding and the EU £ 18 @.@ 67 million . Anna Musgrave of the Refugee Council argues that the programme " is rarely talked about and the Home Office , in the main , stay fairly quiet about it . " 
 = = History = = 
 The Gateway Protection Programme is not the first British refugee resettlement programme . Other , informal resettlement programmes include the Mandate Refugee Scheme , and the UK has also participated in the Ten or More Plan . The former is for so @-@ called " mandate " refugees who have been granted refugee status by UNHCR in third countries . To qualify for the scheme , refugees must have close ties to the UK and it must also be demonstrated that the UK is the most appropriate country for their resettlement . The Ten or More Plan , established by UNHCR in 1973 and administered in the UK by the British Red Cross , is for refugees requiring medical attention not available in their current location . During the 1990s , 2 @,@ 620 refugees were settled in the UK through these two programmes . In 2003 , the UK 's Ten or More Plan had a resettlement goal of 10 people and the Mandate Refugee Scheme 300 . Refugees have also been resettled through specific programmes following emergencies . For example , 42 @,@ 000 Ugandan Asians expelled from Uganda during 1972 – 74 , 22 @,@ 500 Vietnamese during 1979 – 92 , over 2 @,@ 500 Bosnians in the 1990s , and over 4 @,@ 000 Kosovars in 1999 . 
 A new resettlement programme was proposed by the British Home Secretary , David Blunkett in October 2001 , having been hinted at by the previous Home Secretary , Jack Straw , in a speech to the European Conference on Asylum in Lisbon in June 2000 . The legal basis for the programme 's funding was established by Section 59 of the Nationality , Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 . This act was passed by the House of Commons by 362 votes to 74 in June 2002 and by the House of Lords – at the ninth attempt , following concern about the introduction of measures allowing for the detention of asylum seekers in rural areas ) – in November 2002 . 
 The Gateway Protection Programme was subsequently established in March 2004 , with the first refugees arriving in the UK on 19 March . Initially , the programme quota was set at 500 per year . The British government has faced criticism from academics and practitioners over the small number of refugees it has resettled in comparison with other developed states . For example , in 2001 the countries with the largest quota schemes were the United States ( 80 @,@ 000 refugees ) , Canada ( 11 @,@ 000 ) and Australia ( 10 @,@ 000 ) . Initially , David Blunkett had intended to raise the quota to 1 @,@ 000 in the second year of the programme 's operation , but local councils ' reluctance to participate in the scheme meant that it was slow to take off . It has been argued that their reluctance showed that hostile attitudes towards asylum seekers had carried over to affect the most genuinely needy refugees . The quota remained at 500 per year until the 2008 / 09 financial year , when it was increased to 750 refugees per year . The number of refugees resettled under the scheme is small in comparison to the number of asylum seekers offered protection in the UK . For example , in 2013 , 17 @,@ 647 initial decisions on asylum claims were made by the Home Office , of which 5 @,@ 734 ( 32 @.@ 5 per cent ) determined the applicant to be a refugee and granted them asylum , 53 ( 0 @.@ 3 per cent ) granted humanitarian protection and 540 ( 3 @.@ 1 per cent ) granted discretionary leave . 11 @,@ 105 applications ( 62 @.@ 9 per cent ) were refused . Worldwide , there were 51 @.@ 2 million forcibly displaced people at the end of 2013 , 16 @.@ 7 million of whom were refugees . 
 The programme has been supported by the main British political parties at the national level since its inception , and there has also been support from councillors from each of the main parties at the local authority level . On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the scheme in 2014 , refugee groups and others praised it as a successful programme and called for it to be expanded , particularly in light of the Syrian refugee crisis . In early 2014 , Amnesty International and the Refugee Council campaigned for the government to offer resettlement or humanitarian protection to Syrian refugees above and beyond the Gateway quota of 750 per year , " to ensure that resettlement opportunities continue to be available to refugees from the rest of the world " . The anniversary of the programme was also the occasion of further criticism of the 750 quota , with some commentators arguing that this is mean @-@ spirited and continues to compare unfavourably with the refugee resettlement programmes of states including the United States , Canada and Australia . Others , such as academic Jonathan Darling , have been more skeptical about expanding the scheme , for fear that any such move will be accompanied by greater restrictions on the ability of people to claim asylum in the UK . He argues that " we must be critical of any attempts to expand such a quota @-@ based scheme at the expense of a more progressive asylum system " . Furthermore , he argues that the " hospitality " of the scheme is highly conditional and can be viewed as a form of " compassionate repression " , with the UNHCR , the Home Office and local authorities all involved in " sorting , decision , and consideration over which individuals are the ' exceptional cases ' " , to the exclusion of others . 
 In September 2015 , in the context of the European migrant crisis , Labour Party leadership candidate Yvette Cooper called for an increase in the number of refugees resettled in the UK to 10 @,@ 000 . The prime minister , David Cameron , subsequently announced that the UK would resettle 20 @,@ 000 refugees from camps in countries bordering Syria over the period to 2020 under the Vulnerable Persons Relocation Scheme , which was established in early 2014 and is distinct from , but modelled on , the Gateway Protection Programme . 
 = = Refugees resettled = = 
 The number of refugees resettled under the programme has been below the quota in every year except for 2009 , 2012 and 2013 . Refugees resettled have included Liberians from Guinea and Sierra Leone , Congolese ( DRC ) from Uganda and Zambia , Sudanese from Uganda , Burmese ( including Karen , Mon , Pa <unk> and Rohingya people ) from Thailand , Ethiopians from Kenya , and Mauritanians from Senegal . Provision was made for 1 @,@ 000 Iraqi refugees to be resettled in the UK between 1 April 2008 and the end of March 2010 . In 2008 , 236 Iraqis were resettled and as of 18 May , a further 212 had been resettled in 2009 . However , in May 2009 the programme was shut down for those Iraqis resettling due to having worked in support of British occupying forces and therefore at risk for reprisals . This decision was criticised as premature and " mean @-@ spirited " by some members of Parliament . Nonetheless , other Iraqis continue to be resettled under the Gateway Protection Programme and between 2004 and 2014 , a total of 1 @,@ 344 Iraqis were resettled as part of the programme . Other nationalities of refugees resettled under the scheme include Bhutanese , <unk> , Palestinians , Sierra <unk> and Somalis . 
 = = Resettlement locations = = 
 In March 2009 , out of the 434 local authorities in the UK , 15 were participating in the programme . By 2012 , a total of 18 local authorities had participated . In a review of the scheme , academics Duncan Sim and <unk> Laughlin note that " it is clear that , as with asylum seekers dispersed by the UK Borders Agency under Home Office dispersal policy , most refugees have been resettled away from London and south east England , a policy which may lead to separation of extended families " . Of the 18 local authorities , eight are in North West England and three in Yorkshire and Humberside . 
 The first refugees resettled under the programme were housed in Sheffield , which was the first city to join the scheme and which had branded itself the UK 's first ' City of Sanctuary ' . Others have been housed in cities and towns including Bradford , Brighton and Hove , Bromley , Colchester , Hull , Middlesbrough , Motherwell , Norwich , and the Manchester area including Bolton , Bury , Oldham , Rochdale , Salford , Stockport and Tameside . Sheffield , Bolton and Hull have received the largest numbers , accounting for just under half of all refugees resettled under the programme between 2004 and 2012 . The large proportion of refugees who have been resettled in North West England has been attributed partly to strong leadership on migration issues in Greater Manchester . 
 In 2007 , North Lanarkshire Council won the " Creating Integrated Communities " category in the UK Housing Awards for its involvement in the Gateway Protection Programme . Research with Congolese refugees settled with North Lanarkshire Council in Motherwell has found that the majority want to stay in the town and that they view it positively both as a location in its own right , and in comparison with other resettlement locations . 
 In April 2007 , Bolton Museum held an exhibition of photos of Sudanese refugees resettled in the town under the programme . A film , titled Moving to Mars was made about two ethnic Karen families resettled from Burma to Sheffield under the Gateway Protection Programme . The film opened the Sheffield International Documentary Festival in November 2009 and was aired on the television channel More4 on 2 February 2010 . One ethnic Karen refugee resettled with his family in Sheffield in 2006 , <unk> <unk> , signed a professional contract to play football for Sheffield United F.C. in March 2015 . 
 On 17 July 2009 , three Congolese men resettled in Norwich under the programme were killed in a car crash on the A1 road . The Home Office released a promotional video in October 2009 that highlighted the success of the programme in resettling the first 15 Congolese families in Norwich in 2006 . In 2011 , the Home Office stopped using Norwich as a resettlement location in favour of locations in Yorkshire and Lancashire , reportedly to the disappointment of the local council . 
 = = Evaluations = = 
 Resettlement has been presented as a means of the UK fulfilling its obligations towards displaced people in the context of hostile public attitudes towards asylum seekers . Research has shown that members of the British public are generally well disposed to providing protection to genuine refugees , but are sceptical about the validity of asylum seekers ' claims . A report published in 2005 states that " some participating agencies have been reluctant to pursue a proactive media strategy due to local political considerations and issues relating to the dispersal of asylum seekers " . However , in February 2006 , the Parliamentary Under @-@ Secretary of State for the Home Department Andy Burnham , when asked about how the programme fitted in with community cohesion strategies , stated in the House of Commons that : 
 " The early evidence from areas in which authorities have participated in the programme shows that it has been successful in challenging some of the attacks on the notion of political asylum that we have heard in recent years . In Bolton and Sheffield in particular , the towns have rallied around the individuals who have come to them . The programme has been a positive experience for the receiving community and , of course , for the vulnerable individuals who have benefited from the protection that those towns have offered " . 
 A report into the experience of refugees resettled in Brighton and Hove under the scheme between October 2006 and October 2007 was published by the Sussex Centre for Migration Research at the University of Sussex in December 2007 . The report found that the refugees had struggled to gain employment and English language skills . Another evaluation report undertaken for the Home Office and published in 2011 also found that only small numbers of resettled refugees were in paid employment , noting that many were still more concerned about meeting their basic needs . 
 In February 2009 , the Home Office published a report evaluating the effectiveness of the Gateway Protection Programme . The research it was based upon focused on refugees ' integration into British society in the 18 months following their resettlement . The research found that refugees showed signs of integration , including the formation of social bonds through community groups and places of worship . The report noted that low employment rates and slow progress with acquiring English language skills were particular concerns . Younger refugees and children had made the most progress . No specific language lessons are provided under the Gateway Protection Programme . Instead , Gateway refugees who require help with their English language skills are provided with access to mainstream English for Speakers of Other Languages ( ESOL ) courses , which are run by a range of state , voluntary and community @-@ based organisations . However , the International Catholic Migration Commission ( <unk> ) Europe reports that in Sheffield , it can be difficult for resettled refugees to gain access to ESOL classes because demand has generally exceeded supply – a situation also noted by an evaluation of the scheme 's operation in Motherwell undertaken in 2013 . The Motherwell evaluation found that most of the male refugees were in employment , but that many of them were not in jobs that allowed them to use their skills . The majority of women were not in work , reflecting a lack of job opportunities but also a lack of childcare provision . 
 A number of programme evaluations have found that many resettled refugees have been the victims of verbal or physical attacks in the UK . The Home Office 's 2009 evaluation notes that between one @-@ quarter and half of each of four groups of Liberian and Congolese refugees resettled under the programme had suffered verbal or physical harassment . An evaluation undertaken by academics at Sheffield Hallam University for the Home Office in 2011 found that one @-@ fifth of the refugees surveyed for the evaluation ( who had been in the UK for a year ) had been the victims of verbal or physical attacks in their first six months in the UK , and just over a fifth had been attacked in the second six months of their resettlement . Many of the victims of this abuse had not reported it to the authorities , and the authors of the evaluation suggest that this is a reason why there was a gap between the perceptions of refugee and service providers , who generally suggested that community relations were good . Verbal and physical attacks against refugees were also noted in the 2013 Motherwell evaluation . 
 = Dreamcast = 
 The Dreamcast ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) is a home video game console released by Sega on November 27 , 1998 in Japan , September 9 , 1999 in North America , and October 14 , 1999 in Europe . It was the first in the sixth generation of video game consoles , preceding Sony 's PlayStation 2 , Nintendo 's GameCube and Microsoft 's Xbox . The Dreamcast is Sega 's final home console , marking the end of the company 's 18 years in the console market . 
 In contrast to the expensive hardware of the unsuccessful Sega Saturn , the Dreamcast was designed to reduce costs with " off @-@ the @-@ shelf " components , including a Hitachi SH @-@ 4 CPU and an NEC PowerVR2 GPU . Released in Japan to a subdued reception , the Dreamcast enjoyed a successful U.S. launch backed by a large marketing campaign , but interest in the system steadily declined as Sony built hype for the upcoming PlayStation 2 . Sales did not meet Sega 's expectations despite several price cuts , and the company continued to incur significant financial losses . After a change in leadership , Sega discontinued the Dreamcast on March 31 , 2001 , withdrawing from the console business and restructuring itself as a third @-@ party publisher . 9 @.@ 13 million Dreamcast units were sold worldwide . 
 Although the Dreamcast had a short lifespan and limited third @-@ party support , reviewers have considered the console ahead of its time . Its library contains many games considered creative and innovative , including Crazy Taxi , Jet Set Radio and Shenmue , as well as high @-@ quality ports from Sega 's NAOMI arcade system board . The Dreamcast was also the first console to include a built @-@ in modem for Internet support and online play . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Released in 1988 , the Sega Genesis ( known as the Sega Mega Drive in Europe and Japan ) was Sega 's entry into the fourth generation of video game consoles . Selling 30 @.@ 75 million units worldwide , the Genesis was the most successful console Sega ever released . The successor to the Genesis , the Sega Saturn , was released in Japan in 1994 . The Saturn was a CD @-@ ROM @-@ based console that displayed both 2D and 3D computer graphics , but its complex dual @-@ CPU architecture made it more difficult to program for than its chief competitor , the Sony PlayStation . Although the Saturn debuted before the PlayStation in both Japan and the United States , its surprise U.S. launch — which came four months earlier than originally scheduled — was marred by a lack of distribution , which remained a continuing problem for the system . Moreover , Sega 's early release was undermined by Sony 's simultaneous announcement that the PlayStation would retail for US $ 299 — compared to the Saturn 's initial price of $ 399 . Nintendo 's long delay in releasing a competing 3D console and the damage done to Sega 's reputation by poorly supported add @-@ ons for the Genesis ( particularly the Sega 32X ) allowed Sony to establish a foothold in the market . The PlayStation was immediately successful in the U.S. , in part due to a massive advertising campaign and strong third @-@ party support engendered by Sony 's excellent development tools and liberal $ 10 licensing fee . Sony 's success was further aided by a price war in which Sega lowered the price of the Saturn from $ 399 to $ 299 and then from $ 299 to $ 199 in order to match the price of the PlayStation – even though Saturn hardware was more expensive to manufacture and the PlayStation enjoyed a larger software library . Losses on the Saturn hardware contributed to Sega 's financial problems , which saw the company 's revenue decline between 1992 and 1995 as part of an industry @-@ wide slowdown . Furthermore , Sega 's focus on the Saturn over the Genesis prevented it from fully capitalizing on the continued strength of the 16 @-@ bit market . 
 Due to long @-@ standing disagreements with Sega of Japan , Sega of America CEO Tom Kalinske became less interested in his position . On July 16 , 1996 Sega announced that <unk> Irimajiri had been appointed chairman and CEO of Sega of America , while Kalinske would be leaving Sega after September 30 of that year . Sega also announced that Sega Enterprises cofounder David Rosen and Sega of Japan CEO Hayao Nakayama had resigned from their positions as chairman and co @-@ chairman of Sega of America , though both men remained with the company . Bernie Stolar , a former executive at Sony Computer Entertainment of America , was named Sega of America 's executive vice president in charge of product development and third @-@ party relations . Stolar did not support the Saturn due to his belief that the hardware was poorly designed and publicly announced at E3 1997 that " The Saturn is not our future . " After the launch of the Nintendo 64 , sales of the Saturn and Sega 's 32 @-@ bit software were sharply reduced . As of August 1997 , Sony controlled 47 percent of the console market , Nintendo controlled 40 percent , and Sega controlled only 12 percent . Neither price cuts nor high @-@ profile games were proving helpful to the Saturn 's success . Due to the Saturn 's poor performance in North America , Sega of America laid off 60 of its 200 employees in the fall of 1997 . 
 As a result of the company 's deteriorating financial situation , Nakayama resigned as president of Sega in January 1998 in favor of Irimajiri . Stolar would subsequently accede to president of Sega of America . Following five years of generally declining profits , in the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 Sega suffered its first parent and consolidated financial losses since its 1988 listing on the Tokyo Stock Exchange . Due to a 54 @.@ 8 % decline in consumer product sales ( including a 75 @.@ 4 % decline overseas ) , the company reported a consolidated net loss of ¥ 35 @.@ 6 billion ( US $ 269 @.@ 8 million ) . Shortly before announcing its financial losses , Sega revealed that it was discontinuing the Saturn in North America , with the goal of preparing for the launch of its successor . This decision effectively left the Western market without Sega games for over one year . Rumors about the upcoming Dreamcast — spread mainly by Sega itself — leaked to the public before the last Saturn games were released . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As early as 1995 , reports surfaced that Sega would collaborate with Lockheed Martin , The 3DO Company , Matsushita , or Alliance Semiconductor to create a new graphics processing unit , which conflicting accounts said would be used for a 64 @-@ bit " Saturn 2 " or an add @-@ on peripheral . Development of the Dreamcast was wholly unrelated to this rumored project . In light of the Saturn 's poor market performance , Irimajiri decided to start looking outside of the company 's internal hardware development division to create a new console . In 1997 , Irimajiri enlisted the services of Tatsuo Yamamoto from International Business Machines to lead an 11 @-@ man team to work on a secret hardware project in the United States , which was referred to as " <unk> " . Accounts vary on how an internal team led by Hideki Sato also began development on Dreamcast hardware ; one account specifies that Sega of Japan tasked both teams , while another suggests that Sato was bothered by Irimajiri 's choice to begin development externally and chose to have his hardware team begin development . Sato and his group chose the Hitachi SH @-@ 4 processor architecture and the <unk> PowerVR2 graphics processor , manufactured by NEC , in the production of their <unk> . Initially known as " <unk> " , this project was later codenamed " Dural " , after the metallic female fighter from Sega 's Virtua Fighter series . 
 Yamamoto 's group opted to use 3dfx Voodoo 2 and Voodoo Banshee graphics processors alongside a Motorola PowerPC <unk> central processing unit ( CPU ) , but Sega management later asked them to also use the SH @-@ 4 chip . Both processors have been described as " off the shelf " components . In 1997 , 3dfx began its IPO , and as a result of legal obligations unveiled its contracts with Sega , including the development of the new console . This angered Sega of Japan executives , who eventually decided to use the Dural chipset and cut ties with 3dfx . According to former Sega of America vice president of communications and former NEC brand manager Charles Bellfield , presentations of games using the NEC solution showcased the performance and low cost delivered by the SH @-@ 4 and PowerVR architecture . He further stated that " Sega 's relationship with NEC , a Japanese company , probably made a difference [ in Sega 's decision to adopt the Japanese team 's design ] too . " Stolar , on the other hand , " felt the US version , the 3Dfx version , should have been used . Japan wanted the Japanese version , and Japan won . " As a result , 3dfx filed a lawsuit against both Sega and NEC claiming breach of contract , which would eventually be settled out of court . The choice to use the PowerVR architecture concerned Electronic Arts ( EA ) , a longtime developer for Sega 's consoles . EA had invested in 3dfx but was unfamiliar with the selected architecture , which was reportedly less powerful . As recounted by Shiro Hagiwara ( a general manager at Sega 's hardware division ) and Ian Oliver ( the managing director of Sega subsidiary Cross Products ) , the SH @-@ 4 was chosen while it was still in development and following a lengthy deliberation process because it was the only available processor that " could adapt to deliver the 3D geometry calculation performance necessary . " By February 1998 , Sega had renamed the Dural " Katana " ( after the Japanese sword ) , although certain hardware specifications such as random access memory ( RAM ) were not yet finalized . 
 Knowing that the Sega Saturn had been set back by its high production costs and complex hardware , Sega took a different approach with the Dreamcast . Like previous Sega consoles , the Dreamcast was designed around intelligent subsystems working in parallel with one another , but the selections of hardware were more in line with what was common in personal computers than video game consoles , reducing the system 's cost . According to Damien McFerran , " the motherboard was a masterpiece of clean , uncluttered design and compatibility . " Chinese economist and future Sega.com CEO Brad Huang convinced Sega chairman Isao Okawa to include a modem with every Dreamcast despite significant opposition from Okawa 's staff over the additional $ 15 cost per unit . To account for rapid changes in home data delivery , Sega designed the Dreamcast 's modem to be modular . Sega selected the GD @-@ ROM media format for the system . The GD @-@ ROM , which was jointly developed by Sega and Yamaha Corporation , could be mass @-@ produced at a similar price to a normal CD @-@ ROM , thus avoiding the greater expense of DVD @-@ ROM technology . As the GD @-@ ROM format can hold about 1 GB of data , illegally copying Dreamcast games onto a 650 MB CD @-@ ROM sometimes required the removal of certain game features , although this did not prevent copying of Dreamcast software . Microsoft developed a custom Dreamcast version of Windows CE with DirectX API and dynamic @-@ link libraries , making it easy to port PC games to the platform , although programmers would ultimately favor Sega 's development tools over those from Microsoft . 
 Sega held a public competition to name its new system and considered over 5 @,@ 000 different entries before choosing " Dreamcast " — a combination of " dream " and " broadcast " . According to Katsutoshi Eguchi , Japanese game developer Kenji Eno submitted the name and created the Dreamcast 's spiral logo , but this claim has not been verified by Sega . The Dreamcast 's start @-@ up sound was composed by the Japanese musician Ryuichi Sakamoto . Because the Saturn had tarnished Sega 's reputation , the company planned to remove its name from the console entirely and establish a new gaming brand similar to Sony 's PlayStation , but Irimajiri 's management team ultimately decided to retain Sega 's logo on the Dreamcast 's exterior . Sega spent US $ 50 – 80 million on hardware development , $ 150 – 200 million on software development , and $ 300 million on worldwide promotion — a sum which Irimajiri , a former Honda executive , humorously compared to the investments required to design new automobiles . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Despite taking massive losses on the Saturn , including a 75 percent drop in half @-@ year profits just before the Japanese launch of the Dreamcast , Sega felt confident about its new system . The Dreamcast attracted significant interest and drew many pre @-@ orders . Sega announced that Sonic Adventure , the next game starring company mascot Sonic the Hedgehog , would arrive in time for the Dreamcast 's launch and promoted the game with a large @-@ scale public demonstration at the Tokyo Kokusai Forum Hall . However , Sega could not achieve its shipping goals for the Dreamcast 's Japanese launch due to a shortage of PowerVR chipsets caused by a high failure rate in the manufacturing process . As more than half of its limited stock had been pre @-@ ordered , Sega stopped pre @-@ orders in Japan . On November 27 , 1998 , the Dreamcast launched in Japan at a price of JP ¥ 29 @,@ 000 , and the entire stock sold out by the end of the day . However , of the four games available at launch , only one — a port of Virtua Fighter 3 , the most successful arcade game Sega ever released in Japan — sold well . Sega estimated that an additional 200 @,@ 000 @-@ 300 @,@ 000 Dreamcast units could have been sold with sufficient supply . Key Dreamcast software titles Sonic Adventure and Sega Rally Championship 2 , which had been delayed , arrived within the following weeks , but sales continued to be slower than expected . Irimajiri hoped to sell over 1 million Dreamcast units in Japan by February 1999 , but less than 900 @,@ 000 were sold , undermining Sega 's attempts to build up a sufficient installed base to ensure the Dreamcast 's survival after the arrival of competition from other manufacturers . There were reports of disappointed Japanese consumers returning their <unk> and using the refund to purchase additional PlayStation software . Seaman , released in July 1999 , was considered the Dreamcast 's first major hit in Japan . Prior to the Western launch , Sega reduced the price of the Dreamcast to JP ¥ 19 @,@ 900 , effectively making the hardware unprofitable but increasing sales . The price reduction and release of Namco 's Soul Calibur helped Sega to gain 17 percent on its shares . 
 Working closely with Midway Games ( which developed four launch titles for the system ) and taking advantage of the ten months following the Dreamcast 's release in Japan , Sega of America worked to ensure a more successful U.S. launch with a minimum of 15 launch games . Despite lingering bitterness over the Saturn 's early release , Stolar successfully managed to repair relations with major US retailers , with whom Sega presold 300 @,@ 000 Dreamcast units . In addition , a pre @-@ launch promotion enabled consumers to rent the system from Hollywood Video in the months preceding its September launch . Sega of America 's senior vice president of marketing Peter Moore , a fan of the attitude previously associated with Sega 's brand , worked with Foote , Cone & Belding and Access Communications to develop the " It 's Thinking " campaign of 15 @-@ second television commercials , which emphasized the Dreamcast 's hardware power . According to Moore , " We needed to create something that would really intrigue consumers , somewhat apologize for the past , but invoke all the things we loved about Sega , primarily from the Genesis days . " On August 11 , Sega of America confirmed that Stolar had been fired , leaving Moore to direct the launch . 
 Prior to the Dreamcast 's release , Sega was dealt a blow when EA — the largest third @-@ party video game publisher — announced it would not develop games for the system . EA executive Bing Gordon claimed " [ Sega ] couldn 't afford to give us [ EA ] the same kind of license that EA has had over the last five years " , but Stolar recounted that EA president Larry Probst wanted " exclusive rights to be the only sports brand on Dreamcast " , which Stolar could not accept due to Sega 's recent $ 10 million purchase of sports game developer Visual Concepts . While the Dreamcast would have none of EA 's popular sports games , " Sega Sports " titles developed mainly by Visual Concepts helped to fill that void . 
 The Dreamcast launched in North America on September 9 , 1999 at a price of $ 199 — which Sega 's marketing dubbed " 9 / 9 / 99 for $ 199 " . Eighteen launch titles were available for the Dreamcast in the U.S. Sega set a new sales record by selling more than 225 @,@ 132 Dreamcast units in 24 hours , earning the company $ 98 @.@ 4 million in what Moore called " the biggest 24 hours in entertainment retail history " . Within two weeks , U.S. Dreamcast sales exceeded 500 @,@ 000 . By Christmas , Sega held 31 percent of the North American video game marketshare . Significant launch titles included Soul Calibur , an arcade fighting game that was graphically enhanced for the system and went on to sell one million units , and Visual Concepts ' high @-@ quality football simulation NFL 2K . On November 4 , Sega announced it had sold over one million Dreamcast units . Nevertheless , the launch was marred by a glitch at one of Sega 's manufacturing plants , which produced defective GD @-@ ROMs . 
 Sega released the Dreamcast in Europe on October 14 , 1999 , at a price of GB ₤ 200 . By November 24 , 400 @,@ 000 consoles had been sold in Europe . By Christmas of 1999 , Sega of Europe reported selling 500 @,@ 000 units , placing it six months ahead of schedule . Sales did not continue at this pace , and by October 2000 , Sega had sold only about 1 million units in Europe . As part of Sega 's promotions of the Dreamcast in Europe , the company sponsored four European football clubs : Arsenal F.C. ( England ) , AS Saint @-@ Étienne ( France ) , U.C. Sampdoria ( Italy ) , and Deportivo de La Coruña ( Spain ) . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 Though the Dreamcast launch had been successful , Sony still held 60 percent of the overall video game market share in North America with the PlayStation at the end of 1999 . On March 2 , 1999 , in what one report called a " highly publicized , vaporware @-@ like announcement " Sony revealed the first details of its " next generation PlayStation " , which Ken Kutaragi claimed would allow video games to convey unprecedented emotions . The center of Sony 's marketing plan and the upcoming PlayStation 2 itself was a new CPU ( clocked at 294 MHz ) jointly developed by Sony and Toshiba — the " Emotion Engine " — which Kutaragi announced would feature a graphics processor with 1 @,@ 000 times more bandwidth than contemporary PC graphics processors and a floating @-@ point calculation performance of 6 @.@ 2 <unk> per second , rivaling most supercomputers . Sony , which invested $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in two large @-@ scale integration semiconductor fabrication plants to manufacture the PlayStation 2 's " Emotion Engine " and " Graphics Synthesizer " , designed the machine to push more raw polygons than any video game console in history . Sony claimed the PlayStation 2 could render 75 million raw polygons per second with absolutely no effects , and 38 million without accounting for features such as textures , artificial intelligence , or physics . Even with such effects , Sony estimated the PlayStation 2 could render 16 million polygons per second , whereas independent estimates ranged from 3 million to 20 million , compared to the Dreamcast 's roughly 3 million . The system would also utilize the DVD @-@ ROM format , which could hold substantially more data than the Dreamcast 's GD @-@ ROM format . Because it could connect to the Internet while playing movies , music , and video games , Sony hyped PlayStation 2 as the future of home entertainment . Rumors spread that the PlayStation 2 was a supercomputer capable of guiding missiles and displaying Toy Story @-@ quality graphics , while Kutaragi boasted its online capabilities would give consumers the ability to " jack into ' The Matrix ' ! " In addition , Sony emphasized that the PlayStation 2 would be backwards compatible with hundreds of popular PlayStation games . Sony 's specifications appeared to render the Dreamcast obsolete months before its U.S. launch , although reports later emerged that the PlayStation 2 was not as powerful as expected and distinctly difficult to program games for . The same year , Nintendo announced that its next generation console would meet or exceed anything on the market , and Microsoft began development of its own console . 
 Sega 's initial momentum proved fleeting as U.S. Dreamcast sales — which exceeded 1 @.@ 5 million by the end of 1999 — began to decline as early as January 2000 . Poor Japanese sales contributed to Sega 's ¥ 42 @.@ 88 billion ( $ 404 million ) consolidated net loss in the fiscal year ending March 2000 , which followed a similar loss of ¥ 42 @.@ 881 billion the previous year and marked Sega 's third consecutive annual loss . Although Sega 's overall sales for the term increased 27 @.@ 4 % , and Dreamcast sales in North America and Europe greatly exceeded the company 's expectations , this increase in sales coincided with a decrease in profitability due to the investments required to launch the Dreamcast in Western markets and poor software sales in Japan . At the same time , increasingly poor market conditions reduced the profitability of Sega 's Japanese arcade business , prompting the company to close 246 locations . Knowing that " they have to fish where the fish are biting " , Sega of America president Peter Moore ( who assumed his position after Stolar had been fired ) and Sega of Japan 's developers focused on the U.S. market to prepare for the upcoming launch of the PS2 . To that end , Sega of America launched its own Internet service provider , Sega.com , led by CEO Brad Huang . On September 7 , 2000 Sega.com launched SegaNet , the Dreamcast 's Internet gaming service , at a subscription price of $ 21 @.@ 95 per month . Although Sega had previously released only one Dreamcast title in the U.S. that featured online multiplayer ( <unk> Rocket ! , a puzzle game developed by Sonic Team ) , the launch of SegaNet ( which allowed users to chat , send email , and surf the web ) combined with NFL <unk> ( a football game including a robust online component ) was intended to increase demand for the Dreamcast in the U.S. market . The service would later support games including Bomberman Online , Phantasy Star Online , Quake III Arena , and Unreal Tournament . The September 7 launch coincided with a new advertising campaign to promote SegaNet , including via the MTV Video Music Awards of the same day , which Sega sponsored for the second consecutive year . Sega employed aggressive pricing strategies with relation to online gaming . In Japan , every Dreamcast sold included a free year of Internet access , which Okawa personally paid for . Prior to the launch of SegaNet , Sega had already offered a $ 200 rebate to any Dreamcast owner who purchased two years of Internet access from <unk> To increase SegaNet 's appeal in the U.S. , Sega dropped the price of the Dreamcast to $ 149 ( compared to the PS2 's U.S. launch price of $ 299 ) and offered a rebate for the full $ 149 price of a Dreamcast ( and a free Dreamcast keyboard ) with every 18 @-@ month SegaNet subscription . 
 Moore stated that the Dreamcast would need to sell 5 million units in the U.S. by the end of 2000 in order to remain a viable platform , but Sega ultimately fell short of this goal with some 3 million units sold . Moreover , Sega 's attempts to spur increased Dreamcast sales through lower prices and cash rebates caused escalating financial losses . Instead of an expected profit , for the six months ending September 2000 Sega posted a ¥ 17 @.@ 98 billion ( $ 163 @.@ 11 million ) loss , with the company projecting a year @-@ end loss of ¥ 23 @.@ 6 billion . This estimate was more than doubled to ¥ 58 @.@ 3 billion , and in March 2001 Sega posted a consolidated net loss of ¥ 51 @.@ 7 billion ( $ 417 @.@ 5 million ) . While the PS2 's October 26 U.S. launch was marred by shortages — with only 500 @,@ 000 of a planned 1 million units shipped due to a manufacturing glitch — this did not benefit the Dreamcast as much as expected , as many disappointed consumers continued to wait for a PS2 — while the PSone , a remodeled version of the original PlayStation , was the best @-@ selling console in the U.S. at the start of the 2000 holiday season . According to Moore , " the PlayStation 2 effect that we were relying upon did not work for us ... people will hang on for as long as possible ... What effectively happened is the PlayStation 2 lack of availability froze the marketplace " . Eventually , Sony and Nintendo held 50 and 35 percent of the US video game market , respectively , while Sega held only 15 percent . According to Bellfield , Dreamcast software sold at an 8 @-@ to @-@ 1 ratio with the hardware , but this ratio " on a small install base didn 't give us the revenue ... to keep this platform viable in the medium to long term . " 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 On May 22 , 2000 Okawa replaced <unk> as president of Sega . Okawa had long openly advocated that Sega abandon the console business . His sentiments were not unique ; Sega co @-@ founder David Rosen had " always felt it was a bit of a folly for them to be limiting their potential to Sega hardware " , and Stolar had previously suggested that Sega should have sold their company to Microsoft . In September 2000 , in a meeting with Sega 's Japanese executives and the heads of the company 's major Japanese game development studios , Moore and Bellfield recommended that Sega abandon its console business and focus solely on software — prompting the studio heads to walk out . Nevertheless , on January 31 , 2001 Sega announced the discontinuation of the Dreamcast after March 31 and the restructuring of the company as a " platform @-@ agnostic " third @-@ party developer . The decision was Moore 's . Sega also announced a Dreamcast price reduction to $ 99 to eliminate its unsold inventory , which was estimated at 930 @,@ 000 units as of April 2001 . After a further reduction to $ 79 , the Dreamcast was cleared out of stores at $ 49 @.@ 95 . The final Dreamcast unit to be manufactured was autographed by the heads of all nine of Sega 's internal game development studios as well as the heads of Visual Concepts and Wave Master and given away with 55 first @-@ party Dreamcast games through a competition organized by GamePro magazine . Okawa , who had previously loaned Sega $ 500 million in the summer of 1999 , died on March 16 , 2001 ; shortly before his death , he forgave Sega 's debts to him and returned his $ 695 million worth of Sega and CSK stock , helping the company survive the third @-@ party transition . As part of this restructuring , nearly one @-@ third of Sega 's Tokyo workforce was laid off in 2001 . 
 9 @.@ 13 million Dreamcast units were sold worldwide . After the Dreamcast 's discontinuation , commercial games were still developed and released for the system , particularly in Japan . In the United States , game sales continued until the end of the first half of 2002 . Sega of Japan continued to repair Dreamcast units until 2007 . As of 2014 , the console is still supported through various MIL @-@ CD independent releases . After five consecutive years of financial losses , Sega finally posted a profit for the fiscal year ending March 2003 . 
 Reasons cited for the failure of the Dreamcast include hype for the PS2 ; a lack of support from EA and Squaresoft , considered the most popular third @-@ parties in the U.S. and Japan respectively ; disagreement among Sega executives over the company 's future , and Okawa 's lack of commitment to the product ; Sega 's lack of advertising money , with Bellfield doubting that Sega spent even " half " the $ 100 million it had pledged to promote the Dreamcast in the U.S. ; that the market was not yet ready for online gaming ; Sega 's focus on " hardcore " gamers over the mainstream consumer ; and poor timing . Perhaps the most frequently cited reason is the damage to Sega 's reputation caused by several previous poorly supported Sega platforms . Writing for GamePro , Blake Snow stated that " The much beloved console launched years ahead of the competition but ultimately struggled to shed the negative reputation [ Sega ] had gained during the Saturn , Sega 32X , and Sega CD days . As a result , casual gamers and jaded third @-@ party developers doubted Sega 's ability to deliver . " Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead noted that the " wait and see " approach of consumers and the lack of support from EA were symptoms rather the cause of Sega 's decline , concluding " Sega 's misadventures during the 1990s had left both gamers and publishers wary of any new platform bearing its name . " According to 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish , " While it would be easy to point an accusatory finger at Sony and blame them for killing the Dreamcast by overselling the PS2 ... there 's a certain level of intellectual dishonesty in such a stance ... [ Sega ] ' s poor U.S. support for hardware like the Sega CD , the 32X , and the Saturn made gamers gun shy . Many consumers felt burned after investing in expensive Sega machines and finding the resulting libraries comparatively lacking " . 
 The announcement of Sega 's third @-@ party transition was met with widespread enthusiasm . According to IGN 's Travis Fahs , " Sega was a creatively fertile company with a rapidly expanding stable of properties to draw from . It seemed like they were in a perfect position to start a new life as a developer / publisher . " Former Working Designs president Victor Ireland wrote that " It 's actually a good thing ... because now Sega will survive , doing what they do best : software . " The staff of Newsweek remarked " From Sonic to Shenmue , Sega 's programmers have produced some of the most engaging experiences in the history of interactive media ... <unk> by a struggling console platform , this platoon of world @-@ class software developers can do what they do best for any machine on the market " . Rosen predicted " they have the potential to catch Electronic Arts " . Game Informer , commenting on Sega 's tendency to produce under @-@ appreciated cult classics , stated : " Let us rejoice in the fact that Sega is making games equally among the current console crop , so that history will not repeat itself . " 
 = = Technical specifications = = 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 Physically , the Dreamcast measures 190 mm × 195 @.@ 8 mm × 75 @.@ 5 mm ( 7 @.@ 48 in × 7 @.@ 71 in × 2 @.@ 97 in ) and weighs 1 @.@ 5 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) . The Dreamcast 's main CPU is a two @-@ way 360 MIPS superscalar Hitachi SH @-@ 4 32 @-@ bit RISC clocked at 200 MHz with an 8 <unk> instruction cache and 16 <unk> data cache and a 128 @-@ bit graphics @-@ oriented floating @-@ point unit delivering 1 @.@ 4 <unk> . Its 100 MHz NEC PowerVR2 rendering engine , integrated with the system 's ASIC , is capable of drawing more than 3 million polygons per second and of deferred shading . Sega estimated that the Dreamcast was theoretically capable of rendering 6 – 7 million raw polygons per second , with the higher figure excluding textures and lighting , but the company conceded " game logic and physics reduce peak graphic performance . " Graphics hardware effects include <unk> filtering , <unk> shading , z @-@ buffering , spatial anti @-@ aliasing , per @-@ pixel translucency sorting and bump mapping . The system can output approximately 16 @.@ 77 million colors simultaneously and displays interlaced or progressive scan video at 640 × 480 video resolution . Its 67 MHz Yamaha AICA sound processor , with a 32 @-@ bit <unk> RISC CPU core , can generate 64 voices with PCM or <unk> , providing ten times the performance of the Saturn 's sound system . The Dreamcast has 16 MB main RAM , along with an additional 8 MB of RAM for graphic textures and 2 MB of RAM for sound . The system reads media using a 12x speed Yamaha GD @-@ ROM Drive . In addition to Windows CE , the Dreamcast supports several Sega and middleware application programming interfaces . In most regions , the Dreamcast included a removable modem for online connectivity , which was modular for future upgrades . The original Japanese model and all PAL models had a transfer rate of 33 @.@ 6 kbit / s , while consoles sold in the US and in Japan after September 9 , 1999 featured a 56 kbit / s dial @-@ up modem . 
 = = = Models = = = 
 Sega constructed numerous Dreamcast models , most of which were exclusive to Japan . A refurbished Dreamcast known as the R7 was originally used as a network console in Japanese pachinko parlors . Another model , the Divers 2000 CX @-@ 1 , possesses a shape similar to Sonic 's head and includes a television and software for teleconferencing . A Hello Kitty version , limited to 2000 units produced , was targeted at Japanese female gamers . Special editions were created for Seaman and Resident Evil Code : Veronica . Color variations were sold through a service called " Dreamcast Direct " in Japan . Toyota also offered special edition Dreamcast units at 160 of its dealers in Japan . In North America , a limited edition black Dreamcast was released with a Sega Sports logo on the lid , which included matching Sega Sports @-@ branded black controllers and two games . 
 = = = Accessories = = = 
 The Dreamcast controller includes both an analog stick and a digital pad , four action buttons , and two analog triggers . The system has four ports for controller inputs , although it was bundled with only one controller . The design of the Dreamcast 's controller , described by the staff of Edge as " an ugly evolution of Saturn 's 3D controller , " was called " [ not ] that great " by 1UP.com 's Sam Kennedy and " lame " by Game Informer 's Andy McNamara . The staff of IGN wrote that " unlike most controllers , Sega 's pad forces the user 's hands into an uncomfortable parallel position . " In contrast to the Sega CD and Sega Saturn , which included internal backup memory , the Dreamcast uses a 128 <unk> memory card called the VMU ( or " Visual Memory Unit " ) for data storage . The VMU features a small LCD screen , audio output from a one @-@ channel PWM sound source , non @-@ volatile memory , a directional pad , and four buttons . The VMU can present game information , be used as a minimal handheld gaming device , and connect to certain Sega arcade machines . For example , players use the VMU to call plays in NFL 2K or raise virtual pets in Sonic Adventure . Sega officials noted that the VMU could be used " as a private viewing area , the absence of which has prevented effective implementation of many types of games in the past . " After a VMU slot was incorporated into the controller 's design , Sega 's engineers found many additional uses for it , so a second slot was added . This slot was generally used for vibration packs providing force feedback like Sega 's " Jump Pack " and Performance 's " Tremor Pack " , although it could also be used for other peripherals including a microphone enabling voice control and player communication . Various third @-@ party cards provide storage , and some contain the LCD screen addition . <unk> announced a Dreamcast @-@ compatible zip drive that could store up to 100 MB of data on removable discs , but it was never released . 
 Various third @-@ party controllers from companies like Mad Catz include additional buttons and other extra features ; third @-@ parties also manufactured arcade @-@ style joysticks for fighting games , such as <unk> 's Arcade Stick and Interact 's Alloy Arcade Stick . Mad Catz and <unk> created racing wheels for racing games . Sega decided against releasing its official light gun in the U.S. , but some third party light guns were available . The Dreamcast supports a Sega fishing " reel and rod " motion controller and a keyboard for text entry . Although it was designed for fishing games such as Sega Bass Fishing , Soul Calibur was playable with the fishing controller , which translated vertical and horizontal movements into on @-@ screen swordplay in a manner that was retroactively cited as a predecessor to the Wii Remote . The Japanese Dreamcast port of Sega 's Cyber Troopers Virtual @-@ On Oratorio <unk> supported a " Twin Sticks " peripheral , but the game 's American publisher , Activision , opted not to release it in the U.S. The Dreamcast could connect to SNK 's Neo Geo Pocket Color , predating Nintendo 's GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable . Sega also produced the <unk> , a digital camera that could be connected to the Dreamcast and used to exchange pictures and participate in video chat over the system 's Internet connection . Sega hoped developers would use the <unk> for future software , as they later did with Sony 's similar EyeToy peripheral . In addition , Sega investigated systems that would have allowed users to make telephone calls with the Dreamcast , and discussed with Motorola the development of an Internet @-@ enabled cell phone that would have used technology from the console to enable quick downloads of games and other data . 
 The console can supply video through several different accessories . The console came with A / V cables , considered at the time to be the standard for video and audio connectivity . Sega and various third parties also manufactured RF modulator connectors and S @-@ Video cables . A VGA adapter allows Dreamcast games to be played on computer displays or Enhanced @-@ definition television sets in 480p . 
 = = Game library = = 
 Before the launch of the Dreamcast in Japan , Sega announced the release of its New Arcade Operation Machine Idea ( NAOMI ) arcade board , which served as a cheaper alternative to the Sega Model 3 . NAOMI shared the same technology as the Dreamcast — albeit with twice as much system , video , and audio memory and an 160 <unk> flash ROM board in place of a GD @-@ ROM drive — allowing nearly identical home conversions of arcade games . Games were ported from NAOMI to the Dreamcast by several leading Japanese arcade companies , including Capcom ( Marvel vs. Capcom 2 and Project Justice ) , Tecmo ( Dead or Alive 2 ) , Treasure ( Ikaruga ) , and Sega itself ( F355 Challenge and Crazy Taxi ) . 
 In what has been called " a brief moment of remarkable creativity " , in 2000 Sega restructured its arcade and console development teams into nine semi @-@ autonomous studios headed by the company 's top designers . Studios included United Game Artists ( UGA ) ( headed by former Sega Rally Championship producer Tetsuya Mizuguchi ) , Hitmaker ( headed by Crazy Taxi creator and future Sega president Hisao Oguchi ) , Smilebit ( headed by Shun Arai and including many former Panzer Dragoon and future Yakuza developers from Team Andromeda ) , <unk> ( headed by <unk> Oba and composed of developers from Sega franchises including Sakura Wars , Shinobi and Streets of Rage ) , Sega AM2 ( Sega 's most famous arcade studio and the developer of Sega 's Virtua Fighter fighting game series , headed by the company 's top developer , Yu Suzuki ) , and Sonic Team ( the developer of Sega 's flagship series , Sonic the Hedgehog , headed by Yuji Naka ) . Sega 's design houses were encouraged to experiment and benefited from a relatively lax approval process , resulting in titles such as Rez ( an attempt to simulate synaesthesia in the form of a rail shooter ) , The Typing of the Dead ( a version of The House of the Dead 2 remade into a touch typing trainer ) , Seaman ( a pet simulator in which players use a microphone to interact with a grotesque humanoid fish whose growth is narrated by Leonard Nimoy ) , and <unk> ( a Japan @-@ exclusive role @-@ playing @-@ game employing commentary on the perceived over @-@ abundance of sequels produced by the video game industry , in which players are tasked with preventing Sega from going out of business ) . Sega also revived franchises from the Genesis era , such as Ecco the Dolphin . Sega 's internal studios were consolidated starting in 2003 , with Mizuguchi leaving the company following the merger of UGA with Sonic Team . 
 UGA created the music game Space Channel 5 , in which players help a female outer space news reporter named Ulala fight aliens with " groove energy " by dancing . Intended for a " female casual " audience , Space Channel 5 is considered one of Sega 's " most daring and beloved " original properties , combining a " defiantly retro " and " uplifting " soundtrack with " dazzling " and " colorful " visual presentation — despite " a lack of real gameplay substance . " Neither Space Channel 5 nor UGA 's Rez were commercially successful , and the latter title was only available in the U.S. market through a PS2 port released in limited quantities . Hitmaker 's arcade ports included Crazy Taxi — an open world arcade racing game known for its addictive gameplay , which sold over one million copies and has been frequently cited as one of the best Dreamcast games — and Virtua Tennis — which revitalized the tennis game genre with a simple two @-@ button control scheme and use of minigames to test the player 's technique . Smilebit 's Jet Set Radio — in which players control a Tokyo @-@ based gang of youthful , rebellious inline skaters called the " <unk> " , who use graffiti to claim territory from rival gangs while evading an oppressive police force — has been cited as a major example of Sega 's commitment to original game concepts during the Dreamcast 's lifespan . Lauded for composer Hideki <unk> 's " punchy , psychedelic " soundtrack incorporating elements of " J @-@ pop and electro @-@ funk " as well as its message of " self @-@ expression and non @-@ violent dissent " , the game also popularized cel shaded graphics . Despite wide praise for its style , some criticized Jet Set Radio 's gameplay as mediocre , and it failed to meet Sega 's sales expectations . Produced by Rieko Kodama , the <unk> @-@ developed traditional role @-@ playing game Skies of Arcadia was acclaimed for its surreal Jules Verne @-@ inspired fantasy world of floating islands and sky pirates , charming protagonists , unique emphasis on the environmental properties of weapons , exciting airship battles , and memorable plot ( including a sequence viewed from multiple perspectives ) . 
 AM2 developed what Sega hoped would be the Dreamcast 's killer app , Shenmue , a " revenge epic in the tradition of Chinese cinema . " The action @-@ adventure title involved the quest of protagonist Ryo Hazuki to avenge his father 's murder , but its main selling point was its rendition of the Japanese city of Yokosuka , which included a level of detail considered unprecedented for a video game . Incorporating a simulated day / night cycle with variable weather , non @-@ player characters with regular schedules , and the ability to pick up and examine detailed objects ( also introducing the Quick @-@ time event in its modern form ) , Shenmue went over budget and was rumored to have cost Sega over $ 50 million . Originally planned as the first installment in an 11 @-@ part saga , Shenmue was eventually downsized to a trilogy — and only one sequel was ever released . While Shenmue was lauded for its innovation , visuals and music , its critical reception was mixed ; points of criticism included " invisible walls " which limited the player 's sense of freedom , boredom caused by the inability to progress without waiting for events scheduled to occur at specific times , excessive in @-@ game cutscenes and a lack of challenge . According to Moore , Shenmue sold " extremely well " , but the game had no chance of making a profit due to the Dreamcast 's limited installed base . Shenmue II " was completed for a much more reasonable sum " , while Sato defended Shenmue as an " investment [ which ] will someday be recouped " because " the development advances we learned ... can be applied to other games " . In addition to the mixed reception for Shenmue , IGN 's Travis Fahs stated that " the [ Dreamcast ] era wasn 't as kind to [ AM2 ] as earlier years " — citing ( among others ) F355 Challenge as an " acclaimed " arcade title that " didn 't do much at home " , and Genki 's port of Virtua Fighter 3 as inferior to the arcade version , " which was already a couple years old and never as popular as its predecessors . " The Virtua Fighter series would experience a " tremendous comeback " with the universally acclaimed Virtua Fighter 4 — which saw a console release exclusively on PS2 . 
 As the first fully 3D platforming game starring Sega 's mascot , Sonic the Hedgehog , Sonic Team 's Sonic Adventure was considered " the centerpiece of the [ Dreamcast ] launch " . Adventure garnered criticism for technical problems including erratic camera angles and glitches , but was praised for its " luscious " visuals , " vast , twisting environments " and iconic set pieces — including a segment in which Sonic runs down the side of a skyscraper — and has been described as the Sonic series ' creative apex . However , it failed " to catch on with players in nearly the way that [ Nintendo 's ] Mario 64 had done " , perhaps due to a perceived lack of gameplay depth . Distinguished by its innovative use of multiple storylines with varied forms of play , Adventure sold 2 @.@ 5 million copies , making it the Dreamcast 's best @-@ selling title . Sonic Team also developed the Dreamcast 's first online game — <unk> Rocket ! — which was widely complimented for its addictive puzzle gameplay and " frantic " multiplayer matches , and the critically successful music game Samba de Amigo , which was noted for its expensive maracas peripheral and colorful aesthetic . Perhaps the most influential of Sonic Team 's Dreamcast releases was Phantasy Star Online , the first online console RPG . Developed after Okawa requested an online game from Sonic Team , PSO was heavily influenced by the PC action RPG Diablo , but refined and simplified its style of gameplay to appeal to console audiences . 
 In sports , Visual Concepts ' NFL 2K football series and its NBA 2K basketball series were critically acclaimed . NFL 2K was considered an outstanding launch game for its high @-@ quality visuals and " insightful , context @-@ friendly , and , yes , even funny commentary " , while NFL <unk> featured groundbreaking online multiplayer earlier than its chief competitor , EA 's Madden NFL series . Madden and 2K continued to compete on other platforms through 2004 — with the 2K series introducing innovations such as a first person perspective new to the genre , and eventually launching ESPN NFL <unk> at the aggressively low price point of $ 19 @.@ 95 — until EA signed an exclusive agreement with the National Football League , " effectively putting every other pro @-@ football game out of business . " After Sega sold Visual Concepts for $ 24 million in 2005 , the NBA 2K series continued with publisher Take @-@ Two Interactive . During the Dreamcast 's lifespan , Visual Concepts also collaborated with Sonic the Hedgehog level designer Hirokazu Yasuhara on the action @-@ adventure game <unk> Bros. and developed the critically successful action game Ooga Booga . 
 To appeal to the European market , Sega formed a French affiliate called No Cliché , which developed titles such as Toy Commander . Sega Europe also approached Bizarre Creations to develop the critically successful racing game Metropolis Street Racer , which featured detailed recreations of London , Tokyo , and San Francisco — complete with consistent time zones and fictional radio stations — and 262 individual race tracks . 
 Although Acclaim , SNK , Ubisoft , Midway , Activision , Infogrames , and Capcom supported the system during its first year , third @-@ party developer support proved difficult to obtain due to the failure of the Sega Saturn and the profitability of publishing for the PlayStation . Namco 's Soul Calibur , for example , was released for the Dreamcast because of the relative unpopularity of the Soul series at the time ; Namco 's more successful Tekken franchise was associated with the PlayStation console and PlayStation @-@ based arcade boards . Nevertheless , Soul Calibur received overwhelming critical acclaim and has been frequently described as one of the best games for the system . Capcom produced a number of fighting games for the system , including the Power Stone series , in addition to a temporary exclusive in the popular Resident Evil series called Resident Evil Code : Veronica . The Dreamcast is also known for several shoot ' em ups , most notably Treasure 's Bangai @-@ O and Ikaruga . 
 In January 2000 , three months after the system 's North American launch , Electronic Gaming Monthly offered praise for the game library , stating , " ... with triple @-@ A stuff like Soul Calibur , NBA 2K , and soon Crazy Taxi to kick around , we figure you 're happy you took the 128 @-@ bit plunge . " In a retrospective , PC Magazine 's Jeffrey L. Wilson referred to Dreamcast 's " killer library " and emphasized Sega 's creative influence and visual innovation as being at its peak during the lifetime of the system . The staff of Edge agreed with this assessment on Dreamcast 's original titles , as well as Sega 's arcade conversions , stating that the system " delivered the first games that could meaningfully be described as arcade perfect . " GamePro writer Blake Snow referred to the library as being " much celebrated " . Damien McFerran of Retro Gamer praised Dreamcast 's NAOMI arcade ports , opining " The thrill of playing Crazy Taxi in the arcade knowing full well that a pixel @-@ perfect conversion ( and not some cut @-@ down port ) was set to arrive on the Dreamcast is an experience gamers are unlikely to witness again . " Nick Montfort and Mia <unk> , writing in Loading ... The Journal of the Canadian Game Studies Association , argued that " the Dreamcast hosted a remarkable amount of videogame development that went beyond the odd and unusual and is interesting when considered as avant @-@ garde ... it is hard to imagine a commercial console game expressing strong resistance to the commodity perspective and to the view that game production is commerce . But even when it comes to resisting commercialization , it is arguable that Dreamcast games came closer to expressing this attitude than any other console games have . " 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish favorably compared Sega 's Dreamcast output , which included some of " the most varied , creative , and fun [ games ] the company had ever produced " , with its " enervated " status as a third @-@ party . Fahs noted " The Dreamcast 's life was fleeting , but it was saturated with memorable titles , most of which were completely new properties . " According to author Steven L. Kent , " From Sonic Adventure and Shenmue to Space Channel 5 and Seaman , Dreamcast delivered and delivered and delivered . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In December 1999 , Next Generation rated the Dreamcast 4 out of 5 stars and stated , " If you want the most powerful system available now , showcasing the best graphics at a reasonable price , this system is for you . " However , Next Generation rated the Dreamcast 's future prognosis as 3 stars out of 5 in the same article , noting that Sony would ship a superior hardware product in the PlayStation 2 in the next year , and that Nintendo had said it would do the same with the GameCube . At the beginning of 2000 , Electronic Gaming Monthly had five reviewers score the Dreamcast 8 @.@ 5 , 8 @.@ 5 , 8 @.@ 5 , 8 @.@ 0 , and 9 @.@ 0 out of 10 points . By 2001 , the reviewers for Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the Dreamcast scores of 9 @.@ 0 , 9 @.@ 0 , 9 @.@ 0 , 9 @.@ 0 , and 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 . BusinessWeek recognized the Sega Dreamcast as one of the best products of 1999 . 
 In 2009 , IGN named the Dreamcast the 8th greatest video game console of all time , giving credit to the innovations and software for the system . According to IGN , " The Dreamcast was the first console to incorporate a built @-@ in modem for online play , and while the networking lacked the polish and refinement of its successors , it was the first time users could seamlessly power on and play with users around the globe . " In 2010 , PC Magazine 's Jeffrey L. Wilson named the Dreamcast the greatest video game console , emphasizing that the system was " gone too soon " . In 2013 , Edge named the Dreamcast the 10th best console of the last 20 years , highlighting innovations that it added to console video gaming , including in @-@ game voice chat , downloadable content , and second screen technology through the use of <unk> . Edge explained the system 's poor performance by stating , " Sega 's console was undoubtedly ahead of its time , and it suffered at retail for that reason ... [ b ] ut its influence can still be felt today . " Writing in 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die , Duncan Harris noted " One of the reasons that older gamers mourned the loss of the Dreamcast was that it signaled the demise of arcade gaming culture ... Sega 's console gave hope that things were not about to change for the worse and that the tenets of fast fun and bright , attractive graphics were not about to sink into a brown and green bog of realistic war games . " Parish , writing for USgamer , contrasted the Dreamcast 's diverse library with the " suffocating sense of conservatism " that pervaded the gaming industry in the following decade . Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer , discussing the Dreamcast 's portrayal " as a small , square , white plastic JFK " , commented that the system 's short lifespan " may have sealed its reputation as one of the greatest consoles ever " : " Nothing builds a cult like a tragic demise " . According to IGN 's Travis Fahs , " Many hardware manufacturers have come and gone , but it 's unlikely any will go out with half as much class as Sega . " 
 = St Caian 's Church , Tregaian = 
 St Caian 's Church , Tregaian , also known as St <unk> 's Church , Tregaean , is a small medieval church dating from the 14th century in Anglesey , north Wales . It is dedicated to St Caian , a Christian from the 5th or 6th century about whom little is known . The building contains a late 14th @-@ century east window and a late 15th @-@ century doorway . The churchyard contains the grave of William ap Howel , who died in 1581 at the age of 105 , leaving over forty children between the ages of 8 and 89 and over three hundred living descendants . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , and is one of three churches in a combined parish . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " an excellent late Medieval rural church " . 
 = = History and location = = 
 The date of construction of the first Christian building on this site is unknown . The church is dedicated to St Caian , a Christian from the 5th or 6th century , about whom little is known . One manuscript says that his father was St Caw , a king in northern Britain who lost his lands and sought safety in Anglesey , where the ruler Maelgwn Gwynedd gave him land in the north @-@ east of the island , the district known as Twrcelyn . If Caian was a son of St Caw , then his sisters included St Cwyllog , who established the nearby church of St Cwyllog , Llangwyllog , in the 6th century . Other manuscripts say that he was active in the 5th century and was a son or grandson of Brychan , a king from south Wales . 
 Caian gives his name to the hamlet of Tregaian in which the church is situated : the Welsh word <unk> ( shortened here to tre ) means " settlement " , and " ‑ <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name – i.e. " Caian 's settlement " . Tregaian is about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) north of Llangefni , the county town of Anglesey , and the church is in the countryside by a small road . 
 The present church is medieval , dating from the latter part of the 14th century , which is the period given to the east window . The doorway is from the late 15th century , the roof from the end of the 16th or beginning of the 17th century , and the nave windows and the panelling of the pulpit are from the 17th century . It is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , as one of three churches in the combined benefice of Llangefni with Tregaean with <unk> ( Talwrn ) . It is within the deanery of Malltraeth , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 , the priest in charge of the parish is the Reverend J Ashley @-@ Roberts . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church is built from rubble masonry . The roof , which is made from slate , has a stone bellcote at the west end . Entrance is through the doorway on the south side , from the late 15th century ; it has decorated surrounds and a square frame . There is no structural division between the nave ( where the congregation sit ) and the chancel ( where the altar is located ) apart from a single step up into the chancel . The church is about 40 feet 6 inches ( 12 @.@ 3 m ) long by 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) wide . The east window , from the late 14th century , is set in a pointed arch with decorative edging . It has stained glass from 1916 depicting Christ crowning a knight with the words " Well done thou good and faithful servant / Take unto you the whole armour of God . " There are two pairs of square @-@ headed windows in the south wall , dating from the 17th century . On the north side of the church , a second entrance was blocked up in the late 19th century , and there is one pair of square @-@ headed windows , also from the 17th century ; there is also a small window at the west end of the church , from the 17th or 18th century . The beams of the roof can be seen from inside the church . Behind the altar is a panelled reredos from the 19th century . 
 The church has a 12th @-@ century circular font , decorated with an irregular pattern of chevrons on the side . The bell is dated 1717 , whilst the pews are from the 19th century . There are memorials tablets from the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries on the walls , some of which commemorate the Lloyd family from a nearby house , Plas Tregaian . A 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire noted a plain silver cup dated 1714 – 15 . The churchyard contains the grave of William ap Howel , who died at the age of 105 in 1581 . Married three times , he fathered 42 or 43 children in and out of wedlock , and more than 300 of his descendants attended his funeral . His children at his death ranged in age from 8 to 89 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed because it is " an excellent late Medieval rural church " . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also states that it " retains a strong simple character in the retention of many early features and its original plan , with structurally undivided nave and chancel . " 
 The 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the church as " a small but neat edifice " , and noted the " handsome " east window . The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis said that the church was " simple and primitive in its construction " . Writing in 1847 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that the font was " remarkable " for having no drain , and was " hardly large enough for immersion . " He added that the east window was of " rather singular " design . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey notes the " unusually wide " east window . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region says that the church " gives an impression of what the Anglesey parish churches were like before so many were reassembled in the 19th century " – partly because the walls lean , it adds . The east window has also been compared to that of St Ceidio 's Church , Rhodogeidio , also on Anglesey . 
 = Mirabito Outdoor Classic = 
 The Mirabito Outdoor Classic , also known as the 2010 AHL Outdoor Classic , was an outdoor ice hockey game played in 2010 between the Syracuse Crunch and Binghamton Senators of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . It was the first outdoor game in the history of the AHL as well as the first outdoor minor league hockey game . Syracuse won the game 2 – 1 with the help of goaltender Kevin Lalande , who stopped 36 of the 37 Binghamton shots , and Alexandre Picard , who scored the first outdoor goal in AHL history . The game was played in front of a then AHL record crowd of 21 @,@ 508 , on a rink constructed at the New York State Fairgrounds on a dirt auto racing track . 
 Crunch owner , Howard Dolgon , pursued the ideal of having his team in an outdoor game , but unlike the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Winter Classic the Crunch were responsible for funding the entire event . In order to afford the cost of hosting an outdoor game sponsorship deals with several independent organizations were made including Mirabito Energy Products , which lent its name to the title of the event . In part because of his success in putting on the event , Dolgon was awarded the James C. Hendy Memorial Award as the AHL 's outstanding executive . Following the success of the Mirabito Outdoor Classic other AHL Outdoor Classics were held by other AHL teams . 
 = = Background = = 
