 = = Death = = 
 Once in Ravenna , Helmichis and Rosamund rapidly became estranged . According to Paul , Longinus persuaded Rosamund to get rid of her husband so that he could marry her . To accomplish this , she made him drink a cup full of poison ; before dying , however , Helmichis understood what his wife had done and forced her to drink the cup too , so they both died . According to Wolfram , there may be some historical truth in the account of Longinus ' proposal to Rosamund , as it was possible to achieve Lombard kingship by marrying the queen , but the story of the two lovers ' end is not historical but legendary . The mutual murder as told by Agnellus is given a different interpretation by Joaquin Martinez Pizarro : he sees Helmichis ' last action as a symbol of how the natural hierarchy of sexes is at last restored , after the queen 's actions had unnaturally modified the proper equilibrium . 
 At this point , Longinus sent the royal treasure and Albsuinda to Constantinople , the Empire 's capital , together with Helmichis ' forces , which were to become Byzantine mercenaries . This was a common Byzantine strategy , already applied previously to the Ostrogoths , by which large national contingents were relocated to be used in other theatres . These are believed to be the same 60 @,@ 000 Lombards that are attested by John of Ephesus as being active in Syria in 575 against the Persians . As for Albsuinda , the Byzantine diplomacy probably aimed to use her as a political tool to impose a pro @-@ Byzantine king on the Lombards . According to Agnellus , once Longinus ' actions came to the attention of emperor Justin II they were greatly praised , and the emperor gave lavish gifts to his official . 
 Cleph kept his throne for only 18 months before being assassinated by a slave . An important success for the Byzantines was that no king was proclaimed to succeed him , opening a decade of interregnum and making the Lombards who remained in Italy more vulnerable to attacks from Franks and Byzantines . It was only when faced with the danger of annihilation by the Franks in 584 that the Lombard dukes elected a new king in the person of <unk> , son of Cleph , who began the definitive consolidation and centralization of the Lombard kingdom . 
 = = Early Middle Ages sources = = 
 Among the surviving Early Middle Ages sources , there are six that mention Helmichis by name . Of these , the only contemporary one is the Chronica of Marius of Avenches , written in the 580s . Marius was bishop of Aventicum , a town located in the western Alps in the Frankish Kingdom of Burgundy . Because of the small distance from Aventicum to the Italian peninsula , the chronicler had easy access to information regarding northern Italy . For this reason , historian Roger Collins considers the Chronica , though short , to be reliable on Italian matters . The remaining sources all come from Italy and were written in later centuries . Two of them were written in the 7th century , the Continuatio <unk> Prosperi and the Origo Gentis Langobardorum , both anonymous . The Continuatio is a chronicle written around 625 that has reached us in a single manuscript . As its name suggests , it is a continuation of the 5th century chronicle of Prosper of Aquitaine . Derived in considerable measure from the Chronica Majora of Isidore of Seville , it blames the Romans for their inability to defend Italy from foreign invaders , and praises the Lombards for defending the country from the Franks . This is the earliest surviving work to name Rosamund , the queen of the Lombards who plays a central role in Helmichis ' attested biography . The other 7th century work , the Origo , is a brief prose history of the Lombards that is essentially an annotated king list , although it begins with a description of the founding myth of the Lombard nation . Giorgio <unk> believes that the Origo was written around 643 as a prologue to the Edictum <unk> , and continued to be updated till 671 . According to Walter Pohl , the author 's motives are mostly political : the Origo serves to consolidate the Lombards ' national identity by emphasising a shared history . Apart from the origin myth , the only more detailed account is the one concerning the death of Alboin , and thus Helmichis . 
 For the events surrounding 572 , the most exhaustive source available is Paul the Deacon 's Historia Langobardorum , a history of the Lombard nation up to 744 . The book was finished in the last two decades of the 8th century , after the Lombard Kingdom had been conquered by the Franks in 774 . Because of the apparent presence in the work of many fragments preserved from Lombard oral tradition , Paul 's work has been often interpreted as a tribute to a vanishing culture . Among these otherwise lost traditions stands the tale of Alboin 's death . According to Herwig Wolfram , what Paul deals with is an example of how nationally vital events were personalized to make them easier to preserve in the collective memory . Even later than the Historia Langobardorum , but possibly using earlier lost sources , are the last two primary sources to speak about Helmichis : the anonymous Historia Langobardorum Codicis Gothani and the Liber Pontificalis Ecclesiae <unk> written by Andreas Agnellus . The first is a brief Christianizing version of the Origo that was made in the first decade of the 9th century from a Carolingian point of view . The second was written in the 830s by a priest from Ravenna and is a history of the bishops who held the see of Ravenna through the ages . Agnellus ' passage on Alboin and Rosamund is mostly derived from Paul and little else . 
 = Wolfenstein : The New Order = 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order is an action @-@ adventure first @-@ person shooter video game developed by MachineGames and published by Bethesda Softworks . It was released on 20 May 2014 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One . The game is the seventh main entry in the Wolfenstein series and the sequel to 2009 's Wolfenstein . Set in alternative history 1960s Europe in a world where the Nazis won the Second World War , the single @-@ player story follows war veteran William " B.J. " Blazkowicz and his efforts to stop the Nazis from ruling over the world . 
 The game is played from a first @-@ person perspective and most of its levels are navigated on foot . The story is arranged in chapters , which players complete in order to progress through the story . A morality choice in the prologue alters the game 's entire storyline ; some characters and small plot points are replaced across timelines . The game features a variety of weapons , most of which can be dual wielded . A cover system is also present . 
 Development began in 2010 , soon after id Software gave MachineGames the rights for the franchise . The development team envisioned Wolfenstein : The New Order as a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game , taking inspiration from previous games in the series and particularly focusing on the combat and adventure elements . The game attempts to delve into character development of Blazkowicz , unlike its predecessors — a choice from the developers to interest players in the story . They also aimed to portray him in a heroic fashion . 
 At release , Wolfenstein : The New Order received generally positive reviews , with praise particularly directed at the combat and the narrative of the game . Considered a positive change to the series by critics , it was nominated for multiple year @-@ end accolades , including Game of the Year and Best Shooter awards from several gaming publications . A stand @-@ alone expansion set before the events of the game , titled Wolfenstein : The Old Blood , was released in May 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order is an action @-@ adventure shooter game played from a first @-@ person perspective . To progress through the story , players battle enemies throughout levels . The game utilizes a health system in which players ' health is divided into separate sections that regenerate ; if an entire section is lost , players must use a health pack to replenish the missing health . 
 Players use melee attacks , firearms and explosives to fight enemies , and may run , jump and occasionally swim to navigate through the locations . Melee attacks can be used to silently take down enemies without being detected . Alternatively , players can ambush enemies , which often results in an intense firefight between the two parties . 
 In combat , a cover system can be used as assistance against enemies . Players have the ability to lean around , over , and under cover , which can be used as a tactical advantage during shootouts and stealth levels . The game gives players a wide variety of weapon options — they can be found on the ground , retrieved from dead enemies , or removed from their stationary position and carried around . Weapon ammunition must be manually retrieved from the ground or from dead enemies . Players have access to a weapon inventory , which allows them to carry as many weapons as they find . With some of these weapons , players have the ability to dual wield , giving them an advantage over enemies by dealing twice as much damage . Players can also customize weapons through the use of upgrades ; for example , a rocket launcher can be attached to the side of an assault rifle , and a laser cannon can be transformed into a wire cutting tool . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Three years after the destruction of the Black Sun portal , the Nazis have developed advanced technologies , enabling them to turn the tide against the Allies . At dawn on 16 July 1946 , U.S. special forces operative Captain William " B.J. " Blazkowicz ( Brian Bloom ) , accompanied by pilot Fergus Reid ( Gideon Emery ) and Private Probst Wyatt III ( A.J. <unk> ) , take part in a massive Allied air raid against a fortress and weapons laboratory run by his nemesis , General Wilhelm " Deathshead " Strasse ( Dwight Schultz ) . The three are captured and brought to a human experimentation laboratory where Deathshead forces Blazkowicz to choose who he will gruesomely kill , Fergus or Wyatt , before leaving Blazkowicz and the survivor to die in the laboratory 's emergency incinerator . They escape the laboratory , but Blazkowicz suffers a critical head injury during the escape , rendering him unconscious and putting him in a coma . He is brought to a psychiatric asylum in Poland , where he remains in a vegetative state for 14 years from which he is unable to awake . He is cared for by the asylum 's head nurse Anya Oliwa ( Alicja <unk> ) and her parents , who run the facility under the Nazi regime . Blazkowicz watches as Anya 's parents are regularly forced to hand patients over to Nazi authorities , who deem them Untermenschen for their mental disabilities . 
 In 1960 , fourteen years after Blazkowicz ' admission , the Nazis order that the asylum is to be shut down , killing all the patients and executing Anya 's family when they resist . Blazkowicz awakens from his vegetative state as he is about to be executed , killing the extermination squad and escaping the asylum with Anya . Blazkowicz and Anya drive to her grandparents ' farm , where they inform him that the Nazis won the war by forcing the United States to surrender in 1948 , and that the members of the ensuing Resistance were captured . Blazkowicz interrogates a captured officer from the asylum ( he was hidden in the trunk of a car ) , learning that the top members of the Resistance are imprisoned in Berlin before brutally executing him with a chainsaw . Anya 's grandparents smuggle her and Blazkowicz through a checkpoint in Stettin before they travel to Berlin . During the train ride , Blazkowicz and Anya enter into a romantic relationship . When they arrive , Anya helps Blazkowicz break into the prison , where he rescues the person he spared fourteen years prior ( Fergus or Wyatt ) and finds that the Resistance movement is a revived Kreisau Circle led by Caroline Becker ( Bonita Friedericy ) , who was left paralyzed due to her injuries at <unk> . 
 The Resistance execute an attack on a Nazi research facility in London , bombing their base of operations , stealing secret documents and prototype stealth helicopters . The documents reveal the Nazis are relying on reverse @-@ engineered technology derived from an ancient organization known as Da 'at Yichud , which created such inventions as energy weapons , computer AI 's , and super concrete ; however , it is also revealed that someone is tampering with the super concrete 's formula , making it susceptible to mold deterioration . The Resistance discover a match with Da 'at Yichud member Set Roth ( Mark Ivanir ) , who is imprisoned in a forced labor camp . Blazkowicz agrees to go undercover inside the camp and meets Set , who tells him that the Nazis have been using technology made by him and other Jewish scientists to mass @-@ produce and control robots , and offers to help the Resistance in return for the destruction of the labor camp . Blazkowicz finds a battery for a device that controls the camp robots , and him and Set take control of a robot , which they then use to destroy the camp and rescue prisoners . 
 Set reveals to the Resistance that the Nazis ' discovery of one of the Da 'at Yichud caches , which included advanced technology centuries ahead of its time , is what allowed Germany to surpass the Allies in military might and ultimately win the war . Set agrees to assist the Resistance by revealing the location of one such cache , but states that the Resistance requires a U @-@ boat to access it . Blazkowicz obtains a U @-@ boat , but discovers that it is the flagship of the Nazis ' submarine fleet , and is equipped with a cannon designed to fire nuclear warheads , which requires codes from the Nazi lunar research facility to operate . Blazkowicz uses the technology found in the Da 'at Yichud cache , namely the <unk> Torque — a sphere that destroys the super @-@ concrete — to steal the identity of a Nazi Lunar scientist and infiltrate the Lunar Base . He succeeds at obtaining the codes , but upon returning to earth , he discovers that Deathshead has mounted an assault on the Resistance base , capturing some of the members . 
 The Resistance use the nuclear codes and the <unk> Torque to mount an assault on Deathshead 's compound . Rescuing the captured resistance prisoners and evacuating them , Blazkowicz makes it to the top of the tower , struggling to Deathshead 's workshop . Inside , Deathshead greets Blazkowicz , revealing to him that he possesses the brain of the soldier that Blazkowicz chose to die , and puts it in a robot . The robot comes alive and assaults Blazkowicz , who defeats it and puts his friend to rest by destroying the brain . <unk> a larger robot mecha , Deathshead then attacks Blazkowicz , who gets the upper hand and destroys the robot , dragging Deathshead out of it . He repeatedly stabs Deathshead , who pulls out a grenade , which explodes and mauls Blazkowicz . As a gravely wounded Blazkowicz crawls towards a window , he mentally recites The New Colossus as he watches the Resistance survivors boarding a helicopter , alongside Anya and Set . Seeing that they have reached safety , and bleeding heavily from his injuries , Blazkowicz orders the Resistance to fire the nuclear cannon . After the credits , a helicopter is heard approaching . 
 = = Development = = 
 After developer MachineGames was founded , the employees all began brainstorming ideas , and pitching them to publishers . In June 2009 , MachineGames owner ZeniMax Media acquired id Software and all of its property , including Doom , Quake and Wolfenstein . Bethesda Softworks , who had previously declined a pitch from MachineGames , suggested that they develop a new game from a franchise acquired by ZeniMax . MachineGames inquired about developing a new game in the Wolfenstein series ; the studio visited id Software , who approved of MachineGames ' request for a new Wolfenstein game . By November 2010 , paperwork was signed , allowing MachineGames to develop Wolfenstein : The New Order . Preliminary development lasted approximately three years . 
 The existence of Wolfenstein : The New Order was first acknowledged by Bethesda Softworks on 7 May 2013 , through the release of an announcement trailer . Prior to this , Bethesda teased the upcoming project by releasing three images with the caption " 1960 " . Though originally due for release in late 2013 , the game was delayed to 2014 in order for the developers to further " polish " the game . In February 2014 , it was announced that The New Order would launch on 20 May 2014 in North America , on 22 May 2014 in Australia , and on 23 May 2014 in Europe . The Australian and European release dates were later pushed forward , resulting in a worldwide launch on 20 May 2014 . All pre @-@ orders of the game granted the purchaser an access code to the Doom beta , developed by id Software . For the German release of The New Order , all Nazi symbols and references were removed ; it is a criminal offence to display Nazi imagery on toys in Germany . Following the game 's release , MachineGames began developing Wolfenstein : The Old Blood , a standalone expansion pack set before the events of The New Order . It was released in May 2015 . 
 = = = Gameplay design = = = 
 The initial inspiration for Wolfenstein : The New Order came from previous games in the franchise . Senior gameplay designer Andreas Öjerfors said that it was the " super intense immersive combat " that defined the previous games , so MachineGames ensured that this elements was included in The New Order . The development team refer to the game as a " first @-@ person action adventure " , naming this one of the unique defining points of the game . " It is the David vs Goliath theme , " Öjerfors explained . " B.J. against a global empire of Nazis . " Öjerfors also acknowledged that many aspects of the game 's narrative are simply exaggerated elements of the Nazi Party : " The larger than life leaders , strange technology , strange experiments . " The team viewed the game as a " dark @-@ roasted blend of drama , mystery , humor . " Creative director Jens Matthies explained that they " take perhaps the most iconic first @-@ person shooter franchise in history and push it into a strange new world . " 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order is the second game to use id Software 's id Tech 5 engine , after Rage ( 2011 ) . The game utilizes the engine to add a large amount of detail to the game world . The team often found it difficult to develop the game with 1080p resolution at 60 frames per second , particularly on complex environments , but " we always made it work somehow " , said Matthies . He has also said that the main advantages of the engine is the speed and the detailing , while its biggest disadvantage is dynamic lighting ; " on the other hand the static light rendering is really awesome , so you have full radiosity and can do really spectacular @-@ looking things using that , " he added . Senior concept artist Axel <unk> said that one of the main inspirations for the art design of the game was movies from the 1960s , calling out the James Bond movies . The design for the Nazis in the game was influenced by the aesthetics of the Nazis at the end of the Second World War ; " it 's blended with the style of the 1960s and the fashion ideals of how to express yourself visually , " Öjerfors explained . This viewpoint is also influenced by the element of exaggeration , which is common throughout the game 's design and has been acknowledged by the team as a development inspiration . Character models can be covered in up to a <unk> texture ; however , this is not used often in the game on individual characters , due to the difficulty of seeing it from a distance . 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order only features a single @-@ player mode . The team felt that dividing focus and resources across both a single @-@ player and an online multiplayer mode would be less efficient . When questioned about the lack of an online multiplayer mode , Öjerfors explained that the decision was simple . " If we could take every bit of energy and sweat the studio has and pour all that into the single @-@ player campaign , it gives us the resources to make something very , very cool , compared to if we would also have to divert some of our resources to making multiplayer . " Executive producer Jerk Gustafsson attributed the choice to the style of game the team is familiar with , stating that MachineGames is " a single @-@ player studio " . 
 = = = Characters and setting = = = 
 The team attempted to develop characters that offer a unique experience to the game . " The overarching goal for us was about building an ensemble of genuinely interesting characters we wanted to interact with , " said Matthies . They also strived to connect the thoughts and actions of all characters to the human experience , allowing players to know " why a person is doing what they are doing " . Matthies feels that all characters , particularly the allies , contain some dimension of his own personality . " They 're an expression of something that is part of me that I think is interesting to explore , " he said . 
 The game 's playable character , William " B.J. " Blazkowicz , has been previously featured as the playable protagonist of all Wolfenstein games . When developing the character of Blazkowicz for The New Order , MachineGames considered his appearances in previous games in the series . When doing this , they realised that the character had never really developed at all throughout the games ; " He 's just the guy that you play , " said Pete Hines , Vice President of PR and Marketing for Bethesda . The team discovered that they were interested in exploring his story , which is what they later invested in . One particular scenario that the team envisioned is putting Blazkowicz in situations where he is uncomfortable . Matthies said , " that 's really interesting to me . I love taking things and making them real . " Throughout the game , Blazkowicz communicates some of his inner thoughts through short monologues , many of which reveal that he has been traumatized by some of his experiences . " We always loved the idea of a prototypical action hero exterior juxtaposed with a rich and vulnerable interior psychology , " said Matthies . One of the largest priorities for the team when developing the character of Blazkowicz was to " reveal whatever needs to be revealed to [ Blazkowicz ] and the player " simultaneously ; Matthies felt that , despite the simplicity of this concept , it is rarely used in games . Prior to developing The New Order , the team had primarily worked on games that involved antihero protagonists . However , id Software wished Blazkowicz to be portrayed differently in the game . Matthies said , " It 's really important to [ id ] that BJ is a hero , and not an anti @-@ hero . " The team attempted to develop Blazkowicz into a character that players could relate to , as they felt that players are generally unable to relate to video game protagonists . " The goal is not to have a protagonist that 's so neutral that you can project yourself into them ; the goal is to have a protagonist that is so relatable that you become them , " said Matthies . They also tried to make players become " emotionally in sync " with Blazkowicz , using the morality choice in the game 's prologue to do so . 
 Wilhelm " Deathshead " Strasse , the game 's main antagonist , has been previously featured as an antagonist of Return to Castle Wolfenstein ( 2001 ) and main antagonist of Wolfenstein ( 2009 ) . For The New Order , the team achieved closure on his story ; to do so in an effective way , they wanted to find an interesting angle to portray him : his personality is full of enthusiasm , and he appreciates life after his near @-@ death experience in the previous game . When developing the Nazis , Matthies states that the team " didn 't want to cartoon @-@ <unk> them " , instead opting to treat them seriously . Gideon Emery , who portrayed Fergus Reid , auditioned for his role in the game . He described Fergus as " a tough as nails soldier , who gives [ Blazkowicz ] both support and a pretty hard time in the process " . Matthies felt that Fergus is a type of father figure to Blazkowicz , and that he " only gives negative reinforcement " . Conversely , he saw Wyatt as a " sort of son surrogate " , as Blazkowicz is tasked as being his protector and mentor , and that he gives " positive reinforcement " . Max Hass , a seemingly brain @-@ damaged member of the Resistance , was inspired by the character of Garp from John Irving 's novel The World According to Garp . Alex <unk> portrayed Max in the game . " Max was the most challenging character to cast , which seems counter @-@ intuitive because he 's a pretty simple guy on paper , but it took a tremendous actor to pull that off and a long time to find him , " Matthies said . 
 A large aspect of the game is the alternative history in which it is set , where the Nazis won the Second World War . The team saw this aspect as an opportunity to create everything at a very large scale , with very little limitations ; " so many things that we can create , and work with , and expand on . So , I never really felt that we were limited , " said Öjerfors . 
 = = = Music production = = = 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order makes use of an original score that reflects the alternative universe depicted in the game . " We wanted to identify with different sounds that were kind of iconic , 1960s sounds , and then do our own twist on them to make a sound authentic enough that it felt realistic , " said Hines . In total , eight original songs were included in the game , and an additional three famous songs were reworked from their original version into German , for use in marketing ; the reworked songs cannot appear anywhere in the game , because the owners wish never to associate their work with any Nazi imagery . To promote the original songs , Bethesda created the fictional <unk> Recording Company , along with backstories for some of the fictional bands that play the original songs . 
 The team placed a high importance on the game 's music . During the game 's development , composer Mick Gordon traveled to Sweden to meet with the team , and spotted the game over three days , partly collaborating with both Fredrik Thordendal and Richard Devine . Gordon expressed the difference in composing the soundtrack for Wolfenstein : The New Order compared to other games ; " usually you sign onto a project and then you 're given a list of 150 battle cues to do , " he said . 
 When searching for a genre in which the soundtrack would be based upon , the team initially sought inspiration from the music of Richard Wagner , who was posthumously admired by Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler . After studying Wagner 's work , the team discovered that it didn 't necessarily fit with the game 's tone . The team then searched for a style of music that would suit the Nazis , ultimately selecting distortion . " There 's lots of analogue distortion types , there 's all sorts of different pedals and valves and things that are really breaking up , " said Gordon . The team also took inspiration from 1960s music , using analogue equipment such as tape machines and reel @-@ to @-@ reel machines . Gordon has said that the soundtrack is " a tribute to all things guitar " . In collaboration with each other , the team of musicians composed over six hours of music which scores the game . Matthies said " A lot of the score features odd time signatures yet it 's all very groovy . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order was released to mostly positive reviews . Metacritic calculated an average score of 81 out of 100 based on 23 reviews for the Windows version , and 79 out of 100 based on 18 reviews for the Xbox One version and 73 reviews for the PlayStation 4 version . GameRankings assigned it an average review score of 84 % based on 12 reviews for the Windows version , 82 % based on 17 reviews for the Xbox One version , and 81 % based on 48 reviews for the PlayStation 4 version . Reviewers liked the game 's concept , narrative and combat mechanics . 
 The combat mechanics of the game received praise . Daniel Hindes of GameSpot felt that the intensity and variety of the combat in the game has granted the series " a breath of fresh air " , and believes that it managed to fulfill his nostalgic expectations from the series . Metro 's David Jenkins said that the combat in the game is the " real deal " , naming it one of the best recent single @-@ player shooter games , while Ryan Taljonick of GamesRadar called it " satisfying " . Simon Miller of VideoGamer.com lauded the game 's shooting and stealth mechanics , naming the former as " solid " . Similarly , GameSpot 's Hindes noted that the stealth was " simple but effective " , and named it one of the best things about the game . Steve Boxer of The Guardian also called out the stealth , calling it " decent " . 
 Colin Moriarty of IGN considered the narrative and characters one of the best features , stating that it 's where the game " really shines " . Metro 's Jenkins also praised the story , stating that the mix of tones is " bizarre but obviously intentional " . Matt <unk> @-@ Gilman of Computer and Video Games called the narrative " intelligently written , brilliantly voiced and highly polished " . Kotaku 's Mike Fahey felt somewhat divided about the story , initially finding the attempts at emotion too obvious , but ultimately feeling satisfied , calling it " spectacular " . He also praised the characterization of Blazkowicz in the game . GamesRadar 's Taljonick also felt mixed about the game 's characters , finding Blazkowicz interesting , but feeling as though the supporting characters were quite undeveloped , leaving players to forget about them during gameplay . Conversely , Matt Bertz of Game Informer noted that the attempts to give Blazkowicz more depth feel odd in reflection to his brutal actions during other parts of the game . VideoGamer.com 's Miller also felt negatively about the narrative , calling it " awful " . Joystiq 's Ludwig <unk> commented on the drastic changes in the narrative 's pacing , feeling that it " dragged down " whenever the player is forced to search for ammunition ; Steven O 'Donnell of Good Game believed otherwise , feeling like he was " gearing up and patching up " after each fight . 
 The game 's use of an alternative history concept , with the Axis victory in World War II , was commended by many reviewers . IGN 's Moriarty and GameSpot 's Hindes called it " interesting " , with the former naming it one of the standout points of the game . Jason Hill of The Sydney Morning Herald called the concept " absorbing " , while Owen Anslow of The Mirror called it " intriguing " . Destructoid 's Chris Carter felt that the development team " went all the way " and spent a lot of time on the game 's concept . 
 The graphical design of the game received commentary from reviewers . GameSpot 's Hindes praised the visual design , noting that it accurately captured the time period , while effectively depicting the alternative storyline in which the game is set . Taljonick of GamesRadar stated that the game 's level design contributes to his enjoyment of the shooting sequences . He also praised the size of the levels , enjoying the possibility of participating in a large gunfight " with some sort of plan " . Kotaku 's Fahey praised the level design for similar reasons , admiring the degree of detail in the game . Digital Spy 's Liam Martin shared mixed commentary on the design , noting that the character models are animated well , but the game is " hardly a shining example of next @-@ gen graphical potential " . ABC 's Alex Walker criticized the game 's graphical design , commenting that the developers " focus [ ed ] their attention " on other aspects of the game . 
 Most critics and commentators shared the opinion that The New Order was better than they were expecting from a Wolfenstein game . Jon Blyth of Official Xbox Magazine called the game an " unexpected gem " , while ABC 's Walker said that he " never expected [ to ] enjoy [ the game ] so much " . The Sydney Morning Herald 's Hill said that the game ensures that the series is " a relevant force again " , while Destructoid 's Carter felt that the game " does wonders for essentially rebooting the franchise without rendering all the previous stories moot " . Edge agreed , calling the developers " brave " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Within a week of its release , Wolfenstein : The New Order became the second @-@ best selling game of 2014 in the United Kingdom , behind Titanfall . The game also topped the weekly UK charts in its first week , totaling a quarter of all games sold in the region and accounting for 36 % of revenue . According to MCV , it was the 22nd best @-@ selling game of 2014 in the UK . In the United States , the game was the fourth and seventh best @-@ selling game of May and June 2014 , respectively . The game was also ranked the fifth and fourteenth best @-@ selling digital PlayStation 4 game of May and June 2014 , respectively . In its first week in Japan , the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 versions of the game were placed on the charts at 15th and 8th , respectively , collectively selling over 11 @,@ 000 units . By June 2014 , the game had sold almost 400 @,@ 000 physical units in Europe , equating to over € 21 million . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Wolfenstein : The New Order received multiple nominations and awards from gaming publications . The game won Game of the Year from Classic Game Room , received nominations from the Golden Joystick Awards , Good Game Game Informer , and IGN Australia , and received runner @-@ up from Polygon . It was also placed on various lists of the best games of 2014 : USA Today placed it at 9th , Eurogamer at 10th , and Ars Technica at 6th . The game also received nominations for Best Shooter from The Escapist , The Game Awards , Game Informer , GameTrailers , Hardcore Gamer and IGN . It received nominations signifying excellence in storytelling from The Game Awards , the Golden Joystick Awards , IGN Australia and the SXSW Gaming Awards . It achieved runner @-@ up for Biggest Surprise awards from both Giant Bomb and the readers of Kotaku . It was also nominated for Best PC Game by IGN Australia , receiving runner @-@ up by Kotaku readers . The game was also nominated for Best Multiplatform from Hardcore Gamer , Best Console Game from IGN Australia , and Best PlayStation 3 Game , Best Xbox 360 Game , and Best Xbox One Game from IGN . 
 = Subway ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " Subway " ( sometimes referred to as " The Accident " ) is the seventh episode of the sixth season of the American police television drama Homicide : Life on the Street , and the 84th episode overall . It first aired on NBC in the United States on December 5 , 1997 . In the episode , John Lange ( Vincent D 'Onofrio ) becomes pinned between a subway train and the station platform . The Baltimore homicide department is informed that Lange will be dead within an hour and Pembleton tries to solve the case while comforting Lange in his final minutes . 
 " Subway " featured guest star Bruce MacVittie as a man suspected of pushing Lange into the path of the train . The episode was written by James Yoshimura , who co @-@ produced with David Simon . It was directed by Gary Fleder and was the only episode of Homicide : Life on the Street helmed by the feature film director . Yoshimura based " Subway " on an episode of the HBO hidden @-@ camera documentary show Taxicab Confessions , in which a New York City detective described a real @-@ life instance of a man trapped between a subway train and platform . 
 " Subway " was filmed on location in a Baltimore Metropolitan Transit Authority station . Fleder included cinematic elements that were uncommon in the traditionally naturalistic show . This led to conflicts between Fleder and director of photography Alex Zakrzewski . " Subway " received overwhelmingly positive reviews but ranked number three in its time @-@ slot during its original broadcast , capturing 10 @.@ 3 million viewers but falling behind ABC 's 20 / 20 and CBS 's Nash Bridges . 
 The episode won a Peabody Award for excellence in television broadcasting and was nominated for two Emmy Awards , one for Yoshimura 's script and one for D 'Onofrio 's guest performance . " Subway " was the subject of a two @-@ hour PBS television documentary , Anatomy of a " Homicide : Life on the Street " , which originally aired on the network on November 4 , 1998 . Screenwriter Vince Gilligan said " Subway " directly influenced an episode of The X @-@ Files that he wrote , which in turn helped inspire the casting of Bryan Cranston in Breaking Bad . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 During an altercation on a crowded subway platform , John Lange ( Vincent D 'Onofrio ) falls against a moving train and is pinned at waist level between a subway car and the edge of the platform . Detectives Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) and Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) arrive to investigate and are told the man 's spinal cord is severed . Although Lange is not feeling much pain , emergency personnel tell the detectives he has less than an hour to live and will die as soon as he is moved . Bayliss questions Larry Biedron ( Bruce MacVittie ) , who was involved with the altercation that led to Lange 's fall . Biedron says he was bumped from behind with Lange , but witnesses give conflicting reports : some say Biedron pushed Lange , some that Lange pushed Biedron , and others say it was an accident . Pembleton tries to talk to Lange , who becomes uncooperative and angry when told he will die . 
 Lange says his girlfriend , Sarah Flannigan ( Laura MacDonald ) , is jogging by the harbor , so Pembleton sends detectives Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) and Falsone ( Jon Seda ) to look for her . Lewis and Falsone talk about the nature of death while questioning random joggers ; their search effort proves fruitless . Lange tries to convince EMT Joy Tolson ( Wendee Pratt ) to give him painkillers , but she refuses because it will reduce their chances of saving his life , even while she insists he cannot be saved . Pembleton keeps Lange company , despite his initial annoyance at Lange 's bullying and mean @-@ spirited attitude . The emergency personnel plan to use airbags to push the subway train away from the platform , then pull Lange free and rush him to the hospital . 
 Pembleton and Lange grow closer ; Lange experiences more pain as time passes and switches among remorse , anger , and casual small talk during their conversations . Later , Pembleton holds Lange 's hand to comfort him and confides about his recent stroke . Bayliss grows suspicious when Biedron says he cannot recall his last place of work or when he moved to Baltimore . Biedron eventually admits he had been criminally charged and placed into a psychiatric ward for pushing a man in front of a Chicago subway train for no reason . Biedron is arrested and Bayliss confirms to Pembleton that Lange was pushed ; Pembleton decides not to tell Lange because he does not think it will comfort him , but Lange figures it out for himself by observing their conversation . Lange experiences greater pain and starts to lose consciousness . After saying " I 'm OK " to Pembleton , Lange falls unconscious and the EMTs push the train with the airbags . Lange dies immediately after he is removed . A shocked and disoriented Pembleton leaves the subway and , after staring at Biedron in the back of a police squad car , walks to his vehicle while recalling a line about how sugar maple leaves behave when it rains ( a line that Lange said as he was dying ) . He then drives away with Bayliss . The episode ends with Flannigan jogging past the subway station . 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 James Yoshimura , one of the Homicide : Life on the Street writers and supervising producers , first conceived the story for " Subway " after watching an episode of the HBO series Taxicab Confessions , which features hidden @-@ camera footage of taxi passengers discussing their lives with the drivers . In the episode he saw , a New York Police Department detective discussed an experience in which a man was pushed and trapped between a subway train and station platform . Although the man was initially still alive , the homicide department was called in to investigate because emergency officials said they knew he would eventually die . The detective said the incident was the most upsetting thing he ever saw . He likened the twisting of the body to that of a plastic bag being spun around quickly and turning like a corkscrew , and said when the train was removed and the body was twisted back , " All your guts fall down and in less than a minute , you 're dead . " 
 Yoshimura first pitched the show to the Homicide : Life on the Street production team in May 1997 at the San Francisco production center of executive producer Barry Levinson . The episode was discussed and well received during a round @-@ table discussion involving Levinson , executive producer Tom Fontana , producer David Simon , supervising producer Julie Martin , and consulting producer Gail Mutrux . During that meeting , <unk> suggested that the transit authority should pressure the police to resolve the homicide case quickly and get the trains moving again , an element which Yoshimura eventually added to the script . Levinson suggested ending the episode with the detectives walking back to the surface , then feeling the hum and vibration of the train starting back up under their feet . This suggestion , however , did not appear in the final episode . 
 Distressed from a long stretch of poor ratings , NBC executives placed pressure on Homicide : Life on the Street producers to improve its viewership and become more popular than its higher @-@ rated time @-@ slot competitor , Nash Bridges . Yoshimura and the other producers , however , decided to continue pushing the envelope with " Subway " because they felt the series needed to maintain its quality and survive . " Subway " had to be greenlighted by NBC before a script could be written and Yoshimura anticipated backlash about the episode . He said , " Every episode , we have trouble with NBC , so this is no different . We 've fought that battle , we 've had five years of that , so it doesn 't matter to us . " However , the executives were surprisingly enthusiastic about the premise . Warren Littlefield , then @-@ president of NBC Entertainment , said his first reaction was " the classic response of a network programmer : ' Oh my God , this is scary ' " , but that he quickly came around to the idea and greenlighted the project . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In writing the script for " Subway " , Yoshimura wanted the Pembleton character to be confronted with his own mortality , a theme that had continued from the previous season where the character suffered a stroke . Although Pembleton does not typically discuss his own feelings , Yoshimura wanted him to be placed in a situation where he not only discussed death , but where the unique circumstance of Lange 's subway incident would cause Pembleton to confide his stroke experience to an almost complete stranger . From the beginning of the writing process , Yoshimura specifically wanted the Lange character to be mean and unpleasant , rather than the nice and innocent victim more typically portrayed in such television episodes : " Tragedy can happen to jerky people too and I think it 'd be much more interesting to see how that kind of character 's circumstances transcends the typical cliched TV kind of victim . " 
 Yoshimura wanted Braugher to treat D 'Onofrio like he was " bad luck " and try to keep his distance at first , but gradually come to view him as a person and form a close bond with him by the end of the episode . A New York City firefighter , Tim Brown , was a consultant for most of the technical information in the episode . In addition to helping Yoshimura with the dialogue from medical staff characters , Brown advised Yoshimura on the method of using air bags to push the subway train forward and remove Lange 's body . Yoshimura included conflicting reports from witnesses about how the incident took place , which the writer described as a " Rashomon thing " , in reference to the 1950 Japanese film in which several characters offer differing descriptions of the same murder . " Subway " continued a sixth season trend in which the detectives became more personally involved with the victims , and thus becoming more emotionally drained at their deaths . For example , in the sixth season episode " Birthday " , Falsone interviewed a victim who eventually died at the conclusion of the episode . It was the first television script Attanasio ever wrote . 
 Yoshimura included a B story of Lewis and Falsone looking for Lange 's girlfriend to provide comic relief and so that the entire episode would not be confined to the subway platform location . Yoshimura wanted the two detectives to also discuss the nature of mortality and death , but deliberately included black humor in their dialogue and made sure the characters did not act " teary @-@ eyed [ or ] philosophical " , because he believed it would be cliched and an inaccurate depiction of how real detectives would behave . Some viewers were offended or startled by the flippant nature of the discussions about death between the two characters . Lange 's girlfriend jogged behind Lewis and Falsone during a scene in which the two detectives were distracted in a discussion . Yoshimura deliberately included this in the episode to create a moment of irony . The line by Falsone to a jogger , " Are you sure you 're not Sarah ? " , and Lewis ' mocking reaction to the question , were both ad @-@ libbed by the actors . 
 Executive producers Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana reviewed the script after it was finished and made minor suggestions for changes . In the original script , Yoshimura made Pembleton more confrontational with the firefighters and emergency personnel , but this aspect of the script was changed when Fontana suggested it was too distracting . NBC executives indicated they would have preferred Lewis and Falsone find Lange 's girlfriend and bring her back to the subway station before Lange died , but Yoshimura described that scenario as a " typical TV ending " and was vehemently opposed to any such change . Fontana also defended the original ending because he said Pembleton ends up filling the role that Lange 's girlfriend would have filled . 
 On August 18 , 1997 , four days before shooting on the episode began , NBC censors provided 17 pages of notes to Yoshimura requiring changes regarding violence and language . A typical Homicide : Life on the Street episode usually results in only three or four pages . Yoshimura made several modifications with the help of his writing assistant Joy Lusco , a future writer on Simon 's HBO series The Wire . The changes included removing several instances of the words " ass " and " bitch " from the script . Lange 's line , " Why am I even saying the son of a bitch 's name ? " was changed to " Why am I even saying the twerp 's name ? " , and his line , " Go find another train and throw your miserable stupid ass in front of it " was changed to " throw yourself in front of it " . 
 = = = Casting and director hiring = = = 
 Consulting producer Gail Mutrux recommended feature film director Gary Fleder to direct " Subway " because she believed he would provide visually engaging direction without distracting from the story in the script . Other Homicide : Life on the Street producers were not familiar with Fleder . When Mutrux told them the name of one of his previous films , Things to Do in Denver When You 're Dead , Yoshimura became concerned Fleder was " one of these indie kind of guys [ who is ] going to come in and try to reinvent our show " , a problem he had experienced with other directors in the past . After watching Things to Do in Denver When You 're Dead , however , Yoshimura believed Fleder would be perfect to direct " Subway " because he felt Fleder could provide strong visuals to a story that took place in one location , and prevent the script from becoming too static and boring . Upon being offered the job , Fleder thought it would be a challenge due to most of the action being confined to a single set , but accepted the director position based on the strength of Yoshimura 's script : , " The script was terrific . And for me , the big issue from day one was , ' How do I not screw it up ? ' " Yoshimura said feature directors often struggle with Homicide : Life on the Street because they are used to working at a slower and more deliberate pace than the typical eight @-@ day filming period of a single episode . Additionally , Yoshimura said , they have little time to adjust to the regular cast and crew , which he described as a " closed community [ who are ] used to shooting or working a certain way on this show , and then have their rhythms and their patterns and their habits " . 
 Casting director Brett Goldstein contacted Vincent D 'Onofrio 's agent about playing the part of John Lange , but the agent said D 'Onofrio would never work in television and refused to even suggest the part to the actor . Goldstein remained convinced the actor was right for the role , and mailed the script directly to D 'Onofrio . The actor liked the script and agreed to play the part . The agent later contacted Goldstein a second time and they got into a dispute over how much money D 'Onofrio would be paid . Yoshimura said D 'Onofrio was not the kind of actor he originally envisioned for the part , although he later praised his performance . D 'Onofrio said he was attracted to the part based on the strength of the script and the reputation of Homicide : Life on the Street , although he had never seen the show himself . Fleder , D 'Onofrio and Andre Braugher had only between two and three hours to read the script , discuss the characters and rehearse the material . Braugher said his first reaction to the episode premise was that it was a " horrifying idea " because he thought it would be sensational and end with a clichéd moral , which Braugher said " frankly , nauseated me , the idea of that " . But Braugher said he was extremely satisfied with Yoshimura 's final script . 
 Bruce MacVittie auditioned for the role of Larry Biedron by mailing a tape of himself performing to the show 's producers . Yoshimura had previously seen MacVittie perform on the New York City stage and thought he was a " wonderful , wonderful actor " . After watching his rehearsal tape , Yoshimura settled on MacVittie for the part not only based on his acting , but on his short physical stature . Yoshimura said , " I 'm watching this tape and I 'm thinking , ' Yeah , this little guy ! Who would suspect this little guy to have these murderous kinds of tendencies . ' " Laura MacDonald was also cast as Lange 's girlfriend Sarah Flannigan based on an audition tape she sent to the show . Wendee Pratt was cast as emergency medical technician Joy Tolson , who works to help Lange throughout the episode but does not get along with him . Yoshimura said he particularly enjoyed Pratt 's performance " because she 's not playing at all sympathetic . This guy 's a pain in her ass . " Shari <unk> , a WBAL ( AM ) disc jockey from the Baltimore area , made a cameo appearance as a witness in the subway . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 NBC sought permission to film " Subway " in a Baltimore Metropolitan Transit Authority station , but the authority was initially hesitant to allow filming for a script that portrayed their train as the source of a fatal accident . Since it was too late to build a set , co @-@ executive producer Jim Finnerty told Yoshimura to wait before writing the script because of the strong possibility the episode could never be filmed . When Yoshimura insisted on continuing anyway , Finnerty angrily stormed out of the meeting . However , Finnerty was eventually able to convince the authority to allow filming in one of their stations . Yoshimura also sought 300 extras to play firefighters , emergency medical personnel , transit workers and commuters . Finnerty authorized the use of more extras than an episode usually received , but refused to pay for 300 extras , forcing Yoshimura to make minor modifications to the script . 
 Seven days of pre @-@ production began on August 15 , 1997 . On the first day , Fleder met with Yoshimura and Fontana to discuss the script and the director 's vision for the episode . Fleder suggested modifying the prologue , and storyboarded the introduction that was included in the episode . The new prologue involved commuters coming down to the train station while a street band performed , leading up to the subway accident before the opening credits rolled . The song featured in this prologue , " Killing Time " , was written by Lisa Matthews , the lead singer of the Baltimore @-@ area band Love Riot . Matthews also had a brief cameo on " Subway " as one of the witnesses to Lange 's fall . On August 16 , the show creators scouted out the Johns Hopkins Hospital Metro Subway Station , where the episode was to be filmed . At the request of the authority , the subway was renamed the fictional Inner Harbor station during filming . Fleder himself had only one hour to scout the location with his technical crew . Art director Vincent Peranio created a dummy wall to place in the empty space between two subway cars , making it appear the two trains were one big car . Inside the dummy wall was a space where the actor could stand and appear cut . Stunt coordinator G.A. Aguilar also choreographed the accident that day , and Peranio simulated the accident itself by tying a dummy into the hole in the dummy wall . Peranio originally wanted a stuntman to fall against the moving train , spin and fall into the padded hole in the dummy wall , but the transit authority refused to allow it . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was filmed in seven days , starting on August 26 , 1997 . The Baltimore Metropolitan Transit Authority gave permission for filming to take place in one of their subways , but only allowed shooting to take place between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. when the trains were not running . The restrictive hours , short preparation time , confining shooting space and excessive heat due to lack of ventilation created additional stresses to the crew of more than 100 people during the filming of the episode . The tight schedule and lack of rehearsal time was difficult on the actors , but D 'Onofrio said it added " a certain velocity and energy " to the shoot , which made the dialogue from the actors feel less rehearsed and more spontaneous . Yoshimura served as the on @-@ set consulting editor during filming along with fellow producer David Simon , who wrote the book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , from which the series was adapted . The cast and crew shot between seven and nine pages of the script each of the seven production days . Fleder said he was impressed by this pace because he usually shoots between one and two pages per day during his movies , and he said the actors on Homicide : Life on the Street were better prepared and more cooperative than his usual film actors . 
 Fleder dedicated a great deal of focus to establishing the correct chemistry between Braugher and D 'Onofrio . Fleder said , " The energy between them had to be [ strong ] because they 're carrying the episode . The audience is centered on them and if either of them falters , the whole episode kind of falls apart . " The first day of shooting had to take place outside the subway station , so all outside scenes were shot first . As a result , the final scenes of the film were shot on the first day . Among those scenes were Pembleton leaving the subway in a daze following Lange 's death ; Yoshimura deeply regretted that this was one of the first scenes shot because he felt the performance would have been more moving if Braugher had some previous dramatic interaction with D 'Onofrio . 
 The stunt simulating Lange 's fall into the subway train was filmed on August 27 , the second production day , and Yoshimura said it was the most challenging part of the shoot . D 'Onofrio and MacVittie had to arrive at the platform just as the subway train was approaching , and their scene had to be reshot several times because the train did not pass the actors on time . The crew also filmed shots of a dummy dressed as Lange being dragged by the train inside the dummy wall , but most of those scenes were not used in the final cut . The remaining five filming days focused primarily on the scenes between Braugher and D 'Onofrio , which Yoshimura and Fleder felt were the most crucial element of the episode . During the filming of the climactic scene with Pembleton and Lange which ends with Lange 's death , several members of the crew reacted emotionally , something Yoshimura said is extremely rare since the crew members typically look at their work as a job and do not become emotionally invested in the story they are filming . 
 While shooting the first subway scenes , D 'Onofrio 's performance was over @-@ the @-@ top and bombastic . Yoshimura asked him to act a little calmer during the earlier scenes and save the energy for the later scenes , because " if he did go up right away , there was nowhere else for him to go after that " . D 'Onofrio agreed and modified his performance accordingly . Fleder also clashed with MacVittie over his portrayal of the Biedron character . Fleder felt the character appeared too crazy in earlier scenes , and the actor was telegraphing the twist in which MacVittie would turn out to be a murderer . MacVittie approached Yoshimura about the criticism , but Yoshimura agreed with Fleder 's interpretation . After MacVittie toned down the character 's behavior , Fleder said he was extremely pleased with the end result . 
 Many of the firefighters appearing as extras in " Subway " were Baltimore firefighters . Yoshimura said the firefighters who appeared to be running in the episode were actors , while the real firefighters walked slowly because , based on their real @-@ life experience , they knew there would be no need to rush in a situation involving a fatality . Although power on the railings were turned off during shooting , the crew and producers were not aware that some residual electricity continues to run through the cars even after the tracks have been shut down . At one point during the shooting , D 'Onofrio felt a charge of that electricity run through him and said , " I 'm really feeling something strange here . " The crew initially believed D 'Onofrio to be ad @-@ libbing a line of dialogue in character , but eventually realized he was being electrified . When the Baltimore Metropolitan Transit Authority explained about the residual electricity , the crew installed rubber insulation so D 'Onofrio would not touch the metal of the train and experience any electricity . Fleder was impressed that D 'Onofrio continued with the shoot , and said , " Most actors I worked with would 've left the set at that point . " 
 = = = Photography = = = 
 " Subway " was shot by Alex Zakrzewski , the series ' regular director of photography . The episode was staged so that Pembleton is initially keeping his distance from Lange , but gradually moves closer and closer as they begin to bond , and by the end he is sitting next to him and holding his hand . Accordingly , the initial scenes included wider shots with Braugher and D 'Onofrio on the outer edges of the frame , but later scenes included more close @-@ ups of the two sitting together . Although Homicide : Life on the Street typically employs a number of back @-@ and @-@ forth whip pan @-@ style cuts , Fleder asked that the style be modified for this episode . In earlier scenes , Fleder asked for wider long shots to create a sense of setting within the subway station , and as the episode progressed and the story became more intense , he then allowed more close @-@ ups and whip pans . This led to disagreements on the set between Fleder and Zakrzewski , who felt Fleder was trying to being too disruptive and difficult . Fleder said of his behavior , " I have to admit , I 'm not the most charming guy on the set . I 'm just not . When I 'm on the set , I 'm very focused and my humor goes away and I become not so charming . " After the episode was complete , Fleder said he and Zakrzewski settled their differences and were both happy with the final result . 
 Fleder also asked for stylistic touches on the episode which were inconsistent with the show 's typical emphasis on documentary @-@ style realism . For example , he arranged for red scrim lighting to reflect on the subway car to add an artistic visual touch , even though there was nothing in particular in the subway station that reflected such a light . Upon hearing of the technique , Yoshimura was initially concerned , saying " Oh , he 's getting artsy <unk> with me . " Just before Lange 's death , Fleder included a close @-@ up with Braugher looking directly into the camera , breaking the fourth wall in a way typically forbidden on the show . During an outdoor dialogue scene between Johnson and Seda while the characters were driving in a car , Fleder filmed it by placing the camera outside the car 's front windshield and panning back and forth between the two actors . Unbeknownst to Fleder , all car shots on Homicide : Life on the Street are only allowed to be filmed from inside the car to keep the scene more realistic . As a result of Fleder 's car scene , a memo was circulated to the cast and crew reminding them of this policy and threatening to fire anybody who allowed a scene to be shot through the windshield again . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 The episode was edited by series regular Jay Rabinowitz in a Manhattan NBC facility , with consultation at various times by Fleder , Yoshimura and Tom Fontana . Rabinowitz edited the episode for several days alone , then worked with Fleder for four days , making hundreds of edits to the episode . Yoshimura worked with the editor next and was disappointed with the first cut of the episode that he saw , claiming it needed to be " a lot more frenetic and <unk> at the end , and not so artsy " . Yoshimura also told Rabinowitz the final cut of the episode should place strong emphasis on Braugher because he felt the story is experienced " through his eyes " . During the editing process , Yoshimura originally removed a scene featuring a silhouette of Pembleton riding the escalator out of the subway station after Lange died . Yoshimura felt the shot was too sentimental , but Levinson personally had it placed it back in the episode after Fleder claimed to have " begged " for it to be included . When Fontana first watched the episode , he felt the prologue was too confusing because it was difficult to tell what happened during the accident scene . It was edited so that rather focusing on medium shots of D 'Onofrio and MacVittie , it included a wider shot to establish the presence of a subway train before the accident so viewers would not be so confused . 
 Audio tracks were mixed with recorded sounds from real subway cars , as well as PA system announcements , to make the episode sound more authentic . In the original episode , Pembleton grabbed Biedron by the collar of his shirt while Biedron sat in the back of a squad car during one of the final scenes . The scene was modified so that Pembleton only looked at Biedron because Yoshimura felt the scene was just as effective without him grabbing Biedron . During the last scene of the episode , in which Lange 's girlfriend jogs by the subway station and ignores the emergency vehicles , Rabinowitz was originally instructed to include a musical score . He tried many different types of music , including rock music , Irish music , classical music , jazz , and piano riffs . When none of the music worked , Fontana suggested including no music at all , and it was agreed the silence was the most effective solution . Fontana said after watching the episode repeatedly during the editing process , he said he liked the final product but doubted he would watch it again for a long time because it was " too emotionally draining " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews and ratings = = = 
 " Subway " was originally scheduled to air during the 1997 November sweeps season , but lower @-@ than @-@ expected ratings for the three @-@ part sixth season premiere , " Blood Ties " , prompted NBC to move its broadcast date to December 5 and heavily promote it . The strategy also gave the press more time to preview it and generate reviews . Warren Littlefield said , " The feeling was let 's get out of the insanity of the sweeps and say , ' This is a little different ' — hopefully we 'll bring more people to this episode . " During this time , the episode was renamed " The Accident " in some advertising materials . 
 When all the Nielsen ratings markets were accounted for , " Subway " was listed as having been seen by 10 @.@ 3 million households . It was the third @-@ highest ranked show in its time @-@ slot , behind ABC 's 20 / 20 , which was seen by 17 @.@ 7 million households , and CBS 's Nash Bridges , which was seen by 11 @.@ 9 million . NBC executives had hoped that the extensive promotion and press coverage of " Subway " would help it outperform Nash Bridges and so lift Homicide : Life on the Street above its usual third place in the rankings . When it did not , " Subway " was considered a commercial failure , and helped fuel already existing discussions within NBC on whether to cancel the show . 
 Reviews were overwhelmingly positive for " Subway " . It was identified by The Baltimore Sun as one of the ten best episodes of the series , with Sun writer Chris Kaltenbach declaring , " Dramas don 't come any better than this . " Kinney Littlefield of The Orange County Register said it was " perhaps the best Homicide episode ever " and praised D 'Onofrio 's performance . USA Today gave the episode its highest rating of four stars . Tom Shales of The Washington Post called it , " a tour de force for D 'Onofrio and Braugher " . Entertainment Weekly writer Bruce Fretts said , " This is as gripping an hour of television as you 're ever likely to see . " Television and literary critic John Leonard said " Subway " was " an artistic experience that is as genuine and accomplished and crafted as you will get anywhere " . David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street : The Unofficial Companion , said of the episode , " Writer James Yoshimura proves that he has not lost his touch , with yet another truly grueling screenplay . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " Subway " won a 1998 Peabody Award for excellence in television broadcasting . The episode also received two Emmy Award nominations during the 50th Primetime Emmy Awards season . James Yoshimura was nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series for the episode 's script , and Vincent D 'Onofrio received a nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series . It lost both nominations ; NYPD Blue won the best writing Emmy for the fifth season episode " Lost Israel " , and John Larroquette won the guest actor award for his appearance in " Betrayal " , a second season episode of The Practice . However , Jay Rabinowitz and Wayne Hyde won an International Monitor Award for best editing in a film @-@ oriented television series . 
 In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " Subway " # 25 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes . 
 = = = Cultural influences = = = 
 Vincent D 'Onofrio 's character in " Subway " partially inspired the creation of the antagonist played by Bryan Cranston in " Drive " , a sixth season episode of The X @-@ Files , which first aired on November 15 , 1998 . In the episode , Cranston 's character is unpleasant and anti @-@ semitic , but he is dying throughout the episode , and screenwriter Vince Gilligan intended for the audience to sympathize with him despite his unlikeable qualities . Gilligan said this was influenced by " Subway " which he called an " amazing episode " . He said of D <unk> 's character : “ The brilliant thing they did in this episode , the thing that stuck with me , was this guy ’ s an asshole , the guy really is unpleasant , and yet at the end ( you ) still feel his humanity . " The casting of Cranston in this role directly led Gilligan to eventually cast him as the lead in his television series Breaking Bad . 
 = = PBS Documentary " Anatomy of a ' Homicide : Life on the Street ' " = = 
 WGBH @-@ TV , a Boston @-@ based Public Broadcasting Service station , produced a 75 @-@ minute television documentary about the episode " Subway " called Anatomy of a " Homicide : Life on the Street " . The documentary was written , produced and directed by filmmaker Theodore Bogosian , and was originally broadcast on November 4 , 1998 at 9 p.m. on PBS . The film focused predominantly on James Yoshimura , beginning with his conception of the script and ending with his reaction to the episode 's television broadcast and the ratings numbers . The documentary included a brief featurette about Homicide : Life on the Street and its history of both critical acclaim and low ratings . It also focused on the balance between art and business , with Yoshimura and the other producers trying to produce an intelligent , high quality episode while also capturing high ratings . 
 The documentary crew put wireless microphones on several of the actors and crew and followed them through the conception , pre @-@ production , filming , editing , screening and reception of " Subway " . Many people involved with the show found the process extremely disruptive . In particular , Fleder said he hates to be photographed and found the camera crew distracting and stressful . Fleder , who agreed to interviews for the documentary but refused to wear a microphone on the set , said of the crew , " To pull off a show like this , a seven @-@ day shoot with this much dialogue and this many shots per day , you have to be really , really focused , and for me the thing with the documentary crew kept pulling away from the focus . " 
 Rob Owen , television editor of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , said the documentary provided an interesting , entertaining and detailed look behind the scenes of the show . Owen said this was " rare , because TV doesn 't usually reveal details about itself . It 's nice to see PBS pulling back the curtain on its competition , and I wish it happened more often . " Manuel Mendoza of The Dallas Morning News praised it , calling it " a documentary as rare to public TV as Homicide is to commercial television " , but said it " falls short of being definitive " because it cannot address all elements of the series due to its brief running time . Several commentators praised the humorous scene in the documentary where Yoshimura goes line @-@ by @-@ line through his script and replaces curse words based on orders from NBC censors . 
 = The Secret of the Nagas = 
 The Secret of the Nagas is the second novel of the Shiva trilogy series by the Indian author Amish Tripathi . The story takes place in the imaginary land of Meluha and narrates how the inhabitants of that land are saved from their wars by a nomad named Shiva . It begins from where its predecessor , The Immortals of Meluha , left off , with Shiva trying to save Sati from the invading Naga . Later Shiva takes his troop of soldiers and travels far east to the land of Branga , where he wishes to find a clue to reach the Naga people . Shiva also learns that Sati 's first child is still alive , as well as her twin sister . His journey ultimately leads him to the Naga capital of Panchavati , where he finds a surprise waiting for him . 
 Tripathi started writing The Secret of the Nagas while the first part of the trilogy was being released . He relied on his knowledge of geography and history to expand the locations visited in the story . The book was released on 12 August 2011 , and was published by Westland Press . Before its release , the author confessed that many revelations would be present in the book , including the true nature of many characters . Two theatrical trailers were created for showing in multiplex cinema halls , as Tripathi believed that the film @-@ going audience also reads his books , and that would create publicity . 
 The Secret of the Nagas was in high demand before its release , with 80 @,@ 000 copies pre @-@ ordered . The book quickly reached the top of best @-@ seller listings , selling 95 @,@ 000 copies the first month , before going for a re @-@ print . As of June 2015 , over 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the Shiva Trilogy have been sold at gross retail sales of over ₹ 60 crore ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) . Although the book was commercially successful , The Secret of the Nagas received mixed reviews from critics . While it received praise for its " impressive conception " and story development , it also received criticism for Tripathi 's usage of non @-@ literary language . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 The story begins where The Immortals of Meluha ended . Shiva , the fabled savior of the land of Meluha , rushes to save his wife Sati from the Naga , the supposed killer of Shiva 's friend Brahaspati . The Naga escapes , leaving behind coins with strange engravings . After consulting with Sati 's father Daksha and Dilipa , the king of Ayodhya , they come to know that the coin belongs to King <unk> , the ruler of the land of Branga in eastern India . Shiva and Sati travel to Kashi , where a community of Brangas inhabit , in order to get more information on the Nagas . They are accompanied in their journey by Shiva 's General Parvateshwar , his associates Nandi and Veerbhadra , Ayurvati the doctor , and Bhagirath and Anandamayi , the prince and princess of Ayodhya . At Kashi , Parvateshwar gets mortally injured while trying to pacify a riot at the Branga community . The Branga leader Divodas administers a medicine on Parvateshwar ; it works and the General is healed , but Shiva comes to know from Ayurvati that it contains herbs which is only available at Panchavati , the capital of the Nagas . He consults with Divodas and comes to know that Branga suffers from a mortal plague , which has led them to ally with the Nagas , in return for benefits . Shiva decides to travel to Branga but Divodas informs him that to reach there special ships need to be made , which would take about six months . 
 As the ships are prepared Sati gives birth to Kartik , her son with Shiva . The journey to Branga starts , with Sati staying back at Kashi to help the King with a lion attack on the local villagers . When Sati and her soldiers are on the verge of losing against the lions , a group of Naga soldiers led by a man and a woman arrive and assist them in killing the lions . The Naga woman reveals herself to be Kali , Sati 's twin sister . She was denounced by their father Daksha since she was born with deformities , including two extra , functioning hands . The man reveals himself as Ganesh , Sati 's first child , whom she believed to have died at child birth . Since Ganesh was also born with deformities , which led to his face resembling that of an elephant ’ s , Daksha denounced him and lied to Sati . Both Kali and Ganesh are brought back to Kashi by Sati and they wait for Shiva 's arrival . 
 At Branga , Shiva learns that the only person aware of the medicine recipe is a bandit named Parashuram , who leads a secluded life and kills any man coming near his abode in the jungles . Shiva and his men defeat Parashuram , and to his surprise comes to know that he is a Vasudev , the group of scholars who have been guiding him on his journey . Parashuram is also surprised to see Shiva as the fabled Neelkanth ; in remorse for his actions , he severs his left hand . He gives the recipe of the medicine to the people of Branga and leaves for Kashi with Shiva . At Kashi , Shiva is introduced to Ganesh and Kali by Sati . Shiva recognizes Ganesh as the Naga who tried to attack on Sati and as the killer of Brahaspati . Severely angered , he leaves Sati and takes up residence at the Branga locality . One day , while playing with Kartik at a local park , three lions attack them and Ganesh becomes severely injured while saving Kartik . Shiva forgives him and together with Sati , confronts Daksha , who confesses to murdering Sati 's first husband and denouncing Kali and Ganesh . Daksha blames Shiva for causing distrust between him and Sati , who disgusted with Daksha 's deeds , asks him to leave Kashi and go back to Meluha . 
 Shiva decides to travel to Panchavati under the guidance of Kali , who is the Naga queen and knows the path through the Dandak Forest to the Naga capital . While traveling they are attacked from the river side by a cache of ships containing the weapons of mass destruction known as <unk> Astra that was once forbidden by Lord Rudra , the legendary supreme ruler of India . After fleeing from the attack and safely reaching Panchavati , Shiva and Sati suspect Daksha to be behind this . Kali takes Shiva to a nearby school in the capital , where she believes that the greatest secret of the Nagas lies . There in a classroom , Shiva finds Brahaspati , perfectly alive and teaching a class . 
 = = Characters and locations = = 
 Tripathi believes that " Myths are nothing but jumbled memories of a true past . A past buried under mounds of earth and ignorance . " The book has known characters from Hindu texts as well as those born from Tripathi 's imagination , however the characters from the Hinduism do not inherit all of their classical traits . 
 Characters 
 Shiva – The main character in the story . He is a Tibetan immigrant to Meluha and the chief of the Guna tribe . On arriving in Meluha and consuming the Somras ( a potion ) , his throat turns blue making him the Neelkanth of the Meluhan legend , which speaks of the appearance of Neelkanth as a destroyer of evil . The Meluhans end up believing that Shiva would be their saviour . 
 Sati – A Meluhan princess , she is the daughter of King Daksha . Shiva falls in love with her but could not marry her initially because of a law that considers her to be a Vikarma , an untouchable ; he later marries her going against the law . According to the Meluhans , <unk> are people who bear misfortunes in this life due to sins of their past births . Sati is a skilled swords @-@ woman and is very brave since childhood . 
 Kartik – Shiva 's and Sati 's son 
 Nandi – A captain in the Meluhan army . A loyal devotee of Shiva , who is often considered for his opinion and suggestions by Shiva . 
 Veer Bhadra – A captain of Shiva 's army and his close childhood friend . He was later renamed as Veer Bhadra , a title earned by once defeating a tiger singlehandedly . 
 <unk> – The chief Meluhan scientist who becomes Shiva 's good friend . Though he does not believe the legend of the Neelkanth , he believes that Shiva is capable of taking Meluha to its new glory . 
 Daksha – The King of the Meluhans , he is appreciative of every effort that Shiva does to save his country . 
 Veerini – The Queen of the Meluhans , wife of Emperor Daksha . 
 Bhagirath – The prince of Ayodhya , who is the target of an assassination plot . 
 Anandamayi – The princess of Ayodhya . Bhagirath 's sister . A strong @-@ willed woman , Anandamayi courts Parvateshwar as her consort . 
 Parvateshvar – Head of Meluhan Army and a Suryavanshi , Parvateshvar is critical of Shiva 's ways with the Meluhans , and is a dedicated man to Daksha . He eventually becomes an avid follower of Shiva as he realizes that Shiva could actually lead them to victory and finish Lord Ram 's Unfinished Task . 
 Ayurvati – The Chief of Medicine , Ayurvati is another intelligent and revered woman , who is capable of curing any disease . She is the first one to realize that Shiva is the " Neelkanth " , their savior . 
 Kali – Sati 's twin sister who was separated from her after birth , due to their father denouncing her . Kali was born with two extra functioning appendages , hence she was ostracized from society and declared a Naga . 
 Ganesh – Sati 's first child who was declared dead by her father , as he was born with physical deformities . Ganesh was raised later by Kali , and they created the formidable Naga army . 
 Races 
 Suryavanshis – The Suryavanshis are followers of Shri Ram and the Solar Calendar and try to lead a life that is as ideal as possible . The Suryavanshis believe in Satya , Dharma , Maan — truth , duty and honor . 
 Chandravanshis – The Chandravanshis are followers of the Lunar Calendar . Traditionally the Chandravanshis and Suryavanshis are enemies . 
 Naga – A cursed race of people who have physical deformities . They are extremely skilled warriors . 
 Kingdoms 
 Meluha – The empire of the Suryavanshis , also known as the land of pure life . Meluha is based in the areas of the modern Indian provinces of Kashmir , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Delhi , Haryana , Rajasthan , Gujarat and the whole of Pakistan . It also includes parts of eastern Afghanistan . 
 Swadweep – The empire of the Chandravanshis , also known as the island of the individual . Swadweep comprises the modern Indian provinces of Uttarakhand , Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Jharkhand , West Bengal , Sikkim , Assam , Meghalaya and all of the country of Bangladesh , besides most parts of Nepal and Bhutan . 
 <unk> ( Branga + <unk> ) – The heart of <unk> ( literal meaning ) or land of the Brangas , situated on the eastern part of India . Shiva travels there with his entourage in search of the recipe for a medicine and to know the truth about the Nagas . 
 Dandak Forest – Located in the modern Indian province of Maharashtra and parts of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Chhattisgarh , Orissa and Madhya Pradesh , Dandak is a dense and treacherous forest where the Nagas stay , at their capital Panchavati . 
 Characters and locations adapted as per the books from the series and from the official website . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Tripathi had initially decided to write a book on philosophy , but was dissuaded by his family members , so he wrote a book on Shiva , one of the Hindu gods . Tripathi 's agent decided to publish the book himself . After its release in February 2010 , The Immortals of Meluha went on to become a huge commercial success . It had to be reprinted a number of times to keep up with the demand . 
 While the first book was being released , Tripathi started work on the second part of the trilogy , then titled The Naga Secret . Tripathi wanted to start the story from exactly where he ended in the first book , with Sati 's fate being revealed . He also wanted to expand the geography of the story , allowing the characters to travel far East of India and also far South to the land of the Nagas , an ancient empire that existed more than five thousand years ago and was filled with eternal wars and the legend of a blue @-@ throated god who would save the world . In an interview with Mumbai Mirror in July 2011 , he clarified that it was difficult for him to do research about the geographical situations of India in 4000 BC in just one year , so he relied on his own knowledge and that of his relatives . " I was an atheist till eight years ago , but I have always been surrounded by relatives with immense faith , so scriptures are something I have inadvertently grown up with and learned " , he added . The mythological and the technical aspects included in the story also came from Tripathi 's habit of reading storybooks on history and ancient technology ; he was helped by his father , who is a scientist . Tripathi quit his job as a banker while writing the book , dedicating his whole time to the book . 
 Tripathi revealed in an interview with IBN Live that the story would continue from where it ended in the first book . The Secret of the Nagas was edited by <unk> Pandit , who also edited the first book . Rashmi Pusalkar designed the book cover , which depicted Shiva holding a snake and looking towards the banks of the city of Kashi . The photo was shot by Chandan <unk> , with Sagar Pusalkar standing in as a model for Shiva . The snake was created in CGI with the make @-@ up being done by Prakash Gor . Two trailers were created for promoting the book , one depicting Sati dancing and one showing Shiva drinking the Somras , thus turning his throat blue . The videos were conceptualized and marketed by Sangram Surve and Shalini Iyer of Think Why Not team , who also undertook the advertising of the book . The trailers are planned to be shown alongside films in multiplexes by the end of September or October 2011 . Tripathi believed that this would " work as the audience that visits theaters is the same that reads my books . " The book was released on 12 August 2011 , at Landmark Bookstores in Mumbai . Actor Vivek Oberoi was present with Tripathi at the launch . The UK publication rights of the Shiva trilogy , including The Secret of the Nagas was purchased by Jo Fletcher Books , with the deal being made by Claire Roberts at Trident Media Group , acting on behalf of the author and the author 's Indian agent , Anuj Bahri of Red Ink Literary Agency . 
 In 2013 , a music album called Vayuputras , an original soundtrack based on the Shiva Trilogy books , was released . The album is an extension of The Immortals of Meluha and The Secret of the Nagas with special tracks inspired by important junctures like Shiva 's dance and the war speech in the books . Artists like Sonu Nigam , Taufiq Qureshi , Palash Sen , Bickram Ghosh worked on the album . This was the first time ever that an original soundtrack was made for a book series . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 <unk> Khanna from Mint praised Tripathi 's portrayal of Shiva in the book , complimenting the fact that he was able to successfully deliver the humane side of his characters , and their emotions and motivations . He also pointed out that Tripathi 's experimentation with Indian Scriptures , has been successful in transforming an otherwise mundane genre , " long overdue in popular literature , especially by an Indian author " . However , he was disappointed in the weak dialogue and the grammatical errors scattered throughout the book , especially the inclusion of " glaringly out @-@ of @-@ place world " words , thus having too many anachronism in the book . Rito Paul from Daily News and Analysis shared Khanna 's opinion , while saying that the book " is impressive in its conception . But it is executed poorly . " We 're thrust into the narrative , mid @-@ action , exactly from where the first book ended . And the breathless pace of the action hardly ever lets up ... There are more twists and turns than in a Gordian knot , and at least two revelations of the ' Luke @-@ I @-@ am @-@ your @-@ father ' variety ... And it really <unk> , because there is so much scope for flair , adventure and wonder in the world Tripathi has imagined ... The Secrets is not a bad book . The plot holds your attention and the story races along , but the writing veers between the pedestrian and the ridiculous . Tripathi is an excellent story @-@ teller . But he is a poor writer . " 
 <unk> Pal of Mumbai Boss was disappointed in the book and theorized a number of reasons for it . He felt that the solid plot and the unambiguous storytelling of The Immortals of Meluha was missing in The Secret of the Nagas , whose ending failed to live up the curiosity . Pal particularly criticized Tripathi 's language , saying " It seems that while writing The Secret of the Nagas , much of Amish ’ s attention was upon language . There are obvious and woefully inept attempts at literary flair that make the novel a tiresome read . The book suffers from a rash of exclamation marks and unnecessary italics . Sentences have been sliced to create weak , dangling fragments ( ' Parashuram charged . Followed by his vicious horde ' ) . Instead of simply talking , people bellow , scream , whisper and fall silent . They are flabbergasted , they pirouette in the middle of a fight , and use words like ' exponentially ' , ' gargantuan ' and ' plethora ' in their speech . The net result is text that is labored , trite and awkward . " Kishwar Desai from Asian Age felt that in The Secret of the Nagas , the characterization of Shiva lost some of the fervor in it from the first book , and is cast more as a Bollywood hero , comparable to the likes of actor Salman Khan . Desai also noticed that there were too many characters in the book , most of them remaining unexplored . Likening the book with a computer game , the reviewer concluded that " one of the remarkable qualities of [ the book ] is that it is a very visual tale and less like a literary exercise . " Some critics like <unk> Deb of Outlook though favored the visual style more and felt that Tripathi stayed true to the fantasy genre . 
 " Well @-@ detailed world with its own geography , history and mythology , and he adds a quirky charm to his tale with dashes of modern science . And the second part is arguably the toughest to write , since it ’ s at the centre of the arc of the plot , where the trajectory could very easily flatten <unk> writer has to keep the momentum of the first part going , while setting up all the pieces for the finale , scattering around a few clues to <unk> the reader enough to stay with the storyteller for the full <unk> Amish does not disappoint . Mysterious hints dropped in Immortals get explained , the scale widens by several orders of magnitude , and the nature of Shiva ’ s quest becomes more complex , even as its ultimate goal becomes much more fundamental . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The Secret of the Nagas was in high demand before its release . Of the 100 @,@ 000 copies printed for it , 80 @,@ 000 copies had already been pre @-@ ordered , according to Nielsen BookScan . After release it quickly became a best @-@ selling fiction , topping the list published by Hindustan Times . It went on to sell 95 @,@ 000 copies , with a second print run of 50 @,@ 000 more being ordered . Khanna attributed this success to the increasing interest in the series . He explained that Tripathi 's portrayal of mythology in a different way had been long been popular with comics writers , but few Indian writers have used it yet — and none with the sort of success that Tripathi has achieved . Khanna drew a contrast between the retail price of The Secret of the Nagas and that of contemporary author Chetan Bhagat 's novel Revolution 2020 , explaining that while Tripathi 's book was selling at the original price , Bhagat 's novel was sold at a reduced price to attain sales . This view was shared by Deepanjana Paul of The First Post , who believed that " if readers like the writing , they aren 't averse to paying more . " The book sold over 175 @,@ 000 copies , making it one of the best @-@ selling fiction novels of 2010 and also of 2011 . The Immortals of Meluha and The Secret of the Nagas , have crossed a print run of a million copies . These books have continued to top the bestseller lists of Nielsen BookScan , with the gross retail sales of ₹ 220 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 3 million ) within two years of publishing . As of June 2015 over 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the Shiva Trilogy have been sold with gross retail sales of over ₹ 60 crore ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The books have been translated into a number of local languages like English ( South Asia ) , Hindi , Tamil , Marathi , Gujarati , Assamese , English ( UK ) , Telugu and Malayalam , with the author believing that publishing as a whole is gradually being embedded in the Indian business sensibilities . Further explaining his thoughts , Tripathi said " I genuinely believe those five years from today , we will have a situation when other languages will account for higher sales of books than in English . That is the big change happening in publishing — it is taking pride in its own culture than knowing other cultures like in television , where regional language channels have more TRPs . " Other than the local versions , the books have also been released in the Amazon Kindle version , available in India and UK . 
 = William H. Seward = 
 William Henry Seward ( May 16 , 1801 – October 10 , 1872 ) was United States Secretary of State from 1861 to 1869 , and earlier served as Governor of New York and United States Senator . A determined opponent of the spread of slavery in the years leading up to the American Civil War , he was a dominant figure in the Republican Party in its formative years . Although regarded as the leading contender for the party 's presidential nomination in 1860 , he was defeated by Abraham Lincoln . 
 Seward was born in southeastern New York , where his father , a farmer , owned slaves . He became educated as a lawyer , moving to the Central New York town of Auburn . Seward was elected to the New York State Senate in 1830 as an Anti @-@ Mason . Four years later , he became the Whig Party 's gubernatorial nominee . Though he was not successful in that race , Seward was elected governor in 1838 , winning a second two @-@ year term in 1840 . During this period , he signed several laws advancing the rights and opportunities for black residents , as well as guaranteeing fugitive slaves jury trials in the state , protecting abolitionists , and using his position to intervene in cases of free blacks enslaved in the South . 
 After several years practicing law in Auburn , he was elected by the state legislature to the U.S. Senate in 1849 . Seward 's strong stances and provocative words against slavery brought him hatred in the South . He was re @-@ elected to the Senate in 1855 , and soon joined the nascent Republican Party , becoming one of its leading figures . As the 1860 presidential election cycle approached , he was regarded as the leading candidate for the Republican nomination . Several factors , including attitudes to his vocal opposition to slavery , his support for immigrants and Catholics , and his association with editor and political boss Thurlow Weed , combined to defeat him . Although devastated by his loss , he campaigned for Lincoln , who was elected , and who appointed him Secretary of State . 
 Seward did his best to stop the southern states from seceding ; once that failed , he devoted himself wholeheartedly to the Union cause . His firm stance against foreign intervention in the Civil War helped deter Britain and France from entering the conflict and possibly gaining the independence of the Confederate States . He was one of the targets of the 1865 assassination plot that killed Lincoln , and was seriously wounded by conspirator Lewis Powell . Seward remained loyally at his post through the presidency of Andrew Johnson , during which he achieved the Alaska purchase . His contemporary Carl Schurz described Seward as " one of those spirits who sometimes will go ahead of public opinion instead of tamely following its footprints . " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Seward was born in the small community of Florida , New York , in Orange County , on May 16 , 1801 , the third son of Samuel Sweezy Seward and his wife Mary ( Jennings ) Seward . Samuel Seward was a wealthy landowner and slaveholder in New York State ; slavery was not fully abolished until 1827 . Florida , located some 60 miles ( 97 km ) from New York City and west of the Hudson River , was a small rural village of perhaps a dozen homes . Young Seward attended school there , and also in the nearby county seat of Goshen . He was a bright student and enjoyed his studies . In later years , one of the former family slaves would relate that instead of running away from school to go home , Seward would run away from home to go to school . 
 At the age of 15 , Henry ( he was known by his middle name as a boy ) was sent to Union College in Schenectady , New York . Admitted to the sophomore class , Seward became a star student , elected to Phi Beta Kappa . Samuel Seward kept his son short on cash , and in December 1818 , in the middle of Henry 's final year at Union , the two quarreled about money . The younger Seward returned to Schenectady , but soon left school in company with a fellow student , Alvah Wilson . The two took ship from New York to Georgia , where Wilson had been offered a job in rural Putnam County as rector , or principal , of a new academy . En route , Wilson took a job at another school , leaving Seward to continue on to <unk> in Putnam County . The trustees interviewed the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Seward , and found his qualifications acceptable . 
 Seward enjoyed his time in Georgia , where he was accepted as an adult for the first time in his life . He was treated hospitably , but also witnessed the ill @-@ treatment of slaves . Seward was persuaded to return to New York by his family , and did so in June 1819 . As it was too late for him to graduate with his class , he studied law at an attorney 's office in Goshen before returning to Union College , securing his degree with highest honors in June 1820 . 
 = = Lawyer and state senator = = 
 = = = Early career and involvement in politics = = = 
 After graduation , Seward spent much of the following two years studying law in Goshen and New York City with attorneys John Duer , John Anthon and Ogden Hoffman . He passed the bar examination in late 1822 . He could have practiced in Goshen , but disliked the town , and sought a practice in growing Western New York . Seward decided upon Auburn in Cayuga County , about 150 miles ( 240 km ) west of Albany , and 200 miles ( 320 km ) northwest of Goshen . He joined the practice of retired judge Elijah Miller , whose daughter Frances Adeline Miller was a classmate of his sister Cornelia at Emma Willard 's Troy Female Seminary . Seward married Frances Miller on October 20 , 1824 . 
 In 1824 , while Seward was journeying with his wife to Niagara Falls , one of the wheels on his carriage was damaged while they passed through Rochester . Among those who came to their aid was local newspaper publisher Thurlow Weed . Seward and Weed would become closer in the years ahead as they found they shared a belief that government policies should promote infrastructure improvements , such as roads and canals . Weed , deemed by some one of the earliest political bosses , would become a major ally of Seward . Despite the benefits to Seward 's career of such a supporter , perceptions that Seward was too much controlled by Weed became a factor in the former 's defeat for the Republican nomination for president in 1860 . 
 Almost from the time he settled in Auburn , Seward involved himself in politics . At that time , the political system was in flux as new parties evolved . In New York State , there were generally two factions , which went by varying names , but were characterized by the fact that Martin Van Buren led one element , and the other opposed him . Van Buren , over a quarter century , held a series of senior posts , generally in the federal government . His allies were dubbed the Albany Regency , as they governed for Van Buren while he was away . 
 Seward originally supported the Regency , but by 1824 had broken from it , concluding it was corrupt . He became part of the Anti @-@ Masonic Party , which became widespread in 1826 after the disappearance and death of William Morgan , a Mason in Upstate New York ; he was most likely killed by fellow Masons for publishing a book revealing the order 's secret rites . Since the leading candidate in opposition to President John Quincy Adams was General Andrew Jackson , a Mason who mocked opponents of the order , Anti @-@ Masonry became closely associated with opposition to Jackson , and to his policies once he was elected president in 1828 . 
 Governor DeWitt Clinton had nominated Seward as Cayuga County Surrogate in late 1827 or early 1828 , but as Seward was unwilling to support Jackson , he was not confirmed by the state Senate . During the 1828 campaign , Seward made speeches in support of President Adams ' re @-@ election . Seward was nominated for the federal House of Representatives by the Anti @-@ Masons , but withdrew , deeming the fight hopeless . In 1829 , Seward was offered the local nomination for New York State Assembly , but again felt there were no prospects of winning . In 1830 , with Weed 's aid , he gained the Anti @-@ Masonic nomination for state senator for the local district . Seward had appeared in court throughout the district , and had spoken in favor of government support for infrastructure improvements , a position popular there . Weed had moved his operations to Albany , where his newspaper , the Albany Evening Journal , advocated for Seward , who was elected by about 2 @,@ 000 votes . 
 = = = State senator and gubernatorial candidate = = = 
 Seward was sworn in as state senator in January 1831 . He left Frances and their children in Auburn , and wrote to her of his experiences . These included meeting former vice president Aaron Burr , who had returned to practicing law in New York following a self @-@ imposed exile in Europe after his duel with Alexander Hamilton and treason trial . The Regency ( or the Democrats , as the national party led by Jackson and supported by Van Buren was becoming known ) controlled the Senate . Seward and his party allied with dissident Democrats and others to pass some legislation , including penal reform measures , for which Seward would become known . 
 During his term as state senator , Seward traveled extensively , going to visit other anti @-@ Jackson leaders , including former president Adams . He also accompanied his father Samuel Seward on a trip to Europe , where they met the political men of the day . Seward hoped that the Anti @-@ Masons would nominate Supreme Court Justice John McLean for president against Jackson 's re @-@ election bid in 1832 , but the nomination fell to former Attorney General William Wirt . Kentucky Senator Henry Clay , an opponent of Jackson , was a Mason , and thus unacceptable as party standard @-@ bearer . In the aftermath of Jackson 's easy victory , many of those who opposed him believed a united front necessary to defeat the Democrats , and the Whig Party gradually came into being . The Whigs believed in legislative action to develop the country , and opposed Jackson 's unilateral actions as president , which they deemed imperial . Many Anti @-@ Masons , including Seward and Weed , readily joined the new party . 
 In preparation for the 1834 election , New York 's Whigs met in Utica to determine a gubernatorial candidate . Democratic Governor William Marcy was heavily favored to be re @-@ elected , and few prominent Whigs were anxious to run a campaign which would most likely be lost . Seward 's wife and father wanted him to retire from politics to increase the income from his law practice , and Weed urged him to seek re @-@ election to the state Senate . Nevertheless , the reluctance of others to run caused Seward to emerge as a major candidate . Weed procured Seward 's triumph at the Utica convention . The election turned on national issues , most importantly President Jackson 's policies . These were then popular , and in a strong year for Democrats , Seward was defeated by some 11 @,@ 000 votes — Weed wrote that the Whigs were overwhelmed by illegally cast ballots . 
 Defeated for governor and with his term in the state Senate having expired , Seward returned to Auburn and the practice of law at the start of 1835 . That year , Seward and his wife undertook a lengthy trip , going as far south as Virginia . Although they were hospitably received by southerners , the Sewards saw scenes of slavery which confirmed them as its opponents . The following year , Seward accepted a position as agent for the new owners of the Holland Land Company , which owned huge tracts of land in Western New York , upon which many settlers were purchasing real estate on installment . The new owners were viewed as less forgiving landlords than the old , and when there was unrest , they hired Seward , popular in Western New York , in hopes of adjusting the matter . He was successful , and when the Panic of 1837 began , persuaded the owners to avoid foreclosures where possible . He also , in 1838 , arranged the purchase of the company 's holdings by a consortium that included himself . 
 Van Buren had been elected president in 1836 ; even with his duties , Seward had found time to campaign against him . The economic crisis came soon after the inauguration , and threatened the Regency 's control of New York politics . Seward had not run for governor in 1836 , but with the Democrats unpopular , saw a path to victory in 1838 ( the term was then two years ) . Other prominent Whigs also sought the nomination . Weed persuaded delegates to the convention that Seward had run ahead of other Whig candidates in 1834 ; Seward was nominated on the fourth ballot . Seward 's opponent was again Marcy , and the economy the principal issue . The Whigs argued that the Democrats were responsible for the recession . As it was thought improper for candidates for major office to campaign in person , Seward left most of that to Weed . Seward was elected by a margin of about 10 @,@ 000 votes out of 400 @,@ 000 cast . The victory was the most significant for the Whig Party to that point , and put the Regency permanently out of power in New York State . 
 = = Governor of New York = = 
 William Seward was sworn in as New York 's governor on January 1 , 1839 , inaugurated in front of a crowd of jubilant Whigs . In that era , the annual message by the New York governor was published and discussed to an extent that only a president 's would be today . Seward biographer Walter Stahr wrote that his address " brimmed with his youth , energy , ambition , and optimism " . Seward took note of America 's great unexploited resources , and stated that immigration should be encouraged in order to take advantage of them . He urged that citizenship and religious liberty be granted to those who came to New York 's shores . At the time , New York City 's public schools were run by a Protestant group , and used Protestant texts , including the King James Bible . Seward believed the current system was a barrier to literacy for immigrants ' children , and proposed legislation to change it . Education , he stated , " banishes the distinctions , old as time , of rich and poor , master and slave . It banishes ignorance and lays axe to the root of crime " . Seward 's stance was popular among immigrants , but was disliked by nativists ; their opposition would eventually help defeat his bid for the Republican presidential nomination in 1860 . 
 Although the Assembly had a Whig majority at the start of Seward 's first term as governor , the party had only 13 legislators out of 32 in the state Senate . The Democrats refused to co @-@ operate with Governor Seward except on the most urgent matters , and he initially found himself unable to advance much of his agenda . Accordingly , the 1839 legislative elections were crucial to Seward 's legislative hopes , and to advancing the nominations of many Whigs to state office whose posts required Senate confirmation . Both Seward and President Van Buren gave several speeches across New York State that summer . Henry Clay , one of the hopefuls for the Whig nomination for president , spent part of the summer in Upstate New York , and the two men met by chance on a ferry . Seward refused to formally visit Clay at his vacation home in Saratoga Springs in the interests of neutrality , beginning a difficult relationship between the two men . After the 1839 election , the Whigs had 19 seats , allowing the party full control of state government . 
 Following the election , there was unrest near Albany among tenant farmers on the land owned by Dutch @-@ descended patroons of the van Rensselaer family . These tenancies allowed the landlords privileges such as enlisting the unpaid labor of tenants , and any breach could result in termination of tenure without compensation for improvements . When sheriff 's deputies in Albany County were obstructed from serving eviction writs , Seward was asked to call out the militia . After an all @-@ night cabinet meeting , he did so , though quietly assuring the tenants that he would intervene with the legislature . This mollified the settlers , though Seward proved unable to get the legislature to pass reforming laws . This question of tenants ' rights was not settled until after Seward had left office . 
 In September 1839 , a ship sailing from Norfolk , Virginia to New York City had been discovered to have an escaped slave on board . The slave was returned to his owner pursuant to the Fugitive Slave Clause of the Constitution , but Virginia also demanded that three free black sailors , said to have concealed the fugitive aboard ship , be surrendered to its custody . This Seward would not do , and the Virginia General Assembly passed legislation inhibiting trade with New York . With Seward 's encouragement , the New York legislature passed acts in 1840 protecting the rights of African Americans against Southern slave @-@ catchers . One guaranteed alleged fugitive slaves the right of a jury trial in New York to establish whether they were slaves , and another pledged the aid of the state to recover free blacks kidnapped into slavery ( as happened to Solomon Northup of Saratoga Springs in 1841 , who did not regain freedom until 1853 . ) 
 Both Seward and Van Buren were up for re @-@ election in 1840 . Seward did not attend the December 1839 Whig National Convention in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , but Weed did on his behalf . They were determined to support General Winfield Scott for president , but when Weed concluded Scott could not win , he threw New York 's support to the eventual winner , General William Henry Harrison . This action outraged supporters of Senator Clay . These grievances would not be quickly forgotten — one supporter of the Kentuckian wrote in 1847 that he was intent on seeing the " punishment of Seward & Co. for defrauding the country of Mr. Clay in 1840 " . 
 Seward was renominated for a second term by the Whig convention against Democrat William Brock , a former state legislator . Seward did not campaign in person , but ran affairs with Weed behind the scenes and made his views known to voters through a Fourth of July speech and lengthy letters , declining invitations to speak , printed in the papers . In one , Seward expounds upon the importance of the log cabin — a structure evoking the common man and a theme that the Whigs used heavily in the national campaign — where Seward had always found a far warmer welcome than in the marble palaces of the well @-@ to @-@ do ( evoking the aristocratic Van Buren ) . Both Harrison and Seward were elected . Although Seward would serve another almost thirty years in public life , his name would never again pass before the voters . 
 In his second term , Seward was involved with the trial of Alexander McLeod , who had boasted of involvement in the 1837 Caroline Affair , in which Canadians came across the Niagara River and sank the Caroline , a steamboat being used to supply William Lyon Mackenzie 's fighters during the Upper Canada Rebellion . McLeod was arrested , but the British Foreign Minister , Lord Palmerston , demanded his release . McLeod , who was part of the Canadian colonial militia , could not be held responsible for actions taken under orders . Although the Van Buren administration had agreed with Seward that McLeod should be tried under state law , its successor did not , and urged that charges against McLeod be dropped . A series of testy letters were exchanged between Governor Seward and Harrison 's Secretary of State Daniel Webster , and also between the governor and the new president John Tyler , who succeeded on Harrison 's death after a month in office . McLeod was tried and acquitted in late 1841 . Stahr pointed out that Seward got his way in having McLeod tried in state court , and the diplomatic experience served him well as Secretary of State . 
 Seward continued his support of African Americans , signing legislation in 1841 to repeal a " nine @-@ month law " that allowed slaveholders to bring their slaves into the state for a period of nine months before they were considered free . After this , slaves brought to the state were immediately considered freed . Seward also signed legislation to establish public education for all children , leaving it up to local jurisdictions as to how that would be supplied ( some had segregated schools ) . 
 = = Out of office = = 
 As governor , Seward incurred considerable personal debt not only because he had to live beyond his salary to maintain the lifestyle expected of the office , but also because he could not pay down his obligation from the land company purchase . At the time he left office , he owed $ 200 @,@ 000 . Returning to Auburn , he absorbed himself in a profitable law practice . He did not abandon politics , and received former president Adams at the Seward family home in 1843 . 
 According to his biographer , John M. Taylor , Seward picked a good time to absent himself from electoral politics , as the Whig Party was in turmoil . President Tyler , a former Democrat , and Senator Clay each claimed leadership of the Whig Party and , as the two men differed over such issues as whether to re @-@ establish the Bank of the United States , party support was divided . The abolitionist movement attracted those who did not want to be part of a party led by slavery @-@ supporting southerners . In 1844 , Seward was asked to run for president by members of the Liberty Party ; he declined and reluctantly supported the Whig nominee , Clay . The Kentuckian was defeated by Democrat James K. Polk . The major event of Polk 's administration was the Mexican – American War ; Seward did not support this , feeling that the price in blood was not worth the increase in territory , especially as southerners were promoting this acquisition to expand territory for slavery . 
 In 1846 Seward became the center of controversy in Auburn when he defended , in separate cases , two felons accused of murder . Henry Wyatt , a white man , was charged with fatally stabbing a fellow inmate in prison ; William Freeman , an African American , was accused of breaking into a house after his release and stabbing four people to death . In both cases the defendants were likely mentally ill and had been abused while in prison . Seward , having long been an advocate of prison reform and better treatment for the insane , sought to prevent each man from being executed by using the relatively new defense of insanity . Seward gained a hung jury in Wyatt 's first trial , though he was subsequently convicted in a retrial and executed despite Seward 's efforts to secure clemency . Freeman was convicted , though Seward gained a reversal on appeal . There was no second Freeman trial , as officials were convinced of his insanity . Freeman died in prison in late 1846 . In the Freeman case , invoking mental illness and racial issues , Seward argued , " he is still your brother , and mine , in form and color accepted and approved by his Father , and yours , and mine , and bears equally with us the proudest inheritance of our race — the image of our Maker . Hold him then to be a Man . " 
 Although contentious locally , the trials boosted Seward 's image across the North . He gained further publicity in association with Ohioan Salmon P. Chase when handling the unsuccessful appeal in the United States Supreme Court of John Van Zandt , an anti @-@ slavery advocate sued by a slaveowner for assisting African Americans in escaping on the Underground Railroad . Chase was impressed with Seward , writing that the former New York governor " was one of the very first public men in our country . Who but himself would have done what he did for the poor wretch Freeman ? " 
 The main Whig contenders in 1848 were Clay again , and two war hero generals with little political experience , Winfield Scott and Zachary Taylor . Seward supported the nominee , General Taylor . The former governor was less enthusiastic about the vice @-@ presidential candidate , New York Comptroller Millard Fillmore , a rival of his from Buffalo . Nevertheless , he campaigned widely for the Whigs against the Democratic presidential candidate , former Michigan senator Lewis Cass . The two major parties did not make slavery an issue in the campaign . The Free Soil Party , mostly Liberty Party members and some Northern Democrats , nominated former president Van Buren . The Taylor / Fillmore ticket was elected , and the split in the New York Democratic Party allowed the Whigs to capture the legislature . 
 State legislatures elected U.S. Senators until the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment in 1913 . In 1849 one of New York 's seats was up for election , and a Whig would likely be elected to replace John Adams Dix . Seward , with Weed 's counsel , decided to seek the seat . When legislators convened in January 1849 , he was spoken of as the favorite . Some opposed him as too extreme on slavery issues , and intimated that he would not support the slaveholding President @-@ elect Taylor , a Louisianan . Weed and Seward worked to dispel these concerns , and when the vote for the Senate seat took place , the former governor received five times the vote of the nearest other candidate , gaining easy election on the first ballot . 
 = = U.S. Senator = = 
 = = = First term = = = 
 William Seward was sworn in as senator from New York on March 5 , 1849 , during the brief special session called to confirm President Taylor 's cabinet nominees . Seward was seen as having influence over Taylor : taking advantage of an acquaintance with Taylor 's brother . Seward met with the former general several times before Inauguration Day ( March 4 ) , and was friendly with Cabinet officers . Taylor hoped to gain the admission of California to the Union , and Seward worked to advance his agenda in the Senate . 
 The regular session of Congress that began in December 1849 was dominated by the issue of slavery . Senator Clay advanced a series of resolutions , which became known as the Compromise of 1850 , giving victories to both North and South . Seward opposed the pro @-@ slavery elements of the Compromise , and in a speech on the Senate floor on March 11 , 1850 invoked a " higher law than the Constitution " . The speech was widely reprinted , and made Seward the leading anti @-@ slavery advocate in the Senate . President Taylor took a stance sympathetic to the North , but his death in July 1850 caused the accession of the pro @-@ Compromise Fillmore and ended Seward 's influence over patronage . The Compromise passed , and many Seward adherents in federal office in New York were replaced by Fillmore appointees . 
 Although Clay had hoped the Compromise would be a final settlement on the matter of slavery that could unite the nation , it divided his Whig Party , especially when the 1852 Whig National Convention endorsed it to the anger of liberal northerners like Seward . The major candidates for the presidential nomination were President Fillmore , Senator Daniel Webster , and General Scott . Seward supported Scott , who he hoped like Harrison could unite enough voters behind a military hero to win the election . Scott gained the nomination , and Seward campaigned for him . With the Whigs unable to reconcile over slavery , whereas the Democrats could unite behind the Compromise , the Whigs won only four states , and former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce was elected president . Other events , such as the 1852 publication of Uncle Tom 's Cabin and Northern anger over the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act ( an element of the Compromise ) , widened the divide between North and South . 
 Seward 's wife Frances was deeply committed to the abolitionist movement . In the 1850s , the Seward family opened their Auburn home as a safehouse to fugitive slaves on the Underground Railroad . Seward 's frequent travel and political work suggest that it was Frances who played the more active role in Auburn abolitionist activities . In the excitement following the rescue and safe transport of fugitive slave William " Jerry " Henry in Syracuse on October 1 , 1851 , Frances wrote to her husband , " two fugitives have gone to Canada — one of them our acquaintance John . " Another time she wrote , " A man by the name of William Johnson will apply to you for assistance to purchase the freedom of his daughter . You will see that I have given him something by his book . I told him I thought you would give him more . " 
 In January 1854 , Democratic Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas introduced his Kansas – Nebraska Bill . This would permit territories to choose whether to join the Union as free or slave states , and effectively repeal the Missouri Compromise forbidding slavery in new states north of 36 ° 30 ′ North latitude . Seward was determined to defeat what he called " this infamous Nebraska Bill " , and worked to ensure the final version of the bill would be unpalatable to enough senators , North and South , to defeat it . Seward spoke against the bill both on initial consideration in the Senate and when the bill returned after reconciliation with the House . The bill passed into law , but northerners felt they had found a standard around which they could rally . Those in the South defended the new law , arguing that they should have an equal stake through slavery in the territories their blood and money had helped secure . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 The political turmoil engendered by the North @-@ South divide not only split both major parties , but led to the founding of new ones . The American Party ( better known as the Know Nothings ) contained many nativists , and pursued an anti @-@ immigrant agenda . The Know Nothings did not publicly discuss party deliberations ( thus , they knew nothing ) . They disliked Seward , and an uncertain number of Know Nothings sought the Whig nomination to legislative seats . Some made clear their stance by pledging to vote against Seward 's re @-@ election , but others did not . Although the Whigs won a majority in both houses of the state legislature , the extent of their support for Seward as US senator was unclear . When the election was held by the legislature in February 1855 , Seward won a narrow majority in each house . The opposition was scattered , and a Know Nothing party organ denounced two dozen legislators as " traitors " . 
 The Republican Party had been founded in 1854 , in reaction to the Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act . Its anti @-@ slavery stance was attractive to Seward , but he needed the Whig structure in New York to get re @-@ elected . In September 1855 , the New York Whig and Republican parties held simultaneous conventions that quickly merged into one . Seward was the most prominent figure to join the new party , and was spoken of as a possible presidential candidate in 1856 . Weed , however , did not feel that the new party was strong enough on a national level to secure the presidency , and advised Seward to wait until 1860 . When Seward 's name was mentioned at the 1856 Republican National Convention , a huge ovation broke out . In the 1856 presidential election , the Democratic candidate , former Pennsylvania senator James Buchanan , defeated the Republican , former California senator John C. Frémont , and the Know Nothing candidate , former president Fillmore . 
 The 1856 campaign played out against the backdrop of " Bleeding Kansas " , the violent efforts of pro- and anti @-@ slavery forces to control the government in Kansas Territory and determine whether it would be admitted as a slave or free state . This violence spilled over into the Senate chamber itself after Republican Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner delivered an incendiary speech against slavery , making personal comments against South Carolina Senator Andrew P. Butler . Sumner had read a draft of the speech to Seward , who had advised him to omit the personal references . Two days after the speech , Butler 's nephew , Congressman Preston Brooks entered the chamber and beat Sumner with a cane , injuring him severely . Although some southerners feared the propaganda value of the incident in the North , most lionized Brooks as a hero . Many northerners were outraged , though some , including Seward , felt that Sumner 's words against Butler had unnecessarily provoked the attack . Some Southern newspapers felt that the Sumner precedent might usefully be applied to Seward ; the Petersburg Intelligencer , a Virginia periodical , suggested that " it will be very well to give Seward a double dose at least every other day " . 
 In a message to Congress in December 1857 , President Buchanan advocated the admission of Kansas as a slave state under the Lecompton Constitution , passed under dubious circumstances . This split the Democrats : the administration wanted Kansas admitted ; Senator Douglas demanded a fair ratification vote . The Senate debated the matter through much of early 1858 , though few Republicans spoke at first , content to watch the Democrats tear their party to shreds over the issue of slavery . The issue was complicated by the Supreme Court 's ruling the previous year in Dred Scott v. Sandford that neither Congress nor a local government could ban slavery in the territories . 
 In a speech on March 3 in the Senate , Seward " delighted Republican ears and utterly appalled administration Democrats , especially the Southerners " . Discussing Dred Scott , Seward accused Buchanan and Chief Justice Roger B. Taney of conspiring to gain the result , and threatened to reform the courts to eliminate Southern power . Taney later told a friend that if Seward had been elected in 1860 , he would have refused to administer the oath of office . Buchanan reportedly denied the senator access to the White House . Seward predicted slavery was doomed : 
 The interest of the white races demands the ultimate emancipation of all men . Whether that consummation shall be allowed to take effect , with needful and wise precautions against sudden change and disaster , or be hurried on by violence , is all that remains for you to decide . 
 Southerners saw this as a threat , by the man deemed the likely Republican nominee in 1860 , to force change on the South whether it liked it or not . Statehood for Kansas failed for the time being , but Seward 's words were repeatedly cited by Southern senators as the secession crisis grew . Nevertheless , Seward remained on excellent personal terms with individual southerners such as Mississippi 's Jefferson Davis . His dinner parties , where those from both sides of the sectional divide mixed and mingled , were a Washington legend . 
 With an eye to a presidential bid in 1860 , Seward tried to appear a statesman who could be trusted by both North and South . Seward did not believe the federal government could mandate emancipation but that it would develop by action of the slave states as the nation urbanized and slavery became uneconomical , as it had in New York . Southerners still believed that he was threatening the forced end of slavery . While campaigning for Republicans in the 1858 midterm elections , Seward gave a speech at Rochester that proved divisive and quotable , alleging that the U.S. had two " antagonistic system [ that ] are continually coming into closer contact , and collision results . … It is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces , and it means that the United States must and will , sooner or later , become entirely either a slave @-@ holding nation , or entirely a free @-@ labor nation . " White southerners saw the " irrepressible conflict " speech as a declaration of war , and Seward 's vehemence ultimately damaged his chances of gaining the presidential nomination . 
 = = Election of 1860 = = 
 = = = Candidate for the nomination = = = 
 In 1859 , Seward was advised by his political supporters that he would be better off avoiding additional controversial statements , and left the country for an eight @-@ month tour of Europe and the Middle East . Seward spent two months in London , meeting with the Prime Minister , Lord Palmerston , and was presented at Court to Queen Victoria . Seward returned to Washington in January 1860 to find controversy : that some southerners blamed him for his rhetoric , which they believed had inspired John Brown to try to start a slave insurrection . Brown was captured and executed ; nevertheless , Mississippi representatives Reuben Davis and Otho Singleton each stated that if Seward or another Radical Republican was elected , he would meet with the resistance of a united South . To rebut such allegations , and to set forth his views in the hope of receiving the nomination , Seward made a major speech in the Senate on February 29 , 1860 , which most praised , though white southerners were offended , and some abolitionists also objected because the senator , in his speech , said that Brown was justly punished . The Republican National Committee ordered 250 @,@ 000 copies in pamphlet form , and eventually twice that many were printed . 
 Weed sometimes expressed certainty that Seward would be nominated ; at other times he expressed gloom at the thought of the convention fight . He had some reason for doubt , as word from Weed 's agents across the country was mixed . Many in the Midwest did not want the issue of slavery to dominate the campaign , and with Seward as nominee , it inevitably would . The Know Nothing Party was still alive in the Northeast , and was hostile to Seward for his pro @-@ immigrant stances , creating doubts as to whether Seward could win Pennsylvania and New Jersey , where there were many nativists , in the general election . These states were crucial to a Republican nominee faced with a Solid South . Conservative factions in the evolving Republican Party opposed Seward . 
 = = = Convention = = = 
 There were no primaries in 1860 , no way to be certain how many delegates a candidate might receive . Nevertheless , going into the 1860 Republican National Convention in May in Chicago , Seward was seen as the overwhelming favorite . Others spoken of for the nomination included Ohio Governor Salmon P. Chase , former Missouri congressman Edward Bates , and former Illinois congressman Abraham Lincoln . 
 Seward stayed in Auburn during the convention ; Weed was present on his behalf and worked to shore up Seward 's support . He was amply supplied with money : business owners had eagerly given , expecting Seward to be the next president . Weed 's reputation was not entirely positive ; he was believed corrupt by some , and his association both helped and hurt Seward . 
 Enemies such as publisher and former Seward ally Horace Greeley cast doubts as to Seward 's electability in the battleground states of Illinois , Indiana , Pennsylvania and New Jersey . Lincoln had worked hard to gain a reputation as a moderate in the party and hoped to be seen as a consensus second choice , who might be successful in those critical states , of which the Republicans had to win three to secure the election . Lincoln 's men , led by his friend David Davis , were active on his behalf . As Lincoln had not been seen as a major candidate , his supporters had been able to influence the decision to hold the convention in his home state , and surrounded the New York delegation , pro @-@ Seward , with Lincoln loyalists . They eventually were successful in gaining the support of the delegations from the other battleground states , boosting delegates ' perceptions of Lincoln 's electability . Although Lincoln and Seward shared many views , Lincoln , out of office since 1849 , had not excited opposition as Seward had in the South and among Know Nothings . Lincoln 's views on nativism , which he opposed , were not public . 
 On the first ballot , Seward had 173 ½ votes to Lincoln 's 102 , with 233 needed to nominate . Pennsylvania shifted its vote to Lincoln on the second ballot , and Seward 's lead was cut to 184 ½ to 181 . On the third , Lincoln had 231 ½ to Seward 's 180 after the roll call , but Ohio changed four votes from Chase to Lincoln , giving the Illinoian the nomination and starting a small stampede ; the nomination was eventually made unanimous . When word reached Seward by telegraph , by the accounts of witnesses , he calmly remarked that Lincoln had some of the attributes needed to be president , and would certainly be elected . 
 = = = Campaigning for Lincoln = = = 
 Despite his public nonchalance , Seward was devastated by his convention loss , as were many of his supporters . The New Yorker was the best @-@ known and most popular Republican , and his defeat shocked many in the North , who felt that Lincoln had been nominated through chicanery . Although Seward sent a letter stating Weed was not to blame , Seward 's political manager took the defeat hard . Seward was initially inclined to retire from public life , but received many letters from supporters : distrustful of Lincoln , they urged Seward to remain involved in politics . On his way to Washington to return to Senate duties , he stopped in Albany to confer with Weed , who had gone to Lincoln 's home in Springfield , Illinois to meet with the candidate , and had been very impressed at Lincoln 's political understanding . At the Capitol , Seward received sympathy even from sectional foes such as Jefferson Davis . 
 Lincoln faced three major opponents . A split in the Democratic Party had led northerners to nominate Senator Douglas , while southerners chose Vice President John C. Breckenridge . The Constitutional Union Party selected former Tennessee senator John Bell . As Lincoln would not even be on the ballot in ten southern states , he needed to win almost every northern state to take the presidency . Douglas was said to be strong in Illinois and Indiana , and if he took those , the election might be thrown into the House of Representatives . Seward was urged to undertake a campaign tour of the Midwest in support of Lincoln and did so for five weeks in September and October , attracting huge crowds . He journeyed by rail and boat as far north as Saint Paul , Minnesota , into the border state of Missouri at St. Louis , and even to Kansas Territory , though it had no electoral votes to cast in the election . When the train passed through Springfield , Seward and Lincoln were introduced , with Lincoln appearing " embarrassed " and Seward " constrained " . In his oratory , Seward spoke of the U.S. as a " tower of freedom " , a Union that might even include Canada , Latin America , and Russian America . 
 New York was key to the election ; a Lincoln loss there would deadlock the Electoral College . Soon after his return from his Midwest tour , Seward embarked on another , across New York State , speaking to large crowds . At Weed 's urging he went to New York City and gave a patriotic speech before a large crowd on November 3 , only three days before the election . On Election Day , Lincoln carried most Northern states , while Breckenridge took the Deep South , Bell three border states , and Douglas won Missouri — the only state Seward campaigned in that Lincoln did not win . Lincoln was elected . 
 = = Secession crisis = = 
 Lincoln 's election had been anticipated in Southern states , and South Carolina and other Deep South states began to call conventions for the purpose of secession . In the North , there was dissent over whether to offer concessions to the South to preserve the Union , and if conciliation failed , whether to allow the South to depart in peace . Seward favored compromise . He had hoped to remain at home until the New Year , but with the deepening crisis left for Washington in time for the new session of Congress in early December . 
 The usual tradition was for the leading figure of the winning party to be offered the position of Secretary of State , the most senior Cabinet post . Seward was that man and around December 12 , the vice president @-@ elect , Maine Senator Hannibal Hamlin , offered Seward the position on Lincoln 's behalf . At Weed 's advice , Seward was slow to formally accept , doing so on December 28 , 1860 , though well before Inauguration Day , March 4 , 1861 . Lincoln remained in Illinois until mid @-@ February , and he and Seward communicated by letter . 
 As states in the Deep South prepared to secede in late 1860 , Seward met with important figures from both sides of the sectional divide . Seward introduced a proposed constitutional amendment preventing federal interference with slavery . This was done at Lincoln 's private request ; the president @-@ elect hoped that the amendment , and a change to the Fugitive Slave Act to allow those captured a jury trial , would satisfy both sides . Congressmen introduced many such proposals , and Seward was appointed to a committee of 13 senators to consider them . Lincoln was willing to guarantee the security of slavery in the states that currently had it , but he rejected any proposal that would allow slavery to expand . It was increasingly clear that the deep South was committed to secession ; the Republican hope was to provide compromises to keep the border slave states in the Union . Seward voted against the Crittenden Compromise on December 28 , but quietly continued to seek a compromise that would keep the border states in the Union . 
 Seward gave a major speech on January 12 , 1861 . By then , he was known to be Lincoln 's choice as Secretary of State , and with Lincoln staying silent , it was widely expected that he would propound the new administration 's plan to save the Union . Accordingly , he spoke to a crowded Senate , where even Jefferson Davis attended despite Mississippi 's secession , and to packed galleries . He urged the preservation of the Union , and supported an amendment such as the one he had introduced , or a constitutional convention , once passions had cooled . He hinted that New Mexico Territory might be a slave state , and urged the construction of two transcontinental railroads , one northern , one southern . He suggested the passage of legislation to bar interstate invasions such as that by John Brown . Although Seward 's speech was widely applauded , it gained a mixed reaction in the border states to which he had tried to appeal . Radical Republicans were not willing to make concessions to the South , and were angered by the speech . Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens , a radical , warned that if Lincoln like Seward ignored the Republican platform and tried to purchase peace through concessions , he would retire , as too old to bear the years of warfare in the Republican Party that would result . 
 Lincoln applauded Seward 's speech , which he read in Springfield , but refused to approve any compromise that could lead to a further expansion of slavery . Once Lincoln left Springfield on February 11 , he gave speeches , stating in Indianapolis that it would not be coercing a state if the federal government insisted on retaining or retaking property that belonged to it . This came as the United States Army still held Fort Sumter ; the president @-@ elect 's words upset moderate southerners . Virginia Congressman Sherrard Clemens wrote , " Mr. Lincoln , by his speech in the North , has done vast harm . If he will not be guided by Mr. Seward but puts himself in the hands of Mr. Chase and the ultra [ that is , Radical ] Republicans , nothing can save the cause of the Union in the South . " 
 Lincoln arrived in Washington , without announcement and incognito , early on the morning of February 23 , 1861 . Seward had been advised by General Winfield Scott that there was a plot to assassinate Lincoln in Baltimore when he passed through the city . Senator Seward sent his son Frederick to warn Lincoln in Philadelphia , and the president @-@ elect decided to travel alone but for well @-@ armed bodyguards . Lincoln travelled without incident , and came to regret his decision as he was widely mocked for it . Later that morning , Seward accompanied Lincoln to the White House , where he introduced the Illinoisan to President Buchanan . 
 Seward and Lincoln differed over two issues in the days before the inauguration : the composition of Lincoln 's cabinet , and his inaugural address . Given a draft of the address , Seward softened it to make it less confrontational toward the South ; Lincoln accepted many of the changes , though he gave it , according to Seward biographer <unk> G. Van Deusen , " a simplicity and a poetic quality lacking in Seward 's draft " . The differences regarding the Cabinet revolved around the inclusion of Salmon Chase , a radical . Lincoln wanted all elements of the party , as well as representation from outside it ; Seward opposed Chase , as well as Democrats such as Gideon Wells and Montgomery Blair . Seward did not get his way , and gave Lincoln a letter declining the post of Secretary of State . Lincoln felt , as he told his private secretary , John Nicolay , that he could not " afford to let Seward take the first trick " . No reply or acknowledgement was made by Lincoln until after the inaugural ceremonies were over on March 4 , when he asked Seward to remain . Seward did and was both nominated , and confirmed by the Senate , with minimal debate , on March 5 , 1861 . 
 = = Secretary of State = = 
 = = = Lincoln administration = = = 
 = = = = War breaks out = = = = 
 Lincoln faced the question of what to do about Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor , held by the Army against the will of South Carolinians , who had blockaded it . Major Robert Anderson , in command , had sent word that he would run out of supplies . Seward , backed by most of the Cabinet , recommended to Lincoln that an attempt to resupply Sumter would be provocative to the border states , that Lincoln hoped to keep from seceding . Seward hinted to the commissioners that had come to Washington on behalf of the Confederacy that Sumter would be surrendered . Lincoln was loath to give up Sumter , feeling it would only encourage the South in its insurgency . 
 With the Sumter issue unresolved , Seward sent Lincoln a memorandum on April 1 , proposing various courses of action , including possibly declaring war on France and Spain if certain conditions were not met , and reinforcing the forts along the Gulf of Mexico . In any event , vigorous policies were needed and the president must either establish them himself or allow a Cabinet member to , with Seward making it clear he was willing to do it . Lincoln drafted a reply indicating that whatever policy was adopted , " I must do it " , though he never sent it , but met with Seward instead , and what passed between them is not known . Seward 's biographers make the point that the note was sent to a Lincoln who had not yet proved himself in office . 
 Lincoln decided on expeditions to try to relieve Sumter and Florida 's Fort Pickens . Meanwhile , Seward was assuring Justice John Archibald Campbell , the intermediary with the Confederate commissioners that had come to Washington in an attempt to secure recognition , that no hostile action would be taken . Lincoln sent a notification to South Carolina 's governor of the expedition , and on April 12 , Charleston 's batteries began firing on Sumter , beginning the Civil War . 
 = = = = Diplomacy = = = = 
 When the war started Seward turned his attention to making sure that foreign powers did not interfere in the conflict . When in April 1861 , the Confederacy announced that it would authorize privateers , Seward sent word to the American representatives abroad that the U.S. would become party to the Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law of 1856 , outlawing such vessels , but Britain required that , if the U.S. were to become a party , the ratification would not require action to be taken against Confederate vessels . 
 The Palmerston government considered recognizing the Confederacy as an independent nation . Seward was willing to wage war against Britain if it did , and drafted a strong letter for the American Minister in London , Charles Francis Adams , to read to the Foreign Secretary , Lord Russell . Seward submitted it to Lincoln , who , realizing that the Union was in no position to battle both the South and Britain , toned it down considerably , and made it merely a memorandum for Adams 's guidance . 
 In May 1861 , Britain and France declared the South to be belligerents by international law , and their ships were entitled to the same rights as U.S.-flagged vessels to remain 24 hours in neutral ports . Nevertheless , Seward was pleased that both nations would not meet with Confederate commissioners or recognize the South as a nation . Britain did not challenge the Union blockade of Confederate ports , and Seward wrote that if Britain continued to avoid interfering in the war , he would not be overly sensitive to what wording they used to describe their policies . 
 In November 1861 , the USS San Jacinto , commanded by Union Captain Charles Wilkes , intercepted the British mail ship RMS Trent and removed two Confederate diplomats , James Mason and John Slidell . They were held in Boston amid jubilation in the North and outrage in Britain . The British minister in Washington , Lord Lyons demanded their release , as the U.S. had no right to stop a British @-@ flagged ship traveling between neutral ports . The British drew up war plans to attack New York and sent reinforcements to Canada . Seward worked to defuse the situation . He persuaded Lyons to postpone delivering an ultimatum , and told Lincoln that the prisoners would have to be released . Lincoln did let them go , reluctantly , on technical grounds . Relations between the U.S. and Britain soon improved ; in April 1862 , Seward and Lyons signed a treaty they had negotiated allowing each nation to inspect the other 's ships for contraband slaves . In November 1862 , with America 's image in Britain improved by the issuance of the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation , the British cabinet decided against recognition of the Confederacy as a nation . 
 Confederate agents in Britain had arranged for the construction of Confederate ships , most notably the CSS Alabama , which ravaged Union shipping after her construction in 1862 . With two more such vessels under construction the following year , supposedly for French interests , Seward pressed Palmerston not to allow them to leave port , and , nearly complete , they were seized by British officials in October 1863 . 
 = = = = Involvement in wartime detentions = = = = 
 From the start of the war until early 1862 , when responsibility was passed to the War Department , Seward was in charge of determining who should be detained without charges or trial . Approximately 800 men and a few women , believed to be Southern sympathizers or spies , were detained , usually at the initiation of local officials . Once Seward was informed , he would often order that the prisoner be transferred to federal authorities . Seward was reported to have boasted to Lord Lyons that " I can touch a bell on my right hand , and order the arrest of a citizen ... and no power on earth , except that of the President , can release them . Can the Queen of England do so much ? " 
 In September 1861 , Maryland legislators planned to vote to leave the Union . Seward took action against them : his son Frederick , the United States Assistant Secretary of State , reported to his father that the Union men had gone unmolested and the disloyal legislators were in prison . On evidence provided by detective Allen Pinkerton , Seward in 1862 ordered the arrest of Rose Greenhow , a Washington socialite with Confederate sympathies . Greenhow had sent a stream of reports south , and continued even after being placed on house arrest . From Washington 's Old Capitol Prison , the " Rebel Rose " provided newspaper interviews until she was allowed to cross into Confederate territory . 
 When Seward received allegations that former president Pierce was involved in a plot against the Union , he asked Pierce for an explanation . Pierce indignantly denied it . The matter proved to be a hoax , and the administration was embarrassed . On February 14 , 1862 , Lincoln ordered that responsibility for detentions be transferred to the War Department , ending Seward 's part in them . 
 = = = = Relationship with Lincoln = = = = 
 Seward had mixed feelings about the man who had blocked him from the presidency . One story is that when Seward was told that to deny Carl Schurz an office would disappoint him , Seward angrily stated , " Disappointment ! You speak of me of disappointment ! To me , who was justly entitled to the Republican nomination for the presidency , and who had to stand aside and see it given to a little Illinois lawyer ! " Despite his initial reservations about Lincoln 's abilities , he came to admire Lincoln as the president grew more confident in his job . Seward wrote to his wife in June 1861 , " Executive skill and vigor are rare qualities . The President is the best of us , but he needs constant and assiduous cooperation . " According to Goodwin , " Seward would become his most faithful ally in the cabinet ... Seward 's mortification at not having received his party 's nomination never fully abated , but he no longer felt compelled to belittle Lincoln to ease his pain . " Lincoln , a one @-@ term congressman , was inexperienced in Washington ways , and relied on Seward 's advice on protocol and social etiquette . 
 The two men built a close personal and professional relationship . Lincoln fell into the habit of entrusting Seward with tasks not within the remit of the State Department , for example asking him to examine a treaty with the Delaware Indians . Lincoln would come to Seward 's house and the two lawyers would relax before the fire , chatting . Seward began to feature in the president 's humorous stories . For example , Lincoln would tell of Seward remonstrating with the president , whom he found polishing his boots , " In Washington , we do not blacken our own boots " , with Lincoln 's response , " Indeed , then whose boots do you blacken , Mr. Secretary ? " 
 Other cabinet members became resentful of Seward , who seemed to be always present when they discussed their departments ' concerns with Lincoln , yet they were never allowed to be there when the two men discussed foreign affairs . Seward announced when cabinet meetings would be ; his colleagues eventually persuaded Lincoln to set a regular date and time for those sessions . Seward 's position on the Emancipation Proclamation when Lincoln read it to his cabinet in July 1862 is uncertain ; Secretary of War Edwin Stanton wrote at the time that Seward opposed it in principle , feeling the slaves should simply be freed as Union armies advanced . Two later accounts indicate that Seward felt the time was not yet to issue it , and Lincoln did wait until after the bloody stalemate at Antietam that ended Confederate General Robert E. Lee 's incursion into the North to issue it . In the interim , Seward cautiously investigated how foreign powers might react to such a proclamation , and learned it would make them less likely to interfere in the conflict . 
 Seward was not close to Lincoln 's wife Mary , who by some accounts had opposed his appointment as Secretary of State . Mary Lincoln developed such a dislike for Seward that she instructed her coachman to avoid passing by the Seward residence . The Secretary of State enjoyed the company of the younger Lincoln boys , Willie and Tad , presenting them with two cats from his assortment of pets . 
 Seward accompanied Lincoln to Gettysburg , Pennsylvania in November 1863 , where Lincoln was to deliver a short speech , that would become famous as the Gettysburg Address . The night before the speech , Lincoln met with Seward . There is no surviving evidence that Seward authored any changes : he stated after the address , when asked if had had any hand in it , that only Lincoln could have made that speech . Seward also proposed to Lincoln that he proclaim a day of national thanksgiving , and drafted a proclamation to that effect . Although post @-@ harvest thanksgiving celebrations had long been held , this first formalized Thanksgiving Day as a national observance . 
 = = = = 1864 election ; Hampton Roads Conference = = = = 
 It was far from certain that Lincoln would even be nominated in 1864 , let alone re @-@ elected , as the tide of war , though generally favoring the North , washed back and forth . Lincoln sought nomination by the National Union Party , composed of Republicans and War Democrats . No one proved willing to oppose Lincoln , who was nominated . Seward was by then unpopular among many Republicans and opponents sought to prompt his replacement by making Lincoln 's running mate former New York Democratic senator Daniel S. Dickinson ; under the political customs of the time , one state could not hold two positions as prestigious as vice president and Secretary of State . Administration forces turned back Dickinson 's bid , nominating instead Military Governor of Tennessee Andrew Johnson , with whom Seward had served in the Senate . Lincoln was re @-@ elected in November ; Seward sat with Lincoln and the assistant presidential secretary , John Hay , as the returns came in . 
 In January 1865 , Francis Preston Blair , father of former Lincoln Postmaster General Montgomery Blair , went , with Lincoln 's knowledge , to the Confederate capital of Richmond to propose to Davis that North and South unite to expel the French from their domination of Mexico . Davis appointed commissioners ( Vice President Alexander Stephens , former U.S. Supreme Court justice Campbell , and former Confederate Secretary of State Robert M.T. Hunter ) to negotiate . They met with Lincoln and Seward at the Hampton Roads Conference the following month . Lincoln would settle for nothing short of a cession of resistance to the federal government and an end to slavery ; the Confederates would not even concede that they and the Union were one nation . There was much friendly talk , as most of them had served together in Washington , but no agreement . After the conference broke up , Seward sent a bucket of champagne to the Confederates , conveyed by a black oarsman in a rowboat , and called to the southerners , " keep the champagne , but return the Negro . " 
 = = = Assassination attempt = = = 
 John Wilkes Booth had originally planned to kidnap Lincoln , and recruited conspirators , including Lewis Powell . Having found no opportunity to abduct the president , on April 14 , 1865 , Booth assigned Powell to assassinate Seward , with George Atzerodt to kill Vice President Johnson and himself to kill Lincoln , which would slay the three senior members of the Executive Branch . Accordingly , another member of the conspiracy , David Herold , led Powell to the Seward home on horseback and was responsible for holding Powell 's horse while he committed the attack . Seward had been hurt in an accident some days before , and Powell gained entry to the home on the excuse he was delivering medicine to the injured man , but was stopped at the top of the stairs by Frederick Seward , who insisted Powell give him the medicine . Powell instead attempted to fire on Frederick , and beat him over the head with the barrel of his gun when it misfired . Powell burst through the door , threw Fanny Seward ( the secretary 's daughter ) to one side , and jumped on the bed , and stabbed William Seward in the face and neck five times . A soldier assigned to guard and nurse the secretary , Private George F. Robinson , jumped on Powell , forcing him from the bed . Powell fled , stabbing a messenger , Emerick Hansell , as he went , to find that Herold , panicked by the screams from the house , had left with both horses . Seward was at first thought dead , but revived enough to instruct Robinson to send for the police and lock the house until they arrived . 
 Almost simultaneously with the attack on Seward , Booth had mortally wounded Lincoln at Ford 's Theatre . Atzerodt , however , decided not to go through with the attack on Johnson . When Secretary of War Edwin Stanton and Navy Secretary Gideon Welles hurried to Seward 's home to find out what had happened , they found blood everywhere . 
 All five men injured that night at the Seward home survived . Powell was captured the next day at the boarding house of Mary Surratt , and was executed on July 7 , 1865 , along with Herold , Atzerodt , and Mrs. Surratt , convicted as conspirators in the Lincoln assassination . They died only weeks after Seward 's wife Frances , who never recovered from the shock of the assassination attempt . 
 = = = Johnson administration = = = 
 = = = = Reconstruction and impeachment = = = = 
 In the first months of the new Johnson administration , Seward did not work much with the president . Seward was at first recovering from his injuries , and Johnson was ill for a time in the summer of 1865 . Seward was likely in accord with Johnson 's relatively gentle terms for the South 's re @-@ entry to the Union , and with his pardon of all Confederates but those of high rank . Radical Republicans such as Stanton and Pennsylvania Representative Thaddeus Stevens proposed that the freed slaves be given the vote , but Seward was content to leave that to the states ( few Northern states gave African @-@ Americans the ballot ) , believing the priority should be reconciling the power @-@ holding white populations of the North and South to each other . 
 Unlike Lincoln , who had a close rapport with Seward , Johnson kept his own counsel , and generally did not take advantage of Seward 's political advice as Congress prepared to meet in December 1865 . Johnson had issued proclamations allowing for the southern states to reform their state governments and hold elections ; they mostly elected men who had served as prewar or wartime leaders . Seward advised Johnson to state , in his first annual message to Congress , that southern states meet three conditions for readmission to the Union : repeal of secession , repudiation of the war debt incurred by the rebel governments , and ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment . Johnson , hoping to appeal to both Republicans and Democrats , did not take the suggestion . Congress did not seat southerners , but appointed a joint committee of both houses to make recommendations on the issue . Johnson opposed the committee ; Seward was prepared to wait and see . 
 In early 1866 , Congress and president battled over the extension of the authorization of the Freedmen 's Bureau . Both sides agreed that the bureau should end after the states were re @-@ admitted , the question was whether that would be soon . With Seward 's support , Johnson vetoed the bill . Republicans in Congress were angry with both men , and tried but failed to override Johnson 's veto . Johnson vetoed the Civil Rights Bill , which was to grant citizenship to the freedmen . Seward advised a conciliatory veto message ; Johnson ignored him , telling Congress it had no right to pass bills affecting the South until it seated the region 's congressmen . This time Congress overrode his veto , gaining the necessary two @-@ thirds majority of each house , the first time this had been done on a major piece of legislation in American history . 
 Johnson hoped the public would elect congressmen who agreed with him in the 1866 midterm elections , and embarked on a trip , dubbed the Swing Around the Circle that summer , giving speeches in a number of cities . Seward was among the officials who went with him . The trip was a disaster for Johnson ; he made a number of ill @-@ considered statements about his opponents that were criticized in the press . The Radical Republicans were strengthened by the results of the elections . The Republican anger against Johnson extended to his Secretary of State — Maine Senator William P. Fessenden said of Johnson , " he began by meaning well , but I fear that Seward 's evil counsels have carried him beyond the reach of salvation . " 
 In February 1867 , both houses of Congress passed the Tenure of Office Bill , purporting to restrict Johnson in the removal of presidential appointees . When Stanton refused , Seward drafted a veto message for Johnson , questioning the measure 's constitutionality . It was to no avail , Congress promptly overrode the veto . Johnson suspended , then fired Stanton , over Reconstruction policy differences , leading to the president 's impeachment for allegedly violating the Tenure of Office Act . Seward recommended that Johnson hire the renowned attorney , William M. Evarts , and , with Weed , raised funds for the president 's successful defense . 
 = = = = Mexico = = = = 
 Mexico was strife @-@ torn in the early 1860s , as it often had been in the fifty years since independence . France , Spain , and Great Britain joined together to intervene in 1861 on the pretext of protecting their nationals , and to secure repayment of debt . Spain and the British soon withdrew , but France remained . Distracted by civil war , Seward could do little to enforce the Monroe Doctrine , and in 1864 , French emperor Napoleon III set his cousin , Archduke Maximilian of Austria on the Mexican throne , with French military support . When this became an issue in the U.S. , Seward used strident language publicly , but was privately conciliatory toward the French . 
 The Confederates had been supportive of France 's actions . Upon returning to work after the assassination attempt , Seward warned France that the U.S. still wanted the French gone from Mexico . Napoleon feared that the large , battle @-@ tested American army would be used against his troops . Seward remained conciliatory , and in January 1866 , Napoleon agreed to withdraw his troops after a twelve- to eighteen @-@ month period , during which time Maximilian could consolidate his position against the insurgency led by Benito Juárez . 
 In late 1866 , Napoleon tried to postpone the French departure , but the Americans had large numbers of troops on the north bank of the Rio Grande and Seward held firm . Napoleon suggested a new Mexican government that would exclude both Maximilian and Juárez ; the Americans had recognized Juárez as the legitimate president and were not willing to consider this . In the meantime , Juárez , with the help of American military aid , was advancing through northeast Mexico . The French withdrew in early 1867 , leaving Maximilian , who was soon captured by Juárez 's troops . Although both the U.S. and France urged Juárez against it , the deposed emperor was executed by firing squad on June 19 , 1867 . 
 = = = = Territorial expansion and Alaska = = = = 
 Although in speeches Seward had predicted all of North America joining the Union , he had , as a senator , opposed the Gadsden Purchase obtaining land from Mexico , and Buchanan 's attempts to purchase Cuba from Spain . Those stands were likely because the land to be secured might become slave territory . After the Civil War , this was no longer an issue , and Seward became an ardent expansionist . The Union Navy had been hampered due to the lack of overseas bases during the war , and Seward also believed that American trade would be helped by the purchase of overseas territory . 
 Believing , along with Lincoln , that the U.S. needed a naval base in the Caribbean , in January 1865 , Seward offered to purchase the Danish West Indies ( today the United States Virgin Islands ) . Late that year , Seward sailed for the Caribbean on a naval vessel . Among the ports of call was St. Thomas in the Danish West Indies , where Seward admired the large , easily defended harbor . Another stop was in the Dominican Republic , where he opened talks to obtain Samaná Bay . When Congress reconvened in December 1866 , Seward caused a sensation by entering the chamber of the House of Representatives and sitting down with the administration 's enemy , Congressman Stevens , persuading him to support an appropriation for more money to expedite the purchase of Samaná , and sent his son Frederick to the Dominican Republic to negotiate a treaty . Both attempts fell through ; the Senate , in the dying days of the Johnson administration , failed to ratify a treaty for the purchase of the Danish possessions , while negotiations with the Dominican Republic were not successful . 
 Seward had been interested in whaling as a senator ; his interest in Russian America was a byproduct of this . In his speech prior to the 1860 convention , he predicted the territory would become part of the U.S. , and when he learned in 1864 that it might be for sale , he pressed the Russians ( then a U.S. ally ) for negotiations . The Russian minister , Baron Eduard de Stoeckl , returned home on leave in 1866 . Fearing that the territory might be overrun by American settlers and lost , he urged his government to sell it . He was given the authority to make the sale and when he returned in March 1867 , negotiated with the Secretary of State . Seward initially offered $ 5 million ; the two men settled on $ 7 million and on March 15 , Seward presented a draft treaty to the Cabinet . Stoeckl 's superiors raised several concerns ; to induce him to waive them , the final purchase price was increased to $ 7 @.@ 2 million . The treaty was signed in the early morning of March 30 , 1867 , and ratified by the Senate on April 10 . Stevens sent the secretary a note of congratulations , predicting that the Alaska purchase would be seen as one of Seward 's greatest accomplishments . 
 = = 1868 election and retirement = = 
 Seward hoped that Johnson would be nominated at the 1868 Democratic National Convention , but the delegates chose New York Governor Horatio Seymour . The Republicans chose General Ulysses S. Grant , who had a hostile relationship with Johnson . Seward gave a major speech on the eve of the election , endorsing Grant , who was easily elected . Seward met twice with Grant after the election , leading to speculation that he was seeking to remain as secretary for a third presidential term . The president @-@ elect had no interest in retaining Seward , and the secretary resigned himself to retirement . Grant refused to have anything to do with Johnson , even declining to ride to his inauguration in the same carriage as the outgoing president , as was customary . Despite Seward 's attempts to persuade him to attend Grant 's swearing @-@ in , Johnson and his Cabinet spent the morning of March 4 , 1869 at the White House dealing with last @-@ minute business , then left once the time for Grant to be sworn in had passed . Seward returned to Auburn . 
 Restless in Auburn , Seward embarked on a trip across North America by the new transcontinental railroad . In Salt Lake City , Utah Territory , he met with Mormon leader Brigham Young , who had worked as a carpenter on Seward 's house ( then belonging to Judge Miller ) as a young man . On reaching the Pacific Coast , the Seward party took a steamer north to visit Sitka , Department of Alaska , part of the vast wilderness Seward had acquired for the U.S. After spending time in Oregon and California , the party went to Mexico , where he was given a hero 's welcome . After a visit to Cuba , he returned to the U.S. , concluding in March 1870 his trip of nine months . 
 In August 1870 , Seward embarked on another trip , this time westbound around the world . With him was Olive Risley , daughter of a Treasury Department official , to whom he became close in his final year in Washington . They visited Japan , then China , where they walked on the Great Wall . During the trip , they decided that Seward would adopt Olive , and he did so , thus putting an end to gossip and the fears of his sons that Seward would remarry late in life . They spent three months in India , then journeyed through the Middle East and Europe , not returning to Auburn until October 1871 . 
 = = Death and family matters = = 
 Back in Auburn , Seward began his memoirs , but only reached his thirties before putting it aside to write of his travels . In these months he was steadily growing weaker . On October 10 , 1872 , he worked at his desk in the morning as usual , then complained of trouble breathing . Seward grew worse during the day , as his family gathered around him . Asked if he had any final words , he said , " Love one another . " Seward died that afternoon . His funeral a few days later was preceded by the people of Auburn and nearby filing past his open casket for four hours . Thurlow Weed was there for the burial of his friend , and Harriet Tubman , a former slave whom the Sewards had aided , sent flowers . President Grant sent his regrets he could not be there . 
 William Seward rests with his wife Frances and daughter Fanny ( 1844 @-@ 1866 ) , in Fort Hill Cemetery in Auburn . They had three surviving sons , Augustus Henry Seward ( 1826 @-@ 1876 ) , William H. Seward , Jr . ( 1839 @-@ 1920 ) ( both of whom had served as Union officers before successful business careers ) and Frederick William Seward ( 1830 @-@ 1915 ) ( who served under his father in the State Department ) and one daughter , Cornelia or Frances Seward ( 1836 - 1837 ) . 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 Seward 's reputation , controversial in life , remained so in death , dividing his contemporaries . Former Navy Secretary Gideon Welles argued that not only did Seward lack principles , Gideon was unable to understand how Seward had fooled Lincoln into thinking that he did , gaining entry to the Cabinet thereby . Charles Francis Adams , minister in London during Seward 's tenure as secretary , deemed him " more of a politician than a statesman " , but Charles Dana , former Assistant Secretary of State , disagreed , writing that Seward had " the most cultivated and comprehensive intellect in the administration " and " what is very rare in a lawyer , a politician , or a statesman — imagination " . 
 Scholars of history have generally praised Seward for his work as Secretary of State ; in 1973 , Ernest N. <unk> deemed him , " the one outstanding Secretary of State after John Quincy Adams " . Seward has been given high marks by historians both for his achievements in office , and for his foresight in anticipating the future needs of the U.S. According to his biographer Van Deusen , " his foreign policy built for the future . He wished to prepare America for the great era which lay ahead . So he sought bases , naval stations and , peacefully , additional territory . " 
 Seward 's biographers suggested that there are two faces to Seward . One , " John Quincy Adams Seward " , dreamed big dreams and tried to convey them in speeches , working to achieve education for all , a fair deal for immigrants , an end to slavery , and an expanded America . The other , " Thurlow Weed Seward " , cut backroom deals over cigars and a bottle , and was a pragmatist who often settled for half a loaf when the whole was not achievable . Daniel S. Crofts , in Seward 's entry in American National Biography argued , " Each Seward was , of course , a caricature , and both tendencies , at once symbiotic and contradictory , existed in tandem . " 
 The praise Seward has received extends to his work during the Civil War . Stahr wrote that Seward " skillfully managed the nation 's foreign affairs , avoiding the foreign intervention that would have ensured that the Confederacy would become a separate nation " . Nevertheless , historians , focusing on the battlefields of the Civil War , have given him relatively little attention . Seward has a dozen biographers , while thousands of books focus on Lincoln . According to Crofts , " Seward and Lincoln were the two most important leaders spawned by the intersection of antebellum idealism and partisan politics . Lincoln , of course , will always overshadow Seward . Before 1860 , however , Seward eclipsed Lincoln . " 
 Lincoln 's assassination helped to seal his greatness , and according to Seward biographer John M. Taylor , to relegate " his associates ... to the status of bit players " . Dozens of biographies extolling Lincoln as the quintessential American were written in the decades after the president 's death , placing Lincoln on a pedestal of public esteem Seward could not climb . Seward realized this even in life ; by one account , when asked to show his scars from the attempt on his life , Seward regretted he had not been martyred along with Lincoln , " I think I deserved the reward of dying there " . 
 Despite his being an ardent supporter of American expansionism during his time in the Cabinet , only Alaska was added to U.S. territory during Seward 's service as Secretary of State . ( It should be remembered that the purchase of Alaska was not inevitable ; the land had the same latitude as Siberia and was very difficult to farm , while neither gold nor oil nor any other important mineral was discovered there until years after Seward 's death . ) Nevertheless , his influence extended to later American acquisitions . One of his friends , Hamilton Fish , in 1875 signed the trade reciprocity treaty with the Kingdom of Hawaii that eventually led to American annexation of the islands . William Everts , another Seward friend , in 1877 signed a treaty of friendship with the Samoan Islands , laying the groundwork for another American acquisition . A young friend and protege of Seward , Lincoln 's assistant private secretary , John Hay , served as a successor of Seward from 1898 to 1905 , during which time the U.S. acquired Puerto Rico , Guam , American Samoa , the Philippines , and the Panama Canal Zone . 
 Stahr believes that Seward 's influence is still felt today : 
 Seward believed not only in territorial expansion but in a commercial and diplomatic empire . He encouraged immigration to the United States , always seeing immigration as a source of strength ; he ... was prepared to back up words with arms ; and he believed that Washington was the natural center for inter @-@ American and international discussion . If he were alive today , he would not be surprised to learn ... that many of the most famous Americans are first- or second @-@ generation immigrants , or that New York City is the world 's financial center , or that the headquarters of the World Bank and the Organization of American States are both in Washington . Seward would not be surprised by these developments : he would be pleased . 
 = 2008 attacks on Uttar Pradeshi and Bihari migrants in Maharashtra = 
 The 2008 attacks on Uttar Pradeshi and Bihari migrants in Maharashtra began on 3 February 2008 after violent clashes between workers of two political parties — Maharashtra Navnirman Sena ( MNS ) and Samajwadi Party ( SP ) — at Dadar in Mumbai , capital of the Indian state of Maharashtra . The clashes took place when workers of MNS , a splinter faction formed out of the Shiv Sena ( a major political party of Maharashtra ) , tried to attack workers of SP , the regional party based in Uttar Pradesh , who were proceeding to attend a rally organised by the United National Progressive Alliance ( UNPA ) . Defending his party 's stand , MNS chief Raj Thackeray explained that the attack was a reaction to the " provocative and unnecessary show of strength " and " uncontrolled political and cultural <unk> ( bullying ) of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar migrants and their leaders " . 
 In the events leading to these clashes , Raj Thackeray made critical remarks , themed around language politics and regionalism , about migrants from the North Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar , accusing them of spoiling Maharashtrian culture and not mingling with them . At political rallies held across the state , he questioned the loyalty of Bollywood actor Amitabh Bachchan towards Maharashtra , where he attained " fame and popularity " , accusing him of showing " more interest " in his native Uttar Pradesh . He called the celebration of Chhath Puja by North Indian migrants a " drama " and a " show of arrogance " . 
 On 13 February 2008 , the state government , which was accused of reluctance to take immediate action , ultimately arrested Raj Thackeray and Abu Asim Azmi ( a local SP leader ) on charges of instigation of violence and causing communal disturbance . Although released that same day , a gag order was imposed on both leaders to prevent them from making further inflammatory remarks . Meanwhile , tensions in Maharashtra rose as the news of Raj 's possible arrest , and his subsequent actual arrest , angered his supporters . Incidences of violence against North Indians and their property by MNS workers were reported in Mumbai , Pune , Aurangabad , Beed , Nashik , Amravati , Jalna , and <unk> . Nearly 25 @,@ 000 North Indian workers fled Pune , and another 15 @,@ 000 fled Nashik in the wake of the attacks . The exodus of workers caused an acute labour shortage , affecting local industries . Analysts estimated financial losses of ₹ 5 billion ( US $ 74 million ) – ₹ 7 billion ( US $ 104 million ) . Although the violence receded after the arrests of the two leaders , sporadic attacks were reported until May 2008 . After months of lull , on 19 October 2008 , MNS activists beat up North Indian candidates appearing for the all @-@ India Railway Recruitment Board entrance exam in Mumbai . The incident led to Raj 's arrest and fresh violence . Later on 28 October 2008 a labourer from Uttar Pradesh was lynched in a Mumbai commuter train . 
 The attacks evoked critical reactions from various parts of the country , particularly the Uttar Pradesh and Bihar political leadership . Even Bal Thackeray , Raj 's estranged uncle and chief of the Shiv Sena , who formed his party in 1966 to raise the voice of Marathi <unk> ( Marathi people ) , discounted his nephew 's criticism of Bachchan as " stupidity " . In an editorial a month later in Saamna , the Shiv Sena 's political mouthpiece , however , Bal Thackeray wrote that Biharis antagonised local populations wherever they went and were an " unwelcome lot " throughout the country . The media slated Bal 's remarks as an attempt to recapture his party 's sons @-@ of @-@ soil plank , being hijacked by Raj . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Raj Thackeray 's resignation from Shiv Sena and the formation of MNS = = = 
 On 9 March 2006 , Raj Thackeray , nephew of Bal Thackeray , quit the Shiv Sena and formed the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena ( MNS ) after being " sidelined " by the chief 's son Uddhav . The Shiv <unk> ( Shiv Sena members ) who supported Raj 's leadership , in contrast to his cousin Uddhav , joined the MNS . The party was founded on the ideology of being the benefactor of the local Marathi <unk> ( Marathi people ) , an ideology that the party members felt the Shiv Sena had abandoned . Keeping in line with this , Raj has repeatedly demanded special job reservations for locals . A critic of the influx of migrants into the state , especially Uttar <unk> ( literally meaning " North Indians " ) predominantly from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar , he has blamed the large @-@ scale immigration of people from these economically backward states for causing a shortage of jobs for Maharashtrians . 
 = = = Shiv Sena 's move to appease migrants = = = 
 The Times of India summarised the cause of MNS 's attacks — " There 's a method in MNS 's madness in attacking north Indians in Mumbai though , howsoever flawed it might be . Raj believes his cousin and Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray has been wooing the people from Bihar and UP — through a campaign he began back in 2005 with the inclusive call of Mee Mumbaikar — as his party 's vote @-@ bank . Uddhav 's growing popularity with North Indians had been rankling Raj , who is losing ground and political relevance as evident in the MNS 's performance in the last municipal elections . " 
 = = = Raj 's criticism of Amitabh Bachchan = = = 
 In January 2008 , targeting Mumbai @-@ resident Amitabh Bachchan at political rallies , Raj asserted that the actor was " more interested " in his native state Uttar Pradesh than Maharashtra . He expressed his disapproval of Amitabh 's inaugurating a girls ' school named after his daughter @-@ in @-@ law , actress Aishwarya Rai Bachchan , at Barabanki in Uttar Pradesh , rather than in Maharashtra . Bachchan was also criticised for choosing to run elections from his native state . On 2 February at a party function at Dharavi in Mumbai , Raj said , " Though he [ Amitabh ] has become a star in Mumbai , his interest is in Uttar Pradesh . That is why he was trying to be an ambassador of UP rather than Maharashtra . That is why though he achieved everything in Mumbai , when it came to elections , Amitabh chose Uttar Pradesh " . 
 Responding to Raj 's accusations , the actor 's wife and an SP MP Jaya Bachchan said that they ( <unk> ) were willing to start a school in Mumbai , provided the MNS leader donated the land to build it . She told the media , " I heard that Raj Thackeray owns huge properties in Maharashtra , in Mumbai at <unk> Mills . If he is willing to donate land , we can start a school in the name of Aishwarya here " . Amitabh , however , abstained from commenting on the issue . 
 Bal Thackeray refuted the allegations , saying , " Amitabh Bachchan is an open @-@ minded person , he has great love for Maharashtra , and this is evident on many occasions . The actor has often said that Maharashtra and specially Mumbai has given him great fame and affection . He has also said that what he is today is because of the love people have given him . The people of Mumbai have always acknowledged him as an artiste . It was utter foolishness to make these parochial allegations against him . Amitabh is a global superstar . People all over the world respect him . This cannot be forgotten by anyone . Amitabh should ignore these silly accusations and concentrate on his acting " . According to some reports , Raj 's censure of Amitabh , whom he supposedly admires , stemmed from his disappointment of not being invited to the wedding of Amitabh 's son , Abhishek , despite invitations to his estranged uncle Bal and cousin Uddhav . 
 On 23 March , Amitabh finally spoke out in an interview with a local tabloid , saying , " Random charges are random ; they do not deserve the kind of attention you wish me to give " . Later on 28 March at a press conference for the International Indian Film Academy , when asked what his take was on the anti @-@ migrant issue , Amitabh said that it is one 's fundamental right to live anywhere in the country and the constitution entitles so . He also stated that he was not affected by Raj 's comments . 
 = = = Raj 's remarks on Chhath Puja and migrants = = = 
 In his party speeches , Raj had also reproached North Indian migrants on the celebration of Chhath Puja , a festival popular in Bihar , calling it a " drama " and a " show of arrogance " . He demanded that they must only celebrate Maharashtrian festivals . A petition was filed in the Patna civil court on 8 February against him for his remarks over Chhath Puja . His statements drew flak from leaders of Bihar , especially Indian Railways minister and former chief minister of Bihar , Lalu Prasad Yadav , who challenged that he would come to Mumbai and perform Chhath Puja in front of Raj 's house , also ridiculed Raj saying , " He [ Raj ] is a child in politics " . The Navnirman Sena leader accused migrants of swamping Maharashtra , India 's most industrialised state , in search of jobs . 
 The MNS chief had also accused migrants of disrespecting the local culture . On 9 February , expressing his stance on newer migrants settling in Mumbai , Raj said , " New immigrants to the city should be denied entry into the city , while those already staying here should show respect to the Marathi ' <unk> ' and his culture " . 
 = = = Clashes between MNS and SP workers = = = 
 On 3 February 2008 , MNS and SP workers indulged in street fighting after the former tried to attack the latter , who were proceeding to Shivaji Park , Dadar , in Mumbai to attend a rally organised by the United National Progressive Alliance ( UNPA ) , the ruling coalition party of India , of which the SP is a member . The rally was to be addressed by former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav and other prominent members of the UNPA and SP . Police arrested 73 MNS and 19 SP workers after these clashes on charges of rioting . 
 Raj justified his party 's stand as a response to — " provocative and unnecessary show of strength " and " uncontrolled political and cultural <unk> of the Uttar Pradesh and Bihar migrants and their leaders " — and questioned , " Do political movements need to obey the law ? " On 10 February at a press conference , he issued a statement saying , " What happened in Mumbai in the past one week was only a reaction and if leaders of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar try to demonstrate their strength here , such reactions would recur " . 
 After the clashes , SP approached the Election Commission demanding de @-@ registration of MNS . SP general secretary whose press conference near Azad Maidan was disrupted by MNS activists on 3 February , Amar Singh petitioned the Commission requesting action against the MNS and its leaders for issuing " veiled as well as open threats " against non @-@ Maharashtrians . However , Mumbai police dismissed a complaint of " criminal intimidation " filed against Raj by Singh as ' false and malicious ' . In his complaint filed at Azad Maidan police station , Singh had alleged that sloganeering MNS men had threatened him by using Thackeray 's name while being whisked away by security personnel from the venue . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 = = = February = = = 
 On 3 February , immediately after clashes with SP , MNS workers assaulted North Indian taxi drivers and vandalised their vehicles in Dadar , Mumbai . The police faced strong criticism for remaining mute spectators as MNS workers assaulted North Indians . A departmental inquiry was instituted against the police inaction . Inspector <unk> Kadam and sub @-@ inspector Deepak Pawar , who were assigned duty at Dadar , were suspended for dereliction of duty . Later , over 25 MNS workers were arrested on charges of rioting . In the night , 150 suspected MNS activists ransacked Pratap talkies in Thane , pulled out the print of the Bhojpuri film " Saiyan se <unk> <unk> " and burned it because Bhojpuri is the regional language spoken in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar . The rioters also damaged the theatre and destroyed the seats . A similar incident was reported in Nashik . 
 The next day in Mumbai , two motorcycle @-@ borne MNS supporters hurled bottles at Amitabh Bachchan 's bungalow at Juhu . A group of MNS workers barged inside the booking office of the Grant Road railway station , damaged the booking office windows and tore off posters of a newly released Bhojpuri film put up there . Party workers resorted to stone throwing in some parts of <unk> , a North @-@ Mumbai suburb that has a sizeable North Indian lower middle @-@ class population . In the Central @-@ Mumbai suburb of Bandra , a clash ensued when MNS workers tried to plant party flags at an open market dominated by North Indians . 
 The offices of Bhojpuri actor Manoj Tiwari and North Indian Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam were stoned by MNS supporters on 5 February . Two days later , a group of 20 to 25 MNS activists forced themselves into the Central Mumbai office of the Bombay <unk> 's Union , where they assaulted office staff and damaged property . In response to the attack , the 55 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Union immediately called for a flash strike . The strike was then called off after R. R. Patil , the Home Minister of Maharashtra , assured the Union of justice and safety . An advocate named Arvind Shukla filed a Public Interest Litigation ( PIL ) seeking directions to the Election Commission to <unk> MNS in view of its " anti @-@ national activities " . 
 On 8 February , re @-@ invoking the issue of Marathi pride , Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray on hit out at North Indians again , in a special article titled " <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> " ( My stand , my struggle ) written by him in the Marathi daily Maharashtra Times , Thackeray said , " Even if the whole world opposes my stand , I and my party will continue the struggle to protect Marathi culture , Maharashtrian people and will trample the <unk> of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar . At this juncture , I feel like asking the Maharashtrian people that if I am voicing your true emotion , then why are you sitting on the fence . Come join me in this struggle . " 
 On 12 February , MNS workers attacked vendors and shopkeepers from North India in various parts of Maharashtra and destroyed government property to vent their anger against the reported move to arrest Raj . Sporadic violence was reported in Beed and Aurangabad . State @-@ run buses in these areas were stone @-@ pelted , resulting in the arrest of several MNS workers . In Nashik , MNS workers vandalised several shops belonging to North Indians , forcing other shops and business establishments to close down . One shopkeeper was severely beaten and was admitted to Nashik General Hospital . Banks and schools promptly closed after these incidents . Stone pelting by angry mobs was also reported from the city 's Shalimar and <unk> squares , and the Satpur and Ambad industrial areas remained closed . Nashik police detained 26 MNS workers after the violence . Six municipal cooperators were also put under preventive arrest . Additional police pickets were deployed in various parts of the city , including Shalimar and Ambad Chowk , Satpur , Nashik Road , the MNS head office at Mumbai Naka and some of the city suburbs . In Pune , MNS workers pelted stones on state @-@ run buses and attacked a few shop owners in Pune 's Laxmi Road area , prompting shops to shut down to avoid similar attacks . 
 The Mumbai Police announced its move to put Raj under their custody on 13 February , which created an upsurge of violence in the state and led to two deaths . Attacks on North Indians were reported from Mumbai , Pune , Jalna , Beed , Aurangabad and <unk> . Shops , offices and other business establishments were shut down in different parts of Mumbai , as MNS workers threatened violence in case their leader was arrested . Central Mumbai localities were most affected , especially around Dadar and Shivaji Park , the strongholds of both the MNS and the Shiv Sena . The police blocked roads in front of the residence of Raj in the Shivaji Park area . A civic activist named James John was assaulted by suspected MNS workers while he was attempting to photograph them forcing shop owners to down shutters in JB Nagar , Andheri . John suffered two rib fractures and bruises on his lungs . In Nashik , an employee of the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited , a Maharashtrian , died during a stone pelting on state @-@ run buses by MNS supporters . A migrant from Bihar , who was a security guard with a private company at <unk> in Nashik district , was killed by a mob . 
 In Mumbai and Aurangabad , police rounded up more than 400 MNS workers . In Pune and <unk> @-@ Chinchwad , MNS workers went on a rampage following the arrest of Raj , smashing windows and windscreens of eleven state buses . Thirteen rioters were arrested . They also chopped off both hands of a Bihari hawker sleeping on the streets . He was severely beaten until he fell unconscious . When he gained consciousness the following day , he found himself in a hospital with both hands amputated . The injured , mainly hawkers , were treated at the Nashik Civil Hospital after they were beaten . Shops along Nashik Road closed down after the incident . Incidents of stone pelting on state @-@ run buses were reported from the Nashik Road , Ambad , <unk> Peth , and <unk> areas . Bus services were severely curtailed and diverted via <unk> . In <unk> , MNS workers blocked roads and pelted stones at buses , damaging several vehicles in the process . Though contingents of the Rapid Action Force and the Central Industrial Security Force were deployed in many parts of the state , the police could not control violence by the MNS who adopted hit @-@ and @-@ run methods of attack . More than 200 activists of the MNS were arrested across Nashik . Many activists went underground and coordinated with party activists from undisclosed locations . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 The attacks simmered down after mid @-@ February due to the arrest and imposition of a gag order on Raj . Isolated cases of attacks , however , were reported until April 2008 . On 22 March , six North Indians were beaten up by a group of Holi revellers , suspected to be MNS workers , in Santa Cruz , Mumbai . On the same day , a shop owned by a North Indian was ransacked by a group of 10 – 15 drunken men , who pelted stones and beat his children because they had refused to provide free food . On 29 March , motorcycle @-@ borne assailants damaged at least five taxis owned by North Indians in Central Mumbai . Four people were arrested . Four labourers travelling on the Konkan Kanya Express from Thane to Margao in search of jobs were beaten and looted by some men in Raigad district after being identified as North Indians on 1 April . Then on 30 May , a group of North Indians was injured when a mob of approximately 800 MNS activists attacked them at a meeting organised by the SP and some other North Indians fronts . Five North Indians were critically injured in the attack , and the police arrested 35 MNS activists after the incident . 
 = = = October = = = 
 After months of lull in the anti @-@ North Indian offensive , on 19 October 2008 , MNS activists beat up North Indian candidates appearing for the all @-@ India Railway Recruitment Board entrance exam for the Western region in Mumbai . The attack invoked a quick reaction from Lalu Prasad Yadav and his cabinet colleague Ram Vilas <unk> , who too hails from Bihar . Chief minister Nitish Kumar , on the other hand , spoke to his Maharashtra counterpart Vilasrao Deshmukh and urged him to provide protection to the migrants from Bihar . Lalu demanded a ban on the MNS , and described its chief Raj Thackeray as a " mental case " . 
 Bihar witnessed violent protest after death of Pawan <unk> , a resident of Bara @-@ <unk> village in Nalanda district , in anticipation that he died after being assaulted by MNS activists . However , railway police clarified , based on the CCTV footage , that Pawan had died due to an accident at Andheri station after slipping at a platform . 
 Maharashtra Chief Minister Vilasrao Deshmukh admitted that his government was responsible for failure in preventing the attacks by MNS on north Indian candidates at Railways examination centres and ordered a probe into the incident , which will also enquire into why the job advertisements where not given in Marathi newspapers . " What has happened is not good . Such incidents take place because of loopholes in the law . One can 't hold only the Home Ministry responsible for it , it is ( entire ) government 's responsibility . Such incidents are affecting the image of the state and I have instructed the DGP to take stern action , " Deshmukh said . However , NCP leader Narayan Rane , wrote a piece in 23 October 2008 , issue of ' <unk> ' , in a city newspaper he owns , pleading that Marathis should get their legitimate share in the central government sector . The Times of India noted , the essay indicates that Rane continues to have a soft spot for MNS chief Raj Thackeray – the two were close friends when Rane was in the Sena . Stating that the Marathis were getting a raw deal in central government jobs such as income tax and the railways , Rane said it was perplexing that of 54 @,@ 000 , only 54 Marathis were summoned for the railway recruitment exams . The railways must give Marathis their legitimate share in employment , Rane said . 
 On 20 October 2008 , Thackeray was arrested in Ratnagiri after Mumbai police had received a non @-@ bailable warrant issued by a Jamshedpur court against the MNS chief . Raj 's arrest ignited violence by his supporters in large parts of the city forcing it to shut down . <unk> supporters went on the rampage torching public transport and telling office goers to return home . Many shops and commercial establishments , especially those run or managed by non @-@ Maharashtrians , chose not to open at all to avoid trouble . Raj , whose MNS workers Sunday attacked non @-@ Maharashtrians appearing for the railway board examination , was brought from Ratnagiri , about 250 km from here , to be produced at the Bandra court , where he was summoned for . 
 There was mayhem outside the court premises with large crowds gathering around <unk> and camera crews waiting to capture the trouble . In some places , buses , taxis and autorickshaws were set on fire , in others areas public transport just stayed off the roads . The office of the state Congress spokesperson Sanjay Nirupam was also vandalised . 
 A North Indian shopkeeper was killed in Bhandup , Mumbai after he refused to shut down his shop when MNS activists protesting Raj 's arrest forced him to do so . Four persons were killed and another seriously injured in a village near Kalyan . Deputy commissioner of police ( rural ) Sanjay <unk> said two North Indians , a member of the Agri community and an MNS worker were killed in a clash between the two communities in <unk> , 10 km from Kalyan . Earlier , curfew had been imposed in the entire Kalyan area . The situation in Kalyan worsened in the evening as Raj was driven there to a police station lock @-@ up where he was to spend the night before being presented in a court on 22 October . Five outdoor broadcast vans belonging to media houses were damaged by MNS supporters . A cameraman from <unk> was injured and had to be admitted to a private hospital . One Kalyan @-@ <unk> municipal transport bus was set on fire while five bikes were reduced to ashes . Transport services across Kalyan were paralysed . A jewellery shop was also ransacked by MNS supporters . In all one hundred and twenty @-@ five cases of arson , rioting and <unk> were registered across the state , including in Pune and <unk> , by early evening , and 2 @,@ 085 people were arrested , state director general of police A N Roy said . 
 As news about the arrest spread , there was violence in other parts of Maharashtra too . Sporadic incidents of stone pelting at municipal and private buses were reported in the <unk> of Maharashtra following the arrest of MNS chief Raj Thackeray in Ratnagiri . In <unk> area , some alleged MNS activists damaged a company 's bus that was taking its employees to workplace . Few Pune Municipal Transport ( PMT ) buses were stoned by miscreants , police said . Meanwhile , police have picked up around 100 MNS activists , including some corporators as a preventive measure . In Nashik , MNS activists set ablaze a truck near PWD minister Chhagan Bhujbal 's farm and also damaged another truck at <unk> @-@ <unk> area , police said . Incidents of stone pelting on MSRTC buses and other vehicles were reported in some areas , they said , adding vehicular traffic on the busy Mumbai @-@ Agra @-@ national highway was disrupted following the protest . Police rounded up 70 MNS activists in Nashik incidents and security was tightened in the city . In Solapur , incidents of stone pelting on state transport buses were also reported . In Nagpur MNS party leaders claimed to have damaged several MSRTC buses . 
 Angry students in various parts of Bihar damaged railway property and disrupted train traffic , as a protest . The police said the protesters targeted Patna , <unk> , Barh , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> railway stations in the morning . The protesting students reportedly set afire two AC bogies of an express train at Barh railway station . They ransacked <unk> , Barh , <unk> and <unk> railway stations . According to the railway police , at least 10 students were detained in the morning and extra security was deployed to control the situation . A 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy was killed when police opened fire on protesters . The child was hit by a stray bullet and died at the scene after police in <unk> district fired on a mob attacking a train station . A group of 25 people pelted stones on the Maharashtra Bhawan in <unk> Line , Kanpur , Uttar Pradesh . Constructed in 1928 , the building is owned by the lone trust run by Marathis in Kanpur . 
 = = = January – May 2009 = = = 
 On 26 January 2009 , MNS activists attacked North Indian residents of Satpur near Nashik who were paying tribute to the terrorist attacks on Mumbai in 2008 and also celebrating ' Uttar Pradesh Din ' through cultural programmes . Eight of them were arrested . In May 2009 , alleged MNS workers tried to disrupt Patna @-@ born actress Neetu Chandra 's intimate photoshoot with a model in Mumbai , claiming that it promoted lesbianism and chanting " Jai Maharashtra . " 
 = = Arrests of Raj Thackeray and Abu Asim Azmi = = 
 Raj Thackeray and SP leader Abu Asim Azmi were booked under Indian Penal Code sections 153 ( wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot ) , 153 A ( promoting enmity between groups on the basis of place of birth , residence , etc . ) and 153 B ( imputations , assertions prejudicial to national integration ) on 11 February . The police also applied section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code to both politicians and warned them not to hold any press conferences or rallies in the next seven days . On 13 February , however , police arrested both the leaders . Later that day , a local court granted Raj conditional bail and ordered him not to make any speeches that would inflame public tension . He obtained a release after furnishing a personal bond of Rs . 15 @,@ 000 . Azmi was arrested and taken to the <unk> court in South Central Mumbai and was released on surety of Rs . 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Raj appealed before the court against the gag order imposed on him , stating that he had to move around different places in Maharashtra for propounding the philosophy of his party and that such an order was an infringement of his ' fundamental rights ' . On 22 February , the court dismissed his appeal to re @-@ track the extension of the gag order passed against him , following which MNS started a signature campaign to get support against the gag order . According to MNS , Maharashtrian actors Nana Patekar and Shreyas Talpade had shown support in opposing the gag order , along with actors Salman Khan and <unk> Shetty . Salman Khan and <unk> Shetty , however , later denied the MNS 's claim . This move by MNS prompted the police to serve a show cause notice to Raj , asking him why the gag order should not be extended . 
 Over 1 @,@ 800 activists were put under arrest for substantive offences and as a preventive measure since violence had erupted on the streets of Mumbai on 13 February , according to the Joint Commissioner of Mumbai Police ( Law and Order ) , K. L. Prasad . 
 = = = Expression of displeasure by the Supreme Court = = = 
 On 22 February , while hearing two Public Interest Litigations , the Supreme Court of India termed the attacks on North Indians in Mumbai by Maharashtra Navnirman Sena activists as " a dangerous trend " . The three @-@ judge bench comprising Chief Justice K G Balakrishnan , and Justices R V Ravindran and <unk> Katju observed , 
 " It [ attack on North Indians ] is a very dangerous tendency . What is happening there [ Mumbai ] , we can understand . These [ who were attacked ] are innocent people . We understand the situation there [ in Maharashtra ] and what is happening . This is one country and we will not accept son @-@ of @-@ soil theory . We will not permit <unk> of this country . " 
 The court passed the judgement while hearing two Public Interest Litigations on related issues . While the first , filed by advocate Arvind Shukla , had sought direction to the Election Commission to <unk> Mr Raj Thackeray 's MNS for his controversial remarks against North Indians , the other one , filed by RU Upadhyay , sought protection for the North Indians in Maharashtra and compensation to those who had suffered from the attacks . The court , however , refused to pass any direction on the grounds that the issue was related to the aspect of law and order , and it thus directed the petitioners to have faith in the Bombay High Court and seek further hearing there . 
 In another apparent rebuff to Raj Thackeray , the Supreme Court asserted that every Indian has the right to settle anywhere in the country . A bench consisting of Justices H K Sema and <unk> Katju remarked , 
 " India is not an association or confederation of states , it is a union of state and there is only one nationality that is Indian . Hence every Indian has a right to go anywhere in India , to settle anywhere , and work and do business of his choice in any part of India peacefully . " 
 The apex court made the observation while upholding the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 's move to ban the sale of meat in the town during the nine @-@ day " <unk> festival " observed by the Jain community . 
 = = Exodus of North Indians from Maharashtra = = 
 = = = Nashik = = = 
 The news of Raj 's possible arrest provoked a heightened attack on the North Indians in the industrial town of Nashik in Maharashtra , Raj 's political stronghold . North Indians left the city by buses , trains and private vehicles . Railway officials at Nashik station said that this was the largest crowd using the railroad since the <unk> Kumbha Mela in 2003 – 2004 . It was perhaps one of the largest <unk> from a single district in the country ever . Chhagan Bhujbal , Nashik 's guardian minister , reported that 15 @,@ 000 migrant workers had left the city in the aftermath of the violence against North Indians . 
 = = = Pune = = = 
 In Pune , an estimated 25 @,@ 000 workers left the city in the wake of the attacks , according to government officials . Pune 's District Guardian Minister Ajit Pawar and Collector Prabhakar Deshmukh held meetings of various people 's representatives to stop the mass departure . They were joined by local Congress MP Suresh <unk> , who picketed at Pune railway station to allay fears of those boarding the trains with their family members , carrying their meager belongings . 
 = = = Effects on local industries = = = 
 Local industries in Nashik , especially those located in the Ambad Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation area , were affected due to the large @-@ scale departure of migrant workers . According to a report , 40 percent small and medium industries in the Ambad industrial area had been closed down due to the migration . Though the local industries at Nashik are ancillary units , they provide material to big industries such as Mahindra and Mahindra and Crompton Greaves . Losses resulting from the exodus were estimated to be Rs . 500 – 7 billion . 
 In Pune , where the construction industry was badly hit , some local organisations , working for porters , construction workers and casual labourers , tried to stop the exodus . These organisations set up a National Integration Committee ( NIC ) and charted out confidence @-@ building measures among the migrants in the city . One of the resolutions passed at the meeting was to encourage participation of the North Indians in all festivities in the near future . In fact , ninety percent of the labour force in Pune consists of migrants ; 60 percent of these come from Bihar and UP . It was also feared that the stoppage of construction activities would adversely affect the plans of hosting certain events of the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games to be held in the city . 
 On 8 September 2008 , Infosys Technologies announced that 3 @,@ 000 employee positions had been shifted from Pune to Chennai , due to construction delays caused earlier that year by the attacks on North Indian construction workers . 
 = = Political reactions = = 
 The attacks evoked severe responses from political parties and their leaders , particularly of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar . Mayawati , the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh , accused the Congress @-@ ruled Maharashtra government of failing to prevent the attacks . She demanded centre intervention to protect the lives and properties of North Indians in the state . Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar said " Mumbai <unk> <unk> ( Mumbai will be ruined ) " . In response to the attacks on taxi drivers and vendors , he added , " What will happen in Mumbai if taxis go off the roads ? Mumbai will come to a standstill " . Lalu Prasad Yadav on 5 February 2008 , took up the issue of attacks on North Indians with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and demanded action against those involved in them . Commenting on Raj Thackeray , Lalu Prasad said , " He is desperate and such type of leader will never be successful in the country . The Government should take action against him and his supporters " . 
 In the national capital , Delhi , political and social organisations launched street protests and burnt Raj 's effigy , while members of the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) ' s <unk> cell held a demonstration demanding that the dismissal of the Maharashtra government . In Allahabad , SP workers tried to obstruct the movement of trains in protest . In Uttar Pradesh 's capital , Lucknow , Nationalist Congress Party activists burnt an effigy of Raj . In Patna , capital of Bihar , <unk> 's youth wing staged a demonstration against Raj and the MNS . Thackeray 's effigies were burnt also in Jamshedpur in the state of Jharkhand . 
 Maharashtra Chief Minister Vilasrao Deshmukh condemned Raj 's actions and promised to protect migrants from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar and at the same time warned SP from hijacking the situation for political mileage . The Nationalist Congress Party , a key member of the ruling coalition in Maharashtra , also criticised Raj Thackeray and said the campaign was a " cheap publicity stunt " . On 6 February 2008 about 200 MNS party workers quit their party and re @-@ joined Shiv Sena , to protest against the MNS 's anti @-@ North Indian agenda . 
 On 9 March , Congress President Sonia Gandhi declared that there should be no leniency towards those stoking regional and communal passions . " Unity and integrity are the basic conditions for progress of the nation and to fight terrorism . There should be no leniency towards those who seek to discriminate on the basis of religion and region , " Sonia Gandhi said . She asserted that the country belongs to all with equal rights to it , and that it is the responsibility of all to ensure security of life and property of every citizen in any part of the country . 
 Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha , Lal Krishna Advani of the BJP criticising the attacks commented , " No political party should say or do anything that weakens the country 's unity or undermines the Constitution " . BJP spokesperson Prakash <unk> alleged that the Congress State government deliberately delayed taking any action when the attacks on North Indians began in Mumbai . He said that he suspected Congress had a strategy to divide Maharashtrian and non @-@ Maharashtrian votes , by creating a feeling of insecurity among non @-@ Maharashtrians in the hope that they would vote for the Congress . He blamed the party for trying to divert people 's attention from more critical problems that Maharashtra faces , such as the agrarian crisis and load shedding . He added , " India is one and every Indian has a right to settle down and work in any part of the country " . 
 The Communist Party of India demanded stringent action against those inciting violence and asked democratic forces to launch a united struggle against such elements . The party also accused the media , particularly the electronic media , of encouraging anti @-@ national and parochial forces by giving them " undue publicity " . According to a resolution adopted at its 20th national Congress at Hyderabad , no adequate action was against those who indulge in chauvinistic slogans and perpetuate hooliganism , and the ruling Congress @-@ led coalition and the opposition BJP utilised these forces for their local political gains . The resolution also said , " Opportunistic , parochial and chauvinistic " forces like Shiv Sena and MNS have exploited the situation for narrow electoral gains and demanded compensation for those affected by the violence . The resolution stated that in 1966 , Bal Thackeray gave anti @-@ South Indian slogans and now his nephew wants to repeat that experience by giving anti @-@ North Indian slogans . The All India Minorities Front ( <unk> ) threatened to launch a nationwide agitation against Raj if he did not mend his ways and avoid targeting North Indians and non @-@ Maharashtrians . 
 = = Media coverage and response = = 
 The anti @-@ North Indian violence was labelled as a ' tirade against North Indians ' by sections of the national media ( The Hindu , The Times of India , Deccan Herald , Hindustan Times , The Economic Times ) and international media ( Khaleej Times ) . The Hindustan Times published a survey on the front page on 15 February , which said that 73 percent of Mumbai believed the insular line of the MNS and its president against North Indians was denting Mumbai 's cosmopolitan image . The Hindustan Times later received a call from the MNS spokesperson <unk> <unk> protesting the findings of the study . Raj blamed the English @-@ language and Hindi @-@ language media of being biased against him and his party . In addition , some held the media responsible of giving Raj undue publicity . According to an SMS / web poll conducted by CNN IBN , 88 percent of the voters were of the opinion that Raj Thackeray was " feeding on media hype " . On 11 February , in Pune , a group of about 15 MNS activists burnt 150 copies of The Week , a weekly magazine in English , in reaction to its cover story on Raj 's controversial utterances , portraying him as Mumbai 's Hitler . 
 The Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of Outlook , Vinod Mehta , said in a debate on the media 's role in the situation , " Here is a politician [ Raj Thackeray ] propounding an idea that could lead to a civil war in the country . The doctrine had to be challenged and what could the media have done ? While you may argue that some images were in excess , you will also agree we had to report because this fight to the streets " . Ending the debate on a sarcastic note Mehta said , " It 's ridiculous ! The politicians are not responsible , the state government isn 't responsible , police are not to be blamed but media is responsible " . 
 There is no denying that civic amenities in Mumbai are cracking under the added pressure of a migrant population seeking the riches of India 's commercial capital . The solution cannot be wielding a lathi or a sword . Nor can it be in jingoistic expressions of Marathi pride or North Indian chest thumping . Mumbai will do well to remember how the city came together during the train blasts ( 11 July 2006 Mumbai train bombings ) . No one asked then , who is a migrant and who is a Maharashtrian . It 's dangerous to solve administrative problems with ethnic quick fixes . 
 Painter Pranava Prakash did his exhibition titled " Chal Hat Be Bihari " in Jan 2009 in delhi protesting violence against north Indians in Mumbai . 
 = = = Local vernacular media = = = 
 The Marathi daily Maharashtra Times editorial on Raj 's arrest said that his arrest was a big farce , from which he emerged with pomp and style . It condemned the violence that resulted after the arrest that forced thousands of migrant workers to uproot themselves from various parts of Maharashtra . Loksatta criticised the television channels for their relentless replay of just two instances to portray the violent impact of his arrest . The edit blamed Hindi channels for making Mumbai look like Gujarat during the 2002 Gujarat riots . Another editor in the same daily also wrote that the " Marathi <unk> " ( Marathi demonstration ) will not benefit any party , as the Marathi vote would be divided between the Shiv Sena and MNS . Lokmat , another popular Marathi daily , published a special on a population survey conducted by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences ( <unk> ) , according to which , there has been a 21 % decrease in the migrant population in the city since 1961 . The North Indian population , however , witnessed an increase from 12 to 24 percent . Saamna 's editorial asked what wrong <unk> <unk> , the Maharashtrian man killed in the violence , had committed . The editor of <unk> wrote that although Raj had gained political mileage by taking up the cause of Marathi people , its impact was severe on the migrants , who had to flee the state . 
 Nikhil <unk> , Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of Lokmat TV , on the day of Raj 's arrest said in an interview with CNBC India that the Mumbai police should have acted against Raj Thackeray and Abu Azmi earlier . He said , " Had they acted , there would have been no violence . I think the police reacted a little late . " He expressed his apprehensions about the Shiv Sena stirring up some trouble to compete with Raj Thackeray as he had put the Sena on the back foot . " Raj Thackeray has stolen the show from Uddhav Thackeray . I think Bal Thackeray will be worried and he will create some trouble . He might give some provocative statements . So , the police have to be observant otherwise it will be a fight between the two brothers and Maharashtra and Mumbai will suffer . " 
 Indian Express editor <unk> Kulkarni 's open letter in Loksatta ( Marathi newspaper owned by The Indian Express ) to Raj Thackeray , in response to Raj 's article in Marathi titled <unk> <unk> , Maaza <unk> ( My Stand , My Struggle ) in the Maharashtra Times of 9 February . The letter by <unk> which admonished Raj Thackeray for his " hate speech " solicited a response from Raj . A similar open letter was addressed to Raj by journalist <unk> <unk> to Raj deploring his party 's actions in the 19 October 2008 All @-@ India Railway Recruitment Board examination attack . 
 * Translated in English ( original text in Marathi ) 
 = = Political analysis = = 
 Political observers commented that the attacks on North Indians by MNS were a " shrewd ploy " of their chief Raj to embarrass the Shiv Sena and usurp its core Marathi constituency . They also felt Raj was trying to gain a political foothold by imitating his uncle and political mentor Bal Thackeray , who had headed the anti @-@ South Indian campaign — " Lungi <unk> , <unk> <unk> " ( throw out those who wear <unk> , celebrate by blowing bugles ) — during the formative years of the Shiv Sena in the 1960s . 
 Kumar Ketkar , the editor of the Marathi daily Loksatta , said though Raj might have achieved what he wanted , but he may have not anticipated the attention it would get . He said , " He thought the media would gobble it up and just create a small storm that will shift the agenda . But the great Amar Singh and Abu Azmi fuelled the issue by taking him more seriously than what he deserves . The confrontational position aided the MNS volunteers to get into the limelight " . Ketkar also said the Shiv Sena would lose in the scenario commenting , " The Sena tried to woo the North Indians after it realised their value as a vote bank in the 2004 defeat . They realised that the demography of the city had changed within a decade . That is when they decided it was time to please the North Indians . Uddhav started organising Uttar Bharatiya functions . This is the year that he bore the fruits of his efforts . That is why Raj decided to strike at the same sentiment that the Sena played in the past — the Marathi <unk> . " 
 The author of The Sena Story , Vaibhav Purandare , said Raj resorted to this measure to stem his party 's eroding credibility . He said , " When Raj launched his party , he first started out with an inclusive approach . When he found that it is not working , he had to do something drastic to get back into the limelight . On the other hand , the Sena was actually becoming inclusive . It even began attracting Muslims into its fold . It also began taking up the common man 's issues like farmer suicides and power supply . This is Raj 's attempt to take the Sena 's mass base away to completely embarrass the Sena . And he has succeeded . " Both Ketkar and Purandare , however , agreed that Raj was trying to position himself as Bal Thackeray 's potential successor . 
 = = = Alleged Congress support for MNS = = = 
 <unk> <unk> of Daily News and Analysis noted in her article titled Forget political will , Raj has state support , stated , " Ever since its birth on 9 March 2006 , MNS has been nurtured by the ruling Congress and Nationalist Congress Party ( NCP ) with an ulterior motive of splitting the Shiv Sena . Ironically , the Sena itself was given a ' protected childhood ' in the late 1960s by the then Congress as a tool to war with the Communist Party of India , which had a strong presence in Mumbai . Not surprisingly , covertly the administration has provided Raj adequate platform to consolidate the political forum through an emotive Marathi plank . The purpose is to split the 26 % Marathi voters in Mumbai , which is rather loyal to the Shiv Sena . The electoral merit of the MNS remains untested but its ability to bond with sons of the soil cannot be cursorily dismissed in Mumbai , Thane , Nashik and Pune . " She further noted , " Under chief minister Vilasrao Deshmukh , the Congress sees a double advantage in the strategy : A proactive MNS will divide Sena voters on the one hand and drive Mumbai ’ s North Indian community — which was being targeted as " outsiders " by the MNS — to Congress ’ s lap . North Indians , who dominate 48 essential services in Mumbai , constitute a sizeable — and hence decisive — vote bank . Forget political will , it is well @-@ calculated political design which has withheld the Democratic Front government from taking stern action against Raj . Or else , how does one explain home minister RR Patil engaging in a telephone conversation urging him to slow down instead of arresting his men indulging in violence on streets ? " She also said , " ( Vilasrao ) Deshmukh is no better . He has often said , " My administration will not tolerate divisive forces . Nobody is above the law " . " She expressed her views in reference to , Bombay High Court on lashing out at the Maharashtra government over the threat given by Maharashtra Navnirman Sena about displaying the Marathi signboard on the shops and establishments in the metropolis . " If you don 't have political will , then give that message to the people that we can not do anything , " Division Bench of Justice J N Patel and K K <unk> said dissatisfied about government 's inaction against hooliganism of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena activists . " Why no action has been taken against respondent number six ( Raj Thackeray ) ? Are some people ' untouchable ' for you ? " Justice Patel asked as government failed to file a proper reply regarding the action taken . 
 Congress leader Hussain Dalwai said , " It 's a sad commentary on the administration which has come to a stage where it requires the high court intervention " . He put the onus of his party 's coalition partner , saying , " Whether it is MNS violence in the signboard or dalit killing at <unk> it shows an insensitive administration . The NCP president Sharad Pawar should seriously reflect on the working of the state home department . " Even NCP leaders including Ajit Pawar and Chhagan Bhujbal have told RR Patil and Deshmukh , in the cabinet meet to " either act or shut up " . Suggesting that the Maharashtra government was not keen on taking strong action against MNS chief Raj Thackeray , the NDA on Thursday described as " stage @-@ managed show " the arrest and bail for him in cases of violence against north Indians in the state . BJP MP <unk> Hussain said , " Congress is Raj Thackeray 's event management company and it is trying to project Raj 's arrest as an event instead of making any serious effort to check the violent campaign of MNS against north Indians . There is match @-@ fixing between Raj and the Maharashtra government . The state government deliberately books him under small sections and he gets bail . " Talking on the attacks on North Indian candidates at the All @-@ India Railway Recruitment examinations in Mumbai , Rajya Sabha MP and JD @-@ U national general secretary <unk> Tiwari also attacked Congress for " promoting " the MNS chief and comparing him with slain Punjab separatist leader <unk> . " Congress party has a mastery in creating ' <unk> ' ( self destructing demons ) . Earlier they created <unk> in Punjab , which killed a Congress Prime Minister . Even this Raj Thackeray is ultimately going to damage Congress , " Tiwari claimed . He also alleged that Maharashtra government arrested Raj to carry out a " formality " and as mild charges were pressed , he got bail soon . 
 = = Resumption of verbal attacks = = 
 = = = Raj Thackeray = = = 
 While still under the gag order , in an interview with the Marathi weekly magazine Lok Prabha of the Indian Express group , Raj was quoted as saying : " We will go with folded hands and ask them [ North Indians ] to leave . If they refuse , then we will raise our hands . " Lok Prabha editor Pravin <unk> said : " The MNS chief has technically not made any inflammatory statement . Even when he says he and his party would go with folded hands to people asking them to leave and only raise hands if they refuse , he treads the ground gingerly without naming any community or party per se " . On 3 March , at a party function organised by the MNS at Shivaji Park , after the expiry of the gag order , Raj announced , " I have not given up my mission " , thus signalling to his supporters of continuing his stance on the migrant issue . 
 Then on 3 May , despite legal warnings by the police before his rally , Raj issued a <unk> to his supporters to take action whenever they encountered " injustice " . At a rally at Shivaji Park , he said , " That north Indians are living in Mumbai is because of our mercy . Let it be known " . He told MNS leaders to shed their <unk> and advised his supporters to " take action " whenever they felt necessary . He warned that North Indians who did not speak Marathi and did not respect Marathi culture would be driven away . Raj dared the police in his speech by saying , " Arrest me for this if you can " . After analysing the speech amidst demand for action against the MNS chief a senior police official quoted it was " difficult to find an explicit threat or provocation " in the text of his speech to initiate strong legal action against him and " it seems he [ Raj ] consulted legal experts before making the speech " . 
 = = = Bal Thackeray = = = 
 On 6 March , Bal Thackeray issued an editorial titled Ek Bihari , Sau <unk> ( One Bihari , Hundred illnesses ) in Saamna , Shiv Sena 's political mouthpiece , saying Biharis were " an unwanted lot " in the country . In what was termed as an apparent bid to recapture his party 's Marathi sons of soil plank , which was being hijacked by the MNS leader Raj , Thackeray wrote about Biharis , 
 " They [ Biharis ] are not wanted in southern India , Assam and also Punjab and Chandigarh . The Biharis have antagonised local population wherever they had settled . The UP @-@ Bihari MPs have shown their ingratitude towards Mumbai and Maharashtra with an anti @-@ Marathi tirade in Parliament . " 
 He also denounced Bihari MPs , saying they were " spitting in the same plate from which they ate " by criticising Mumbaikars and Maharashtrians . He also wrote , " They are trying to add fuel to the fire that has been extinguished , by saying that Mumbaikars have rotten brains " . The outburst was apparently in response to MPs from Bihar who had disrupted the proceedings of the Lok Sabha in protest against the attacks on North Indians . Bihar chief minister , Nitish Kumar , upset with the remarks , demanded that the Prime Minister and the Centre intervene in the matter immediately . The Saamna editorial prompted at least 16 Lok Sabha MPs from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh , belonging to the <unk> , JD ( U ) , SP and the Congress , to give notice for breach of privilege proceedings against Bal Thackeray . After the matter was raised in the Lok Sabha Speaker Somnath Chatterjee said : " If anybody has made any comment on our members ' functioning in the conduct of business in the House , not only do we treat that with the contempt that it deserves , but also any action that may be necessary will be taken according to procedure and well established norms . Nobody will be spared " . 
 On 27 March , in protest against Bal Thackeray 's editorial , leaders of Shiv Sena in Delhi resigned citing its " outrageous conduct " towards non @-@ Marathis in Maharashtra and announced that they will form a separate party . Addressing a press conference Shiv Sena 's North India chief Jai Bhagwan Goyal said the decision to leave the party was taken because of the " partial attitude " of the party high command towards Maharashtrians . " Shiv Sena is no different from Khalistan and Jammu and Kashmir militant groups which are trying to create a rift between people along regional lines . The main aim of these forces is to split our country . Like the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena , the Shiv Sena too has demeaned North Indians and treated them inhumanely " , he said . 
 Evaluating the developments , political observers in Mumbai remarked that the Shiv Sena had been " caught in a bind " by Raj 's campaign as it had in recent years sought to portray an inclusive image to try to woo the significant migrant vote in the Mumbai and Thane region in the run @-@ up to the Assembly elections in 2009 . To balance this strategy , the party had started speaking up for Maharashtrians to remind them that it was the Shiv Sena was the original voice of the local people . 
 = Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl is a 2003 American fantasy swashbuckler film based on the Pirates of the Caribbean attraction at Disney theme parks . It was directed by Gore Verbinski and produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer . The story follows pirate Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) and blacksmith Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) as they rescue the kidnapped Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) from the cursed crew of the Black Pearl , captained by Hector Barbossa ( Geoffrey Rush ) , who become undead skeletons at night . 
 Jay Wolpert developed a script based on the theme park ride in 2001 , and Stuart Beattie rewrote it in early 2002 . Around that time , producer Jerry Bruckheimer became involved in the project ; he had Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio work on the script , adding the supernatural curse to the storyline . Filming took place from October 2002 to March 2003 in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and on sets constructed around Los Angeles , California . 
 The world premiere was held at Disneyland Resort in Anaheim , California , on June 28 , 2003 . The film became the first in a series , with two back @-@ to @-@ back sequels , Dead Man 's Chest and At World 's End , released in 2006 and 2007 . A fourth film , On Stranger Tides , was released in 2011 and a fifth film , Dead Men Tell No Tales , is scheduled for release in 2017 . 
 The film received positive reviews from critics and was an unexpected success , grossing over $ 654 million worldwide with many considering it to be the finest film in the series itself . Johnny Depp 's portrayal of Jack Sparrow was universally praised , winning him the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role and earned him nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor , BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role , and Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . The Curse of the Black Pearl was also nominated for four other Academy Awards and BAFTAs . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the early 18th Century while sailing to Port Royal , Jamaica , Governor Weatherby Swann , his daughter Elizabeth , and Lieutenant James Norrington encounter a burning shipwreck and recover a young boy , Will Turner . Elizabeth discovers a golden pirate medallion around his neck , but keeps it so as to protect him . As boats are launched to scour the wreck , Elizabeth sees a ghost ship vanishing into the fog . 
 Eight years later , Norrington is promoted to Commodore and proposes to Elizabeth , but her tight corset makes her faint and fall into the sea . Will 's necklace , which she is wearing , casts a summoning spell . Captain Jack Sparrow comes to Port Royal intending to commandeer a ship , and rescues her . Norrington identifies Jack , and a chase ensues . Jack runs into Will , now a blacksmith and talented swordsman . They duel , and Jack is knocked unconscious , and captured and imprisoned . 
 That night , the Black Pearl , the ship Elizabeth saw as a child , attacks Port Royal in search of the medallion that summoned it . Two pirates capture Elizabeth and take her to meet Captain Barbossa for negotiations . Elizabeth says her last name is Turner , to conceal her identity as the governor 's daughter , but Barbossa takes her as prisoner . Elizabeth tries and fails to kill him , and Barbossa reveals that after his crew took the Aztec treasure of Cortés from Isla de Muerta , they were cursed as immortals , and they appear as skeletons in moonlight . To lift the curse , they need to return all 882 gold pieces and sacrifice the blood of the owner of each piece . Elizabeth 's medallion is the final piece . 
 Will Turner frees Jack from prison to rescue his love Elizabeth . Jack agrees upon learning Will ’ s surname . The two commandeer the HMS Interceptor , infuriating Norrington , and head for the lawless port of Tortuga to recruit a crew . Among the crew is Jack ’ s friend Joshamee Gibbs . Jack reveals that Will ’ s father Bootstrap Bill Turner was a pirate , which confuses and angers the law @-@ abiding Will . Gibbs tells Will that Jack was captain of the Black Pearl until Barbossa mutinied and marooned him on an island ; Jack escaped and vowed revenge on Barbossa . At Isla de Muerta , Will and Jack witness Barbossa sacrificing Elizabeth 's blood and the final gold piece . However , the curse is not lifted because the medallion did not belong to Elizabeth ; it belonged to Bootstrap Bill , making Will the owner by bloodline . Will rescues Elizabeth and brings her to the Interceptor , while Jack and his crew confront Barbossa aboard the Pearl and get locked in the brig . 
 The Pearl pursues the Interceptor , taking the crew hostage and destroying the ship . Will makes a deal with Barbossa to let Elizabeth go free in exchange for his blood to lift the curse , but Barbossa exploits a loophole in the agreement and maroons Jack and Elizabeth on the same island Jack was left on before . Elizabeth makes a smoke signal , and Commodore Norrington brings the HMS Dauntless to rescue Elizabeth and arrest Jack . Elizabeth requests Norrington to return for Will , convincing him by accepting his marriage proposal . 
 That night , the Dauntless arrives at Isla de Muerta . Jack plans to lure the pirates out to be ambushed by the crew of the Dauntless , but the plan goes awry when Barbossa 's crew walks underwater to attack Dauntless . Elizabeth escapes the Dauntless and frees Jack ’ s crew from the brig of the Pearl . However , they refuse to help her rescue Will , so Elizabeth sets out on her own . 
 Jack seemingly reaches a deal with Barbossa to operate a pirate fleet , but suddenly frees Will and engages in a duel with Barbossa , while Elizabeth and Will fight off Barbossa 's crew . Barbossa eventually stabs Jack , but Jack is revealed to be under the immortal curse as well , having taken and kept a piece of gold from Cortez ’ s chest . He reveals the entire deception as a coup to win back the Pearl . Jack shoots Barbossa , and Will simultaneously drops the final medallion into the chest , with his blood on it . The curse is now lifted , causing Barbossa to become mortal ; Barbossa dies from Jack 's gunshot , and the rest of Barbossa 's crew are captured or killed by the Navy . Jack , Elizabeth , and Will escape the island . 
 Upon returning to Port Royal , Jack is led to the gallows to be hanged for piracy . Elizabeth diverts Norrington 's attention and Will attempts a rescue , but Will and Jack are surrounded and held at gunpoint . Elizabeth intercedes and declares her love for Will , leaving Norrington crestfallen . Jack dives into the sea and escapes aboard the Black Pearl , which is waiting nearby . Governor Swann pardons Will and gives his blessing for Elizabeth to marry him . Norrington decides to permit Jack and the Pearl " one day 's head start " before initiating pursuit . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , Barbossa ’ s pet monkey steals a piece of gold from the chest and regains immortality . 
 = = Cast = = 
 See List of Pirates of the Caribbean characters . 
 Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow : Rightful captain of the Black Pearl , Jack fell victim of mutiny from his crew under the direction of his first @-@ mate Hector Barbossa . Left for dead , marooned on a deserted island , Sparrow is back in search of his ship and those who betrayed him . The role was originally written especially for Hugh Jackman , thus the name " Jack Sparrow " ; however , he was not well known outside his native Australia , so Disney cast the more famous Depp as Jack . Depp found the script quirky : rather than trying to find treasure , the crew of the Black Pearl were trying to return it in order to lift their curse ; also , the traditional mutiny had already taken place . Initially Sparrow was , according to Bruckheimer , " a young Burt Lancaster , just the cocky pirate . " At the first read @-@ through , Depp surprised the rest of the cast and crew by portraying the character in an off @-@ kilter manner . After researching 18th @-@ century pirates , Depp compared them to modern rock stars and decided to base his performance on Keith Richards , who would later appear as Jack 's father in Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End . Although Verbinski and Bruckheimer had confidence in Depp , partly because it would be Bloom who was playing the traditional Errol Flynn @-@ type , Disney executives were confused , asking Depp whether the character was drunk or gay , and Michael Eisner even proclaimed while watching rushes , " He 's ruining the film ! " Depp answered back , " Look , these are the choices I made . You know my work . So either trust me or give me the boot . " 
 Geoffrey Rush as Captain Hector Barbossa : The captain of the Black Pearl , since taken over from Sparrow . Barbossa and his crew suffer a curse from Aztec gold that makes them a team of living @-@ dead . Verbinski approached Rush for the role of Barbossa , as he knew he could hint at the subtle complexities of the character while still portraying a simple villainy that would suit the story 's tone . 
 Orlando Bloom as Will Turner : A blacksmith who teams up with Sparrow in his search for the Black Pearl , in order to rescue the pirate @-@ abducted Elizabeth Swan . Bloom read the script after Geoffrey Rush , with whom he was working on Ned Kelly , suggested it to him . 
 Keira Knightley as Elizabeth Swann : Governor Swann 's daughter and Will 's love interest ; Swann is taken by the pirate crew of the Black Pearl . Knightley came as a surprise to Verbinski ; he had not seen her performance in Bend It Like Beckham and was impressed by her audition . 
 Jack Davenport as Commodore James Norrington : A commanding Royal Navy officer at Port Royal , and Elizabeth 's fiancée . 
 Jonathan Pryce as Governor Weatherby Swann : The royal governor of Port Royal and the father of Elizabeth Swann . In contrast to his strong @-@ willed daughter , he is something of a milquetoast . Both Elizabeth and the Governor sailed from England to the Caribbean eight years prior to Curse of the Black Pearl , along with then Lieutenant James Norrington , presumably when Swann assumed the governor 's post . Swann is a doting father , and he wishes for his daughter to accept Commodore Norrington 's marriage proposal . However , he eventually comes to accept that she truly loves Will Turner . Tom Wilkinson was negotiated with to play the part , but the role went to Pryce , whom Depp idolized . 
 Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs : Jack Sparrow 's friend and first mate ; he was once a sailor for the Royal Navy . 
 Zoe Saldana as <unk> : A female pirate who signs up to join Will Turner and Mr. Gibbs for a chance to confront Jack Sparrow for stealing her ship years before . 
 Lee Arenberg as Pintel : A pirate aboard the Black Pearl who , with Ragetti ( see below ) , serves as comic relief for most of the film . He and Ragetti dress up as women to provide the distraction that allows the cursed pirates to board the Dauntless near the end of the movie . 
 Mackenzie Crook as Ragetti : A pirate aboard the Black Pearl , Pintel 's buddy , with a wooden eye that never seems to stay in place . 
 Damian O 'Hare as Lieutenant Gillette : The second @-@ in @-@ command to Commodore Norrington . 
 <unk> Etienne as Koehler : One of Barbossa 's pirate crew . 
 Michael Berry Jr. as Twigg : An Irish sailor who is often paired with Koehler 
 David Bailie as Cotton : A sailor who had his tongue cut out , is now mute and has a macaw to talk for him . 
 Christopher S. Capp as Mr. Cotton 's Parrot . 
 Martin Klebba as Marty : A dwarf pirate who also lived in Tortuga until hired by Jack and Will to rescue Elizabeth . 
 Isaac C. Singleton Jr. as Bo <unk> : The bo <unk> of the Black Pearl , and under Barbossa 's command . He fought with Lieutenant Gillette during the battle of Isla de Muerta . 
 Giles New as <unk> : A dutiful but daft Royal Marine . He serves under the command of Commodore Norrington . 
 Angus Barnett as <unk> : A dutiful but daft Royal Marine . 
 Greg Ellis as Lieutenant Theodore Groves : a lieutenant who admires Sparrow , to the ire of Norrington . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the early 1990s , screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio began to think of a supernatural spin on the pirate genre . Walt Disney Pictures had Jay Wolpert write a script based on the ride in 2001 , which was based on a story created by the executives Brigham Taylor , Michael Haynes , and Josh Harmon . This story featured Will Turner as a prison guard who releases Sparrow to rescue Elizabeth , who is being held for ransom money by Captain Blackheart . 
 Disney was unsure whether to release the film in theaters or direct @-@ to @-@ video . The studio was interested in Matthew McConaughey as Sparrow because of his resemblance to Burt Lancaster , who had inspired that script 's interpretation of the character . If they chose to release it direct @-@ to @-@ video , Christopher Walken or Cary Elwes would have been their first choices . 
 Stuart Beattie was brought in to rewrite the script in March 2002 , because of his knowledge of piracy . When Dick Cook managed to convince producer Jerry Bruckheimer to join the project , he rejected the script because it was " a straight pirate movie . " Later in March 2002 , he brought Elliott and Rossio , who suggested making a supernatural curse – as described in the opening narration of the ride – the film 's plot . 
 In May 2002 , Gore Verbinski signed on to direct Pirates of the Caribbean . He was attracted to the idea of using modern technology to resurrect a genre that had disappeared after the Golden Age of Hollywood and recalled his childhood memories of the ride , feeling the film was an opportunity to pay tribute to the " scary and funny " tone of it . 
 Jim Carrey was considered for the part of Jack Sparrow . However , the production schedule for The Curse of the Black Pearl conflicted with Bruce Almighty , which has been one of Carrey ’ s biggest successes . Others considered for the role include Michael Keaton and Christopher Walken . Although Cook had been a strong proponent of adapting Disney 's rides into films , the box office failure of The Country Bears made Michael Eisner attempt to shut down production of Pirates of the Caribbean . However , Verbinski told his concept artists to keep working on the picture , and when Eisner came to visit , the executive was astonished by what had been created . 
 As recalled in the book <unk> , Eisner pondered " Why does it have to cost so much ? " Bruckheimer replied , " Your competition is spending $ 150 million , " referring to franchises like The Lord of the Rings and The Matrix . Eisner concurred , but with the stigma attached to theme @-@ park adaptations , Eisner requested Verbinski and Bruckheimer remove some of the more overt references to the ride in the script , such as a scene where Sparrow and Turner enter the cave via a waterfall . 
 = = = = Influence of the Monkey Island series of games = = = = 
 Ted Elliott was allegedly writing a Steven Spielberg @-@ produced animated film adaptation of The Curse of Monkey Island , which was cancelled before its official announcement , three years prior to the release of The Curse of the Black Pearl . This film was allegedly in production at Industrial Light and Magic before being cancelled . 
 Ron Gilbert , the creator of the Monkey Island series , has jokingly expressed a bitterness towards Pirates of the Caribbean , specifically the second film , for its similarities to his game . Gilbert has also stated that On Stranger Tides , a novel by Tim Powers which was adapted into the fourth film , was the principal source of inspiration for his video games . 
 = = = Filming and design = = = 
 Verbinski did not want an entirely romanticized feel to the film : he wanted a sense of historical fantasy . Most of the actors wore prosthetics and contact lenses . Depp had contacts that acted as sunglasses , while Rush and Lee Arenberg wore dulled contacts that gave a sinister feel to the characters . Mackenzie Crook wore two contacts to represent his character 's wooden eye : a soft version , and a harder version for when it protrudes . In addition , their rotten teeth and scurvy skin were dyed on , although Depp did have gold teeth added , which he forgot to remove after filming . Depp also used a genuine pistol which was made in 1760 in London , which the crew bought from a dealer in Connecticut . A number of swords were built for the production by blacksmith Tony <unk> . The crew spent five months creating the cavern in which Barbossa and the Black Pearl crew attempt to reverse their curse , filling it with five feet of water , 882 Aztec coins , and some gold paint on the styrofoam rocks for more impressions of treasure . The crew also built the fortress at Port Royal in Rancho Palos Verdes , California , and Governor Swann 's palace was built at Manhattan Beach . A fire broke out in September 2002 , causing $ 525 @,@ 000 worth of damage , though no one was injured . 
 The filmmakers chose St. Vincent as their primary shooting location , as it contained the quietest beach they could find , and built three piers and a backlot for Port Royal and Tortuga . Of most importance to the film were the three ships : the Black Pearl , the Dauntless , and the Interceptor . For budget reasons , the ships were built on docks , with only six days spent in the open sea for the battle between the Black Pearl and the Interceptor . The Dauntless and the Black Pearl were built on barges , with computer @-@ generated imagery finishing the structures . The Black Pearl was also built on the Spruce Goose stage , in order to control fog and lighting . The Interceptor was a re @-@ dressed Lady Washington , a full @-@ scale replica sailing ship from Aberdeen , Washington , fully repainted before going on a 40 @-@ day voyage beginning December 2 , 2002 , arriving on location on January 12 , 2003 . A miniature was also built for the storm sequence . 
 Principal photography began on October 9 , 2002 and wrapped by March 7 , 2003 . The quick shoot was only marred by two accidents : as Jack Sparrow steals the Interceptor , three of the ropes attaching it to the Dauntless did not break at first , and when they did snap , debris hit Depp 's knee , though he was not injured , and the way the incident played out on film made it look like Sparrow merely ducks . A more humorous accident was when the boat Sparrow was supposed to arrive in at Port Royal sank . In October , the crew was shooting scenes at Rancho Palos Verdes , by December they were shooting at Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and in January they were at the cavern set at Los Angeles . The script often changed with Elliott and Rossio on set , with additions such as Gibbs ( Kevin McNally ) telling Will how Sparrow allegedly escaped from an island – strapping two turtles together with rope made of his back hair – and Pryce was written into the climactic battle to keep some empathy for the audience . 
 Because of the quick schedule of the shoot , Industrial Light & Magic immediately began visual effects work . While the skeletal forms of the pirates revealed by moonlight take up relatively little screentime , the crew knew their computer @-@ generated forms had to convince in terms of replicating performances and characteristics of the actors , or else the transition would not work . Each scene featuring them was shot twice : a reference plate with the actors , and then without them to add in the skeletons , an aesthetic complicated by Verbinski 's decision to shoot the battles with handheld cameras . The actors also had to perform their scenes again on the motion capture stage . With the shoot only wrapping up four months before release , Verbinski spent 18 @-@ hour days on the edit , while at the same time spending time on 600 effects shots , 250 of which were merely removing modern sailboats from shots . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Verbinski managed the score with Klaus <unk> and Hans Zimmer , who headed 15 composers to finish it quickly . Alan Silvestri , who had collaborated with Verbinski on Mouse Hunt and The Mexican , was set to compose the score , but Bruckheimer decided to go with Zimmer 's team instead , who were frequent collaborators of his productions . Silvestri left the production before recording any material . 
 = = = Rating = = = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean was the first film released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner to be rated PG @-@ 13 by the MPAA ; one executive noted that she found the film too intense for her five @-@ year @-@ old child . Nonetheless , the studio was confident enough to add The Curse of the Black Pearl subtitle to the film in case sequels were made , and to attract older children . Verbinski disliked the new title because it is the Aztec gold rather than the ship that is cursed , so he requested the title to be unreadable on the poster . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was a great success . However , before its release , many journalists expected Pirates of the Caribbean to be a flop . The pirate genre had not been successful for years , with Cutthroat Island ( 1995 ) a notable flop . The film was also based on a theme park ride , and Depp , known mostly for starring in cult films , had little track record as a box office leading man . 
 Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl opened at # 1 , grossing $ 46 @,@ 630 @,@ 690 in its opening weekend and $ 70 @,@ 625 @,@ 971 since its Wednesday launch . It eventually made its way to $ 654 @,@ 264 @,@ 015 worldwide ( $ 305 @,@ 413 @,@ 918 domestically and $ 348 @,@ 850 @,@ 097 overseas ) , becoming the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2003 . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 50 @.@ 64 million tickets in the US . 
 Overseas , it dominated for seven consecutive weekends at the box office , tying the record of Men in Black II at the time . Only three movies after that broke the record , its sequel , Dead Man 's Chest , ( with nine consecutive # 1 weekends and ten in total ) , Avatar ( with 11 consecutive # 1 weekends ) and The Smurfs ( with eight consecutive # 1 weekends ) . It is currently the 71st @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film has received mostly positive reviews , with Depp 's performance being universally praised . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 79 % of 206 sampled critics gave the film positive reviews and that it received a rating average of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus is that " It may leave you exhausted like the theme park ride that inspired it ; however , you 'll have a good time when it 's over . " At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 63 based on 40 reviews indicating generally favorable reviews . Alan Morrison of Empire felt it was " the best blockbuster of the summer , " acclaiming all the comic performances despite his disappointment with the swashbuckling sequences . Roger Ebert acclaimed Depp and Rush 's performances , with " It can be said that [ Depp 's ] performance is original in its every atom . There has never been a pirate , or for that matter a human being , like this in any other movie ... his behavior shows a lifetime of rehearsal . " However , he felt the film went for too long , a criticism shared by Kenneth Turan 's negative review , feeling it " spends far too much time on its huge supporting cast of pirates ( nowhere near as entertaining as everyone assumes ) and on bloated adventure set pieces , " despite having also enjoyed Depp 's performance . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 For his performance as Captain Jack Sparrow , Johnny Depp won several awards , including Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role at the 10th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Best Male Performance at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards , and Best Actor at the 9th Empire Awards . Depp was also nominated for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy at the 61st Golden Globe Awards , Best Actor in a Leading Role at the 57th British Academy Film Awards , and Best Actor at the 76th Academy Awards , in which The Curse of the Black Pearl also received nominations for Best Makeup , Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Visual Effects . Awards won by Curse of the Black Pearl include Best Make @-@ up / Hair at the 57th British Academy Film Awards , Saturn Award for Best Costumes , Golden Reel Award for Sound Editing , two VES Awards for Visual Effects , and the People 's Choice Award for Favorite Motion Picture . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) — Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Fantasy — Nominated 
 = = Home media = = 
 The DVD and VHS editions of the film were released five months after the theatrical release , December 2 , 2003 , with 11 million copies sold in the first week , a record for live action video . It earned $ 235 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 from DVDs as of January 2004 . The DVD featured two discs , featuring three commentary tracks ( Johnny Depp and Gore Verbinski ; Jerry Bruckheimer , Keira Knightley and Jack Davenport ; and the screenwriter team ) , various deleted scenes and documentaries , and a 1968 Disneyland episode about the theme park ride . A special three @-@ disc edition was released in November 2004 . 
 A PSP release of the film followed on April 19 , 2005 . The high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc version of the film was released on May 22 , 2007 . This movie was also among the first to be sold at the iTunes music store . The Curse of the Black Pearl had its UK television premiere on Christmas Eve 2007 on BBC One at 20 : 30 . It was watched by an estimated 7 million viewers . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The film spun off three sequels , with a fourth sequel set to be released in 2017 . The first two were back @-@ to @-@ back sequels in 2006 and 2007 , Dead Man 's Chest and At World 's End , respectively . The third sequel , On Stranger Tides , was released in 2011 . The fourth sequel was revealed to be called , Dead Men Tell No Tales . Production is slated to begin in October 2014 and was scheduled for a summer 2016 release , but was eventually delayed to 2017 . It is to be directed by Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg . 
 = Night ( book ) = 
 Night ( 1960 ) is a work by Elie Wiesel about his experience with his father in the Nazi German concentration camps at Auschwitz and Buchenwald in 1944 – 1945 , at the height of the Holocaust toward the end of the Second World War . In just over 100 pages of sparse and fragmented narrative , Wiesel writes about the death of God and his own increasing disgust with humanity , reflected in the inversion of the parent – child relationship , as his father declines to a helpless state and Wiesel becomes his resentful teenage caregiver . " If only I could get rid of this dead weight ... Immediately I felt ashamed of myself , ashamed forever . " In Night everything is inverted , every value destroyed . " Here there are no fathers , no brothers , no friends , " a <unk> tells him . " Everyone lives and dies for himself alone . " 
 Wiesel was 16 when Buchenwald was liberated by the United States Army in April 1945 , too late for his father , who died after a beating while Wiesel lay silently on the bunk above for fear of being beaten too . He moved to Paris after the war and in 1954 completed an 862 @-@ page manuscript in Yiddish about his experiences , published in Argentina as the 245 @-@ page Un di velt hot <unk> ( " And the World Remained Silent " ) . The novelist François Mauriac helped him find a French publisher . Les Éditions de Minuit published 178 pages as La Nuit in 1958 , and in 1960 Hill & Wang in New York published a 116 @-@ page translation as Night . 
 Fifty years later the book had been translated into 30 languages , and now ranks as one of the <unk> of Holocaust literature . It remains unclear how much of Night is memoir . Wiesel has called it his deposition , but scholars have had difficulty approaching it as an unvarnished account . The literary critic Ruth Franklin writes that the pruning of the text from Yiddish to French transformed an angry historical account into a work of art . 
 Night is the first in a trilogy — Night , Dawn , Day — marking Wiesel 's transition during and after the Holocaust from darkness to light , according to the Jewish tradition of beginning a new day at nightfall . " In Night , " he said , " I wanted to show the end , the finality of the event . Everything came to an end — man , history , literature , religion , God . There was nothing left . And yet we begin again with night . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Elie Wiesel was born on 30 September 1928 in Sighet , a town in the Carpathian mountains of northern Transylvania , to Chlomo Wiesel , a shopkeeper , and his wife , Sarah , née Feig . The family lived in a community of 10 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 mostly Orthodox Jews . Northern Transylvania had been annexed by Hungary in 1940 , and restrictions on Jews were already in place , but the period Wiesel discusses at the beginning of the book , 1941 – 1943 , was a relatively calm one for the Jewish population . 
 That changed at midnight on Sunday , 18 March 1944 , with the invasion of Hungary by Nazi Germany , and the arrival in Budapest of SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann to oversee the deportation of the country 's Jews . From 5 April Jews over the age of six had to wear a 10 x 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 8 x 3 @.@ 8 in ) yellow badge on the upper @-@ left side of their coats or jackets . Jews had to declare the value of their property , and were forbidden from moving home , travelling , owning cars or radios , listening to foreign radio stations , or using the telephone . Jewish authors could no longer be published , their books were removed from libraries , and Jewish civil servants , journalists and lawyers were sacked . 
 As the Allies prepared for the liberation of Europe , the mass deportations began at a rate of four trains a day from Hungary to the Auschwitz concentration camp in Nazi @-@ occupied Poland , each train carrying around 3 @,@ 000 people . Between 15 May and 8 July 1944 , 437 @,@ 402 Hungarian Jews are recorded as having been sent there on 147 trains , most gassed on arrival . The transports comprised most of the Jewish population outside Budapest , the Hungarian capital . 
 Between 16 May and 27 June , 131 @,@ 641 Jews were deported from northern Transylvania . Wiesel , his parents and sisters — older sisters Hilda and Beatrice and seven @-@ year @-@ old Tzipora — were among them . On arrival Jews were " selected " for the gas chamber or forced labour ; to be sent to the left meant work , to the right , the gas chamber . Sarah and Tzipora were sent to the gas chamber . Hilda and Beatrice survived , separated from the rest of the family . Wiesel and Chlomo managed to stay together , surviving forced labour and a death march to another concentration camp , Buchenwald , near Weimar in Thuringia . Chlomo died there in January 1945 , three months before the 6th Armored Division of the United States Army arrived to liberate the camp . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Moshe the Beadle = = = 
 Night opens in Sighet in 1941 . The book 's narrator is Eliezer , an Orthodox Jewish teenager who studies the Talmud by day , and by night " weep [ s ] over the destruction of the Temple " . To the disapproval of his father , Eliezer spends time discussing the Kabbalah with Moshe the Beadle , caretaker of the Hasidic <unk> ( house of prayer ) . 
 In June 1941 the Hungarian government expelled Jews unable to prove their citizenship . Moshe is crammed onto a cattle train and taken to Poland . He manages to escape , saved by God , he believes , so that he might save the Jews of Sighet . He returns to the village to tell what he calls the " story of his own death , " running from one house to the next : " Jews , listen to me ! It 's all I ask of you . No money . No pity . Just listen to me ! " 
 When the train crossed into Poland , he tells them , it was taken over by the Gestapo , the German secret police . The Jews were transferred to trucks , then driven to a forest in Galicia , near <unk> , where they were forced to dig pits . When they had finished , each prisoner had to approach the hole , present his neck , and was shot . Babies were thrown into the air and used as targets by machine gunners . He tells them about Malka , the young girl who took three days to die , and Tobias , the tailor who begged to be killed before his sons ; and how he , Moshe , was shot in the leg and taken for dead . But the Jews of Sighet would not listen , making Moshe Night 's first unheeded witness . 
 = = = Sighet ghettos = = = 
 The Germans arrived in Sighet around 21 March 1944 , and shortly after Passover ( 8 – 14 April that year ) arrested the community leaders . Jews had to hand over their valuables , were not allowed to visit restaurants or leave home after six in the evening , and had to wear the yellow star at all times . Eliezer 's father makes light of it : 
 The SS transfer the Jews to one of two ghettos , each with its own council or Judenrat . <unk> 's house on a corner of Serpent Street was in the larger ghetto in the town centre , so his family was able to stay at home , though the windows on the non @-@ ghetto side had to be boarded up . 
 In May 1944 the Judenrat is told the ghettos will be closed with immediate effect and the residents deported . Eliezer 's family is first moved to the smaller ghetto , but they are not told their final destination , only that they may each take a few personal belongings . The Hungarian police , wielding truncheons and rifle butts , march Eliezer 's neighbours through the streets . " It was from that moment that I began to hate them , and my hate is still the only link between us today . " 
 = = = Auschwitz = = = 
 Eliezer and his family are crammed into a closed cattle wagon with 80 others . On the third night one woman , Madame <unk> — Night 's second unheeded witness — becomes hysterical , screaming that she can see flames , until the others beat her . Men and women are separated on arrival at Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau , the reception and extermination camp within the Auschwitz complex . Eliezer and his father are " selected " to go to the left , which meant forced labour ; his mother , Hilda , Beatrice and Tzipora to the right , the gas chamber . Hilda and Beatrice managed to survive . 
 The remainder of Night describes Eliezer 's efforts not to be parted from his father , not even to lose sight of him ; his grief and shame at witnessing his father 's decline into helplessness ; and as their relationship changes and the young man becomes the older man 's caregiver , his resentment and guilt , because his father 's existence threatens his own . The stronger Eliezer 's need to survive , the weaker the bonds that tie him to other people . 
 His loss of faith in human relationships is mirrored in his loss of faith in God . During the first night , as he and his father wait in line , he watches a lorry deliver its load of children into the fire . While his father recites the Kaddish , the Jewish prayer for the dead — Wiesel writes that in the long history of the Jews , he does not know whether people have ever recited the prayer for the dead for themselves — Eliezer considers throwing himself against the electric fence . 
 At that moment he and his father are ordered to go to their barracks . But Eliezer is already destroyed . " [ T ] he student of the Talmud , the child that I was , had been consumed in the flames . There remained only a shape that looked like me . " There follows a passage that Ellen Fine writes contains the main themes of Night — the death of God and innocence , and the <unk> du moi , or dissolution of the self , a recurring motif in Holocaust literature : 
 With the loss of self goes Eliezer 's sense of time : " I glanced at my father . How he had changed ! ... So much had happened within such a few hours that I had lost all sense of time . When had we left our houses ? And the ghetto ? And the train ? Was it only a week ? One night – one single night ? " 
 = = = Buna = = = 
 In or around August 1944 Eliezer and his father are transferred from Birkenau to the work camp at Monowitz ( also known as Buna and Auschwitz III ) , their lives reduced to the avoidance of violence and the search for food . " Bread , soup – these were my whole life . I was a body . Perhaps less than that even : a starved stomach . " Their only joy is when the Americans bomb the camp . 
 God is not lost to Eliezer entirely . During the hanging of a child , which the camp is forced to watch , he hears someone ask : Where is God ? Where is he ? Not heavy enough for the weight of his body to break his neck , the boy dies slowly . Wiesel files past him , sees his tongue still pink and his eyes clear . 
 Fine writes that this is the central event in Night , a religious sacrifice — the binding of Isaac and crucifixion of Jesus — described by Alfred Kazin as the literal death of God . Afterwards the inmates celebrate Rosh Hashanah , the Jewish new year , but Eliezer cannot take part . 
 = = = Death march = = = 
 In January 1945 , with the Soviet army approaching , the Germans decide to flee , taking 60 @,@ 000 inmates on a death march to concentration camps in Germany . Eliezer and his father are marched to Gleiwitz to be put on a freight train to Buchenwald , a camp near Weimar , 350 miles ( 563 km ) from Auschwitz . 
 Resting in a shed after marching 50 miles ( 80 km ) , Rabbi <unk> asks if anyone has seen his son . They had stuck together for three years , " always near each other , for suffering , for blows , for the ration of bread , for prayer , " but the rabbi had lost sight of him in the crowd and was now scratching through the snow looking for his son 's corpse . " I hadn 't any strength left for running . And my son didn 't notice . That 's all I know . " <unk> does not tell the man that his son had indeed noticed his father limping , and had run faster , letting the distance between them grow . 
 The inmates spend two days and nights in Gleiwitz locked inside cramped barracks without food , water or heat , sleeping on top of one another , so that each morning the living wake with the dead underneath them . There is more marching to the train station and onto a cattle wagon with no roof . They travel for ten days and nights , with only the snow falling on them for water . Of the 100 in Eliezer 's wagon , 12 survive the journey . The living make space by throwing the dead onto the tracks : 
 = = = Buchenwald , liberation = = = 
 The Germans are waiting with loudhailers and orders to head for a hot bath . Wiesel is desperate for the heat of the water , but his father sinks into the snow . " I could have wept with rage ... I showed him the corpses all around him ; they too had wanted to rest here ... I yelled against the wind ... I felt I was not arguing with him , but with death itself , with the death he had already chosen . " An alert sounds , the camp lights go out , and Eliezer , exhausted , follows the crowd to the barracks , leaving his father behind . He wakes at dawn on a wooden bunk , remembering that he has a father , and goes in search of him . 
 His father is in another block , sick with dysentery . The other men in his bunk , a Frenchman and a Pole , attack him because he can no longer go outside to relieve himself . Eliezer is unable to protect him . " Another wound to the heart , another hate , another reason for living lost . " 
 Begging for water one night from his bunk , where he has lain for a week , Chlomo is beaten on the head with a truncheon by an SS officer for making too much noise . Eliezer lies in the bunk above and does nothing for fear of being beaten too . He hears his father make a rattling noise , " Eliezer . " In the morning , 29 January 1945 , he finds another man in his father 's place . The Kapos had come before dawn and taken Chlomo to the crematorium . 
 Chlomo missed his freedom by three months . The Soviets had liberated Auschwitz 11 days earlier , and the Americans were making their way towards Buchenwald . Eliezer is transferred to the children 's block where he stays with 600 others , dreaming of soup . On 5 April 1945 the inmates are told the camp is to be liquidated and they are to be moved — another death march . On 11 April , with 20 @,@ 000 inmates still inside , a resistance movement inside the camp attacks the remaining SS officers and takes control . At six o 'clock that evening , an American tank arrives at the gates , and behind it the Sixth Armored Division of the United States Third Army . 
 = = Writing and publishing = = 
 = = = Move to France = = = 
 Wiesel wanted to move to Palestine after his release , but because of British immigration restrictions was sent instead by the <unk> au Secours aux Enfants ( Children 's Rescue Service ) to Belgium , then Normandy . In Normandy he learned that his two older sisters , Hilda and Beatrice , had survived . 
 From 1947 to 1950 he studied the Talmud , philosophy and literature at the Sorbonne , where he was influenced by the existentialists , attending lectures by Jean @-@ Paul Sartre and Martin Buber . He also taught Hebrew , and worked as a translator for the Yiddish weekly Zion in <unk> . In 1948 , when he was 19 , he was sent to Israel as a war correspondent by the French newspaper L <unk> , and after the Sorbonne became chief foreign correspondent of the Tel Aviv newspaper <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = 1954 : Un di Velt Hot Geshvign = = = 
 Wiesel wrote in 1979 that he kept his story to himself for ten years . In 1954 he wanted to interview the French prime minister , Pierre Mendès @-@ France , and approached the novelist François Mauriac , a friend of Mendès @-@ France , for an introduction . He writes : " The problem was that [ Mauriac ] was in love with Jesus . He was the most decent person I ever met in that field ... and he was in love with Jesus . ... Whatever I would ask – Jesus . Finally , I said , ' What about Mendès @-@ France ? ' He said that Mendès @-@ France , like Jesus , was suffering ... " 
 Wiesel started writing on board a ship to Brazil , where he had been assigned to cover Christian missionaries within Jewish communities , and by the end of the journey had completed an 862 @-@ page manuscript . He was introduced on the ship to <unk> <unk> , a Yiddish singer travelling with Mark Turkov , a publisher of Yiddish texts . Turkov asked if he could read Wiesel 's manuscript . It is unclear who edited the text for publication . Wiesel wrote in All Rivers Run to the Sea ( 1995 ) that he handed Turkov his only copy and that it was never returned , but also that he ( Wiesel ) " cut down the original manuscript from 862 pages to the 245 of the published Yiddish edition . " 
 Turkov 's <unk> <unk> fun <unk> <unk> in Argentina ( Central Union of Polish Jews in Argentina ) published the book in 1956 in Buenos Aires as the 245 @-@ page Un di velt hot <unk> ( " And the World Remained Silent " ) . It was the 117th book in a 176 @-@ volume series of Yiddish memoirs of Poland and the war , Dos <unk> <unk> ( Polish Jewry , 1946 – 1966 ) . Ruth Wisse writes that Un di Velt Hot Geshvign stood out from the rest of the series , which survivors wrote as memorials to their dead , as a " highly selective and isolating literary narrative . " 
 = = = 1958 : La Nuit = = = 
 Wiesel translated Un di Velt Hot Geshvign into French and in 1955 sent it to Mauriac . Even with Mauriac 's help they had difficulty finding a publisher ; Wiesel said they found it too morbid . Jérôme Lindon of Les Éditions de Minuit , Samuel Beckett 's publisher , agreed to handle it . Lindon edited the text down to 178 pages . Published as La Nuit , a title chosen by Lindon , it had a preface by Mauriac and was dedicated to Chlomo , Sarah and Tzipora . 
 = = = 1960 : Night = = = 
 Wiesel 's New York agent , Georges Borchardt , encountered the same difficulty finding a publisher in the United States . In 1960 Arthur Wang of Hill & Wang in New York — who Wiesel writes " believed in literature as others believe in God " — paid a $ 100 pro @-@ forma advance and published that year a 116 @-@ page English translation by Stella <unk> as Night . The first 18 months saw 1 @,@ 046 copies sell at $ 3 each , and it took three years to sell the first print run of 3 @,@ 000 copies , but the book attracted interest from reviewers , leading to television interviews and meetings with literary figures like Saul Bellow . 
 By 1997 Night was selling 300 @,@ 000 copies a year in the United States . By 2011 it had sold six million copies in that country , and was available in 30 languages . Sales increased in January 2006 when it was chosen for Oprah 's Book Club . Republished with a new translation by Marion Wiesel , Wiesel 's wife , and a new preface by Wiesel , it sat at no . 1 in The New York Times bestseller list for paperback non @-@ fiction for 18 months from 13 February 2006 , until the newspaper decided to remove it . It became the club 's third bestseller to date , with over two million sales of the Book Club edition by May 2011 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Reviewers have had difficulty reading Night as an eyewitness account . It has been categorized as a novel , autobiography , autobiographical novel , non @-@ fictional novel , semi @-@ fictional memoir , fictional @-@ autobiographical novel , fictionalized autobiographical memoir and memoir @-@ novel . Ellen Fine described it as <unk> ( testimony ) . Wiesel called it his deposition . 
 Literary critic Ruth Franklin writes that Night 's impact stems from its minimalist construction . The 1956 Yiddish version , at 865 pages , was a long and angry historical work . In preparation for the French edition , Wiesel 's editors pruned without mercy . Franklin argues that the power of the narrative was achieved at the cost of literal truth , and that to insist that the work is purely factual is to ignore its literary sophistication . Holocaust scholar Lawrence Langer argues similarly that Wiesel evokes , rather than describes : 
 Franklin writes that Night is the account of the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Eliezer , a " semi @-@ fictional construct , " told by the 25 @-@ year @-@ old Elie Wiesel . This allows the 15 @-@ year @-@ old to tell his story from " the post @-@ Holocaust vantage point " of Night 's readers . In a comparative analysis of the Yiddish and French texts , Naomi Seidman , professor of Jewish culture , concludes that there are two survivors in Wiesel 's writing , a Yiddish and French . In re @-@ writing rather than simply translating Un di Velt Hot Geshvign , Wiesel replaced an angry survivor who regards " testimony as a refutation of what the Nazis did to the Jews , " with one " haunted by death , whose primary complaint is directed against God ... " Night transformed the Holocaust into a religious event . 
 Seidman argues that the Yiddish version was for Jewish readers , who wanted to hear about revenge , but the anger was removed for the largely Christian readership of the French translation . In the Yiddish edition , for example , when Buchenwald was liberated : " Early the next day Jewish boys ran off to Weimar to steal clothing and potatoes . And to rape German <unk> [ un tsu <unk> <unk> <unk> ] . " In the 1958 French and 1960 English editions : " On the following morning , some of the young men went to Weimar to get some potatoes and clothes — and to sleep with girls [ coucher avec des filles ] . But of revenge , not a sign . " 
 Franklin writes that Oprah Winfrey 's promotion of Night came at a difficult time for the genre of memoir , after a previous book @-@ club author , James Frey , was found to have fabricated parts of his autobiography , A Million Little Pieces ( 2003 ) . She argues that Winfrey 's choice of Night may have been intended to restore the book club 's credibility . Night has a useful lesson to teach , Franklin writes , about the complexities of memoir and memory . 
 Wiesel tells a story about a visit to a Rebbe , a Hasidic rabbi , he had not seen for 20 years . The Rebbe is upset to learn that Wiesel has become a writer , and wants to know what he writes . " Stories , " Wiesel tells him , " ... true stories " : 
 = Kerry Bog Pony = 
 The Kerry Bog Pony is a mountain and moorland breed of pony that originated in Ireland . Possibly descended from the Irish Hobby horse , it originally lived a mainly feral existence in the peat bogs of what is now County Kerry in southwestern Ireland . Local inhabitants used the ponies as pack and cart horses for transporting peat and kelp to the villages . The breed developed physical characteristics including a low weight @-@ to @-@ height ratio and an unusual footfall pattern , which helped it move on soft ground such as peat bogs . The ponies were known for hardiness and an ability to survive in harsh conditions . 
 War , increasing mechanisation and declines in the local small @-@ farm population almost resulted in the breed 's extinction . In 1994 , a local man found and genetically tested a herd of 20 ponies he used as the foundation stock for rebuilding of the breed . In the early 2000s , the breed was recognised by the Irish Department of Agriculture and Food and the European Commission ; equine passports began to be issued for members of the breed , and small numbers of ponies were exported to the United States . At the same time , Irish and American breed registries were formed . As of 2011 , the registered population is more than 300 ponies . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kerry Bog Ponies generally stand 10 to 12 hands ( 40 to 48 inches , 102 to 122 cm ) high . The Irish breed standard calls for mares to stand 10 – 11 hands and stallions and geldings to stand 11 – 12 hands . Their low weight @-@ to @-@ height ratio enables them to walk on wet ground . Their hind feet tend to track outside their front feet , allowing better progress on soft ground . They exhibit a relatively upright pastern and steep hoof angle compared to other breeds , possibly another characteristic that aids their movement in peat bogs . Kerry Bog Ponies are easy keepers , and when feral they lived on low @-@ nutrient heather , sphagnum moss and possibly kelp from the shoreline . Overall , they are muscular and strong and their heads have concave profiles , small ears and large eyes . Their winter coat is long and dense , serving as protection from harsh weather . All solid coat colours are found , including dilute colours such as palomino , and white markings are common . Pinto @-@ coloured animals are not accepted by the Irish registry . The breed is known by enthusiasts for strength , intelligence and athleticism , and generally used for driving , as companion animals and for therapeutic riding programs . 
 Kerry Bog Ponies are known in Ireland as " hobbies " , possibly derived from the Gaelic practice of <unk> , or the calling out of " Hup , Hup " to attract a pony back to the farmyard . It is considered one of the mountain and moorland pony breeds from the British Isles . A 2006 study using mitochondrial DNA found that the Kerry Bog Pony is not closely related to the other two native Irish breeds , the Irish Draught and the Connemara pony . It has a rare haplogroup more closely related to other small horse breeds found in western Europe , including the Shetland pony and Icelandic horse . A 2012 study found relationships between the Kerry Bog Pony and the Dartmoor Pony and Exmoor Pony breeds , and a lack of common ancestry with the Welsh Pony , as well as reinforcing the lack of relationship to the Connemara . The study also suggested that the Kerry Bog Pony population had some amount of crossbreeding with other mountain and moorland breeds as part of the initial attempts to increase the population in the 1990s . The Kerry Bog Pony may have been one of several breeds that contributed to the development of the Gypsy <unk> horse ( also known as the Irish Cob ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The original ancestry of the Kerry Bog Pony is unknown , but there were horses living a feral existence in peat bogs in what is now County Kerry in southwestern Ireland since at least the 1600s . Some enthusiasts claim that the breed is a descendant of the ancient Irish Hobby . In a 1617 book illustration , the horses pictured resemble both the Kerry Bog Pony of today and the original Irish Hobby , showing the two breeds ' similar morphology . Originally , Kerry Bog Ponies were used to transport peat and kelp . They were known for their ability to navigate through the bogs , around soft spots and over rocks often in wet and windy weather , and for their strength relative to their small size . Some were trained to work in harness and used to pull carts . The ponies were turned loose into the peat bogs when they were not needed , then later re @-@ caught for work . Few if any breeding programs existed ; instead , they were left to reproduce in their feral setting . In 1720 , Isaac Ware travelled to County Kerry and observed that the horses resembled Asturcón ponies from Spain . 
 The British cavalry became aware of the ponies in 1804 , during the Peninsular War , and used them as pack animals during the conflict ; most did not return to Ireland . The famine of 1845 – 1852 furthered their decline , as farmers who previously utilised them died or emigrated . In addition , Spanish donkeys were brought to the island to replace the ponies , and when peat declined as a fuel source , pack animals were no longer needed . In the 1850s , farms began to be consolidated , and more machinery and large draft horses were employed , further reducing the number of ponies needed . Consequently , the ponies were left to run feral , mostly ignored and sometimes shot at by locals . 
 = = = Re @-@ emergence = = = 
 In 1994 , John Mulvihill , who operated the Red Fox Inn at the Kerry Bog Village in <unk> , County Kerry , began a search for remnants of the Kerry Bog Pony population , despite reports that the breed was extinct . He eventually found 20 ponies that resembled those he remembered from his childhood , and removed them from the bog to his stables . In 1995 , he had blood typing performed on the ponies by Weatherby 's Ireland , which identified their DNA markers . Subsequent DNA testing showed them to be a unique breed that formed a separate population from other local ponies and from other breeds in Ireland and Great Britain . Of these 20 ponies , only one was a stallion , named Flashy Fox . Between 1995 and 2012 , he sired more than 140 foals , and played a significant role in repopulating the breed . 
 Mulvihill continued breeding and promoting the ponies , and in 2002 , the breed was recognised by the Irish Government as the Irish Heritage Pony . The same year , the Kerry Bog Pony Society was formed . Also in 2002 , Americans became interested in the breed , and the first ponies were exported from Ireland to the US in 2003 , to a farm in Ohio . In 2005 , the American Kerry Bog Pony Society was founded , with 11 initial registrants . Also in 2005 , the Irish Department of Agriculture and Food and the European Commission recognised the Kerry Bog Pony as an official breed ; the following year , the Irish Horse Board issued the first equine passports for members of the breed . Until 2009 , there was an exception in place that allowed unrelated ponies that met the physical breed standards to be bred as Kerry Bog Ponies , with the offspring being registered and given passports certifying them as purebred Kerry Bog Ponies . This was in part due to a concern of inbreeding among the small number of ponies initially registered . Kerry Bog Ponies were also part of the Irish Rural Environment Protection Scheme ( closed to new applicants in 2009 ) , which financially rewarded farmers for using environmentally @-@ friendly methods . The Kerry Bog Village , an open @-@ air museum on the Ring of Kerry is one location that breeds and houses part of the existing Kerry Bog Pony population . 
 As of 2011 , there were 335 mares and 51 stallions registered with the Irish registry , which included 59 new foals that year . Herd numbers have steadily increased since registrations began in 2005 . These numbers make the Kerry Bog Pony third in population numbers among Irish breeds , behind the Connemara pony and the Irish Draught . Despite the increasing numbers , the breed is still considered to be critically endangered by the Equus Survival Trust . The horses are administered by the Kerry Bog Pony Co @-@ Operative Society of Ireland ( formerly the Kerry Bog Pony Society ) , which is based in Ireland with a branch in Great Britain . Inspections are required before ponies are allowed into the studbook . The book is divided into four classes : Class 1 ponies meet all requirements , Class 2 ponies do not meet the height requirement , Class 3 ponies do not meet the color requirements , and Class 4 ponies have yet to submit to an official inspection . The breed association has hosted an annual breed show and sale in <unk> , County Kerry since 2007 . 
 = Category 6 : Day of Destruction = 
 Category 6 : Day of Destruction is a 2004 four @-@ hour miniseries that was broadcast in the United States on CBS in two parts , with the first part aired on November 14 and the second on November 17 . It was later released to DVD on February 15 , 2005 . The miniseries focuses primarily on the city of Chicago as three unusual storm systems approach from the west , north and south and combine over the city to form a massive hurricane . At the same time a hacker @-@ induced power outage cuts communications leaving a journalist and power officials scrambling to find the cause . 
 The miniseries was a success for CBS in terms of ratings , as it was the highest @-@ rated movie for the channel in two years , and it earned the highest ratings during the November sweeps week with 19 @.@ 4 million viewers watching the first part . Critics were less favorable towards the film , with most panning the film for its dialog , implausible science , and poor acting . Some reviewers did praise the film 's high @-@ budget special effects and felt the film had at least some " charm . " In November 2005 a four @-@ hour sequel , Category 7 : The End of the World , aired in the same two @-@ part format . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Goodman ( Brian Dennehy ) is a week away from a forced retirement from his position as chief meteorologist at the National Weather Administration 's Severe Weather Center . However , tornadoes level Las Vegas , an area normally not prone to the storms . Concerned and upset that the storm system formed unnoticed and that they were unable to warn the people , Goodman begins closely tracking the system . Goodman receives field reports from his friend " Tornado Tommy " ( Randy Quaid ) and assistance from new intern Sabrina Rogers ( Alicia Johnston ) . As time passes , he realizes the system is heading towards Chicago , joined by an unusual warm storm coming from the south , which is already causing a record @-@ breaking heat wave in the city , and an abnormally early cold front from the Arctic . 
 Meanwhile , Mitch Benson ( Thomas Gibson ) , the Chief of Operations at Midwest Electric , is struggling to keep power going to the residents because the six @-@ week heat wave is straining the system and residents are refusing to follow power conservation requests . To get more energy , he is working with the company 's largest supplier , Lexer , but the company 's CEO is trying to find new ways to profit from this crisis . Benson also finds himself caught in a conflict of interest as he is having an affair with the Lexer 's public relations representative , Rebecca Kerns ( Chandra West ) . 
 Ambitious reporter Amy Harkin ( Nancy McKeon ) is stuck reporting on the heat wave while trying to find proof behind the scenes that Lexer and Midwest are responsible for the lack of sufficient power . The Secretary of Energy , Shirley Abbott ( Dianne Wiest ) , is actively warning various politicians and the president that the power grid is too outdated to handle real natural disasters and that it is too vulnerable to attack . Dan London ( Ari Cohen ) , the chief engineer of Lexer , has also repeatedly warned Lexer that their systems are too vulnerable to hackers , but the company is only interested in going with the cheapest options . He decides to blow the whistle on the company to Harkin , but as he refuses to appear on camera , Harkin 's boss will not allow the piece to air . 
 As the storms approach , early storms knock out the city 's primary power generating plant , and Benson is forced to negotiate with Lexer for even more power . Not realizing the devastating nature of the storms coming , London sets out to force Lexer to listen to his warnings by hacking the system and causing a cascading chain reaction that knocks out all of the power in Chicago . Goodman and his team are unable to warn the citizens that the storms have formed into a category 6 hurricane over the Great Lakes and will hit Chicago head on . 
 Harkin realizes what happened to the power and rushes to find London , while Benson and Secretary Abbott gather energy from a multitude of other companies to get around the breakdown at Lexer . Unaware of what each party is doing , London quickly reverses the hacks at the same time as the energy starts flowing in from other companies . This overloads the system , knocking out the entire Midwest power grid as the storm hits the city and London is killed in the process . 
 Unable to do anything further , Benson rushes to find his family after he receives word that they are trapped at a mall and that his daughter has been accidentally shot by her ex @-@ boyfriend . " Tornado Tommy " drives around the city filming tornadoes and is oblivious to another tornado that is headed to his direction . He puts his camcorder in a suitcase and throws it out his window and he is sucked in the tornado . Harkin gives Benson a ride to the mall to pick up his family , then they go to rescue her pregnant sister @-@ in @-@ law from an elevator . After Amy 's cameraman is injured while rescuing her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Harkin stays behind with him and their neighbor . The others rush to reach the airport during the 15 @-@ minute eye of the hurricane , where they are picked up in a plane piloted by Harkin 's brother , an air force weather pilot . After the storm passes , Harkin keeps her promise and tells London 's story on air . 
 = = Production = = 
 Executive producer Bob Sertner wanted the film to have higher @-@ end special effects to mimic the quality of those seen in feature films . To do this , the film uses visual computer effects created by special effects company Area 51 FX , which created over 100 different shots using the digital modeling program LightWave 3D . During shooting , special effect supervisor Craig Weiss noted that the scenes with Randy Quaid were particularly difficult to capture on film due to his appearing in multiple scenes where his character was chased by twisters and surrounded by their destructive aftermaths . The actors also faced new challenges , as the film often replaced traditional green screen setup , where the special effects were added during editing , with live shots taken with the effects in place at the same time . Nancy McKeon , who was pregnant with her first child during production , filmed some of her scenes using a green screen . She found the experience to be fun , noting that it challenges actors to use their imaginations while performing . She also found it easy to play a television reporter due to her being a self @-@ admitted " news junkie . " 
 Unable to find wind machines powerful enough to mimic hurricane @-@ force winds , Sertner brought in a jet engine to aim at the actors and props during necessary scenes . Three dimensional storyboards , called animatics , were used to allow the filmmakers to see what a scene would look like before shooting , using a digital version of the actors . The various weather scenes blended together stock footage of real natural disasters with the computer @-@ generated shots , with care taken to match up the details of the various scenes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Category 6 was initially aired in the United States on CBS as a two @-@ part , four @-@ hour miniseries . The first part aired on Sunday , November 14 , 2004 , and the second followed on Wednesday , November 17 , 2004 . It was later aired in Australia on February 12 , 2005 . 
 The miniseries was first released to Region 1 DVD by CBS Television on February 15 , 2005 . On February 13 , 2007 , Lions Gate Entertainment released it , together with fellow disaster miniseries 10 @.@ 5 , as a two feature set . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The miniseries was highly successful for CBS , as 19 @.@ 4 million viewers tuned in to the first part of the film and made it the channel 's best @-@ rated Sunday night movie in over two years . The second part was watched by 17 million viewers , the highest number of viewers for the channel on a Wednesday night for the fall season . Together , the two parts helped to push the channel to the top spot for the year 's November sweeps week . 
 Despite the high ratings , the film was generally panned by critics , except for almost universal praise for the high @-@ budget special effects . New York Magazine 's John Leonard found it lacking compared to the feature film The Day After Tomorrow , though he did feel it had a certain " raffish zombie charm . " Charlie McCollum of the San Jose Mercury News called it a " third @-@ rate disaster flick — with lame dialogue , voodoo science and wooden performances — spread out over two nights and four seemingly endless hours . " Aaron Barnhart of the Kansas City Star agreed , feeling the filmmakers spent their budget on special effects to the detriment of the film 's dialog . He called the film an " assault on common sense " for positing the idea that the power outage would keep everyone in Chicago from knowing that " something bad " was coming . Daily Variety found the film to be full of clichés and felt the side plots gave the appearance that the film was cast first and that the plot had been written to work around the actors . In comparing the film to a Reese 's Peanut Butter Cup , the magazine notes that it had " two or more disastrous taste treats providing a very loud macro backdrop to the micro tales that play out involving the characters . " Kay McFadden of the Seattle Times also felt the storm became a backdrop " for a contrived soap opera that could take place in sunshine or rain " and that the special effects were fun , but did not feel properly integrated into their scenes . 
 " Category 6 " has high aspirations . Executive producers Robert Sertner and Frank von <unk> aren 't interested in providing the escapist pleasures of a " 10 @.@ 5 " or " The Poseidon Adventure . " Instead , expect a brow @-@ furrowing cornucopia of environmental abuse , job cuts , price @-@ rigging , global warming , nuclear energy , gentrification , aging industrial infrastructure , tourist exploitation , computer hackers , workplace sexism , corporate corruption , piggish consumption and infidelity . 
 The Chicago Tribune 's Sid Smith found the film to be " pretty lousy , despite a wealth of impressive special effects that end with an image of a completely demolished Chicago skyline . " He found the plot to be overly melodramatic and " hokey " with an excessive amount of coincidences and ill @-@ fortunes thrown at the characters , despite the performances of the star @-@ studded cast . Australia 's The Age gave the film a slightly more favorable review , praising the stunts and special effects , though it noted the effects suffer from poor computer editing and referred to the film as " a little entertaining <unk> " that does require one to not think too much about the science to enjoy . 
 = Thomas C. Hindman = 
 Thomas Carmichael Hindman , Jr . ( January 28 , 1828 – September 27 , 1868 ) was a lawyer , United States Representative from the 1st Congressional District of Arkansas , and a Major General in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War . 
 Shortly after he was born in Knoxville , Tennessee , Hindman moved with his family to Jacksonville , Alabama and later Ripley , Mississippi . After receiving his primary education in Ripley , he attended the Lawrenceville Classical Institute ( now known as the Lawrenceville School ) and graduated with honors on September 25 , 1843 . Afterwards , he raised a company in Tippah County for the 2nd Mississippi regiment in the Mexican @-@ American War . Hindman served during the war as a lieutenant and later as a captain of his company . After the war , he returned to Ripley . He studied law , and was admitted to the state bar in 1851 . He then started a law practice in Ripley , before moving it to Helena two years later . 
 Hindman then served as a member of the Mississippi House of Representatives from 1854 to 1856 . He was elected as the Democratic representative from Arkansas 's 1st congressional district in the Thirty @-@ sixth Congress from March 4 , 1859 , to March 4 , 1861 . He was re @-@ elected to the Thirty @-@ seventh Congress , but declined to serve after the onset of the Civil War and Arkansas 's secession from the Union . Instead , Hindman joined the armed forces of the Confederacy . He commanded the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department , and later raised and commanded " Hindman 's legion " for the Confederate States Army . He was promoted to brigadier general on September 28 , 1861 and later to Major General on April 18 , 1862 . After the war , Hindman avoided surrender to the federal government by fleeing to Mexico City . He worked in Mexico as a coffee planter , and attempted to practice law . After the execution of Maximilian I of Mexico , Hindman submitted a petition for a pardon to President Andrew Johnson , but it was denied . Hindman , nonetheless , returned to his former life in Helena . He became the leader of the " Young Democracy " , a new political organization that was willing to accept the Reconstruction for the restoration of the Union . Unexpectedly , he was assassinated by an unknown individual ( s ) on September 27 , 1868 at his Helena home . 
 = = Family background = = 
 Hindman 's parents , Thomas and Sallie Holt , were of English and Scottish ancestry . His maternal ancestors included Major Robert Holt , a successful planter and a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses in 1655 . The Holt family originally came from Halifax County , Virginia before moving to Knoxville . Hindman 's paternal lineage descended from the Carmichael clan in Scotland , some members of which made their way into America after King George II of Great Britain ousted nine hundred Scottish followers of Bonnie Prince Charles to America after the April 16 , 1746 , Battle of Culloden . 
 One of the descendants of the Carmichael clan , Sarah Carmichael , married Samuel Hindman , a wealthy Pennsylvania merchant in the early 1790s . They then moved to Knoxville , and their youngest son Thomas C. Hindman , Sr. was born on November 10 , 1793 . Family legend claims that Hindman , Sr. was the first white male child born in Knoxville . 
 Hindman , Sr. was an ensign in the 39th United States Infantry during the War of 1812 . He was promoted to third lieutenant on January 11 , 1814 and to second lieutenant on May 20 of the same year . He fought in the Battle of New Orleans , the final major battle of the war , and served in active duty until he resigned on June 30 , 1816 due to health concerns . After leaving the army , Hindman , Sr. operated a military ferry on the Tennessee River and served as a lieutenant colonel in the 10th Territorial Militia Regiment for the Alabama Territory . In his dealings as a merchant , he met Lewis Ross . Hindman , Sr. was a frequent visitor at the Ross household , and it was there that he met Lewis 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , Sallie Holt . After a brief courtship , the couple was married in Knoxville on January 21 , 1819 . After settling down in Rhea County , Tennessee , their first daughter was born in 1820 . Three more children , Robert , Mary , and Sarah , were born after the family moved to Post Oak Springs . The family moved back to Knoxville in 1827 . Thomas Carmichael Hindman Jr. was born the next year , and Mildred followed in the year after that . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The elder Hindman frequently made business trips to Alabama , and even moved the family to Jacksonville , Alabama after buying several lots of land there . Hindman took advantage of the many local business opportunities and was able to provide his family with whatever they needed . Hindman Sr. gained a reputation for honesty with his business associates , which included Cherokee Indian tribes in the area . He became trusted by the Cherokee Nation and was appointed as the sub @-@ agent to the Cherokees by President James Monroe . When President Andrew Jackson was in office , Hindman , Sr. was appointed to the post of United States Agent for the Cherokee Nation . The elder Hindman frequently traveled to Washington D.C. to discuss the interests of the Cherokee Nation and , in 1841 , he was assigned by Acting Secretary of War Albert M. Lea to determine why the Cherokees in North Carolina had rejected the government 's suggestion to join other parts of the tribe in Indian Territory . Hindman spent almost two months unsuccessfully trying to persuade the North Carolina Cherokees to rejoin the rest of their nation further West . 
 That year , Hindman 's father purchased a new plantation in Ripley , Mississippi . Meanwhile , the younger Hindman attended local schools before leaving for the Lawrenceville Classical Institute in Lawrenceville , New Jersey , the third oldest boarding school in the country . Hindman received a classical education there and graduated with honors on September 25 , 1843 , as the class salutatorian . After spending some time visiting relatives and studying in New York , Hindman went back to Ripley and commenced his law studies under Orlando Davis , a notable local attorney and Whig Party politician . 
 Meanwhile , Hindman 's father became an active participant in Mississippi politics . He led the state 's Whig Party and served as a member on the executive committee of the local Henry Clay club . In 1845 , he was selected as a delegate to attend a convention in Memphis , Tennessee that promoted transportation and infrastructural projects in the South and West . 
 = = Participation in the Mexican @-@ American War = = 
 Soon , the United States Army engaged in fighting at the US @-@ Mexico border . After skirmishes along the Rio Grande between Mexican forces and American forces led by General Zachary Taylor , Congress approved a declaration of war and President James K. Polk called upon the states to draw up 50 @,@ 000 volunteers to be alongside the army . Mississippi newspapers encouraged state residents to join the action . One newspaper , the Holly Springs Guard , proclaimed , " To arms ! To arms ! Ye brave ! Th ' avenging sword <unk> : March on , march on , all hearts resolved , on [ to ] victory or death . " 
 Hindman was eager to have the chance of serving his country in war . He enlisted as a Second Lieutenant in company E of the Second Mississippi Infantry . His older brother , Robert , also joined the same unit as a private . Hindman and his fellow infantrymen spent the winter training for battle in Camp McClung . Many soldiers were unprepared for the cold temperatures in January 1847 and , as a result , many died of influenza , pneumonia and " the cold plague " The Second Mississippi Infantry headed off towards the United States – Mexico border in February and reached the mouth of the Rio Grande on February 24 , 1847 , just a day after the Battle of Buena Vista . They continued marching , and the number of dead soldiers escalated . By June 1847 , 167 men had died , 134 had been discharged and 38 had deserted . The infantry later moved to Buena Vista , seven miles ( 11 km ) south of Saltillo , Coahuila , for guard duty . The anticipation of glory for the regiment evaporated amongst the ravages of disease , guerrilla raids and camp duties . In March 1847 , Colonel Charles Clark assigned Hindman the position of appointment as the acting regiment 's adjutant , due to his educational background and writing skills . Hindman 's brother , Robert , who was now a sergeant , suffered from smallpox and was medically discharged on April 23 . Hindman rose to the rank of lieutenant and Post Adjutant by the end of the war in 1848 , but did not see any major action during the remainder of his time with the infantry . 
 = = Back in Mississippi = = 
 After returning to Ripley , Hindman continued his law studies under Orlando Davis . A year after the war ended Hindman 's brother , Robert , engaged in a fight with William Falkner because he had thought Falkner tried to block his membership into the Ripley section of the Sons of Temperance . Robert Hindman tried to defend himself , but his gun failed to fire , and Falkner then fatally stabbed him . Falkner was tried for murder , but was acquitted by the jury ruling that he was acting in self @-@ defense . Afterwards , Falkner killed a family friend of the <unk> , and he again was acquitted in the murder trial . Thomas Hindman and Falkner engaged in a gun fight , but neither man was injured . The tense relationship between Falkner and Hindman culminated in a settlement made by Matthew C. Galloway , who would later become the future editor of the Memphis , Tennessee Appeal . 
 Hindman himself joined the Ripley chapter of the Sons of Temperance and served as the recording secretary of the local branch . In 1853 , he successfully campaigned for a seat to represent Tippah County in the Mississippi legislature . Hindman 's Mississippi lawmaking career ended when the legislature adjourned in March 1854 . 
 = = Move to Arkansas = = 
 By 1854 , Hindman realized that he had little room to maneuver in the crowded Mississippi political arena . Looking across the Mississippi River , Hindman observed that the young and turbulent State of Arkansas was wide open for a well @-@ educated and ambitious politician . Hindman left Mississippi politics when he moved to Helena , Arkansas on March 18 , 1854 . 
 Hindman threw himself into the political and social scenes in his new home state . In June 1854 , he formed a law partnership with John Palmer , a young Kentucky native who was known as a " distinguished member " of the Helena bar . Hindman became active in civic affairs and plans for Helena 's economic development . At an Independence Day festival in 1854 , he gave a speech about the importance of railroad development in Arkansas . Hindman catapulted himself into the fray by taking a stand against the anti @-@ immigrant and anti @-@ Catholic Know @-@ Nothings , whom he considered " pestilent fanatics " . Hindman and Palmer established a Democratic association designed to stamp out the Know @-@ Nothing threat . During this time , Hindman became close friends with Patrick Cleburne , who would later parallel his course as a Confederate Major General . The two men also formed a business partnership with William Weatherly to buy a newspaper , the Democratic Star , in December 1855 . 
 Cleburne and Hindman were both wounded by gunshots during a street fight in Helena with Know @-@ Nothing members . After the men recovered , they appeared before a grand jury to respond to any charges brought against them . They were exonerated and , afterwards , went to Hindman 's parents ' house in Mississippi . Hindman received praise for his actions and became a force in Democratic politics after the Know @-@ Nothings were defeated . 
 In 1856 , Hindman ran for the Congressional seat in his First District , but was defeated by the incumbent , Alfred B. Greenwood , at the Democratic state convention . His gracious withdrawal at the convention to avoid Democratic infighting earned him more notice from the party hierarchy . During this time , Hindman met and courted Mary " Mollie " Watkins <unk> . Despite her parents ' reluctance , the two were married on November 11 , 1856 , with Patrick Cleburne serving as best man . 
 In the summer of 1857 , Hindman became editor of the Helena States @-@ Rights Democrat and was the unchallenged leader of the Democratic Party in eastern Arkansas . From this platform , he launched his 1858 Congressional bid . He did not face a serious challenge for the Democratic nomination and he had the backing of newspapers through the state . Editor Richard H. Johnson of the Little Rock True Democrat reminded voters of Hindman 's previous run for the nomination in 1856 and praised him for being a " thorough [ - ] going Democrat " of " marked abilities " . At the state Democratic convention in Batesville , Hindman easily defeated A. M. Wilson and Dandridge McRae . In the general election , Hindman defeated the Republican challenger , William M. Crosby , by a vote of 18 @,@ 255 to 2 @,@ 853 . 
 = = = Bringing down Arkansas 's political " family " = = = 
 During his term , Hindman tried to bring unity to the state 's Democratic Party . He turned on the political hierarchy in the state , and political warfare divided the Democratic Party in Arkansas , with the pro @-@ Hindman forces on one side and the forces of the political " family " that had ruled Arkansas since territorial days on the other . He labeled the actions of the " family " as " the most concentrated wrath of the small managers of the caucus and of certain outside high @-@ priests who manage [ d ] them " . 
 " Family " leaders threatened to block Hindman 's 1860 re @-@ election to Congress . Hindman challenged them and predicted the overthrow of a group he called " the fusionists " and " champions of amalgamation " . The dispute between Hindman and the political family escalated after Hindman charged that the state had been overpaying the True Democrat for public printing . The True Democrat denied the allegations and claimed that Hindman 's motive was out of selfishness , rather than concern . They argued that he wanted printing contracts to be awarded to the Helena State @-@ Rights Democrat and the Little Rock Old Line Democrat , both of which he controlled . 
 One of the " family " leaders , Elias Nelson Conway , sought to settle the state 's banking situation by starting a plan that would seize the assets of people indebted to the bank , who included Hindman 's father @-@ in @-@ law . Hindman travelled across the state to publicly denounce the proposition . In the 1860 race for governor , Hindman backed Henry Massey Rector , while the " family " candidate was Richard H. Johnson , the editor of the True Democrat . Johnson had been nominated as the Democratic candidate , but Rector announced his candidacy as an independent Democrat . In the gubernatorial election , Rector narrowly defeated Johnson by a vote of 31 @,@ 044 to 28 @,@ 967 . After the election , the editor of the Old @-@ Line Democrat , Thomas C. Peek , proclaimed that the end of the political dynasty of the " family " had come . New issues such as the Civil War were brought to center stage and the " family " never exercised their dominance over state politics again . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 As the American Civil War approached , Hindman was an ardent voice for secession and was essentially Arkansas 's most prominent Fire @-@ Eater . When Arkansas voted 65 @-@ 5 to secede from the Union in May 1861 , Hindman was present in the gallery of the convention . With war approaching , Hindman resigned from Congress and recruited a regiment at Helena , which was mustered into Confederate service . He requested the state government for muskets , clothing and ten days of rations so that his men could " fight for our country " . By June 1 , 1861 , Hindman had raised ten companies which would eventually become known as the 2nd Arkansas Infantry , with six companies stationed at Helena and four at Pine Bluff . He lost five companies who refused to leave the state to fight . Afterwards , Hindman followed orders to report to Richmond , Virginia . He began the long journey with his regiment in June . By September 1861 , Hindman was promoted to the rank of brigadier general . He and his regiment were soon active participants in the disastrous Kentucky Campaign , followed soon thereafter by fierce fighting at the Battle of Shiloh in April 1862 , where he was slightly wounded . 
 After his recovery , Hindman was promoted to the rank of Major General and was appointed commander of the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department to prevent an invasion by the Union troops led by Samuel Curtis . Events in Arkansas had taken a terrible turn for the worse . Most units had been stripped from the state for service east of the Mississippi River . When Hindman arrived in Little Rock , Arkansas , he found that his command was " bare of soldiers , penniless , defenseless , and dreadfully exposed " to the Federal Army that was approaching dangerously from the northwest . 
 Hindman set to work and issued a series of harsh military edicts , instituting conscription , authorizing guerrilla warfare and requisitioning supplies for the defense of the State . Hindman also commenced a campaign of misinformation designed to mislead Federal authorities about the strength of the state 's defenses . He also diverted Texas troops bound for Virginia for use in the defense of Arkansas . This series of events , combined with harassing tactics , confused the Federal authorities , causing them to fear that they did not have an adequate supply line to conquer the state and soon diverted from a course towards the capital and instead moved to Helena to reestablish a solid supply line . 
 = = = In charge of " Hindman 's Legion " = = = 
 Hindman 's edicts , however , raised the ire of the local citizenry and they , and Hindman 's political enemies , demanded that the Confederate leaders in Richmond replace him . By August 1862 , the authorities in Richmond decided to replace him with the well @-@ meaning but incompetent Theophilus H. Holmes . Hindman convinced Holmes to give him a field command in northern Arkansas and he proceeded with a plan to drive out the invader . Hindman aggressively moved into northwest Arkansas and managed to intercept the Federal army while it was divided into two parts . At this moment , however , Hindman 's normally aggressive style gave way to uncharacteristic doubt . Rather than attack the divided pieces of the Federal army , Hindman entrenched himself at Prairie Grove , Arkansas , allowing the Federal forces to recombine and assault him . 
 Hindman 's position was well selected , but the better equipped and supplied Federal forces wore down the Confederate forces and Hindman was forced to withdraw back towards Little Rock , having missed his chance to destroy the Federal army . After the stalemate at Prairie Grove , Hindman was transferred back across the river and participated in the Battle of Chickamauga alongside his friend Pat Cleburne . After being wounded in the neck at Chickamauga , Hindman and his legion continued to fight along with the Army of Tennessee against General William Tecumseh Sherman in the Atlanta Campaign , across north Georgia from the First Battle of Dalton to the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain , just outside Marietta , Georgia . On July 4 , 1864 , at Kennesaw Mountain he was struck in the eye by a tree limb and fell off his horse . Hindman suffered severe injuries that left him unfit for service on the battlefield . He went to Atlanta and later Macon , Georgia to recuperate from his injuries . Afterwards , Hindman hoped that he would be able to fight after a full recovery . He applied for a transfer to the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department . His request was denied by the Confederate War Department , but Jefferson Davis offered Hindman a leave of absence until he had fully recovered from his " physical disability " . After his leave of absence was approved in August , Hindman set out for Texas . During their journey , Hindman 's second daughter , Sallie , died of an illness near Meridian , Mississippi . Hindman arrived in San Antonio and settled there with his family for the time being . He was honored by military officials and local residents on January 26 , 1865 . By May 1865 , Confederate generals in New Orleans signed a document with Union generals detailing the Confederate terms of surrender . Hindman refused to surrender and , along with many other ex @-@ Confederates , he crossed the Rio Grande into Mexico and sought asylum . 
 = = Post @-@ war activities = = 
 Hindman joined Confederate refugees in the Mexican town of <unk> , where he engaged in coffee planting and attempted to practice law . By April 1867 , he was confident enough in the situation at home to return to Arkansas and apply to President Andrew Johnson for a pardon . Hindman 's application was one of the few denied . Nonetheless , he attempted to return to his former life . Politics still called to him and , although ineligible to run for office , he came out against the Reconstruction Constitution , which put him in direct conflict with reconstruction authorities . These authorities revived a treason indictment against him and had him arrested . This did not stop Hindman , who went on the political circuit and had some success building an unlikely coalition of newly freed slaves and Democrats . 
 = = = Assassination = = = 
 At around 9 : 30 on the night of September 27 , 1868 , Hindman was assassinated by one or more unknown assailants who fired through his parlor window while he was reading his newspaper with his children . The musket shots hit Hindman in the jaw , throat and hands , and he died eight hours later due to significant blood loss . Before his death , Hindman gave a farewell speech to his neighbors and political supporters , from the porch of his house . With " perfect composure " , Hindman told listeners to " unite their courage and determination to bring peace to the people " . Hindman hinted at the recent political debate with Powell Clayton as a possible motivation for the shooting and said , " I do not know who killed me ; but I can say , whoever it was , I forgive him . " He asked James H. O 'Connor , the husband of Mollie 's stepmother , to " take care of my family and be a protector to my wife and dear little ones " . After O 'Connor accepted , Hindman stated , " I forgive everybody , and hope they will forgive me . " Afterwards , he was too weak to continue speaking , and he sat down on a lounge . He remained there until he died early next morning . The assassination was announced in all major newspapers throughout the state . William Woodruff of the Gazette said Hindman died as an " able and distinguished man " whose " short but splendid career " had a profound impact on Arkansan state politics . 
 Hindman 's assassins were never caught , and many theories regarding their identities have circulated throughout the years . In 1869 , a white prisoner at the Phillips County jail told officials that he overheard two black inmates , Sip Cameron and Heyward Grant , discussing the crime . Grant supposedly confessed to the crime , saying the murder was part of a larger plot to seek revenge for the killing of Lee Morrison , a black individual from Helena who had been hanged on September 27 , 1868 . Grant 's claims did not fit with the facts of the murder and his statements were dismissed from the investigation . No further leads ever developed , so the case was never reopened . Hindman was buried at Evergreen Cemetery ( later named Maple Hill Cemetery ) in Helena , near the grave of his friend Patrick Cleburne . 
 = Mortal Kombat II = 
 Mortal Kombat II ( commonly abbreviated as MKII ) is a competitive fighting game originally produced by Midway Games for the arcades in 1993 . It was later ported to multiple home systems , including the PC , Amiga , Game Boy , Sega Game Gear , Sega Genesis , Sega Saturn , Super Nintendo Entertainment System , and various PlayStation consoles , mostly in licensed versions developed by Probe Entertainment and Sculptured Software and published by Acclaim Entertainment . 
 Mortal Kombat II was the second game in the Mortal Kombat series , improving the gameplay and expanding the mythos of the original Mortal Kombat , notably introducing more varied Fatality finishing moves and several iconic characters , such as Kitana , Mileena , Kung Lao , Noob Saibot , and the series ' recurring villain , Shao Kahn . The game 's plot continues from the first game , featuring the next Mortal Kombat tournament set in the <unk> realm of Outworld , with the Outworld and Earthrealm representatives fighting each other on their way to challenge the evil emperor Shao Kahn . 
 The game was an unprecedented commercial success and was acclaimed by most critics , receiving many annual awards and having been featured in various top lists in the years and decades to come , but also perpetuating a major video game controversy due to the series ' continuous depiction of graphic violence . Its legacy includes spawning a spin @-@ off game Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks and having the greatest influence on the 2011 reboot game Mortal Kombat , as well as inspiring numerous video game clones . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay system of Mortal Kombat II is an improved version of that from the original Mortal Kombat . There are several changes in standard moves : a crouching punch and turnaround kick are added , low and high kicks have greater differentiation ( be they crouching or standing up ) , the roundhouse kick are made more powerful ( knocking an opponent across the screen , like the game 's uppercut ) , and it is easier to perform a combo due to reduced recovery times for attacks . Returning characters also gained new special moves , including some to be used in mid @-@ air , and the game plays almost twice as fast as the original . However , all playable characters in the game still share most generic attributes ( such as power and jump height ) and all normal moves are also the same between each character . 
 As with its predecessor , matches are divided into rounds , and the first player to win two rounds by fully depleting their opponent 's life bar is the winner ; at this point the losing character will become dazed and the winner is given the opportunity of using a finishing move . Mortal Kombat II lacks the " Test Your Might " bonus games and point system from the first game , in favor of a consecutive win tally where wins are represented by icons . 
 The game marked the introduction of multiple Fatalities ( post @-@ match animations of the victorious characters executing their defeated foes ) as well as additional , non @-@ lethal finishing moves to the franchise : <unk> ( turning the opponent into a crying baby ) , Friendships ( a non @-@ malicious interaction , such as dancing or giving a gift to the defeated opponent ) and additional stage @-@ specific Fatalities ( the winner <unk> his or her opponent into an abyss below , spikes in the ceiling , or a pool of acid in the background ) . Finishing moves cannot be performed neither by nor against the boss and secret characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following his failure to defeat Liu Kang in the Mortal Kombat tournament , the evil Shang Tsung begs his master Shao Kahn , supreme ruler of Outworld and the surrounding kingdoms , to spare his life . He tells Shao Kahn that if they hold it in Outworld the invitation for the next Mortal Kombat cannot be turned down , and the Earthrealm warriors must attend . Kahn agrees to this plan and also restores Shang Tsung 's youth . He then extends the invitation to the thunder god and Earthrealm 's protector , Raiden , who gathers his warriors and takes them into Outworld . The new tournament is much more dangerous , as Shao Kahn has the home field advantage , and an Outworld victory will allow him to subdue Earthrealm . 
 According to the Mortal Kombat series ' canon , Liu Kang won this tournament as well , defeating Shao Kahn and his bodyguard Kintaro . The game 's story mode can be also finished using any other playable character , resulting in different non @-@ canonical endings for each of them . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Debuting characters : 
 Baraka ( played by Richard <unk> ) , a warlord of Outworld 's nomadic Tarkatan race , responsible for the assault on the Shaolin Monastery on the orders of Shao Kahn . 
 Jackson " Jax " Briggs ( played by John Parrish ) , U.S. Special Forces officer who enters the tournament to rescue his partner Sonya Blade from Outworld . 
 Kitana ( played by Katalin Zamiar ) , a female ninja who works as a personal assassin in the service of Shao Kahn . She has been suspected of secretly aiding the Earthrealm warriors . 
 Kung Lao ( played by Anthony Marquez ) , Shaolin monk and close friend of Liu Kang , descendant of the Great Kung Lao ( who was defeated by Goro and Shang Tsung 500 years before the events of MK ) . He seeks to avenge his ancestor and the destruction of the Shaolin temple . 
 Mileena ( played by Katalin Zamiar ) , twin sister to Kitana who also serves as an assassin for Kahn . Her mission during the tournament is to ensure the loyalty of her sister , but she also has plans of her own . 
 Returning characters : 
 Johnny Cage ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , Hollywood actor who joins Liu Kang in his journey to Outworld . 
 Liu Kang ( played by Ho Sung Pak ) , Shaolin monk who is the reigning champion of Mortal Kombat . He travels to Outworld to seek vengeance for the death of his Shaolin monastery brothers . 
 Raiden ( played by Carlos Pesina ) , thunder god who returns to Mortal Kombat to stop Kahn 's evil plans of taking Earthrealm for his own . 
 Reptile ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , Shang Tsung 's personal bodyguard . 
 Scorpion ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , <unk> spectre who returns to the tournament to once again assassinate Sub @-@ Zero . 
 Shang Tsung ( played by Philip Ahn M.D. ) , the evil sorcerer who convinced Kahn to spare his life after losing the last tournament , with a new plan to appease his master , who in turn restores Tsung 's youth . He also serves as a sub @-@ boss of the game , appearing before Kintaro in the single player mode . As in the first game he is able to morph into any of the playable characters , retaining their moves ( in some versions only the character against whom he is currently fighting ) . 
 Sub @-@ Zero ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , a male ninja who possesses <unk> . Despite apparently being killed in the first tournament , he mysteriously returns , traveling into the Outworld to again attempt to assassinate Shang Tsung . 
 = = = Non @-@ playable characters = = = 
 Kintaro ( stop @-@ motion ) , Shao Kahn 's bodyguard , sent by his race to avenge Goro 's defeat . He is the game 's penultimate boss . 
 Shao Kahn ( played by Brian Glynn , voiced by Steve Ritchie ) , the evil Emperor of Outworld , who wishes to conquer Earthrealm by any means . He is the host of the tournament and the game 's final boss . 
 The game 's hidden opponents are Jade ( played by Katalin Zamiar ) , a female ninja clad in green ; Noob Saibot ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , a dark @-@ silhouetted ninja who is a " lost warrior " from the first MK game ; and Smoke ( played by Daniel Pesina ) , a male ninja clothed in gray . Sonya and Kano are the only playable characters from the first Mortal Kombat who were not implemented as regular fighters , though they do appear in the background of the Kahn 's Arena stage , chained and on display as his prisoners . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Game = = = 
 According to the project 's lead programmer Ed Boon , Mortal Kombat II was " intended to look different than the original MK " and " had everything we wanted to put into MK but did not have time for . " In 2012 , Boon placed creating the game among his best Mortal Kombat memories , recalling : " When we did Mortal Kombat II , we got new equipment and all that stuff , but it was funny because when we started working on Mortal Kombat II , the mania , the hysteria of the home versions of Mortal Kombat I was literally all around us . We were so busy working on the next one , going from seven characters to 12 and two Fatalities per character and all these other things that that consumed every second . " Both the theme and art style of MKII were slightly darker than those of its predecessor , although a more vibrant color palette was employed and the new game had a much richer color depth than the previous game . A new feature was the use of multiple layers of parallax scrolling in the arcade version . The game was made to be less serious with the addition of humorous alternative finishing moves . Some of the considered Fatalities were rejected as too extreme at the time . 
 Care was taken during the programming process to give the game a " good feel " , with Boon simulating elements such as gravity into the video game design . John Tobias noted that the previous game 's reliance on juggling the opponent in the air with successive hits was an accident , and had been tightened in Mortal Kombat II . Boon said that the reason to not completely remove it in favor of a different system of chaining attacks together was to set the game apart from the competing titles such as Street Fighter and allow for players to devise their own combinations of attacks . At one point , a bonus stage was planned to feature " a bunch of ninjas jumping all over the place and you would swing at them , just like you 're in the middle of a fight in a kung fu movie . " All of the music was composed , performed , recorded and mixed by Dan Forden , the MK series ' sound designer and composer , using the Williams DCS sound system . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 To create the character animations for the game , actors were placed in front of a gray background and performed the motions , which were recorded on videotape ( initially on a standard <unk> camera , later upgraded to a broadcast @-@ quality , $ 20 @,@ 000 Sony camera ) , which had been upgraded since the development of the first title from standard to broadcast quality . The video capture footage was then processed into a computer , and the background was removed from selected frames to create sprites . Towards the end of the game 's development , they opted to instead use a blue screen technique and processed the footage directly into the computer for a similar , simpler process . The actors were lightly sprayed with water to give them a sweaty , glistening appearance , while post @-@ editing was done on the sprites afterward to highlight flesh tones and improve the visibility of muscles , which Tobias felt set the series apart from similar games using digitized graphics . Animations of Shang Tsung morphing into other characters were created by Midway 's John Vogel using a computer , while hand @-@ drawn animations were used for other parts of the game , such as the Fatalities . For animating Goro and Kintaro , clay sculptures were created by Tobias ' friend Curt Chiarelli and then turned into 12 @-@ inch latex miniatures that were used for stop motion filming . Because of technical restrictions , the actors ' costumes had to be simple and no acrobatic moves such as back @-@ flips could have been recorded ; the hardest moves to perform were some of the jumping kicks . 
 Several characters ( namely Jade , Kitana , Mileena , Noob Saibot , Reptile , Scorpion , Smoke and Sub @-@ Zero ) were created using the first game 's palette swap technique on just two base models . The game was noted for its " strong female presence , " as it was featuring more than one woman character as it was common in the genre at the time . Due to memory limitations and the development team 's desire to introduce more new characters , two fighters from the original Mortal Kombat , Sonya Blade and Kano , whom Boon cited as the least @-@ picked characters in the game , were excluded , substituted by two palette swaps , Mileena and Reptile . In place of Sonya , two new playable female characters , Kitana and Mileena , were introduced so the game might better compete against Capcom 's Street Fighter II : The World Warrior featuring Chun @-@ Li . Another planned female fighter , based on the real @-@ life kickboxer Kathy Long whom Tobias admired , was omitted due to time constraints . A male bonus character played by Kyu Hwang was also cut from the game . 
 = = Release = = 
 The first version of MKII , revision 1 @.@ 4 , " was effectively a public beta test , " featuring few Fatalities and many software bugs ; it also lacked the endings for the characters . It took three subsequent revisions to have the moves and finishing moves finalized and all the bugs corrected , also adding additional content , as development had still been in progress for all that time . The final version was revision 3 @.@ 1 , released in January 1994 . 
 = = = Marketing and merchandise = = = 
 In conjunction with the release of the arcade game in 1993 , an official comic book , Mortal Kombat II Collector 's Edition , written and illustrated by Tobias , was released through mail order , describing the backstory of the game in a greater detail . Acclaim Entertainment stated that it " had started Mortal Kombat II with a $ 10 million global marketing campaign " for the home versions . A part of this sum was used to film and air the live @-@ action TV commercial created by David Anderson and Bob Keen . The video featured Scorpion , Sub @-@ Zero , Reptile ( with a notably more @-@ reptilian appearance ) , Kitana , Baraka and Shao Kahn , who were played by the same actors as in the game . The game 's promotional campaign 's tagline was " Nothing ... Nothing can prepare you . " In 2008 , Eurogamer called Mortal Kombat II " a marketing triumph . " 
 Malibu Comics published a series of Mortal Kombat comic books featuring the characters from both MKII and the original game . Mortal Kombat II : Music from the Arcade Game Soundtrack , an album featuring music from Mortal Kombat II and Mortal Kombat , composed by Dan Forden , could originally only be purchased by ordering it through a limited CD offer , which was posted on the arcade version of the game 's attract mode . Other merchandise for the game included a series of collectible stickers by Panini Group and two different series of action figures ( released in Argentina in 1995 and in the USA in 1999 , respectively ) . Mortal Kombat Kard Game was marketed as " Mortal Kombat II trading cards " . 
 = = = Home versions = = = 
 Since 1994 , multiple official ports and emulated versions of Mortal Kombat II were released for a wide variety of home systems , including the 8 @-@ bit ( Game Boy , Master System and Sega Game Gear ) , 16 @-@ bit ( Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) and Sega Genesis ) and 32 @-@ bit ( Sega 32X , PlayStation and Sega Saturn ) consoles , Amiga and PC DOS computers , and the PlayStation Network ( PSN ) . The Game Boy , Game Gear , SNES , and Genesis versions were released simultaneously on September 13 , 1994 , dubbed " Mortal Tuesday " by Acclaim 's marketing . The game was also featured in several compilation releases , including Midway Arcade Treasures 2 for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube and Xbox . Midway Arcade Treasures : Extended Play for the PlayStation Portable , and Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection for the PSN , Xbox Live Arcade and Steam . A Nintendo DS compilation release was cancelled . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Mortal Kombat II proved to be an enormous commercial success and even a cultural phenomenon . WMS Industries , owner of Midway Games at the time , reported its 1993 sales in the quarter ending December 31 rose to $ 101 million from $ 86 million and said much of its revenue gain was related to the sale of the arcade version of MKII . By 1996 , the number of arcade machines sold approached 25 @,@ 000 units ; at that time , arcade games that sold 5 @,@ 000 units were considered strong titles ( Midway printed special T @-@ shirts to celebrate 300 machines being manufactured in one day ) and an arcade cabinet cost $ 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 . MKII was considered an arcade game of the year , taking over from the original Mortal Kombat . 
 On the day of the release of the game 's first four versions for cartridge @-@ based console systems ( Sega 's Genesis and Game Gear and Nintendo 's SNES and Game Boy ) , dubbed " Mortal Friday " ( September 9 , 1994 ) , an unprecedented number of more than 2 @.@ 5 million copies were shipped to be distributed , with the best opening @-@ week sales in video game history at that point . Acclaim 's analysts expected that the number of copies sold would reach at least 2 @.@ 5 million within the first few weeks of release ( at an average retail price of $ 60 ) and the sales to top $ 150 million by end of the year . First @-@ week sales of over $ 50 million managed to surpass the initial box office results of that season 's Hollywood film blockbusters , such as Forrest Gump , True Lies , The Mask and The Lion King . Mortal Kombat II became the world 's best @-@ selling video game ( until it was eclipsed by Donkey Kong Country , released in November 1994 ) and the Genesis version managed to sell 1 @.@ 78 million copies in the United States alone , along with an additional 1 @.@ 51 million American copies of the game for the SNES . By 2002 , estimated gross sales of Mortal Kombat II home video games exceeded $ 400 million . Re @-@ released in 2007 , the PSN version has continued to occupy the service 's top ten monthly sales chart nearly three years later in February 2010 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The initial critical reception of Mortal Kombat II was overwhelmingly positive , with Sega Visions describing the way in which the sequel was directed as " sheer brilliance , " and Nintendo Power calling it " the hottest fighter ever . " Tony <unk> of The Daily Gazette opined the " incredible " hype surrounding the game was " well deserved , " describing it as " a perfect blend of great graphics , action and violence . " In his review of the arcade release , Rik Skews of Computer + Video Games ( C + VG ) wrote " the only true rival to Street [ F ] <unk> II " returned " in a sequel that bites off the head of the original . " 
 Regarding the Sega Genesis / Mega Drive version , Mark Patterson of C + VG wrote that " Probe has done an incredible job with this conversion . Everything is here , and I mean everything . " Sushi @-@ X of Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) called it " a great translation considering its limitations , " although a reviewer for The Detroit News felt " very disappointed " with this port and recommended the SNES version instead , which C + VG declared " the most perfect coin @-@ op conversion ever . " The four reviewers of EGM hailed the SNES version as a " near @-@ perfect " translation of the arcade game . While commenting that its graphics and sounds are not as good as those of the SNES version , they held the Genesis version to be an outstanding port as well . A reviewer for The Baltimore Sun called the SNES version " the best game I 've ever played - a true translation , " while Patterson noted it was the bloodiest game Nintendo has yet allowed to be released . 
 About the 32X version , IGN 's Levi Buchanan stated that " if you do not have a SNES , this is the home version of MKII to get . " In contrast , GamePro remarked that the 32X version offered too little improvement over the Genesis version , even failing to correct the control shortcomings , and was technically poor given the 32X 's capabilities . 
 Regarding the portable console ports , Patterson stated that " no Game Boy owner should go without this " and called the Game Gear version " still the best handheld beat- ' em up " on the market despite all the content that was not present in this version of the game . EGM reviewers concurred that the Game Gear version " has eye @-@ popping graphics , and great control - so much so that you won 't believe this is a portable , " but were less enthusiastic about the Game Boy version . Though they commented that it is better than most fighting games for the system , two of their four reviewers felt that it was not worth getting with the game available on much more powerful platforms . 
 Critical reception of the Amiga version was also mostly very favorable , including Ed Lawrence of CU Amiga declaring that " every person who own an Amiga has to own Mortal Kombat 2 . In terms of revitalising the Amiga market , this is far more important than any Commodore buy @-@ out could ever be . " In a rare dissenting opinion , Jonathan Nash of Amiga Power called it " a clearly nonsensical title , " recommending to " buy Shadow Fighter instead . " The later PC version was also well @-@ received , with Next Generation stating that " if you like fighting games , this is the best that 's available . " 
 Reviewing the CD @-@ ROM based Saturn port , EGM commented that the graphics are identical to the arcade version but that there are missing sound effects and " unbearable " slowdown when first performing a special move . They rated it the best home version of the game to date , but felt that with Mortal Kombat II having considerably aged by this point , any port needed to be near arcade perfect to stand out . Next Generation felt that the Saturn version was arcade perfect , but that the Mortal Kombat series as a whole was grossly overrated and lacked any gameplay innovations to make it stand out from other fighting games . They summarized that " if you are a fan of the game ( and you know who you are ) , then the Saturn version is everything you can hope for - an arcade @-@ perfect translation - and yet , there is nothing outside of a flashy presentation and a little gore to recommend this game over a million others just like it . " Scary Larry of GamePro agreed that the Saturn port " duplicates the arcade version perfectly " , but argued that the slowdown and load times make the game frustrating to play . He concluded that the conversion would make a decent holdover until Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 hit the Saturn , but fails to measure up to Mortal Kombat 3 on the PlayStation . Sega Saturn Magazine was extremely disappointed with the final version of the Saturn port , calling it " much worse than any of the versions seen on the cartridge format , " as opposed to the vastly superior pre @-@ release version they had reviewed five months earlier . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Mortal Kombat II received numerous annual awards from gaming publications . Game Players gave it the titles of " Best Genesis Fighting Game " , " Best SNES Fighting Game " and " Best Overall SNES Game " of 1994 . The staff of Nintendo Power ranked MKII as the second ( SNES ) and fifth ( Game Boy ) " Top Game " of 1994 , while the magazine 's readers voted it to receive the 1995 's Nintendo Power Awards for " Best Tournament Fighter ( all Nintendo platforms ) " and " Best Play Control ( Game Boy ) " , with the game having been nominated by the staff also in the categories " Worst Villain " ( positively , an equivalent of " Best Hero " ) and " Best Overall ( all Nintendo platforms ) " . VideoGames named MKII as the " Best Fighting Game " of 1994 , also awarding it second place in the categories " Best Super NES Game " and " Best Arcade @-@ to @-@ Home Translation " . Other awards included " The Best of the Show ( Super NES ) " for the <unk> ' 94 from GamePro and " Bloodiest Game of 1994 " from EGM . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 As in the case of the first Mortal Kombat game , the content of Mortal Kombat II became the subject of a great deal of controversy regarding violent video games . <unk> Cherry of Toledo Blade wrote that both games had " an army of critics too : people upset by the bone @-@ crunching , blood @-@ spurting , limb @-@ ripping violence depicted on the small screen . " According to IGN , " Mortal Kombat II wore its notoriety as a badge of honor , boasting about it in promotional materials , and even parodying it in @-@ game . " The game was banned in Germany , where MKII was put in the index by the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons ( <unk> ) and all versions of the game except for the Game Boy version were subjected to being confiscated from the nation 's market for violating the German Penal Code by showing excessive violence and cruel acts against representations of human beings . Due to regional censorship , the game was also released with green @-@ colored blood and black @-@ and @-@ white fatality sequences in Japan ; it was at that time a unique occurrence of a western game being censored in Japan , not the reverse . Years later , Boon recalled : " I 've always had the position that the rating system was a good idea and should be put in place . Once Mortal Kombat II came out , there was a rating system in place . We were an M @-@ rated game , and everybody knew the content that was in there , so it became almost a non @-@ issue . " Tobias agreed , saying that they " were content with the M for mature on our packaging . " 
 There were also some other controversies . In 1994 , Guy Aoki , president of Media Action Network for Asian Americans ( MANAA ) , criticized the game for allegedly perpetuating existing stereotypes of Asians as martial arts experts with the game 's portrayal of several of its characters . Allyne Mills , publicist at Acclaim , responded to this by stating : " This is a fantasy game , with all different characters . This is a martial arts game which comes from Asia . [ sic ] The game was not created to foster stereotypes . " Critical studies professor Marsha Kinder accused the game of " a misogynist aspect to the combat , " alleging that " in MKII , some of the most violent possibilities are against women . Also , their fatality moves are highly eroticised . " Members of Mortal Kombat II cast ( Daniel Pesina , Philip Ahn and Katalin Zamiar , as well as Sonya 's actress Elizabeth <unk> ) , seeking additional royalties for the game 's home ports , sued Midway , Williams , Nintendo of America , Sega of America and Acclaim Entertainment for misuse of their likenesses in an unauthorized way in two different cases in 1996 and 1997 , losing both of them . After that , Pesina ( who sought $ 10 million for his role in both games , after being paid several thousand ) agreed to participate in the <unk> advertisement photo shoot attacking Mortal Kombat . He later recalled , " I don 't think [ the ad ] actually upset people at Midway . I think it more upset some of the hardcore Mortal Kombat fans . " 
 = = = Retrospective = = = 
 According to IGN 's Leif Johnson , 1994 " was the year of games like Doom and Mortal Kombat II " . Over the following years , multiple publications acclaimed Mortal Kombat II as one of the best video games ever . It was ranked as the 97th top game of all time by the staff of Game Informer in 2001 , as the 38th most important video game of all time by the staff of GamePro in 2007 , and as the 32nd best video game of all time by The Boston Phoenix in 2010 . Featuring it in their 2003 video game hall of fame series , the staff of GameSpot wrote : " Mortal Kombat II was so much better , as a sequel , than it had to be that it absolutely deserves a place in the pantheon of all @-@ time classics . " 
 Many publications also listed Mortal Kombat II among the best video games of its genre or era . It was ranked as the third best fighting game by the staff of GamePro and the ninth best fighting game of all time by Rich Knight of Cinema Blend in 2008 , as the third top fighting game of all time by Marissa Meli of UGO and the second best 2D fighting game ever made by Robert Workman of GamePlayBook in 2010 , and as the third best fighting game of all time by Peter Rubin of Complex in 2011 . It was also ranked as the 53rd best game on any Nintendo platform by the staff of Nintendo Power in 1997 , featured among the 100 best games of the 20th century by Jakub <unk> of Benchmark in 2009 , and ranked as the tenth best 16 @-@ bit game ever by McKinley Noble of PC World that same year . 
 The game also received accolades for its various conversions . Mortal Kombat II was included among the ten best arcade games by Wirtualna Polska , and ranked as the fifth top arcade game by the staff of GameTrailers in 2009 , as the 31st top arcade game of all time by the staff of GameSpy in 2011 , and as the sixth best arcade game of the 1990s by Complex in 2013 . Regarding the 16 @-@ bit console versions , MKII was ranked as the fourth best ever Genesis game by Complex and as the 19th best Genesis game by GamesRadar , as well as as the 12th best ever SNES game by Rich Knight of Complex and as the 25th top game for the SNES by Richard George of IGN ; in 1995 , SNES magazine Super Play also ranked it as the best sequel on the platform . In Poland , where the Amiga was the most popular gaming platform of the early 1990s , MKII was ranked as the ninth best ever Amiga game by Michał Wierzbicki of CHIP and as 22nd best Amiga game by PSX Extreme editor @-@ in @-@ chief Przemysław <unk> . 
 GamesRadar called it " the point when the series became great . " In 2007 , GamesRadar included four elements of this game - Dan Forden 's " Toasty ! " effect during an uppercut ( also ranked as the 11th funniest moment in video games by Rich Knight of Complex in 2012 ) , Friendship and Babality finishing moves , and the ceiling @-@ spikes Stage Fatality - among the ten greatest things about Mortal Kombat . Reviewing the PlayStation 3 release in 2007 , IGN 's Jeff Haynes stated that " Mortal Kombat II still manages to stand up almost 15 years later as one of the best arcade fighters around . " As late as 2009 , many fans still considered MKII to be the best title in the series . According to a 2011 article by Mike Harradence of PlayStation Universe , the " bigger , bolder and bloodier " game remains " a firm fan favourite among MK aficionados . " That year , IGN 's Richard George wrote that " Mortal Kombat II is considered by many to be the pinnacle of the series " and called it " still one of the most fun 16 @-@ bit fighters to play . " In 2013 , Rich Knight and Hanuman Welch of Complex wrote that " Mortal Kombat II took everything we loved about the original and magnified it by about a million . ( ... ) We still love this game . " That same year , Knight and Gus Turner from the same magazine also ranked it as the sixth best 2D fighting game of all time , stating : " Truth be told , the latest MK has nothing on this one . Nothing . A step up from the original in every way , MK II was , and still is , a solid , violent game that 's an essential title to grab for any serious fan of fighting games . " In 2014 , Kevin Wong of Complex wrote : " Today , we remember Mortal Kombat II for its anarchic spirit : the game was endlessly intriguing and weird , and it had an uneasy <unk> could happen at any given moment . Critics derided Mortal Kombat as meaningless shock value , but its sequel proved those naysayers wrong . Mortal Kombat II was a Flawless Victory : irreverent , hilarious , and horrific in equal measures . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Rumored content = = = 
 While many games have been subject to urban legends about secret features and unlockable content , these kinds of myths were particularly rampant among the dedicated fan community of Mortal Kombat in connection with Mortal Kombat II . According to GameSpy , " the [ arcade gaming ] community was abuzz about myriad secrets both true and false . " The game 's creators did little to dispel those rumors that included supposed " Nudality " or " Sexuality " finishing moves for Kitana and Mileena , Shang Tsung 's ability to transform into Kano and Goro , and " Hornbuckle " being featured as an additional secret character . 
 Some of them were eventually implemented in subsequent MK games . Among these rumors to be adapted later were the <unk> ( used in Mortal Kombat 3 and its updates ) and an ability to throw an opponent into the mouth of a tree in the Living Forest stage ( first used in Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks ) . Rumored characters included a red female ninja character ( actually just a glitch that reportedly turned Kitana 's outfit from blue to red ) , who was dubbed " Scarlet " by fans and was officially introduced as Skarlet in 2011 's Mortal Kombat , and the male ninja Ermac that has originated as a glitch in the original game and was teased in MKII before finally becoming playable in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 . A nameless , flaming palette swap of Liu Kang seen far deep in the background of the Pit II stage , initially dubbed as " Torch " by fans , officially debuted in Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance as a secret character Blaze that later became the final boss of Mortal Kombat : Armageddon . 
 = = = Related titles = = = 
