 Some elements of Mortal Kombat II ( such as the characters of Kitana and Shao Kahn ) are featured in the 1995 film Mortal Kombat . It was , nevertheless , mostly based on the first game . 
 The plot and characters of the game served as basis for the 2005 spin @-@ off game Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks , a beat 'em up title which follows Liu Kang and Kung Lao as they fight their way through Outworld to defeat Shao Kahn . Some of the plot Shaolin Monks , such as the death of Jade , is not compatible with the general Mortal Kombat game series . 
 The events of Mortal Kombat II , along with the first Mortal Kombat and Mortal Kombat 3 ( including its expansions ) , were later retold in the 2011 fighting game Mortal Kombat , which was as an effective reboot of the series . In it , Raiden uses time travel to revisit the tournaments from the original games in the series in order to change the future in the aftermath of Armageddon . The ladder / arcade mode of this game follows the same order of bosses as in MKII ( with Shang Tsung , Kintaro and Shao Kahn as the final three opponents ) and its controls and Fatality system are most reminiscent of MKII . Classic costumes from MKII were also brought back as alternate outfits for female ninja characters in the PlayStation Vita version . 
 Mortal Kombat II was to be one of the three games remade in HD in the cancelled fighting game Mortal Kombat HD Arcade Kollection . However , only a simple compilation game titled Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection was released instead . 
 = Hoodening = 
 Hoodening ( / <unk> / ) , also spelled Hodening and <unk> , is a folk custom found in Kent , a county in south @-@ eastern England . The tradition entails the use of a wooden hobby horse known as a hooden horse which is mounted on a pole and carried by an individual hidden under a sackcloth . Historically , the tradition was restricted to the area of East Kent , although in the twentieth century it spread into neighbouring West Kent . It represents a regional variation of a " hooded animal " tradition that appears in various forms throughout the British Isles . 
 As recorded from the eighteenth through to the early twentieth centuries , hoodening was a tradition performed at Christmas time by groups of farm labourers . They would form into teams to accompany the horse on its travels around the local area , and although the makeup of such groups varied , they typically included an individual to carry the horse , a leader , a man in female clothing known as a " Mollie " , and several musicians . The team would then carry the hooden horse to local houses and shops , where they would expect payment for their appearance . Although this practice is extinct , in the present the hooden horse is incorporated into various Kentish Mummers plays and Morris dances which take place at different times of the year . 
 The origins of the hoodening tradition , and the original derivation of the term " hooden " , remain subject to academic debate . An early suggestion was that the term " hooden " was related to the pre @-@ Christian god Woden , and that the tradition therefore originated with pre @-@ Christian religious practices in the Early Medieval Kingdom of Kent , however this approach has not found support from historians or folklorists studying the tradition . Most scholars to have commented on the custom have thought it most likely that the term " hooden " relates to " hooded " , a reference to the sackcloth worn by the individual carrying the horse . 
 The earliest textual reference to the hoodening tradition comes from the first half of the eighteenth century . A number of scattered references to it appeared over the next century and a half , many of which considered it to be a declining tradition that had become extinct in many parts of Kent . Aware of this decline , in the early twentieth century the folklorist and historian Percy Maylam documented what survived of the tradition and traced its appearances in historical documents , publishing his findings as The Hooden Horse in 1909 . Although deemed extinct at the time of the First World War , the custom was revived in an altered form during the mid @-@ twentieth century , when the use of the hooden horse was incorporated into a number of modern Kentish folk traditions . 
 = = Description = = 
 Surviving sources testify to the fact that while there was clear variation in the hoodening tradition as it was practiced by different individuals in different parts of East Kent , it was nevertheless " on the whole remarkably uniform " . The hooden horse , which was at the centre of the tradition , was usually made out of a wooden horse 's head affixed to a pole about four feet long , with a hinged jaw that was moved by a string . This horse was then carried aloft by an individual who was concealed beneath a dark cloth . As part of the hoodening custom , a team of " hoodeners " , consisting of between four and eight men , would carry the horse through the streets . This team included the horse with a " <unk> " operating it , a " Groom " , " Driver " , or " Waggoner " who carried a whip and led the horse by a bridle , a " Jockey " who would attempt to mount the horse , a " Mollie " who was a man dressed as a woman , and one or two musicians . All of the men were farm labourers , usually being those who worked with horses . They performed the custom at Christmas time , and usually on Christmas Eve . The team would arrive at people 's houses where they would sing a song before being admitted entry . Once inside , the horse pranced and gnashed its jaw , while the Jockey attempted to mount it , and the Mollie swept the floor with their broom while chasing any girls present . Sometimes they would sing further songs and carols at this point . Upon being presented with payment , the team would leave to repeat the process at another house . 
 Hoodening was part of a wider " hooded animal " tradition that the folklorist E. C. Cawte identified as existing in different forms in various parts of Britain . Features common to these customs were the use of a hobby horse , the performance at Christmas time , a song or spoken statement requesting payment , and the use of a team who included a man dressed in women 's clothing . 
 = = Etymology and origins = = 
 The folklorist Percy Maylam noted that most nineteenth @-@ century sources describing the tradition had spelled the word as <unk> , but that he favoured hooden because it better reflected the pronunciation of the word with its long vowel . He added that " the word ' hooden ' rhymes with ' wooden ' and not with ' sodden ' as some writers appear to think " . Given this pronunciation , Cawte suggested that <unk> was a better spelling for the tradition 's name . Maylam also noted that none of the hoodeners with whom he communicated were aware of the etymology of the term , and that similarly they were unaware of the tradition 's historical origins . 
 One possible explanation for the origin of hooden was that it had emerged as a mispronunciation of wooden , referring to the use of the wooden horse . Maylam was critical of this idea , expressing the view that such a mispronunciation was unlikely to emerge from the Kentish dialect . A second possibility is that the name hooden was a reference to the hooded nature of the horse 's bearer . The historian Ronald Hutton deemed this to be the " simplest " derivation , while folklorists Charlotte Sophia Burne and E. C. Cawte also considered it the most likely explanation . However , Maylam was also critical of this , suggesting that the cloth under which the carrier was concealed was too large to be considered a hood . 
 In his History of Kent , the antiquarian Alfred John Dunkin suggested that Hodening was a corruption of <unk> , and that it was ultimately derived from the Gothic <unk> , meaning horse . Maylam , however , opined that Dunkin 's argument could be " ignored " , stating that it rested on the erroneous assumption that Hodening began with a short vowel . 
 Maylam concluded that the hoodening tradition was " a mutilated survival " of a form of Morris dance . Noting that some Medieval Morris dancers had incorporated games devoted to the English folk hero Robin Hood into their custom , he suggested that hoodening might have originally been a reference to Robin Hood . This idea was challenged by Burne , who noted that in his legends , Robin Hood was always depicted as an archer rather than a horse @-@ rider , thus questioning how he had come to be associated with the hooden horse . In addition , she noted that the Medieval games devoted to Hood all took place in May rather than at Christmas , as hoodening did . Cawte also criticised Maylam 's argument , noting that there was no evidence of Morris dancing in Kent prior to the twentieth century , and that neither hoodening nor Robin Hood had a particularly close association with the Morris dance to start with . 
 = = = Possible Early Medieval origins = = = 
 In 1807 , an anonymous observer suggested that the term <unk> was linked to the putative Anglo @-@ Saxon god Woden , and that the tradition might be " a relic of a festival to commemorate our Saxon ancestors landing in Thanet " . In 1891 , it was suggested that the custom had once been known as " <unk> " , a reference to the Early Medieval Scandinavian god Odin . The author of this idea further suggested that the custom had begun either with the ritual wearing of the skins of horses sacrificed to Odin , or as an early Christian mockery of such Odinic practices . Maylam noted that he was initially attracted to the idea that the term <unk> had derived from Woden – an Old English name that he thought a more likely origin than the Old Norse Odin – but that upon investigating this possibility found " no sufficient evidence " for it . He added that it would seem unlikely that the W would be lost from Woden in the Kentish dialect , citing the example of <unk> , a Kentish village whose name is often interpreted as having derived from Woden and which clearly retains its use of W. Ultimately , he stated that " one feels that the theory is based on inferences and analogies not strong enough for a foundation to carry the building erected on them " . The idea of linking the tradition to Woden was also dismissed as unlikely by both Burne and Cawte . 
 Believing it likely that the hoodening tradition " substantially pre @-@ dates " its earliest textual appearances , the folklorist Geoff Doel suggested the possibility that it had originated as a Midwinter rite to re @-@ energise the vegetation , as evidence noting that other English winter folk customs , such as the Apple Wassail , have also been interpreted in this manner . Doel also suggested that the use of the horse in the tradition may have some connections to either the use of the white horse as the symbol of Kent , and the use of Hengist and Horsa ( " stallion " and " horse " in Old English ) as prominent characters in the origin myths of the Early Medieval Kingdom of Kent . 
 = = Regional restrictions = = 
 Historians have catalogued 33 recorded instances of the hoodening tradition extant in Kent prior to the twentieth @-@ century revival . These are clustered in a crescent shape along the eastern and northern coasts of the county , and all were found within the area historically defined as East Kent , with the tradition being unknown in neighbouring West Kent . More specifically , Maylam noted that there were no records of the tradition having been found west of Godmersham . This region was " a well populated area " during the period in which the hoodeners were active , and Maylam noted that all of the areas in which the tradition were found contained the East Kentish dialect . Cawte analysed the historical distribution of the hoodeners and found that it did not correspond with the areas of early Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement in Kent , and that it similarly did not accord with the county 's coal mining areas . Cawte also stated that " there is no apparent reason why the custom did not spread further afield " . 
 = = Recorded appearances = = 
 = = = Early textual references = = = 
 The oldest known textual reference to hoodening comes from the Alphabet of <unk> , a manuscript authored by Samuel Pegge , an antiquary who served as the vicar of Godmersham in Kent from 1731 to 1751 . After Pegge 's death , the manuscript was obtained by Sir Frederic Madden , and after his death it was purchased by the English Dialect Society , who published it in 1876 . In this manuscript , Pegge noted simply that " Hoodening ( <unk> ) is a country masquerade at Christmas times " , comparing it to <unk> and the <unk> <unk> of Derbyshire . 
 The earliest known textual description of the tradition is provided by a letter that was published in a May 1807 edition of European Magazine . The letter had been written by an anonymous individual who was describing their encounter with the hoodeners on a visit to the Kentish coastal town of Ramsgate in Thanet : 
 I found they begin the festivities of Christmas by a curious procession : a party of young people procure the head of a dead horse , which is affixed to a pole about four feet in length ; a string is affixed to the lower jaw ; a horse @-@ cloth is also attached to the whole , under which one of the parts gets , and by frequently pulling the string , keeps up a loud snapping noise , and is accompanied by the rest of the party , grotesquely habited , with hand @-@ bells ; they thus proceed from house to house , ringing their bells , and singing carols and songs ; they are commonly gratified with beer and cake , or perhaps with money . This is called , provincially , a Hodening . 
 Later commenting on this source , Maylam highlighted that its author did not appear to be from Kent and that , from their use of wording , it appeared that they had been told about the tradition by locals but had not actually witnessed it first hand . As such , Maylam suggested that the author may have been wrong in describing the use of a horse 's skull in the Ramsgate tradition , given that both later sources and the hoodeners of his own time all used a wooden model of a horse 's head . At the same time , Maylam noted that the use of a horse 's skull was not impossible , for such skulls had also been used in the hobby horse traditions of other parts of Britain . 
 The anonymously authored work was repeated almost verbatim in a range of other publications in the coming decades , giving its description far wider exposure . The first printed reference to the hooden horse having a wooden head appeared in Mackenzie E. C. Walcott 's Guide to the Coast of Kent , where he referred to a " curious custom [ which ] used to prevail " in Ramsgate . Maylam later suggested that the Ramsgate hooden horse tradition died out between 1807 and 1838 , for he had interviewed a number of elderly town residents in the early twentieth century and while several were aware that it had once taken place in the town , none could recall it happening in their own lifetime . 
 = = = Latter nineteenth @-@ century = = = 
 Many years after the event , the Kentish antiquarian J. Meadows Cooper related that while sitting in a pub on the outskirts of Margate on Boxing Day 1855 he had encountered a party carrying a hooden horse that entered the building . Another local resident , Mrs. Edward Tomlin , later related that as a child she had lived at a house named <unk> that was near to Margate , and that she remembered the hooden horse visiting them at Christmas time during the 1850s and up until 1865 . Maylam 's researches also found recollections of a hooden horse which had appeared in Herne and <unk> but which been discontinued in the 1860s , another that was active from Wingate Farm House in Harbledown during the 1850s , and one that had been active at <unk> but which had ceased by the 1860s . He found another based at Lower <unk> which had been active from at least the least the 1850s under the leadership of Henry Brazier ; it was subsequently taken over by his son John , until the tradition ended locally in 1892 . In a January 1868 edition of the Kentish Gazette , an anonymous author mentioned that hoodening had taken place in Minster , Swale on the Christmas Eve of 1867 . The author noted that the tradition featured carol singing and the ringing of <unk> , which were accompanied by the appearance of a hooden horse ; they expressed surprise at this latter event because they had thought that the horse was " as extinct as the <unk> " . 
 In their 1888 Dictionary of the Kentish Dialect , W. D. Parish and W. F. Shaw claimed that Hodening was a term used in Kent to refer to a custom involving the singing of carols , but that in the past Hoodening had been applied to " a <unk> or masquerade " involving the hooden horse . They added that they had gained information on this older custom in 1876 from the Reverend H. Bennett Smith of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade , who had in turn learned from a retired farmer in his parish that " the farmer used to send annually round the neighbourhood the best horse under the charge of the wagoner , and that afterwards instead , a man used to represent the horse , being supplied with a tail , and with a wooden figure of a horse 's head , and plenty of horse hair for a mane ... The custom has long since ceased . " 
 Parish and Shaw did not mention what time of year the tradition took place on or its geographical location . They also made no reference to a sack concealing the person carrying the horse . Doel thought it likely that neither Parish or Shaw had ever seen a hooden horse , and that instead their information was based on older written sources . He also thought it noteworthy that they described the tradition using the past tense , indicating that they considered it to be either dead or dying at the time of writing . However , Maylam believed that the information regarding the decline of the tradition was erroneous , because hoodeners were still active in St. Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade during the early twentieth century and various locals living in the area at the time could recall it taking place in the area back to the 1840s . 
 In December 1889 , a letter written by a resident of St. Lawrence named Charles J. H. Saunders appeared in The Bromley Record . Saunders stated that he had conversed with many elderly residents of Thanet on the subject of hoodening , and that they informed him that the custom had been discontinued around fifty years previously , after a woman in Broadstairs was so scared by the hooden horse that she died . He added that a horse 's skull was rarely used , " owing to the difficulty procuring one " , and that the wooden head was thus typically used as a replacement . He stated that the hoodening company typically consisted of a " Jockey " who placed himself on the back of the individual carrying the horse , and that it was the " sport " that bystanders attempted to throw him off , resulting in violence . The horse and jockey were also accompanied by two singers , two attendants , and an individual dressed as an " old woman " carrying a broom ; when the company knocked on people 's doors , it was the old woman 's job to sweep the inhabitants feet away with her broom and to chase any girls until being paid off with money or refreshments . He was of the opinion that the custom had been restricted to the Isle of Thanet , noting that locals informed him that it had been carried out in Ramsgate , St. Lawrence , Minster , St. Nicholas , <unk> , Monkton , and Birchington . However , contradicting this was a number of letters published in The Church Times in January 1891 which attested to the continuing practice of the hooden horse tradition at both Deal and Walmer . 
 = = = Percy Maylam 's investigations = = = 
 Percy Maylam was born into a farming family in 1865 at <unk> Farm in <unk> , and in 1890 became a solicitor of the Supreme Court before working as a professional solicitor at Canterbury . Married to Kate <unk> , who had been born in Hastings , together they had two sons , Robert and James . Outside of his professional life , Maylam was a keen cricketer , coin collector , and amateur historian , and in 1892 joined the Kent Archaeological Society . 
 During the 1880s , Maylam came upon the hoodening tradition and began undertaking research into it , searching for textual references to the tradition in books , periodicals , and newspapers , and interviewing those involved in three extant traditions , at St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade , Walmer , and Deal . He expressed the opinion that " in these days Kent possesses so few genuine popular customs of this kind that we cannot afford to be indifferent to those still in existence . This is my excuse for my attempt to record the custom as now existing before it is utterly lost to us . " The period in which Maylam conducted his research was one that was witnessing increased interest in the recording of Britain 's rural folk culture , in particular by members of the professional classes – of which Percy was a member – in part due to the fear that such traditions were rapidly dying out . Such folklore collecting was encouraged by The Folklore Society , with whom Maylam was associated , and also by the widely read book , The Golden Bough , a work of comparative folkloristics authored by the anthropologist James Frazer . Maylam published his research in 1909 as The Hooden Horse , in an edition limited to 303 copies . The book was reviewed in the Folklore journal by Burne , who described it as " an admirable piece of work , careful , thorough , unambitious , and complete in itself " , while Cawte later described it as " unusually good " . 
 Maylam concluded that at the time , there was only one hooden horse still in active use in Thanet , that stored at Hale Farm in St. Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade , which he noted was brought out each Christmas to visit Sarre , Birchington and St. Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade itself . The members included a man in female garb , known as the Mollie , in their procession , but added that this had not been done for some time and was thus reintroduced for Maylam 's benefit . In his book , Maylam included a photograph of the horse taken at Sarre in 1905 . On Christmas Eve 1906 , Maylam encountered a second hooden horse , this time at Walmer . This horse came into the local hotel tearoom at about 6 @.@ 30 pm , accompanied by two musicians – one playing the tambourine and the other the concertina – and a man named Robert Laming who lead the horse itself . They were wearing ordinary clothes , but informed Maylam that they had once worn smock frocks as part of the tradition . They had no Mollie , and the members could not recall a Mollie ever having been part of their custom . The hotel owner 's daughter placed a gratuity in the horse 's mouth , before the troupe moved on to the local shops , where they were also given gratuities in a similar manner . Maylam talked to the troupe about the tradition , and eventually organised the photographing of the Walmer horse and those who accompanied it in March 1907 . 
 Maylam also interviewed those involved in the hoodening tradition at Deal , whom he encountered in the summer of 1909 . One elderly gentleman , Robert Skardon , related that his own father had once led the town 's hoodening troupe , in which he personally carried the head , his father the drum , his " Uncle John <unk> " the fiddle , and " old Harry <unk> " the piccolo . For many years they had included a man dressed in woman 's clothing , who was known as a " Daisy " rather than a " Mollie " , but that this had been discontinued . Skardon had given up the tradition many years previously , and the hooden horse itself had come into the possession of Elbridge Bowles of Great <unk> , who continued to lead a hoodening troupe after Christmas each year , visiting Deal as well as the neighbouring villages of <unk> , Ripple , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Maylam was also informed that at the time of Britain 's involvement in the Second Boer War , the horse had been decorated with military equipment . The fourth hooden horse that Maylam encountered was owned by the men who worked at George Goodson 's farm in Fenland , Word , near Sandwich . They informed him that it had been made by a farm hand in Cleve , Monkton , before being brought to Word when one of the Cleve farm workers relocated there . 
 Ultimately , Maylam believed that the custom – as a " natural and spontaneous observance " among the people – was clearly going to die out , expressing his hope that the hooden horses could be preserved in Kentish museums and brought out for specially arranged public processions so as to maintain their place in Kentish culture . In later life , Maylam focused his attentions on exploring his family history , privately publishing Maylam Family Records in 1932 , before dying in 1939 . In the century following his death , Maylam 's book on hoodening became difficult to obtain and expensive to purchase , and so to mark the centenary of its first publication , it was republished under the altered title of The Kent Hooden Horse in 2009 by The History Press . Writing an introductory article for the second publication , Doel , a specialist in Kentish folklore , praised Maylam 's book as a " classic study " which was " impressive for its separation of fact from speculation as to the origins and significance of the custom . " 
 = = = Twentieth @-@ century revival = = = 
 Writing in 1967 , the folklorist Barnett Field claimed that at some point after Maylam 's book was published , hoodening had " died out . The Horses were hung up in the stables , and when the tractors came , were taken out and burnt on the bonfire . " He noted that the first revival of the custom after the First World War took place at the 1936 Kent District Folk @-@ Dance Festival at Aylesford . A new horse was specially created for this festival , and was modeled on an older example that had been used at Sarre . This new horse was subsequently adopted by the Ravensbourne Morris Men , a Morris troupe based in the West Kentish village of Keston , in 1947 . The Ravensbourne Morris ' hoodening tradition is the earliest known variant of the custom to exist in West Kent , although there are accounts of a hooden horse being located at <unk> School in the West Kentish town of Beckenham during the 1930s . As the Ravensbourne Morris included former pupils and staff of <unk> school , there is the possibility that this was the same horse . At the 1945 celebration marking British victory in the Second World War , a horse was brought out in <unk> ; this instance has been described as " a kind of missing link between tradition and revival " because the horse had been used as part of the historical hoodening tradition up until the mid @-@ 1920s . 
 Barnett Field ( 1912 – 2000 ) had been born at Wych Cross in the Ashdown Forest and subsequently educated at Tunbridge Wells . He trained as a banker before working as manager of the Hythe and Folkestone branches of the Westminster Bank until his retirement in 1979 . Field and his wife , Olive Ridley , had a keen interest in folk dances ; she established the Folkestone National Folk Dance Group in 1950 , and he founded the East Kent Morris Men in 1953 . Field constructed a hooden horse for the group to use , based in large part on the Deal horse photographed for Maylam 's book , and unveiled it at the Folkestone celebrations for the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in June 1953 . After this , it came to be used by both the East Kent Morris Men and the Folkestone District National Dance Group 's Handbell Ringers , who took it with them for performances in various parts of continental Europe , including Austria , the Netherlands , Yugoslavia , Sweden , and Czechoslovakia , developing what came to be known as " handbell hoodening " . The Handbell Ringers also brought out the horse to accompany them as they went around in public collecting money for charity at Christmas time . 
 From 1954 , the horse was also brought out for a Whitsun celebration in which it was paraded from Charing to the village green at Wye . A special service was held in the Charing Church , in which the Morris Men danced in the chancel and through the aisle , while the vicar bridled the horse itself . The horse was also brought out for a July 1956 ceremony in which The Swan Inn , a pub at <unk> , was officially renamed as The Hooden Horse ; present were the East Kent Morris Men , the Handbell Ringers , and the Ravensbourne Morris Men . This venture led to the groups establishing a new folk custom , " hop hoodening " , which was derived in part from an older hop picking ceremony found in the Weald area . Their new custom involved the different groups joining together on a tour around the villages of East Kent , beginning at Canterbury Cathedral and going through Ramsgate , Cliftonville , and Herne Bay before ending in a barn dance at <unk> . 
 In October 1957 , Field was introduced to Jack Laming of Walmer , who as a boy had performed in a hoodening troupe earlier in the century . Laming taught Field more about the historical hoodening tradition , and together they unearthed an old hooden horse that was stored at Walmer 's <unk> Farm ; this artefact was later placed on display at Deal Maritime and Local History Museum . In June 1961 Field and his wife then established the first Folkestone International Folklore Festival as a biannual celebration of folk customs ; it continued for 28 years . 
 Since the end of the Second World War , the hooden horse 's use has been revived in Whitstable , where it is often brought out for the Jack in the Green festival each May , and is owned by a group called the Ancient Order of <unk> . Since 1981 , the Tonbridge Mummers and <unk> have made use of a horse , incorporating it into a play specially written for the purpose by Doel and Nick Miller . An annual conference of hoodeners was also established ; initially meeting at the Marsh Gate Inn near Herne Bay , it subsequently moved to Simple Simon 's in Canterbury . A member of the St. Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade hoodeners , Ben Jones , established a website devoted to the tradition . At the prompting of local residents , in December 2014 a pub named The Hungry Horse , located on the corner of Haine Road and Nash Road in Broadstairs , was renamed as The Hoodening Horse after the folk custom . Commenting on the Kentish revival of hoodening , Hutton suggested that its success was " due largely " to the desire of many Kentish folk to culturally distinguish themselves from neighbouring London . 
 = Ohio State Route 357 = 
 State Route 357 ( SR 357 ) is a 2 @.@ 353 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 3 @.@ 787 km ) north – south state highway in the northern portion of U.S. state of Ohio . Existing entirely on South Bass Island in Lake Erie , the highway begins at its southern terminus of West Shore Boulevard , about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) west of Put @-@ in @-@ Bay . SR 357 then travels northeast to its northern terminus at a dead end at Lake Erie , approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Put @-@ in @-@ Bay . 
 SR 357 is one of two Ohio state routes on Lake Erie islands . Though this two @-@ lane route travels predominantly east – west , it once extended to the mainland of Ohio via the Catawba Island ferry , which is why it carries a north – south routing . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entirety of SR 357 exists within the confines of South Bass Island in Lake Erie . It is located within Put @-@ in @-@ Bay Township in Ottawa County . In 2012 , between 490 and 590 vehicles travel on the road on average each day . SR 357 begins at West Shore Boulevard , and travels southwestward . The route passes by Oak Point State Park , and becomes part of Bayview Avenue . SR 357 then intersects County Route 163 , which leads to the Put @-@ in @-@ Bay Airport , and the Put @-@ in @-@ Bay – Catawba Island ferry . The route later leaves Put @-@ in @-@ Bay , near Perry 's Victory and International Peace Memorial . SR 357 turns northeast to Columbus Avenue , and later ends at a dead end near the lake , next to a driveway . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR 357 designation was created in 1934 . At the time , the highway was routed along the entirety of its present alignment on South Bass Island . However , in 1946 , when SR 53 was extended northerly from Port Clinton to end at its present northern terminus in Catawba Island , SR 357 was simultaneously extended south onto the mainland via the ferry that connects Put @-@ in @-@ Bay with Catawba Island , then south along SR 53 to a new southern terminus at SR 2 east of Port Clinton . By 1969 , all of the 1946 extension of SR 357 was eliminated , with the Put @-@ in @-@ Bay – Catawba Island ferry becoming a connector between the southern end of SR 357 and the northern endpoint of SR 53 , and the mainland portion of SR 357 becoming just SR 53 . By 1973 , the Put @-@ in @-@ Bay – Catawba Island ferry docked on the south side of South Bass Island , ending the direct access to ferry docks and the rest of the state highway system from SR 357 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ottawa County . 
 = Saint Francis Receiving the Stigmata ( van Eyck ) = 
 Saint Francis of Assisi Receiving the Stigmata is the name given to two unsigned paintings completed around 1428 – 32 that art historians usually attribute to the Flemish artist , Jan van Eyck . The panels are nearly identical , apart from a considerable difference in size . Both are small paintings : the larger measures 29 @.@ 3 cm x 33 @.@ 4 cm and is in the <unk> Gallery in Turin , Italy ; the smaller panel is 12 @.@ 7 cm x 14 @.@ 6 cm and in the Philadelphia Museum of Art . The earliest documentary evidence is in the 1470 inventory of Anselme Adornes of Bruges 's will ; he may have owned both panels . From the 19th to mid @-@ 20th centuries , most scholars attributed them either to a pupil or follower of van Eyck 's working from a design by the master . 
 The paintings show a famous incident from the life of Saint Francis of Assisi , who is shown kneeling by a rock as he receives the stigmata of the crucified Christ on the palms of his hands and soles of his feet . Behind him are rock formations , shown in great detail , and a panoramic landscape that seems to relegate the figures to secondary importance . This treatment of Francis is the first such to appear in northern Renaissance art . The arguments attributing the works to van Eyck are circumstantial and based mainly on the style and quality of the panels . A later , third version is in the Museo del Prado in Madrid , but is weaker and strays significantly in tone and design . 
 Between 1983 and 1989 the paintings underwent technical examination and were extensively restored and cleaned . Technical analysis of the Philadelphia painting established that the wood panel comes from the same tree as that of two paintings definitively attributed to van Eyck , and that the Italian panel has underdrawings of a quality that it is thought could only have come from him . After nearly 500 years , the paintings were reunited in 1998 in an exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art . Today the consensus is that both were painted by the same hand . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The paintings may have belonged to the Adornes family of Bruges . A copy of a will written in 1470 by Anselme Adornes , a member of one of the leading families in Bruges , was found in 1860 . As he left for pilgrimage to Jerusalem , Adornes bequeathed to his two daughters in convents two paintings he describes as by van Eyck . He described one as " with a portrait of St Francis , made by the hand of Jan van Eyck " , ( " een <unk> <unk> dat Sint @-@ <unk> in <unk> van <unk> <unk> <unk> van <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) . 
 Anselme may have inherited the paintings from his father Pieter or uncle Jakob , who had travelled to Jerusalem on pilgrimage about 50 years earlier , returning to Ghent around 1427 or 1428 . On their return the Adornes brothers funded a replica of Jerusalem 's Church of the Holy Sepulchre built in Bruges , known as the Jerusalem chapel . They may also have commissioned the two St Francis paintings as commemoration of the pilgrimage , in the fashion of the Eyckian The Three Marys at the Tomb – attributed to Jan 's brother Hubert – a painting which may have been commissioned to commemorate a successful pilgrimage . An alternative theory is that they had the small painting prepared as a portable devotional work to bring on pilgrimage . The ownership of private devotional pieces was not uncommon – the often itinerant Philip the Good kept an altarpiece for travelling . Even more intriguing is that Philip had van Eyck paint two identical betrothal portraits of Isabella of Portugal in 1428 – to ensure one survived the trip from Portugal – which may have set a precedent that Bruges art patrons sought to emulate . Anselme Adornes almost certainly brought the smaller painting with him on pilgrimage in 1470 ; it was seen in Italy , particularly in Florence , and widely copied . In the early 1470s Sandro Botticelli , <unk> , Filippino Lippi and Giovanni Bellini each produced variations of St Francis Receiving the Stigmata that included motifs from van Eyck 's version , especially evident in the rendering of the rocky background . 
 The paintings fell into obscurity for centuries until 1886 when art historian W. H. J. Weale drew the connection between them and the Adornes will . William à Court , 1st Baron Heytesbury bought the Philadelphia painting sometime between 1824 and 1828 in Lisbon . At that time it was thought to be by Albrecht Dürer , but in 1857 the art historian Gustav Waagen attributed it to van Eyck . Heytesbury sold it to a dealer in November 1894 ; a month later the Philadelphia collector John G. Johnson bought it for £ 700 . In 1917 , he bequeathed his art collection to the City of Philadelphia . 
 The Turin painting was acquired in 1866 from the mayor of a nearby town . Previously it was owned by a professor living in the province of Alessandria ; he bought it from a former nun in that province . The documentation is sketchy , but suggests the nun possessed it early in the 19th century during the dissolution of convents in the area under Napoleon . That a nun owned the painting three centuries after Adornes purportedly bequeathed a van Eyck St Francis to his daughter in a convent , and that the Adornes family owned property in Alessandria , is suggestive , but no evidence exists to confirm a connection . 
 The technical investigations Butler conducted during her tenure resulted in worldwide collaborations and three publications . The culmination of the research came in 1998 with an exhibition at the Philadelphia Museum of Art . The exhibition was small , with a handful of paintings and a few manuscript leaves . Only two are definitively attributed to the master , the Annunciation , which came from the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , and Saint Barbara , loaned from Antwerp . Two Saint Christopher 's , one in Philadelphia and the other from the Louvre , are considered to be by workshop members . From Cleveland came a John the Baptist in the Landscape , thought to be by van Eyck followers . The Philadelphia and Turin Saint Francis paintings were both on display , reunited for probably the first time since the 15th century . 
 = = The panels = = 
 The small Philadelphia panel is painted with oil on parchment ( vellum ) ; a reconstructed red vermilion border surrounds the image – it is similar to those seen in contemporary illuminated manuscripts . It gives the illusion of the viewer looking through a window into the landscape . The parchment measures 12 @.@ 9 cm × 15 @.@ 2 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in × 6 @.@ 0 in ) ; the image measures 12 @.@ 7 by 14 @.@ 6 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 by 5 @.@ 7 in ) . Underneath are five wood supports ; the parchment is glued to one , and four smaller pieces , added at a later date , frame the image . The parchment is unusually thick and has a thin insoluble layer of primer . The wooden frames were primed in a thick layer of white , which overlaps the parchment in places . The borders were gilded at some time ; technical analysis found particles of gold leaf on the lower border . The Turin panel is painted on two oak panels joined with a band of parchment or cloth , on a ground of chalk and animal glue . 
 = = = Figures = = = 
 In both paintings , Saint Francis of Assisi kneels by a rock as he receives the stigmata that were to stay on his body until his death . The composition is tonally similar to Giotto 's 1295 – 1300 Saint Francis Receiving the Stigmata , but more grounded in earthly reality . The design is a mostly faithful representation of the original Franciscan texts , but differs in that Francis does not lean forward towards Christ . 
 Francis has individualized features , to the point that the attention to his face gives it the quality of a portrait such as van Eyck 's c . 1431 Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati . The head and face are minutely detailed . Francis is in his mid @-@ thirties , wears stubble and has a somewhat <unk> face and receding hairline . He is presented as a highly intelligent but perhaps detached and impassive individual . He is given a complex and inscrutable expression ; physiological traits not uncommon in contemporary Flemish painting . He kneels on a bed of flowers , and his heavy robe and folded drapery have a choppy and overflowing feel . His lower limbs seem disconnected , positioned in an anti @-@ naturalistic manner ; giving the impression that he is levitating . 
 Till @-@ Holger Borchert observes that Francis 's feet are positioned slightly too high above the rest of his body , making them " so bizarrely placed as to look like a foreign body " . Others have taken this as an indication of a less experienced and weaker workshop painter , but Borchert draws a similarity to two works accepted as van Eyck originals . In the " Adoration of the Mystic Lamb of God " panel of the c . 1432 Ghent Altarpiece , the prophets kneel in a similar way with their feet placed awkwardly behind them . The donor in the c . 1435 Madonna of Chancellor Rolin is in a similar pose , although his feet are not visible . While some critics view the positioning of Francis 's feet as a weakness , Joseph Rishel of the Philadelphia Museum of Art argues that the contortion is necessary to show both wounds , and that the unusual positioning adds to the mystical tone of the painting . 
 The wounds on Francis 's hands and feet are realistically portrayed ; the cuts are not overly deep or dramatic and lack supernatural elements such as beams of light . The representation of Christ in the guise of a Seraph with three pairs of wings , is an unusually fantastical element for van Eyck 's normally reserved sensibility . A number of art historians have addressed this disconnect and noted that Francis looks straight ahead and is unconcerned with the apparition . Holland Cotter described this disconnect as appearing as if Christ 's " mystical vision were somehow aural rather than visual experience , and [ Francis ] was holding himself absolutely still to catch its distant sound " . 
 Francis 's disciple , secretary and confessor Brother Leo acts as eyewitness . He is dressed in sombre colours and rendered in a more compact manner than Francis ; crouched as if sunk into the pictorial space in the far right of the panel . His form is highly geometric and voluminous . His cord belt curves down to end next to that of Francis , symbolising the continuity between the Order 's founder and his successors . Leo 's posture seems to indicate mourning , although he appears to be resting or asleep . 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 Nature is a key aspect in van Eyck 's works . According to Rishel , elements of his landscapes may appear " magically beautiful but [ are ] in fact quite oblivious to the sacred action in the foreground " . Katherine Luber believes that open vistas and lowered horizons are a hallmark . The Francis paintings seem to be early experiments with landscape ; the painter places rocks in the mid @-@ ground , solving the problem of how to transition from foreground to background ; a similar resolution is found in the lower @-@ right wing of the Ghent Altarpiece . 
 The browns of the rocks and trees echo those of the robes of the saints . The broad sweep of the mountains and city isolates the figures against the grandeur of nature and bustling human life . Behind the figures a panoramic mountain landscape soars to the sky ; the mid @-@ ground contains a variety of rocks and spikes , including strata of fossiliferous layers . As with the New York Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych , the mountains are capped with snow , which van Eyck may have seen during his visits to Italy and Spain , where he crossed the Alps and Pyrenees . 
 The paintings contain a number of highly detailed rock formations . Despite the early to mid @-@ 15th century date , the conservator Kenneth Bé observes that , to modern geologists " the details , colors , textures , and morphologies in Van Eyck 's rendering of rocks yield a plethora of scientifically accurate information " . He identifies four distinct rock types . Those in the right foreground are heavily weathered limestone boulders . There are a number of identifiable shell fossils , painted in a dark reddish brown suggesting iron or dark coloured mineral impurities . Behind them is a stratified sedimentary sequence . The mid @-@ ground contains igneous rock , the far distance a pair of jagged peaks . 
 Specialists from both art history and geology have remarked on the level of observed and precise detail found in the background . The mid @-@ ground contains a boulder with a crescent @-@ shaped form that could only have arisen from the rock face " intersecting the fossils to reveal cross sections of the shells in side profile " , according to Bé . Another boulder has closed loops . The fossilised shells are in a pattern that suggest that some of the boulders have been upturned from their original orientation . The fossils are a type of mollusk similar either to present @-@ day <unk> or brachiopods . 
 The landscape shows a fictive Flemish city . As in the diptych in New York , some buildings and landmarks can be identified with Jerusalem . It closely resembles the background of the Rolin panel , which has undergone much deeper attention from scholars , with a number of identifications made with structures in Jerusalem , including the Mosque of Omar , known to van Eyck through second @-@ hand textual and visual descriptions . People and animals populate the city walls , but some are only visible under magnification in the Philadelphia painting . The lake by the city shows a boat whose shadow is reflected in the water . Reflective water surfaces were another typical Eyckian innovation , one he seems to have mastered early , evidenced by the water scenes in the Turin @-@ Milan Hours , and which requires a considerable degree of artistry . Plants consist of tiny foreground flowers , larger mid @-@ ground grasses and background bushes and trees . The small carpet of white flowers in the foreground is reminiscent of those in the Ghent Altarpiece 's central panel ; behind Francis are dwarf palms . 
 = = = Iconography = = = 
 The Franciscan Order had a strong following by the 15th century ; its Third Order of Saint Francis attracted women and men to local lay confraternities , such as the Confraternity of the Dry Tree in Bruges to which Anselme Adornes belonged . St Francis was closely associated with pilgrimages , then popular and most often taken to holy sites in Spain and Jerusalem . He was revered for his own pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 1219 ; by the 15th century the Franciscans were responsible for maintaining the holy sites in Jerusalem , particularly the Church of the Holy Sepulchre . 
 St Francis lived austerely , in imitation of Christ . He embraced the natural world , and took vows of poverty , charity and chastity . In 1224 at La Verna , he experienced the mystical vision which van Eyck portrays . Thomas of <unk> , author of Francis 's hagiography , describes the vision and stigmatization : " Francis had a vision in which he saw a man like a seraph : he had six wings and was standing above him with his hands outstretched and his feet bound together , and was fixed to a cross . Two wings were lifted above his head , and two were spread ready for flight , and two covered his whole body . When Francis saw this he was utterly amazed . He could not fathom what this vision might mean . " As he meditated , " marks of nails began to appear on his hands and feet ... His hands and feet seemed to be pierced by nails appearing on the inside of his hands and the upper side of his feet … <unk> right side was scarred as if it had been pierced by a spear , and it often seeped blood . " To the medieval observer , the appearance of the stigmata signifies Francis 's complete absorption in the vision of the seraph . 
 The Turin and Philadelphia paintings show Francis in profile , kneeling , meditating quietly , facing away from the crucified seraph . Van Eyck eliminated the dramatic pose and rays of light causing the stigmata , which according to Snyder , are generally " essential features of the iconography " . Perhaps the wounds on the soles of the feet were intended to be concealed , because the underdrawing of the Turin painting shows Francis wearing sandals . Some scholars , most notably Panofsky , argued against the attribution to van Eyck on the basis of the somewhat arcane iconography . Others , including James Snyder , view the imagery as typical of van Eyck 's medieval view of mystical and visionary experience . 
 Van Eyck 's meticulous setting and landscape were another innovation in iconography . Generally La Verna was depicted with sparse detail , whereas here St Francis kneels in a detailed countryside , perhaps a specific spot around La Verna in the Italian Apennines , where striated sandstone is commonly found . The setting is appropriately remote . St Francis appears to stare beyond the vision to the rocks , seemingly unaffected , a common Eyckian device to illustrate a mystical vision . For example , in his Madonna of Chancellor Rolin it is difficult to tell whether the location is Mary 's throne @-@ room or whether she is merely an apparition in Rolin 's chamber – one he seemingly stares past . 
 Leo , traditionally a sleeping figure smaller than Francis , is here given equal size . Surrounded by barren rocks , he faces away from the seraph , his feet positioned near a small stream , which signifies redemption or salvation , gushing from the rocks . On Francis 's left are symbols of life : plants , a river valley , a cityscape and mountains . Snyder writes that for van Eyck a mystical vision had to be presented with great subtlety , and that in these paintings he captures the event perfectly , because Francis is shown as he is said to have reacted to the vision – kneeling in quiet meditation . 
 = = = Condition = = = 
 The panels are in relatively good condition given their age . The Philadelphia version is better preserved ; it has superior tonalities and more prominent colours . In 1906 , Roger Fry gave it a well @-@ documented restoration with overpaint removed . Fry was at the time Curator of Paintings at the Metropolitan Museum and performed restorations despite a formal lack of training ; the St Francis was the second restoration he undertook . He attributed the work to Hubert van Eyck , and thought the Turin version a copy . His removal of a section at the top revealed a red border ; he wrote that van Eyck had " conceived it as a miniature in oil on panel , and that it might indicate a date not very far removed from the drawings of the Turin Book of Hours " ( Milan @-@ Turin Hours ) . In 1926 he recorded : " When it came to me , the panel was considerably larger at the top , and dull opaque sky concealed the join where the extra piece had been added on to satisfy some owner who did not appreciate the compressed composition of the original . The sky had been enlivened ... with a crowd of small white @-@ cloud like forms suggesting the presence of a cohort of angels . " His restoration removed more than 10 centimetres ; before the restoration it measured 24 cm × 16 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in × 6 @.@ 3 in ) , afterwards 12 cm × 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in × 5 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 Further conservation was undertaken between 1983 and 1989 using a stereo microscope . Restorers removed varnish that had turned brown as well as layers of old fillers – one of which contained the pigment <unk> , not available until 1859 . They stripped paint additions from the mountain peaks , Leo 's robe and in the area around Francis 's tonsure . The removal of overpainting revealed an X that had been scratched into the original paint on the upper right stones at some unknown time . According to Butler , the removal of pigment exposed underlying paint in " amazingly good condition " . 
 The Turin panel has suffered heavy overpainting and cracking along the vertical join . The marbleized reddish @-@ brown paint on its reverse is heavily worn . In the 20th century the panel underwent three restorations and extensive technical analyses . The earliest , in 1952 , removed overpainting and repaired pigment loss to Francis 's tonsure , Leo 's cowl and areas of vegetation between the two figures . Restorers discovered an irretrievably lost inscription on a rock adjacent to the seraph @-@ Christ , and evidence of earlier overpainting of one of Leo 's feet . Continued paint loss and cracking along the join required further restoration in 1970 , when a fixing agent was applied to prevent cracking , and Francis 's tonsure was repainted . 
 Cracking along the vertical join of the wooden panels was severe enough to warrant a third restoration in 1982 . <unk> light revealed that modern varnishes had yellowed , while further overpainting was found . Working under ultraviolet light , paint from earlier restorations was removed , uncovering lost colours and landscape details , including the snow @-@ capped mountains and birds of prey on the upper left . Restorers found clues to sources of confusion in earlier restorations , especially the unusual positioning of Francis 's tonsure and Leo 's feet , which were discovered to be crossed under his body . 
 = = Attribution = = 
 Research in the late 19th century lead to what Rishel describes as " one of the <unk> conundrums in the study of Early Netherlandish art " , as efforts were made to establish authorship and date the panels in terms of precedence . The panels are neither signed nor dated , and have proved especially difficult to attribute . Establishing an approximate date of completion is usually one of the most important factor in attributing an old master painting . Dendrochronological analysis of the Philadelphia panel dated its growth rings to between 1225 and 1307 . It was established that the board was cut from the same tree as the wood of two known panels by van Eyck , the Portrait of Baudouin de Lannoy ( c . 1435 ) and Portrait of Giovanni di Nicolao Arnolfini ( 1438 ) . These have tree @-@ rings that developed between 1205 and 1383 , and 1206 and 1382 , respectively . Examination of the sapwood suggests a felling date of around 1392 . Assuming a typical 10 years of seasoning before use , any of the paintings could have begun from around 1408 onwards . The Turin version is painted on two glued boards , vertical to the image . The rings from board I are dated between 1273 and 1359 , those of board II from 1282 to 1365 . 
 Based on the perceived " faulty proportions " of the figures , Ludwig von Baldass suggested a date early in van Eyck 's career , around 1425 . He attributes the unusual positioning and anatomy to a young and relatively inexperienced painter , one who was still experimenting . He notes how the landscape and individual elements are similar to Hubert van Eyck 's style , but that the close observation of nature reveals Jan 's hand . Luber suggests a slightly later date of about 1430 , during the period van Eyck finished the Ghent Altarpiece . She bases her supposition on the fact that van Eyck 's employer Philip the Bold sent him to Portugal in the late 1420s ; he would have been unavailable for a commission until his return in 1430 . Furthermore , the landscape details , which correlate to van Eyck 's work of the period , combined with the return from pilgrimage late in the 1420s of the Adornes brothers ( who may have commissioned the two paintings ) , suggest a completion date of about 1430 . 
 A free copy from some two generations later is in the Prado in Madrid . This is in a vertical format and measures 47 x 36 cm . A large tree is added at the left , and the foreground rocks extended higher . The landscape is somewhat different , and reflects the world landscape style of Joachim Patinir , to whom the painting has been attributed in the past . This was largely because the jagged peaks in the distance have been added to and altered to Patinir 's trademark depiction of the distinctive landscape of Dinant , his hometown . This panel was attributed by Max Jakob Friedländer to a " Master of Hoogstraten " , an anonymous follower of Quentin Massys , and dated around 1510 . The awkwardness of the figures has been rectified , the placement of his feet and knees " made more rational " according to Rishel , but St Francis stares at the apparition . Another copy , placed tentatively in Brussels c . 1500 , is probably a copy of the Turin version . 
 Noting the similarity of Francis 's pose to the kneeling figure in the " Turin @-@ Milan Hours " miniature of The Agony in the Garden , Borchert , who believes van Eyck 's work as a manuscript illuminator came late in his career , concludes that both were completed after the master had died , perhaps completed by members of the workshop . Unlike Borchert , Luber thinks that The Agony evidences his early experiments with perspective , as he began to resolve the transition between foreground and background , by placing the fence in the mid @-@ ground , a device found in the St Francis through the positioning of the rocks . Luber says the underdrawings in the miniature are similar to those in the St Francis paintings , and stylistically typical of those in van Eyck 's later work , an important factor when considering attribution . 
 Although the tree @-@ ring analysis of the Philadelphia painting firmly places it in van Eyck 's workshop , the technical evidence fails to prove indisputably whether van Eyck or a workshop member painted it . Until the early 1980s it was thought that the Philadelphia panel was the original and the Turin panel a copy , but x @-@ ray analysis revealed a highly developed and sophisticated design underneath the paint that is accepted as by Jan van Eyck 's hand . Infrared reflectography further disclosed extensive underdrawings beneath the original paint ; the artist even made alterations to the composition after laying down the underdrawings and completing the painting . The underdrawings are typical of van Eyck 's work and similar to those found in the Ghent Altarpiece , thereby , according to Luber , tying the Turin version to van Eyck . 
 There are three possibilities ; the panels are van Eyck originals ; they were completed by workshop members after his death from one of his underdrawings ; or they were created by a highly talented follower compiling a pastiche of Eyckian motifs . While a majority of specialists have come to believe they are van Eyck originals , there have been significant dissenting voices in the recent past . Opinion in the mid @-@ 20th century generally favoured a van Eyck ; significantly , Erwin Panofsky expressed doubts regarding the attribution . 
 = = Research = = 
 <unk> Butler , head conservator at the Philadelphia Museum of Art , oversaw a multi @-@ national research project between 1983 and 1989 . Her team investigated the provenance of the two paintings and relationships between them through technical analyses . At that time both paintings underwent further restorations . They examined the wooden supports , parchment fibres and priming layers of the Philadelphia painting . A sample of paint was taken from the seraph @-@ Christ 's wings ; analysis found particles of pure ultramarine , the most expensive pigment at the time . The team identified red organic lake in the stigmata wounds , and vermilion and lead white on Francis 's cheeks . Infrared reflectography found a base layer of paint overlaid with hatching and fine brush strokes on an additional layer . The greenery was painted with a copper <unk> that over time has darkened to brown . The mountains and sky were painted with ultramarine and lead white . Compared to the Turin painting , the Philadelphia version shows little evidence of underdrawing . 
 Butler found the structure and details of the two paintings to be almost identical . The individual components matched " quite precisely " , but were slightly off register , raising questions as to whether one was copied from the other . The Turin painting has a simpler paint structure than the other , more extensive underdrawing , and finer pigment particles , and the colours differ . The stones in the Philadelphia painting are darker and more orange than the predominantly grey hues of the Turin rocks . The greenery in the Philadelphia version shows more discolouration than in the other . Under magnification the paintings ' brush strokes are near identical , particularly in the rendering of the clouds . 
 = M @-@ 46 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 46 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan between Muskegon and Port Sanilac , terminating near Lake Michigan and Lake Huron on each end . Except for the north – south segment that corresponds with the US Highway 131 ( US 131 ) freeway between Cedar Springs and Howard City , M @-@ 46 is practically a due east – west surface highway . The road runs through rural sections of the Lower Peninsula connecting several freeways including US 31 , US 131 , US 127 and I @-@ 75 . 
 The highway was formed by July 1 , 1919 along two discontinuous sections of its current corridor . The gap was filled in by 1927 , but a second break in the routing was created in the 1930s . This second interruption in the corridor was eliminated within a year . The various paths that M @-@ 46 has followed have been straightened over the intervening years , producing the modern corridor by the 1970s . Other changes have been made to the location of the western terminus in Muskegon , but it has remained fixed in its current location since 1984 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 46 is one of three trans @-@ peninsular highways in the Lower Peninsula , starting blocks away from Lake Michigan in Muskegon and running almost to Lake Huron in Port Sanilac . The other two highways that do this are M @-@ 55 ( Manistee – Tawas City ) and M @-@ 72 ( Empire – Harrisville ) . The highway is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like all other state trunkline highways in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highway highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This measurement is a calculation of the traffic level along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT figured that lowest traffic levels were the 1 @,@ 855 vehicles used the highway daily near the eastern terminus . The peak traffic volumes were the 30 @,@ 505 vehicles AADT along the section of M @-@ 46 immediately east of the US 31 freeway near Muskegon . The trunkline has been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) between the western terminus and US 31 , and between Cedar Springs and the M @-@ 53 junction in Sanilac County . The NHS is a network of roadways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = = Muskegon to Saginaw = = = 
 M @-@ 46 starts at an intersection between Muskegon and Apple avenues near the downtown Muskegon business district . The highway follows Apple Avenue eastward through the edge of the district and through a residential area in Muskegon to an interchange with the US 31 freeway . On the other side of the freeway , Apple Avenue runs farther east , leaving the Muskegon area and passing through the rural woodlands of Muskegon County . Along the way , the road passes the Hall Drain , an artificial reservoir . At Casnovia , M @-@ 37 merges in from the north at a roundabout intersection , and the two highways run concurrently across the county line into Kent County , turning to the southeast . A few miles later in Kent City , M @-@ 46 turns due east again and leaves M @-@ 37 to run independently along 17 Mile Road . The highway runs through more mixed agricultural land to Cedar Springs , where M @-@ 46 turns north along the US 131 freeway . 
 US 131 / M @-@ 46 runs northwards through the northern Kent and western Montcalm counties for about 16 miles ( 26 km ) near Sand Lake and Pierson . Near Howard City . M @-@ 46 leaves the freeway and turns eastward independently along Howard City – Edmore Road . The highway runs through the north side of Montcalm County connecting the communities of Lakeview and Edmore . Between Six Lakes and Edmore , M @-@ 66 runs along M @-@ 46 , a distance of around 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) . The trunkline passes several small lakes and crosses the Maple River near <unk> before crossing into Gratiot County . The highway , now called Monroe Road crosses more farm fields as it approaches Alma . North of downtown , M @-@ 46 intersects the north – south leg of the Alma business loop before meeting the US 127 freeway . East of this freeway interchange , M @-@ 46 picks up the east – west leg of the US 127 business loop for St. Louis . Although similar , the separate business loop follows M @-@ 46 along Monroe Road over the Pine River to Main Street , where it turns south through downtown . M @-@ 46 continues eastward from town through farm fields to Breckenridge . At Meridian Road , the highway follows Gratiot Road into Saginaw County east through Merrill and Hemlock to the Saginaw area . East of Hemlock , M @-@ 46 meets the northern terminus of M @-@ 52 and then the southern terminus of M @-@ 47 in Saginaw Charter Township near its crossing of the Tittabawassee River . 
 = = = Saginaw to Port Sanilac = = = 
 As M @-@ 46 enters Saginaw proper , it follows Gratiot Avenue past the Saginaw Country Club . The area around the club is filled with residential subdivisions as the roadway approaches the Saginaw River . M @-@ 46 follows Stephens Street southeasterly and Rust Avenue eastward to cross the river . The highway continues along Rust Avenue to Warren Avenue where it turns north . The highway then follows Holland Avenue , which is the continuation of Gratiot Avenue on the east side of the river . M @-@ 46 passes through an interchange with I @-@ 75 / US 23 and leaves the Saginaw area . The highway continues eastward through rural Saginaw County into the region of the Lower Peninsula known as The Thumb . In Tuscola County , M @-@ 46 passes through the Vassar State Game Area and crosses the Cass River north of Vassar . 
 The area near the river east to the M @-@ 24 junction is forested . As M @-@ 46 approaches Kingston , farms dominate the landscape again . M @-@ 46 crosses into Sanilac County just west of the M @-@ 53 junction at Van Dyke Road . Between Elmer and Sandusky , M @-@ 19 follows M @-@ 46 for about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) . The highway crosses the Black River near <unk> . The eastern end of M @-@ 46 is in Port Sanilac , just blocks west of the city 's marina on Lake Huron at an intersection with M @-@ 25 . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 46 was designated by July 1 , 1919 on a discontinuous route that ran between Howard City and Saginaw and between rural Tuscola County and Port Sanilac . The highway followed a different routing in place than it does today . The western terminus was in downtown Howard City , rather than north of town . The road ran farther south in Gratiot County so that it went into downtown Alma . By the end of 1927 , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) filled in the gap between Saginaw and Tuscola County , and the department extended the western end to Muskegon . M @-@ 46 followed the contemporary US 131 between Cedar Springs and Howard City and the modern routing west to Muskegon ending at US 31 downtown . In the middle of the 1930s , the section north of Howard City was straightened , removing the angled route between <unk> and Howard City in favor of a more direct connection to US 131 . The US 131 and M @-@ 37 concurrencies were removed , however , when the section between Kent City and Cedar Springs was removed from the highway system . That gap was eliminated in late 1936 when M @-@ 46 was routed down US 131 to Howard City and along M @-@ 82 to Newaygo . From there , it followed M @-@ 37 south to Casnovia . A new road was opened in early 1937 between <unk> and Alma , which was designated as part of M @-@ 46 by the end of the year . The western terminus was extended farther west through Muskegon to the outlet of Muskegon Lake on Lake Michigan as well . The M @-@ 82 concurrency was removed in 1938 , and a more direct routing between Six Lakes and Edmore opened at the same time . 
 By the end of the 1950s , the routing through Muskegon was altered . Instead of terminating in the park at the outlet of Muskegon Lake into Lake Michigan , M @-@ 46 was routed to follow US 16 to the car ferry docks . The last section of gravel highway was also paved in Newaygo County near the Montcalm County line . The routing of M @-@ 46 between Casnovia and Howard City was altered in 1973 when the US 131 freeway was opened north of Cedar Springs by then @-@ Congressman Gerald R. Ford . M @-@ 46 was restored to the Kent City – Cedar Springs roadway it used in the 1930s and routed concurrently along US 131 again . In the process , M @-@ 47 replaced a section of M @-@ 57 that had been designated along the 17 Mile Road in late 1948 or early 1949 . The last change to M @-@ 46 's routing was made in the early 1980s . The extension through Muskegon to the car ferry docks was reversed , truncating the highway to its current terminus at then @-@ Bus . US 31 in 1984 . The business loop was shifted away from this location in 2007 , leaving M @-@ 46 to terminate at a junction with a city street instead of another state highway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hall XPTBH = 
 The Hall XPTBH was a prototype American twin @-@ engined seaplane , submitted to the United States Navy by the Hall Aluminum Aircraft Corporation in response to a 1934 specification for new bomber and scout aircraft . Constructed in an innovative fashion that made extensive use of aluminum , the XPTBH proved successful in flight testing , but failed to win favor with the U.S. Navy . No production contract was awarded , and the single aircraft built served in experimental duties before its destruction in a hurricane during 1938 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 In late 1934 , the U.S. Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics ( BuAer ) issued a specification for new scout bomber and torpedo bomber designs . Eight companies submitted a total of ten designs in response , evenly split between monoplanes and biplanes . The Hall Aluminum Aircraft Company submitted the only seaplane design ; a single prototype was ordered by the Navy for evaluation on June 30 , 1934 . Given the designation XPTBH @-@ 1 , it became the only aircraft to receive three mission @-@ type letters under the U.S. Navy 's designation system used between 1922 and 1962 . 
 Hall 's choice of the twin @-@ float seaplane configuration was dictated by the Navy 's requirement that the new torpedo @-@ bomber design should be capable of carrying a standard naval torpedo of the type carried by destroyers . As ordered , the XPTBH @-@ 1 was intended to be fitted with Wright R @-@ 1820 " Cyclone " radial engines ; delays in design caused by Hall relocating their production facility , difficulties with the contract , and doubts about the aircraft 's performance potential led to a redesign , the aircraft becoming slightly smaller and the engines being changed to a pair of Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 1830 " Twin Wasp " radials . The changes to the aircraft resulted in it receiving the revised designation XPTBH @-@ 2 . 
 Utilising Hall 's standard aluminum tubular spar , the fuselage and wing leading edges were covered in aluminum , while the rest of the wing and the control surfaces were fabric @-@ covered . The aircraft was well @-@ armed defensively by 1930s standards , with a powered turret , designed by Hall , mounted in the nose and carrying a single .30 @-@ caliber machine gun . Hand @-@ traversed mountings for a pair of machine guns were fitted in dorsal ( top ) and ventral ( belly ) positions aft . An optically flat glass panel was fitted in the nose below the turret for use by the bombardier ; the aircraft 's offensive weaponry , consisting of a Mark XIII aerial torpedo or , alternatively , up to 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) of bombs , was carried in an internal bomb bay , the twin @-@ float arrangement allowing for a clear release of the weaponry . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Delivered to the Navy on January 30 , 1937 , the aircraft was officially presented to the public at Hall 's Bristol , Pennsylvania factory in April of that year . The aircraft 's early flight testing , starting in February and conducted by test pilot Bill McAvoy , showed that the XPTBH had few faults , with the only significant issue being a lack of roll authority – a reduction of the ability of the ailerons to turn the aircraft – as a result of the surface area of the floats . A modification to increase the area of the rudder solved the issue . The aircraft 's water @-@ handling characteristics were found to be excellent ; the only significant complaints that surfaced during the testing period concerned the XPTBH @-@ 2 's beaching gear , which was found to be extremely difficult to use in anything other than the calmest water . 
 Although the XPTBH @-@ 2 met most of its design specifications and was rated overall very good in flight testing , it failed to meet the contractual requirements for top speed and attack speed . In addition , the U.S. Navy did not consider a seagoing torpedo @-@ bomber to be an aircraft for which there was an operational requirement ; the fact that as a floatplane the aircraft was restricted to operation from water was also considered a negative , while the aircraft 's " three @-@ in @-@ one " role led it to be viewed as a jack of all trades , purpose @-@ designed aircraft for each role being considered superior . The company , however , blamed Navy politics for the lack of a production order . 
 Following the conclusion of its test program , the XPTBH @-@ 2 was used for experimental duties at the Naval Torpedo Station in Newport , Rhode Island , participating in trials of aerial torpedoes . Its service at Newport came to an end on September 21 , 1938 , when the XPTBH @-@ 2 was destroyed during the Great New England Hurricane . The XPTBH @-@ 2 was the last aircraft designed by Hall Aluminum ; the company remained in business until 1940 , when it was bought out by Consolidated Aircraft . 
 = = Specifications ( XPTBH @-@ 2 ) = = 
 Data from <unk> 1990 , Trimble 2005 , Boyne 2001 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : four ( pilot , copilot / navigator / bombardier , flight mechanic / gunner , radio operator / gunner ) 
 Length : 55 ft 11 in ( 17 @.@ 04 m ) 
 Wingspan : 79 ft 4 in ( 24 @.@ 18 m ) 
 Height : 24 ft 1 in ( 7 @.@ 34 m ) 
 Wing area : 828 sq ft ( 76 @.@ 9 m2 ) 
 Airfoil : Clark YM 
 Empty weight : 11 @,@ 992 lb ( 5 @,@ 439 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 17 @,@ 983 lb ( 8 @,@ 157 kg ) 
 Max takeoff weight : 21 @,@ 414 lb ( 9 @,@ 713 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Pratt & Whitney XR @-@ 1830 @-@ 60 radial piston engines , 800 hp ( 600 kW ) each 
 Propellers : 3 @-@ bladed Curtiss constant @-@ speed 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 182 mph ; 293 km / h ( 158 kn ) 
 Cruise speed : 170 mph ( 148 kn ; 274 km / h ) 
 Range : 2 @,@ 621 mi ; 4 @,@ 219 km ( 2 @,@ 278 nmi ) 
 Combat range : 850 mi ; 1 @,@ 369 km ( 739 nmi ) with torpedo 
 Service ceiling : 20 @,@ 400 ft ( 6 @,@ 218 m ) at 17 @,@ 983 pounds ( 8 @,@ 157 kg ) mission weight 
 Time to altitude : 5 @.@ 3 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) 
 Wing loading : 25 @.@ 8 lb / sq ft ( 126 kg / m2 ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 x .30 @-@ caliber machine guns in nose turret and dorsal position ; 1 x .30 @-@ cal or .50 @-@ cal machine gun in ventral position 
 Bombs : One Mark XIII torpedo or up to 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) bombs 
 = Wild Guns = 
 Wild Guns is a 1994 space western shooting gallery video game developed by Natsume for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Set in the Wild West with steampunk and sci @-@ fi influences , the story follows Annie and her bounty hunter Clint , seeking revenge for the death of her family . The player controls either Annie or Clint sidestepping and jumping in the foreground while shooting down enemy robots in the background and dodging enemy bullets . These gameplay mechanics combine elements from third @-@ person shooters and light gun games . 
 Development lasted five months on a small budget with a team of only three core members and two support staff . The team leads had previously worked together on The Ninja Warriors ( 1994 ) for the Super NES , and so chose to develop for that system although more powerful hardware platforms were available . Wild Guns was heavily influenced in its gameplay and artistic design by arcade games such as Dynamite Duke and Blood Bros .. The game 's scenery , characters , and sound design drew ideas from the Western film genre and the science fiction manga Cobra , creating a space western setting . 
 Wild Guns received positive reviews at its initial release , and in retrospective reviews is considered a cult classic . Critics have praised the gameplay of what has become a niche genre , the cooperative mode , and graphical attention to detail . The game was re @-@ released on the Virtual Console for the Wii in 2010 and Wii U in 2014 . A remaster titled Wild Guns : Reloaded for PlayStation 4 is due for release in late 2016 , featuring classic gameplay with enhancements such as additional characters and stages . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wild Guns is a shooting gallery game with an American Wild West setting along with sci @-@ fi and steampunk influences . The gameplay combines elements from third @-@ person shooters and light gun games in a similar fashion to Cabal and Blood Bros .. There are six levels , each with two stages , followed by a mini @-@ boss , and a third stage with a final boss . Single player and cooperative modes are available , as well as target practice allowing two players to compete to achieve the highest score . The story follows a young woman named Annie seeking revenge against the Kid family for abducting and killing her family . She seeks help from renowned space bounty hunter Clint . Although Clint says he doesn 't need Annie 's assistance , she insists , claiming she has a personal vendetta against the Kid family and is a skilled shooter . 
 The player controls either Clint or Annie in the foreground with the D @-@ pad and must shoot enemies in the background and dodge enemy fire . While holding the fire button down , the D @-@ pad instead makes the gun reticle move . Shooting and moving at the same time is not possible . While the gun is holstered , the player can jump , dive , and roll to evade gunfire . A " Look Out ! " text bubble will appear when one can dodge bullets . Some enemies will throw dynamite sticks at the player , but these can be tossed back . A lasso can be used to temporarily stun enemies . 
 Both enemies and their bullets can be shot down . Defeating enemies will sometimes reveal item boxes , which can hold precious metals such as gold and silver for extra points , and bombs . Only five bombs can be held at a time , which can be used to clear the screen of enemies . Weapon upgrades may appear after defeating certain enemies . These weapons , such as shotguns and machine guns , will increase the player 's firing speed or damage output . When a player 's bullets hit an enemy , a gauge at the bottom of the screen will gradually fill . Once filled , the player will be awarded with a Vulcan gun , the most powerful weapon in the game which grants invincibility . The gauge will then begin to deplete and the Vulcan gun will disappear once empty . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Wild Guns began when a small team of Natsume staff was asked to create a game quickly and cheaply while waiting for their next major assignment . The team consisted of three core members : <unk> Taniguchi for game design and graphics , <unk> <unk> for programming , and Hiroyuki <unk> for sound . Two other people helped as support staff . Although 32 @-@ bit hardware such as the 3DO was already available , the team chose to develop for the Super NES because the three had worked together previously on The Ninja Warriors for that system and considered it to be viable . Development of Wild Guns lasted approximately five months and was led by Taniguchi . 
 Wild Guns was heavily influenced by Dynamite Duke and Blood Bros. during development . The space western setting was largely influenced by the space western manga Cobra . The screen shaking and mirage @-@ like effects that occur after explosions were influenced by the film RoboCop 3 . When composing the music for Wild Guns , Hiroyuki <unk> drew upon the influence of a western soundtrack " Best Of " CD that Natsume had provided him . He enjoyed listening to the CD both during and after development . The game 's music was created using PC @-@ <unk> , a Roland W @-@ 30 keyboard , and a MIDI sequencer . Some sounds came from the Roland Sound Canvas series . 
 Originally , the reticle could only move up and down , and lateral movement was done by moving the player side @-@ to @-@ side ; this , however , proved to be cumbersome and was changed . The " Look Out ! " text bubble was added because of difficulty judging bullet distances due to the screen 's artificial 3D depth . Clint and Annie were designed in clothing that was emblematic of the time period , and Annie 's dress was chosen instead of jeans to avoid overlapping with Clint 's design and to enable easier animation . The characters ' names were suggested by the American Natsume offices . Due to the game 's low budget , voice actors were not used ; instead , Taniguchi 's voice was recorded in the office bathroom for Clint . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The North American version of Wild Guns was set to be released in the third quarter of 1994 and was reviewed at the time , but the release was unexpectedly delayed until the third quarter of 1995 . Reviewers at Electronic Gaming Monthly cited the cooperative multiplayer mode and challenging levels as the game 's strongest points . They declared it one of the best shooters on the SNES and compared it to the Neo Geo game NAM @-@ 1975 . GamePro praised the game for its intense action , fun cooperative multiplayer mode , colorful graphics , and ability to shoot almost any on @-@ screen object . They remarked that the game is difficult even on easy , but that players are rewarded for perseverance . Nintendo Power found the game to have good graphics and control , and complimented the presence of both male and female playable characters . However , they believed the game was not as challenging as other shooters . A 32X version was reportedly planned for 1996 , but never materialized . 
 In a retrospective Virtual Console review , IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas commended the gameplay depth and the detailed visual presentation . He acknowledged the difficulty , even on easy , but praised the game as one of the best examples of the niche shooting gallery genre . Mat Allen of Nintendo Life found the game to be an excellent example of what the Virtual Console is for : providing gamers chances to experience quality games that were overlooked in their time . He highlighted the release as providing a cheap option to play a game which has become an expensive collector 's item . Critics and Natsume themselves have acknowledged Wild Guns as a cult classic . Todd Ciolek of GameSetWatch cited Wild Guns as one of the best games in a genre that has become a lost art . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A new title called Wild Guns : Reloaded for PlayStation 4 was announced in 2016 . The game was developed by the original team and features classic characters and stages but also enhances the original by adding more playable characters , enemies , stages , and up to 4 @-@ player support . 
 = Cody Asche = 
 Cody James Asche ( born June 30 , 1990 ) is an American professional baseball third baseman and left fielder for the Philadelphia Phillies of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He is 6 feet 1 inch ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) tall , and weighs 180 pounds ( 82 kg ) . After growing up in O 'Fallon , Missouri , he attended the University of Nebraska , where he played college baseball for the Nebraska Cornhuskers , majored in economics and achieved recognition for both his athletic and academic performance . He was drafted by the Phillies in 2011 . He quickly progressed through the minor league system , briefly dabbling at second base before predominantly sticking at third base and left field . At both positions , minor league scouts regarded his defensive ability as sub @-@ optimal . 
 The Phillies called him up to the major leagues and he became the team 's starting third baseman in 2014 . Many compare his playing style , particularly his demeanor and work ethic , to that of former Phillies ' teammate Chase Utley . As a hitter , he is better as a contact hitter than a power hitter ; defensively , he has improved , which has drawn accolades from former Phillies manager Ryne Sandberg . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Asche was born on June 30 , 1990 in St. Charles , Missouri to Todd and Julie Asche ; he has a brother named Tyler . He grew up playing baseball , which he started playing with his father and brother in the yard around age five , and football , but he quit playing football in his freshman year of high school . He attended Fort Zumwalt West High School in O 'Fallon , Missouri . Playing for the school 's baseball team , he had a .425 batting average across his career and batted .512 in his senior season . He then enrolled at the University of Nebraska , where he played college baseball for the Nebraska Cornhuskers . In 2011 , Asche 's junior year , he had a .327 batting average . His 12 home runs led the Big 12 Conference , while his 56 runs batted in ( RBIs ) placed him second in the conference . He was named a second @-@ team All @-@ American . While at Nebraska , he majored in economics and maintained a grade point average ( GPA ) of 3 @.@ 407 . Because of his strong grades , he earned placement on the Big 12 Conference Commissioner 's Honor Roll , a distinction bestowed upon student @-@ athletes that achieve a GPA of 3 @.@ 0 or greater , for five of his college semesters . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor league career = = = 
 The Phillies drafted Asche in the fourth round , with the 151st overall selection , of the 2011 MLB draft . In 2011 , the Phillies moved him to second base for his professional debut the Williamsport Crosscutters of the Class A @-@ Short Season New York – Penn League . He struggled there , posting a batting average of just .192 . After the season , he was moved back to third base . In 2012 , he hit .349 with the Clearwater Threshers of the Class A @-@ Advanced Florida State League , and was promoted to the Reading Phillies of the Class AA Eastern League , where he batted .300 . Using his combined stats from all levels during the 2012 season , he led all Phillies minor leaguers with a .324 batting average , and 168 hits ; his efforts earned him two Phillies Minor League Player of the Week selections ( one in May and one in August ) , and a Minor League Player of the Month selection in May . The Phillies assigned Asche to the Peoria Javelinas in the Arizona Fall League after the season for further development , and he played in the league 's all @-@ star game and led the league in doubles with 11 . 
 Keith Law , a minor league talent evaluator for ESPN , derided Asche as a prospect both offensively and defensively , noting that he likely would not be much of a power hitter and was a questionable defender . Nevertheless , Baseball America rated Asche as the Phillies ' seventh @-@ best prospect after the 2012 season . After the 2012 season , another analyst wrote that Asche had an " average " body for a baseball player , commented that while he had limited power potential , he could be a solid contact hitter because of quick hands and " incredibly sound " hitting mechanics , but was a " terrible " defender with a " <unk> arm " . Subsequently , however , he improved defensively to become " passable " . In 2013 , Asche played for the Lehigh Valley IronPigs of the Class AAA International League ( IL ) . He was named to the IL team in the Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star Game . After batting .295 with 15 home runs and 68 RBIs for Lehigh Valley , and being named their Player of the Month for July , the Phillies promoted Asche to the major leagues on July 30 . One writer found it " mildly surprising " that the Phillies called up Asche rather than Maikel Franco , a fellow third base prospect who most thought had far more potential than Asche . 
 = = = Major league career = = = 
 = = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = = 
 = = = = = 2013 = = = = = 
 Although Asche was a non @-@ roster invitee to major league spring training , the Phillies called up Asche to give him " an extended look " at the third base position , particularly in comparison to Franco . Upon his call @-@ up , some scouts compared him to Chase Utley , particularly his demeanor . Asche hoped to emulate Utley , noting , " I can only hope someday I can be compared to that guy . " On August 8 , Asche went 3 @-@ for @-@ 5 with a double , a home run and two RBIs . He had a two @-@ run home run to right field in the fourth inning to give the Phillies a nine @-@ run lead . It was the first home run of his big league career . On September 6 , 2013 , Asche hit a game @-@ winning two @-@ run homer to lead the Phillies over the first @-@ place Atlanta Braves . Asche concluded the 2013 season with a .235 batting average , 5 home runs , and 22 RBIs at the major league level . 
 = = = = = 2014 = = = = = 
 Entering the 2014 season , most writers thought he had earned the starting third baseman 's job . Bill Baer , a writer for ESPN , NBC Sports , and Baseball Prospectus , noted that not only had Asche earned a starting spot , but that his 2013 success helped the development of the team at large . He explained , 
 " Last year , the Phillies went into the off @-@ season looking at a weak free agent market for third basemen and no realistic internal options . The Phillies opted to trade for Michael Young , which did not pan out . Considering the way Asche has played in a month @-@ plus , the Phillies don ’ t have to worry about third base at all this off @-@ season . Even better is that Maikel Franco will get a chance to prove himself at the Triple @-@ A level over an entire season . Had Asche not been an option , the Phillies may have gone with another stopgap solution , and that could have motivated the Phillies to rush Franco along faster than necessary " , – Bill Baer 
 Phillies manager Ryne Sandberg also called Asche the leading candidate for the job , noting that he would be the Phillies first homegrown third baseman since Scott Rolen . Most were optimistic on Asche 's development , though noted he is another left @-@ handed hitter in a lineup dominated by lefties , featuring only one @-@ to @-@ two righties . The Phillies ultimately demoted Franco , and Asche was named the opening day starter at third base . 
 Asche began the 2014 successfully ; on opening day , he went three @-@ for @-@ four at the plate ( 3 hits in 4 at bats ) , scored four runs , had a double , home run , and two RBIs . However , over the first month of the season , he struggled , which led to frequent replacement in the lineup by either Freddy Galvis or Jayson Nix , particularly against left @-@ handed pitchers . None of the trio produced offensively , which led to suggestions within the media the Phillies should promote Franco . On May 6 , however , he had four hits in four at bats , including a game @-@ tying grand slam in a game against the Toronto Blue Jays , though the Phillies ultimately lost in extra innings . He struggled mightily in the field on May 13 , committing three total errors , two of which occurred in an inning during which the Angels scored four unearned runs . However , after that series , Asche bounced back against the Reds in a three @-@ game series during which he went 7 for 12 with six RBIs and three extra base hits , including a three @-@ run home run . On May 25 , he was placed on the disabled list as a precaution due to a strained left hamstring . As the season progressed , Asche was the regular starter , and ultimately , he described his season as " satisfactory " , with room for improvement , while Crashburn Alley 's Michael Baumann called Asche 's season " encouraging and disappointing at the same time . " 
 = = = = = 2015 = = = = = 
 Asche began the 2015 season among the team 's hottest hitters , and a mainstay in the lineup as the team 's starting third baseman . However , in late April , he began working on skills as an outfielder , ostensibly in preparation for the arrival of minor league prospect Maikel Franco , regarded as a stronger defensive third baseman . In fact , the Phillies optioned Asche back to Triple @-@ A on May 12 to accelerate his development as a left fielder , as Franco was hitting very well in the minor leagues , and could be ready for a promotion . Although surprised and disappointed by the move , Asche sought to trust the organization and play wherever it needed him . Ultimately , Asche struggled to find playing time during the remainder of the season , although MLB.com writer Todd <unk> said that Asche would be given an opportunity in 2016 as the Phillies like his makeup , but the burden will be on him to produce results to justify the playing time , given the amelioration of other options at his positions . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 When Asche reached the major leagues , he was regarded as having decent potential at the plate , perhaps comparable to Mariners ' third baseman Kyle Seager . While he hit for power in the minor leagues , his big league power was expected to be adequate , perhaps averaging 12 – 14 home runs per season . Baseball Prospect Nation reported that he " gets pull happy when he sells out for power and ultimately swings too hard at times . " Like most left @-@ handed hitters , Asche performed better against right @-@ handed pitchers than left @-@ handed pitchers , hitting .238 off the former and .219 off the latter in the major leagues during 2013 . FanGraphs columnist Michael Barr summarized Asche 's offensive potential by writing , " He 's certainly not going to be a world beater , but having double digit home run and speed potential while hitting something in the .275 range is likely the kind of hitter than many of you could use at third base . " 
 = = = Fielding = = = 
 Though as a minor league prospect , analysts derided his defensive potential , with one calling him " terrible " , he progressively improved . Late in 2013 , Sandberg commented on his defensive improvement : " I see tremendous progress on his footwork out there , his reads on balls , his quickness , his reacting to the hops and getting the hop he wants . It looks like he 's really worked on his glove play , just using the glove along with his strong accurate arm . It 's a very true ball that he throws over there . It 's got a lot on it . I 've seen a lot of improving developments since I saw him in mid @-@ February . He 's come a long way . " 
 = = = Playing style = = = 
 New Phillies ' bench coach Larry Bowa said , " ( Asche ) reminds me of a younger Chase Utley , he gets real mad when he misses a ball , he wants to make every play , he wants to go out and work , you can 't hit enough groundballs to him ... he 's got a great attitude ... that kind of energy can invigorate a ball club . " Marcus Hayes , a writer for the Philadelphia Daily News concurred with Bowa 's comparison of Asche to Utley , calling their similarities " eerie " , and writing , " Already , Asche 's solution to failure is to ignore fatigue ; to work harder ; to improve at all costs . His objective is not necessarily to hit home runs , or to hit a big payday , but , rather , to make sure he can beat out a ground ball in late September . Sound familiar ? " Sal <unk> , the hitting coach for the Phillies ' AAA affiliate , noted that Asche also has solid intangibles , including makeup and work ethic , garnering yet another comparison to Utley . For his part , Asche said that while he appreciates the comparison , he wants to be his own player . Asche 's determination and work ethic contributed to his fast ascent through the Phillies minor league system . He is a perfectionist , who recalled a game in which he made three fielding errors as his most memorable game with the big league Phillies . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Asche is married to Angela Albers , whom he presumably met in college at Nebraska . He is a fan of football and an ardent supporter of the Nebraska Cornhuskers ; he routinely drives six hours to attend their home football games . He also " appreciates the speed and violence of hockey " ; conversely , he does not like basketball . During the offseason , he resides in O 'Fallon , Missouri , which is barely over 10 miles ( 16 km ) from his birthplace of St. Charles , Missouri . According to his MLB.com biography , his hobbies include golfing , fishing , and completing crossword puzzles . In an interview , Asche said his favorite television show was Parks and Recreation , and his favorite food was chicken <unk> . He is close to his family , and noted that he started playing baseball around age five or six , with his first experience being playing in the back yard with his father and brother . When he was first called up to the major leagues , he noted , " Emotions were crazy . Trying to hold back tears seeing your parents in the stands for the first time was tough , then playing on top of that made it a little crazy to start . But that is all part of it . I think the phone call I got to make to my parents the day I was called up was the most memorable part ... " 
 = Leofric ( bishop ) = 
 Leofric ( before 1016 – 1072 ) was a medieval Bishop of Exeter . Probably a native of Cornwall , he was educated on the continent . At the time Edward the Confessor was in exile before his succession to the English throne , Leofric joined his service and returned to England with him . After he became king , Edward rewarded Leofric with lands . Although a 12th @-@ century source claims Leofric held the office of chancellor , modern historians agree he never did so . 
 Edward appointed Leofric as Bishop of Cornwall and Bishop of Crediton in 1046 , but because Crediton was a small town , the new bishop secured papal permission to move the episcopal seat to Exeter in 1050 . At Exeter , Leofric worked to increase the income and resources of his cathedral , both in lands and in ecclesiastical vestments . He was a bibliophile , and collected many manuscripts ; some of these he gave to the cathedral library , including a famous manuscript of poetry , the Exeter Book . Leofric died in 1072 ; although his remains were moved to the new Exeter Cathedral which was built after his death , their location is no longer known and the current tomb does not mark his resting place . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known about Leofric , as his cathedral town was not a centre of historical writing , and he took little part in events outside his diocese . Little notice was taken of his life and activities ; only a few charters originated in his household and there is only one listing of gifts to his diocese . No official acts from his episcopate have survived , and there is just a brief death notice in the Leofric Missal , although no notice of his death occurs in the contemporary Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . He occurs as a witness to royal charters . 
 Leofric was probably born in Cornwall , and his parents were English . Because canon law required that a bishop be 30 years old when consecrated , it is likely that Leofric was born before 1016 . The medieval chronicler Florence of Worcester referred to him as a <unk> , which presumably meant that he was a native of Cornwall . He had a brother , <unk> , who acted as his steward and administered the family estates . Leofric was educated in Lotharingia , and may have been brought up abroad . Leofric may have gone into exile either in 1013 when Sweyn Forkbeard , the king of Denmark invaded England or in 1016 , when Sweyn 's son Cnut became king of England . His education possibly took place at the church of St Stephen 's in Toul , where the future Pope Leo IX was a canon from 1017 to 1024 and bishop after 1027 . 
 = = Service to Edward the Confessor = = 
 Before Edward the Confessor became king of England , he was exiled to the continent . Leofric served as Edward 's chaplain , although how or when exactly the two met is unknown . The historian Frank Barlow speculates that it may have been at Bruges in 1039 . When Edward returned to England at the invitation of King Harthacnut , Edward 's half @-@ brother , Leofric accompanied him , witnessing charters during Harthacnut 's lifetime along with Herman who later became Bishop of Sherborne . Leofric remained a close supporter and friend of Edward for the king 's entire life . In 1044 , Edward granted him lands at Dawlish in Devon . 
 Although a 12th @-@ century monastic chronicler at Worcester called Leofric Edward 's chancellor , this is not correct , as Edward had no chancellor at this time . Historians are divided on whether or not Edward ever had an official that could be called a chancellor , but they are agreed that Leofric did not hold such an office . 
 = = Bishop = = 
 When Bishop Lyfing died in 1046 , the king made Leofric Bishop of Cornwall as well as Bishop of Crediton . The two sees , or bishoprics , held by Lyfing became the see of Exeter in 1050 when Bishop Leofric moved his episcopal seat from Crediton to Exeter and combined it with Cornwall . The move of the see received the support of Pope Leo IX , and dates from 1051 . Although Leofric had been a royal clerk before he became bishop , after his elevation he managed to avoid entanglement in the various disputes taking place between the king and Godwin , Earl of Wessex . Instead he spent his energies on the administration of his diocese , but remained on good terms with the king . Leofric 's penitential , the Leofric Missal , still survives , and it includes a prayer for a childless king , which probably referred to King Edward . 
 The abbey church of St. Peter 's at Exeter became Leofric 's cathedral and he was enthroned as Bishop of Exeter there on St Peter 's Day in 1050 with King Edward in attendance . The king , and his wife Edith took part in the ceremony of enthronement , with both of them leading the bishop to his cathedra , or episcopal chair . Edith had dower rights to the town of Exeter , which may explain her presence at the ceremony . 
 Leofric replaced the monks with canons . The new community was given the Rule of Chrodegang by Leofric , which rule he had probably learned in Lotharingia before his return to England . Leofric moved the seat of his see because Crediton was too poor and rural , and Exeter was a city with protective walls and an abandoned church that could be used as the new cathedral . Leofric claimed that he found his diocese lacking in episcopal vestments and the other items required for church services , and his surviving list of gifts to the church noted that he gave vestments , crosses , chalices , censers , altar coverings , and other furnishings to the cathedral . 
 After the move to Exeter , Leofric worked to increase the endowment of the diocese , and especially the cathedral library , which he found almost empty upon his arrival . He later claimed that there were only five books owned by the cathedral chapter when he became bishop . He still remained on good terms with the king , for he was present at Edward 's Christmas court in 1065 that saw the consecration of Edward 's Westminster Abbey church at Westminster . No evidence survives that Leofric was employed by the king in any diplomatic missions , nor does Leofric appear to have attended any papal councils or synods . He was a supporter of the cult of Leo IX , who was proclaimed a saint after Leo 's death . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Leofric survived William the Conqueror 's 1068 siege of Exeter unscathed , although there is no evidence that he was present in the city during the siege . Whether Leofric had originally supported King Harold against William or if he supported William from the start is unclear . The fact that he survived William 's purge of the native English bishops in 1070 is evidence that he must not have been too outspoken against William . Leofric remained bishop until he died on 10 February or 11 February 1072 . He was buried in the crypt of his cathedral . When the cathedral was rebuilt , his remains were moved to the new church , but the location of the tomb has been lost . The current tomb only dates from 1568 and does not mark Leofric 's resting place . 
 During Leofric 's bishopric , his cathedral library was the fourth largest in England , and was an important scriptorium . He gave an important manuscript of Old English poetry , the Exeter Book , to the cathedral library in 1072 . Contained in the Exeter Book are a number of poems showing of all the principal types of poems composed in Old English . This manuscript is one of four main sources for modern knowledge of Anglo @-@ Saxon poetry . Along with the Exeter Book , he also gave a number of other manuscripts and books to the cathedral upon his death . Three versions of the donation list drawn up by Leofric survive , which is one of the earliest surviving cathedral library catalogues . The list consists of 31 books used to conduct cathedral services , 24 other ecclesiastical works , and 11 works that were secular . This last group included philosophical works as well as poetry . The number of manuscripts that he owned and bequeathed to his cathedral was quite large for his time . Besides the Exeter Book and the Leofric Missal , Leofric 's own copy of the Rule of Chrodegang also survives , although it is no longer at Exeter . Now it is at Cambridge University , where it is Corpus Christi College MS 191 . Another surviving manuscript from Leofric 's collection is a Gospel book written in Latin now in the Bodleian Library , which was probably acquired by Leofric while he was on the continent , as the manuscript was originally written for a Breton monastery . In all , about 20 of the manuscripts gifted by Leofric can be identified and are still extant , and only two remain at Exeter – including the Exeter Book . 
 The notice in his cathedral 's records recording his death stated that Leofric was active in his diocese as a preacher , that he built many churches in his bishopric , and was noted as a teacher of his clergy . The historian Frank Barlow describes Leofric as " an able administrator and a progressive force " and one who " exemplifies the foreign prelate at his best " . 
 = The Mermaid ( 1910 film ) = 
 The Mermaid is a 1910 American silent short comedy produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on John Gary , a hotel owner , who wants to revitalize his business . After reading about a reported mermaid sighting , he has his daughter Ethel pose as a mermaid and gets a newspaper reporter to witness and photograph the mermaid . The publicity results in the hotel becoming famous , but Ethel eventually discloses the joke to the guests of the hotel in her mermaid suit . The film was released on July 29 , 1910 and was met with mostly positive reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 30 , 1910 . It states : " John Gary runs a summer hotel at a charming spot on the seashore , but he has been unable to induce people to stop there , and at the opening of the picture he is seen lamenting the fact that there is not a single guest name on his hotel register . At this juncture his daughter Ethel returns from school . Ethel is an expert swimmer , and on reading in the paper the rumor that a mermaid has made several appearances in the water of the Atlantic , he decides to have his daughter pose as the mysterious lady of the sea . He wisely conjectures that a handy mermaid will bring guests . With Ethel clad in appropriate costume , and seated upon the rocks in true mermaid fashion , her father persuades the reporter of the local paper to take a look at the phenomenon . The newspaper man is greatly impressed with the spectacle and obtains a photo of the mermaid , which he publishes . The mermaid gains wide publicity - and <unk> arrive from near and far to see her . Tom , Dick and Harry , a trio of city sports , jump into bathing suits and the water , each bent on capturing the mermaid . She eludes them all , however , and the mystery is not cleared up until Ethel , in a pre @-@ tailored suit , presents herself to the guests and explains the joke . By this time Gary 's hotel is famous and the owner is certain of a big summer business . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Violet Heming as Ethel Gary 
 Frank H. Crane as John Gary 
 Marie Eline 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The Moving Picture World announced that the film would feature Heming and Crane , but Bowers also credits the " Thanhouser Kid " Marie Eline in an unknown role . It is unknown , but possible , that Eline may have played the role of the young boy usher . By this time , Eline had proven herself capable of handling male characters , with the first such credit as a young Italian boy in The Two Roses . Eline would also star as Hans in The Little Hero of Holland . It is unknown if Anna Rosemond , the other leading lady of Thanhouser , had a role in this film . 
 As reviewers would note , the production was not without its faults . One error occurred with the photographer improperly taking pictures of the mermaid . The developed photographs of the mermaid were also impossible given the distances involved . A more minor error in the operation of the hotel was given by the office boy who handled the arriving guests with remarkable speed . Despite these errors , the company was at the forefront of the Independent producers and given great praise by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company in The New York Dramatic Mirror . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel comedy , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 29 , 1910 . The film likely had a wide release , but another film of the same name was released by Società <unk> Ambrosio . The Ambrosio film was released on November 16 , 1910 , but several theater advertisements are ambiguous as to the film being shown . It is known that <unk> and Thanhouser films were sometimes shown together , as one Maryland theater advertisement shows , further complicating identification . The film received mainly positive reviews from critics . The Morning Telegraph found the story to have a novel way of advertising a hotel , but noted the error in the photographer 's attempt and result to photograph the mermaid . The Moving Picture World found the film to be an effective production , but spared few details and a short summary of the film . The most critical review came from The New York Dramatic Mirror which was neutral in its assessment of the production , but it provided a list of faults with the production that focused on continuity issues with action . 
 = The Blood Red Tape of Charity = 
 The Blood Red Tape of Charity is a 1913 American silent short drama film written , directed and starring by Edwin August and produced by Pat Powers . August wrote the scenario with the intent to highlight the evils of organized charity while entertaining the viewers . The film focuses on William Weldon , a telegraph lineman who is injured on the job and cannot work for several weeks . The family seeks aid from charity organizations , but " red tape " regulations prevent the family from receiving timely assistance . A gentleman thief named Marx decides to do one last job for the benefit of the family . Marx forces a doctor to treat the Weldon 's invalid daughter Alice before proceeding to rob a charity ball 's attendees . Marx pawns the stolen articles and saves the family before turning himself into the police . 
 The film was released on September 26 , 1913 and played in theaters throughout the United States . The unbilled cast list has been stated to include Lon Chaney in the role of the pawn broker . The propaganda film was billed as a popular love story by theaters , but the production was the subject of much concern by organized charities . The Charity Organization Societies sought to produce a film to counter the negative portrayal of charities in The Blood Red Tape of Charity . P. L. Whitney stopped short of directly calling the film 's portrayal dangerous , but advocated that charity members use the media to highlight the film 's faults and exaggerations . Patricia Erens would use the surviving film still of the pawn broker , claimed to be Lon Chaney by scholars , as an example of Jewish character archetypes that were prominent in silent films . The film is now considered lost . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film 's plot survives because of Universal 's publication of the details in Moving Picture News . The official description is as follows , " Charity , through excessive organization , often defeats its own purpose . William Weldon , a telegraph lineman , is the father of a large family , and finds it a hard struggle to make ends meet on his small wages . By a fall from a telegraph pole one afternoon he sustains injuries which force a lay @-@ off for several weeks . His family is left destitute and , after a time , seek aid from various charity organizations . In each case the organization promises to make a full investigation and do what they can , but by the time all the red tape and rules are complied with , the family would starve . In the meantime , Marx , a gentleman thief who has a secret retreat in the same building in which the Weldon family live , meets the invalid daughter , Alice Weldon . She tells him of the family 's condition and Marx endeavors to aid her , although at the time he is out of ready cash himself . Taking desperate measures , he holds up a doctor and forces him to attend to Weldon . Then , in company with the female leader of the gang , he attends the charity ball . There he makes a haul — plucking jewelry and trinkets from every one with whom he comes in contact . He pawns the stolen articles and uses the money to help the <unk> . After the family has recovered , through Marx 's aid , the charity organizations finally send a few dollars and a skimpy supply of food . Marx decides to reform — in fact , his reformation has been intended for some time , and his last " job " was only the outcome of his desire to do a worthy charity . He goes to the police , declares himself , and surrenders . Marx is sentenced , and while sitting in his cell a vision of Alice appeared before him , repaying him for his sacrifice and charity . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Edwin August as Marx , a Gentleman Thief 
 Unknown as William Weldon 
 Lon Chaney as a pawnbroker . 
 It is possible that Mary Charleston was a part of the cast due to the Edwin August having been noted as working with her in Powers ' productions . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to an interview with Dorothy Donnell , Edwin August wrote The Blood Red Tape of Charity with an intent on showing the evils of organized charity . August would also direct the production . Within months of completing this production , August would leave Universal . Donnell stated that August was tired of earning money for other people when he would make more under his own brand . 
 The film 's cast and credits were unbilled and very few details emerged , but the film has been claimed to have featured Lon Chaney by two scholars . Jon Mirsalis states that Lon Chaney has an unbilled part as a pawnbroker . Michael Blake also notes that Lon Chaney had a role in the film , but Blake also states that the film had only one reel and lists the production code as <unk> . Blake 's claim that it was a single reel is the subject of dispute because the release was originally as a two reel production in publications and many advertisements for the film . 
 = = Release = = 
 The two @-@ reel film was released on September 26 , 1913 by Universal Film Manufacturing Company under the Powers label . On August 15 , 1913 , prior to the film 's release , the Daily Capital Journal of Salem , Oregon contained a brief section on Edwin August which lists The Blood Red Tape of Charity as one of his latest successes . This occurs more than a month prior to the film 's release , is not known to have appeared in any other source or any known pre @-@ release viewing event . After the film was released nationwide , advertisements for its viewing included newspapers in El Paso , Texas , Chicago , Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Ohio , Nebraska , Kansas , and Pennsylvania . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jon C. Mirsalis 's website cites a review in Moving Picture World which states " There is considerable strength in the offering , but it has some bad faults . One of these is melodramatic and insincere acting . The photography is good and in spite of numerous absurdities the picture has strong moments . " Descriptive ads for the film were often informative , an ad by the Crystal Theater would indicate that August wrote and acted in the film , but also did not shy away from film 's depiction of charity organizations and instead promoted the films defining message as " Charity Organizations Pay Dearly for <unk> " . Another advertisement would cite the New York World review detailing the propaganda film 's intent to gain public attention to incite a " regeneration " of charitable organizations . An advertisement in the El Paso Herald by the Alamo Theater described the film as " a beautiful story of love , devotion and charity . It is a strong moral lesson and should appeal to the " charity workers " in this country . " The advertisement would also say the film would make viewers more charitable and good , but the film 's critique on charity workers in particular would be far from appealing or well received . 
 The film provoked a response by the Charity Organization Societies because the film 's melodramatic and exaggerated depiction of the family 's suffering due to regulation delays . The response to letters about the film the Charity Organization Bulletin wished for a scenario to be written and produced to " give a true picture of the work done by organized charity . " In the book , The Charity Organization Movement in the United States : A Study in American Philanthropy , Volume 19 , the film said to be to an attack on organized charity by a distortion of the facts . These characterizations were accurate as August 's intention to instruct and entertain audiences of the evils of organized charity makes The Blood Red Tape of Charity a propaganda film by definition . Another response by P. L. Whitney , Extension Secretary of United Charities , stopped short of calling the film outright dangerous , but noted its intent and the " poetic justice " that surrounds the two secretaries , one of whom results in Marx postponing his retirement , and later takes their jewelry to provide for the family . Whitney advised the editor and readers to keep watch for the film and use the media to highlight its faults and exaggerations . 
 Patricia Erens would use the film still of the pawnbroker , claimed by Mirsalis to be Lon Chaney , as an example of the common depictions of the Jews in her book The Jew in American Cinema . The film is now considered lost . It is unknown when the film was lost , but if it was in Universal 's vaults it would have been deliberately destroyed along with the remaining copies of Universal 's silent era films in 1948 . 
 = Sun Tea ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Sun Tea " is the sixth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by show co @-@ producers Dylan Morgan and Josh Siegal , and directed by Gail Mancuso . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on November 19 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Nate Corddry , Al Gore , Marceline Hugot , Chris Parnell , Bobb 'e J. Thompson , and Tony Torn . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) puts NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) in charge of reducing the fictional sketch comedy show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan 's ( TGS ) carbon footprint . Meanwhile , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) learns her apartment is becoming a condominium and tries to kick out the resident above her ( Corddry ) . At the same time , Jack and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) reevaluate fatherhood . 
 " Sun Tea " received generally mixed reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 858 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) learns that her apartment building is being converted into a condominium and is told that she must purchase her apartment or face a rent increase . She decides that she wants to buy her apartment and the one above her , and turn them into her dream home . When she learns that her neighbor , Brian ( Nate Corddry ) , will not be bribed out of his apartment , she agrees to move in with him , seemingly to save money , hoping to drive him out with her behavior . At work , Liz is disgusted by her staff writer , Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) peeing in bottles to stop global warming . However , she decides to adopt this behavior to force Brian to leave ; she is successful . 
 At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tells his boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , the negative impact fatherhood has had on his life . They both decide to get vasectomies from Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) . While waiting , Jack discovers the respect Tracy 's son , Tracy Jr . ( Bobb 'e J. Thompson ) , has for his father . After being put under , Tracy realizes his life is horrible because he does not have a daughter . Luckily , Jack is able to stop Dr. Spaceman before he conducts the procedure . 
 Meanwhile , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) is put in charge of reducing TGS with Tracy Jordan 's carbon footprint . He argues that Frank 's habits , albeit disgusting , are actually environmentally friendly . Kenneth gets advice from former Vice President of the United States Al Gore , who tells him to recycle everything " including jokes " . At that point , Gore declares that a whale is in trouble and runs off . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sun Tea " was written by show co @-@ producers Dylan Morgan and Josh Siegal , and directed by Gail Mancuso . This episode was the first writing credit for both Morgan and Siegal , and Mancuso 's eighth directed 30 Rock episode . Morgan and Siegal , along with series producer Paula Pell , would later collaborate on the episode " Argus " , that aired in the show 's fourth season on April 29 , 2010 . " Sun Tea " originally aired on November 19 , 2009 , on NBC in the United States as the sixth episode of the show 's fourth season . 
 This episode aired as part of Green Week , an initiative introduced by NBC 's Chief Executive Jeff Zucker which included having every primetime program which aired between November 15 and November 22 , 2009 , contain some sort of positive environmental theme . Jack McBrayer , who plays NBC page Kenneth Parcell , in regards to the environmental theme , said " It 's something that is relatable and is something that a lot of people are doing . Everybody is on board with greening up the place and being more environmentally friendly in real life . Every now and then people need to be reminded of things that can be done . " " Sun Tea " was filmed on October 23 and November 10 , 2009 . 
 In October 2009 , it was confirmed that actor Nate Corddry , best known as the brother of a former correspondent on the late night satirical television program The Daily Show , would guest star on the show as Liz Lemon 's upstairs neighbor . Former Vice President of the United States Al Gore made his second guest appearance , playing himself , with this episode . Gore first appeared in season two episode " Greenzo " . Actress Marceline Hugot reprised her role as Kathy Geiss , the daughter of Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) , for the eighth time . Don Geiss 's estranged son , <unk> ( Tony Torn ) , sues Kathy for control of the Geiss family trust fund . It is later revealed that Kathy is being represented by Teddy Ruxpin . Comedian actor Chris Parnell , who played Dr. Leo Spaceman in this episode , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . This episode was actor Bobb 'e J. Thompson 's third appearance as Tracy Jordan 's son , Tracy Jr . , on the show . Thompson first guest starred in the episodes " Gavin Volure " and " The Bubble " . 
 The character Astronaut Mike Dexter was first referenced in this episode , in which Liz considers him to be her imaginary perfect husband . In " Sun Tea " , " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) pretends to be Mike Dexter , Liz 's " crazy black boyfriend " , to help her get Brian out of his apartment . In the following episode , " Dealbreakers Talk Show " , actor John Anderson played the character , when Liz fantasizes about what it would be like following the success of her talk show , and is then notified by Mike Dexter that he has to go back to outer space . Astronaut Mike Dexter would be mentioned further in the season . 
 One filmed scene from " Sun Tea " was cut out from the airing . Instead , the scene was included on 30 Rock 's season four DVD as part of the deleted scenes bonus feature . Frank Rossitano is told to stop peeing in jars in his office and forced to use the bathroom . After exiting a bathroom in the 30 Rock building Frank runs into Kenneth and tells him " They can make me use the bathroom , Kenneth , but they will NEVER stop me from eating food in the garbage . " Frank then sees a janitors cart and picks up a half @-@ eaten egg muffin , eats it , and goes through the garbage in search for more food . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In one scene of " Sun Tea " , Jack Donaghy reveals that Don Geiss 's son , Bertram , is suing his half @-@ sister , Kathy , for control of the Geiss family trust fund . Kathy , who is outside of court and interviewed by the news media , is being represented by Teddy Ruxpin , an animatronic talking bear , who is dressed in a suit . 
 When Liz learns from Kenneth that NBC will have Green Week , she says " Oh brother , are they actually going to do something this year or are they just going to put that stupid green peacock in the corner of the screen ? " , a reference to the NBC peacock symbol having a green logo design during Green Week . As a result of what Liz said , Kenneth breaks the fourth wall , a term used when a character in a television show , film or on stage directly addresses the audience , when he glances down at the logo . 
 Tracy , under anesthetic for his vasectomy operation , dreams that he is playing actor Bill Cosby 's television character Cliff Huxtable and Tracy Jr. is Theo Huxtable from the television situation comedy The Cosby Show . 
 Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) admits to Kenneth she once took a low @-@ volume shower with actor Ed Begley , Jr . , and said " What more can I do ? " , after Kenneth told her he was in charge of reducing TGS 's carbon footprint , and that everyone has to help with this . This is a reference to Begley 's environmental activism . 
 At the end , when Al Gore says " Quiet ! A whale is in trouble . I have to go ! " , he repeats a line from season two episode " Greenzo " , in which he also guest starred . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Sun Tea " was watched by 5 @.@ 858 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It constituted a three percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " The Problem Solvers " . During its original broadcast , " Sun Tea " ranked third in its 9 : 30 p.m. slot , behind CBS ' CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which drew 15 @.@ 064 million household viewers , and ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy , which drew 14 @.@ 300 million households . 
 Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger was positive about the episode , writing " This was the strongest overall Thursday this season for NBC 's comedies , and ' Sun Tea ' brought the evening to a fine close . Not all of it worked , but enough of it did ... that I was left happy . " He opined that if the episode gave more time to Kathy being represented by Teddy Ruxpin " I would have given ' Sun Tea ' my stamp of approval " . In regards to the environment story , Sepinwall said it " tied in nicely with both Frank 's disgusting jars and the apartment plot " . Nick Catucci of New York magazine said that the episode was " <unk> with great mini @-@ sketches , gags , and flights of fancy . " Catucci enjoyed Tracy 's Cosby dream , while he was anesthetized , calling it " delightful " . The A.V. Club 's Steven Hyden enjoyed the episode , writing it was " one of the funniest and most enjoyable episodes of the season . " Hyden commented that Liz 's plot had " a string of <unk> [ sic ] jokes . But they were amusing to laugh @-@ out @-@ loud jokes . " " I wouldn 't claim that it was an absolutely top tier episode [ ... ] but what the hell , it had some pretty great moments " , said Sean Gandert for Paste magazine . Gandert enjoyed Jack / Tracy and Liz 's plots , respectively , was glad that Chris Parnell returned as Dr. Spaceman , and said that Gore " also rarely disappoints " , but was not complimentary towards NBC " [ <unk> ] its green week thing " into " Sun Tea " . Time contributor James Poniewozik observed that " the best bits " from this episode were " Teddy Ruxpin the lawyer ; the declaration that ' I , Bertram Geiss , am still Daddy 's fancy boy ' ; and , especially , the show 's treatment of the Green Is Universal mandate . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . IGN contributor Robert Canning did not enjoy the green theme in the episode , reasoning that it " just seemed to get in the way of everything else happening in ' Sun Tea ' . " He was not thrilled with Jack and Tracy 's storyline , noting it was missing heart and emotion , and overall it felt " flat " . Canning felt that Al Gore 's cameo was " fun but wholly unnecessary . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad gave " Sun Tea " a mixed review , noting " I don 't know how funny it was , though . I mean , sure , there was still a ton of great lines tonight ... but not all of them hit the mark like they usually do . " Nonetheless , Sassone concluded " ... any 30 Rock episode with Dr. Spaceman and a couple of digs at NBC 's Green Week is still a pretty good one . " Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , said this episode of 30 Rock was " even more of a comedy drag race than usual . " 
 = Hee Seo = 
 Hee Seo ( Hangul : <unk> ; hanja : <unk> ; born 13 March 1986 ) is a South Korean principal dancer for American Ballet Theatre ( ABT ) , one of the three leading classical ballet companies in the United States . She became the company 's first Korean ballerina to be promoted to principal dancer in ABT 's 75 @-@ year history and is one of only three principal dancers in the company who have worked their way up the ranks from the American Ballet Theatre Studio Company . She is also one of the youngest dancers in ABT history to be promoted to principal at the age of twenty @-@ six . The New York Times has described her style and dancing to " exude an unhurried purity that sums up all that is lovely about ballet " and by Vogue as " unspeakably lissome " . Several critics have noted her style as " lyrical and open " and she has been critically acclaimed for her " humility " and " unique feminine strength " . 
 Seo began training in Russian ballet at the age of twelve ; a relatively late start for a ballet dancer . Seo has stated on numerous occasions that she did not have aspirations of becoming a professional ballet dancer . Her teachers identified her skills and talents early on and within a short period of time she was offered full scholarships to study abroad at prestigious ballet schools . She gained further notice by winning a scholarship at the 2003 Prix de Lausanne as well as the Grand Prix at the 2003 Youth America Grand Prix . 
 She was rapidly promoted from the ABT Studio Company and joined the full company in May 2005 . She was again quickly promoted into the corps de ballet in March 2006 and then to soloist in August 2010 before finally being named as principal dancer in July 2012 by Kevin McKenzie , the artistic director of ABT . During her time at ABT , she has performed numerous lead roles in classical and contemporary ballet . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Seo was born in Seoul , South Korea . Her mother , aunt , and grandmother all studied fine arts and she , along with her two older and younger brothers , studied piano and took swimming lessons . Seo has stated that one of the reasons she has a strong relationship with her mother was because she did not have a sister . 
 In middle school , Seo was the student class president and was offered the opportunity to attend an entrance competition for the <unk> Arts School . She had been dancing for six months but had not received any formal ballet training . She entered into the competition and was awarded a scholarship to attend the <unk> . Initially her parents were against her leaving due to her young age but were persuaded otherwise by one of her teachers . Seo enrolled for one year before leaving to study ballet in a professional training program in the United States . 
 = = Training and career = = 
 Seo began her formal dance training at age twelve ; a relatively late start for a ballet dancer . Jillian Laub from <unk> has described Seo as having " the perfect body for ballet " . At thirteen , she was invited to attend and awarded a full three @-@ year scholarship to study under Alla <unk> at the Kirov Academy of Ballet ( formerly the Universal Ballet Academy ) in Washington DC . Seo has often stated <unk> was a major influence and mentor in her life . Jacqueline <unk> was also one of her teachers and helped train her for competitions . <unk> said , " Seo [ was ] the best student she has ever had " . 
 Seo won the 2003 Prix de Lausanne Award in Switzerland and was offered a scholarship by Reid Anderson to attend the John Cranko Schule . That same year , Seo won the Grand Prix at the 2003 Youth America Grand Prix . John Meehan asked her to join the American Ballet Theatre Studio Company in the following year where she stayed until joining American Ballet Theatre as an apprentice in May 2005 . 
 In the beginning , Seo 's transition to the ABT company was difficult . She had trained under the Russian syllabus at Cranko and needed to make the transition to the " American style " . Seo noted that " the ABT style is to leave the dancers alone . Individual character matters here , and dance that lacks originality cannot survive " . She was able to adapt with the assistance of her mentors who also at the time helped her overcome a serious back injury . In March 2006 , she was promoted to the rank of corps de ballet . She gained significant attention in 2009 when she performed the female lead in MacMillan 's Romeo and Juliet , La Sylphide , and On the Dnieper . She debuted as Juliet on her twenty @-@ third birthday which she has said was " one of [ her ] favorites " . 
 She became a soloist in August 2010 and principal dancer in July 2012 . She was the first Korean ballerina to be promoted to principal dancer in ABT 's 75 @-@ year history and , at age 26 , one of the company 's youngest dancers to be so promoted . Her promotion drew further attention as Seo was one of only three principal dancers in the company to have been promoted from the ABT Studio Company . Julia Moon , the Ballet Director of Universal Ballet , said that " Seo has an incredible talent , not just in dancing but also acting . I have never doubted that someday she would become a principal dancer at ABT " . Seo has been noted for her " lyrical and open " style and " unique feminine strength " by several critics including The New York Times , Dance Magazine , and <unk> . 
 Seo 's debut performance as Principal dancer in 2012 was as Princess Aurora in The Sleeping Beauty and the Swan Queen in Swan Lake . Seo has said that Swan Lake was her most challenging ballet . It is notoriously difficult for its thirty @-@ two <unk> and the lead ballerina having to dance the two contrasting personality roles of Odette , the White Swan , and Odile , the Black Swan . In an interview with Pointe Magazine , Seo said that she " prefers the mental and physical challenge of full @-@ length ballets over repertory works " . In 2014 , Seo had the opportunity to dance several full @-@ length roles in her second year as principal , when three of ABT 's senior principal ballerinas announced their retirement , placing Seo in line for several leading roles . 
 Seo models for Bloch and wears their pointe shoes . In an interview with the The Wall Street Journal , Seo stated that she " carries three to six new pairs a day and alternates them in class and rehearsals to break them in " and that she " can go through a pair a day once the shoes become too soft to support her feet " . 
 Her performances are sponsored by Pamela and David B. Ford . Seo resides in Manhattan in New York City . 
 = = Roles and repertoire at ABT = = 
 = = = Full length ballets = = = 
 = = = Other ballets and repertoire = = = 
 = 1998 Pepsi 400 = 
 The 1998 Pepsi 400 was a NASCAR Winston Cup Series stock car race held on October 17 , 1998 , at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach , Florida . Originally scheduled to be held on the Fourth of July , the race was postponed until the fall due to widespread wildfires in central Florida ; it was the first superspeedway race to be held at night , and the first time ( and , as of 2015 , the only time ) there were two consecutive points @-@ paying restrictor plate races , with the Winston 500 being run first on October 11 . 
 Contested over 160 laps , it was the thirtieth race of the 1998 season . Jeff Gordon of Hendrick Motorsports took his eleventh win of the season , while Bobby Labonte finished second and Mike Skinner finished third . Gordon retained his point lead on the way to his third Winston Cup championship title . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Daytona International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races , the others being Michigan International Speedway , California Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Talladega Superspeedway . The standard track at Daytona International Speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at 31 degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at 18 degrees . John Andretti was the defending race winner . The event was the fifth of five night races held during the 1998 Winston Cup Series season . 
 The 1998 Pepsi 400 was originally scheduled to be run on July 4 , 1998 , as the seventeenth race of the 33 @-@ event Winston Cup Series schedule . It was the first superspeedway race , and first NASCAR event held at Daytona , to be run at night following the installation of <unk> lighting at the Daytona International Speedway ; it was also scheduled to be broadcast live on CBS , the first stock car event to be televised live on primetime network television . 
 During the days leading up to the scheduled start of practice at 3pm , Thursday , July 2 , 1998 , concerns rose on account of the massive wildfire outbreak that was underway in central Florida ; thousands of people were forced to evacuate the area , and Interstate 95 , the primary north – south thoroughfare through the region , was closed . At 10am on July 2 , NASCAR announced that the race was being postponed ; while July 25 was an open date , the decision was made to reschedule the race for October 17 , to allow additional time for the wildfires to be controlled . At the time of the postponement , the race was sold out ; this was the first time the summer race at Daytona International Speedway had achieved sellout status . 
 The rescheduling meant that the race would not be televised on CBS , as the network did not want to compete against Fox 's broadcast of Game 1 of the Major League Baseball World Series , also scheduled for October 17 . On July 21 , it was announced that The Nashville Network , a cable affiliate of CBS , would air the rescheduled race live in its entirety . 
 Prior to the race , Jeff Gordon led the Drivers ' Championship with <unk> points , and Mark Martin was in second with <unk> points . Dale Jarrett was third in the Drivers ' Championship with <unk> points , Rusty Wallace was fourth with <unk> points , and Jeff Burton was in fifth with <unk> points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was tied with Ford for the lead with 216 points each ; Pontiac followed in third with 138 points . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Practice and first round qualifying was held on Thursday , October 15 , 1998 ; Bobby Labonte led pre @-@ qualifying practice with a lap time of 46 @.@ 722 seconds . Five Ford teams , those of drivers Chad Little , Jimmy Spencer , Rich Bickle , Dick Trickle and Billy <unk> , ran Thunderbird @-@ bodied race cars , instead of the standard Taurus ran at most 1998 Winston Cup Series races , believing the Thunderbird to have an aerodynamic advantage at the restrictor plate racetracks . Randal Ritter 's car failed to pass inspection due to extreme irregularities in its construction , and the team withdrew before practice began . 
 Bobby Labonte posted the fastest time in first round qualifying , a lap of 46 @.@ 485 seconds ( 193 @.@ 611 miles per hour ( 311 @.@ 587 km / h ) ) , winning the Bud Pole Award ; Jeff Burton was second fastest . Jeremy Mayfield qualified 25th , the last car to qualify for the race on the first day of time trials . Second round qualifying was held during the afternoon on Friday , October 16 ; the fastest car in the session , placing 26th on the starting grid , was the No. 07 Chevrolet driven by Dan Pardus , qualifying at a speed of 189 @.@ 945 miles per hour ( 305 @.@ 687 km / h ) . Kenny Wallace and Rich Bickle also improved their qualifying times and made the starting field for the race ; Bickle was the slowest car to qualify on time , at 188 @.@ 608 miles per hour ( 303 @.@ 535 km / h ) . Bobby Hamilton , Jimmy Spencer , Ricky Craven , Johnny Benson , Jr . , Ricky Rudd , Kyle Petty and Darrell Waltrip received provisional starting positions ; Rick Mast , Dick Trickle , Rick Wilson , Robert Pressley and Gary <unk> failed to make the field for the event . 
 Ernie Irvan , 14th in Winston Cup Series points entering the event , opted to sit out the majority of practice and qualifying , having suffered injuries in a crash the previous week at Talladega Superspeedway ; Ricky Craven practiced and qualified the No. 36 Pontiac for Irvan . Irvan did run a few laps during practice on Friday night , October 16 ; the " Happy Hour " practice session began at 7 : 30pm and was scheduled to run for two and a half hours , but was delayed during its duration for an hour and 45 minutes , as the track was dried following afternoon thunderstorms . Bobby Hamilton posted the fastest speed in the session , 191 @.@ 345 miles per hour ( 307 @.@ 940 km / h ) . Johnny Benson 's car suffered a hood failure during the session , the hood flying off of the car . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race was held starting at 8pm on Saturday , October 17 , 1998 . Ernie Irvan dropped to the rear of the field prior to the start of the race , due to a driver change ; Ricky Craven had qualified the car . Although Bobby Labonte started on pole , Dale Jarrett , who had started third , led the first lap of the race ; Dale Earnhardt took the lead on lap two and held it through the first caution period of the race , for rain , for three laps starting at lap 13 . A large crash occurred on lap 32 ; initiated by Kevin Lepage losing control of his car in turn two , the wreck collected eleven cars , including Hut Stricklin , Geoff Bodine and three @-@ time Winston Cup champion Darrell Waltrip ; Earnhardt lost the lead during pit stops under caution to Rusty Wallace , with Dave <unk> pitting a lap later than the leaders to pick up five bonus points for leading a lap . Lepage suffered a fractured shoulder in a fall exiting his car . 
 The race resumed on lap 39 ; after Earnhardt took the lead for one lap at lap 44 Jarrett assumed the lead and held it for the next 37 laps , until pit stops shuffled the field and saw Earnhardt , Jeff Gordon , and Bobby Labonte swapping the lead among themselves . Jimmy Spencer and Jeremy Mayfield each also led a single lap during the long green @-@ flag period that ended on lap 107 when Dan Pardus hit the wall in turn two . Gordon had been leading at the time of the caution ; he lost the lead to rookie Kenny Irwin , Jr. during pit stops , and Irwin retained the lead after the resumption of racing on lap 110 , leading 15 laps in total until being passed by Gordon on lap 123 on account of having a flat tire , just before the caution came out once again for a rain shower . 
 The brief four @-@ lap caution saw Gordon retaining the lead ; he continued to pace the field as Irwin , on lap 141 , hit the Thunderbird of Chad Little , setting off a nine @-@ car accident that brought out a caution . Gordon continued to lead on the restart , and on lap 155 , five laps from the finish of the event , rain began to fall once again ; the caution flag was thrown , then the red flag , stopping the race to allow the track to be dried and the event to finish under green . 
 After a 37 @-@ minute red flag period , the race resumed ; Gordon was able to hold off his challengers over the final three laps to take his eleventh win of the season . In the midst of the final sprint , Chad Little ended up getting turned from behind by Jimmy Spencer while in a three wide battle exiting turn 4 and crashed hard into the inside wall , failing to make it to the stripe and finishing 20th . Gordon set an average speed of 144 @.@ 549 miles per hour ( 232 @.@ 629 km / h ) while leading 49 of the race 's 160 laps . Gordon received $ 184 @,@ 325 in purse money . Bobby Labonte finished second ; Mike Skinner was third , while Jeremy Mayfield and Rusty Wallace finished in the top five . The fastest lap of the race was set by Dale Earnhardt , at 191 @.@ 383 miles per hour ( 308 @.@ 001 km / h ) . 
 Gordon , who had entered the race with the points lead , extended it to 358 points over Mark Martin ; nobody would challenge Gordon over the remainder of the season , and he would go on to win his third Winston Cup Series championship ; he was the youngest driver to accomplish the feat . The race took two hours , forty @-@ six minutes , and two seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 176 seconds . 
 = = = Statistical notes = = = 
 The 1998 Pepsi 400 was the only Winston Cup Series start by Dan Pardus , and the last by Billy <unk> . It was also the last race for which Rick Wilson attempted to qualify . 
 The Pepsi 400 would return to its traditional July date in 1999 , and has been held at night every year since the 1998 event , except in 2014 when it was postponed to Sunday due to rain . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = Hubble Deep Field = 
 The Hubble Deep Field ( HDF ) is an image of a small region in the constellation Ursa Major , constructed from a series of observations by the Hubble Space Telescope . It covers an area about 2 @.@ 6 arcminutes on a side , about one 24 @-@ millionth of the whole sky , which is equivalent in angular size to a tennis ball at a distance of 100 metres . The image was assembled from 342 separate exposures taken with the Space Telescope 's Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 over ten consecutive days between December 18 and December 28 , 1995 . 
 The field is so small that only a few foreground stars in the Milky Way lie within it ; thus , almost all of the 3 @,@ 000 objects in the image are galaxies , some of which are among the youngest and most distant known . By revealing such large numbers of very young galaxies , the HDF has become a landmark image in the study of the early universe , with the associated scientific paper having received over 900 citations by the end of 2014 . 
 Three years after the HDF observations were taken , a region in the south celestial hemisphere was imaged in a similar way and named the Hubble Deep Field South . The similarities between the two regions strengthened the belief that the universe is uniform over large scales and that the Earth occupies a typical region in the Universe ( the cosmological principle ) . A wider but shallower survey was also made as part of the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey . In 2004 a deeper image , known as the Hubble Ultra @-@ Deep Field ( <unk> ) , was constructed from a few months of light exposure . The <unk> image was at the time the most sensitive astronomical image ever made at visible wavelengths , and it remained so until the Hubble <unk> Deep Field ( XDF ) was released in 2012 . 
 = = Conception = = 
 One of the key aims of the astronomers who designed the Hubble Space Telescope was to use its high optical resolution to study distant galaxies to a level of detail that was not possible from the ground . Positioned above the atmosphere , Hubble avoids atmospheric airglow allowing it to take more sensitive visible and ultraviolet light images than can be obtained with seeing @-@ limited ground @-@ based telescopes ( when good adaptive optics correction at visible wavelengths becomes possible , 10 m ground @-@ based telescopes may become competitive ) . Although the telescope 's mirror suffered from spherical aberration when the telescope was launched in 1990 , it could still be used to take images of more distant galaxies than had previously been obtainable . Because light takes billions of years to reach Earth from very distant galaxies , we see them as they were billions of years ago ; thus , extending the scope of such research to increasingly distant galaxies allows a better understanding of how they evolve . 
 After the spherical aberration was corrected during Space Shuttle mission STS @-@ 61 in 1993 , the improved imaging capabilities of the telescope were used to study increasingly distant and faint galaxies . The Medium Deep Survey ( MDS ) used the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 ( WFPC2 ) to take deep images of random fields while other instruments were being used for scheduled observations . At the same time , other dedicated programs focused on galaxies that were already known through ground @-@ based observation . All of these studies revealed substantial differences between the properties of galaxies today and those that existed several billion years ago . 
 Up to 10 % of the HST 's observation time is designated as Director 's Discretionary ( DD ) Time , and is typically awarded to astronomers who wish to study unexpected transient phenomena , such as supernovae . Once Hubble 's corrective optics were shown to be performing well , Robert Williams , the then @-@ director of the Space Telescope Science Institute , decided to devote a substantial fraction of his DD time during 1995 to the study of distant galaxies . A special Institute Advisory Committee recommended that the WFPC2 be used to image a " typical " patch of sky at a high galactic latitude , using several optical filters . A working group was set up to develop and implement the project . 
 = = Target selection = = 
 The field selected for the observations needed to fulfill several criteria . It had to be at a high galactic latitude , because dust and obscuring matter in the plane of the Milky Way 's disc prevents observations of distant galaxies at low galactic latitudes . The target field had to avoid known bright sources of visible light ( such as foreground stars ) , and infrared , ultraviolet and X @-@ ray emissions , to facilitate later studies at many wavelengths of the objects in the deep field , and also needed to be in a region with a low background infrared ' cirrus ' , the diffuse , wispy infrared emission believed to be caused by warm dust grains in cool clouds of hydrogen gas ( H I regions ) . 
 These criteria restricted the field of potential target areas . It was decided that the target should be in Hubble 's ' continuous viewing zones ' ( <unk> ) — the areas of sky which are not occulted by the Earth or the moon during Hubble 's orbit . The working group decided to concentrate on the northern CVZ , so that northern @-@ hemisphere telescopes such as the Keck telescopes , the Kitt Peak National Observatory telescopes and the Very Large Array ( VLA ) could conduct follow @-@ up observations . 
 Twenty fields satisfying these criteria were initially identified , from which three optimal candidate fields were selected , all within the constellation of Ursa Major . Radio snapshot observations with the VLA ruled out one of these fields because it contained a bright radio source , and the final decision between the other two was made on the basis of the availability of guide stars near the field : Hubble observations normally require a pair of nearby stars on which the telescope 's Fine Guidance Sensors can lock during an exposure , but given the importance of the HDF observations , the working group required a second set of back @-@ up guide stars . The field that was eventually selected is located at a right ascension of <unk> 36m <unk> and a declination of + 62 ° 12 ′ 58 ″ ; it is approximately 2 @.@ 6 arcminutes in width , or 1 / 12 the width of the Moon . The area is approximately 1 / 28 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of the total area of the sky . 
 = = Observations = = 
 Once a field had been selected , an observing strategy had to be developed . An important decision was to determine which filters the observations would use ; WFPC2 is equipped with forty @-@ eight filters , including narrowband filters isolating particular emission lines of astrophysical interest , and broadband filters useful for the study of the colours of stars and galaxies . The choice of filters to be used for the HDF depended on the ' throughput ' of each filter — the total proportion of light that it allows through — and the spectral coverage available . Filters with <unk> overlapping as little as possible were desirable . 
 In the end , four broadband filters were chosen , centred at wavelengths of 300 nm ( near @-@ ultraviolet ) , 450 nm ( blue light ) , 606 nm ( red light ) and 814 nm ( near @-@ infrared ) . Because the quantum efficiency of Hubble 's detectors is quite low at 300 nm , the noise in observations at this wavelength is primarily due to CCD noise rather than sky background ; thus , these observations could be conducted at times when high background noise would have harmed the efficiency of observations in other passbands . 
 Between December 18 and December 28 , 1995 — during which time Hubble orbited the Earth about 150 times — 342 images of the target area in the chosen filters were taken . The total exposure times at each wavelength were 42 @.@ 7 hours ( 300 nm ) , 33 @.@ 5 hours ( 450 nm ) , 30 @.@ 3 hours ( 606 nm ) and 34 @.@ 3 hours ( 814 nm ) , divided into 342 individual exposures to prevent significant damage to individual images by cosmic rays , which cause bright streaks to appear when they strike CCD detectors . A further 10 Hubble orbits were used to make short exposures of flanking fields to aid follow @-@ up observations by other instruments . 
 = = Data processing = = 
 The production of a final combined image at each wavelength was a complex process . Bright pixels caused by cosmic ray impacts during exposures were removed by comparing exposures of equal length taken one after the other , and identifying pixels that were affected by cosmic rays in one exposure but not the other . Trails of space debris and artificial satellites were present in the original images , and were carefully removed . 
 Scattered light from the Earth was evident in about a quarter of the data frames , creating a visible " X " pattern on the images . This was removed by taking an image affected by scattered light , aligning it with an unaffected image , and subtracting the unaffected image from the affected one . The resulting image was smoothed , and could then be subtracted from the bright frame . This procedure removed almost all of the scattered light from the affected images . 
 Once the 342 individual images were cleaned of cosmic @-@ ray hits and corrected for scattered light , they had to be combined . Scientists involved in the HDF observations pioneered a technique called ' drizzling ' , in which the pointing of the telescope was varied minutely between sets of exposures . Each pixel on the WFPC2 CCD chips recorded an area of sky 0 @.@ 09 arcseconds across , but by changing the direction in which the telescope was pointing by less than that between exposures , the resulting images were combined using sophisticated image @-@ processing techniques to yield a final angular resolution better than this value . The HDF images produced at each wavelength had final pixel sizes of 0 @.@ <unk> arcseconds . 
 The data processing yielded four monochrome images ( at 300 nm , 450 nm , 606 nm and 814 nm ) , one at each wavelength . One image was designated as red ( 814 nm ) , the second as green ( 606 nm ) and the third as blue ( 450 nm ) , and the three images were combined to give a colour image . Because the wavelengths at which the images were taken do not correspond to the wavelengths of red , green and blue light , the colours in the final image only give an approximate representation of the actual colours of the galaxies in the image ; the choice of filters for the HDF ( and the majority of Hubble images ) was primarily designed to maximize the scientific utility of the observations rather than to create colours corresponding to what the human eye would actually perceive . 
 = = Contents of the Deep Field = = 
 The final images were released at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in January 1996 , and revealed a plethora of distant , faint galaxies . About 3 @,@ 000 distinct galaxies could be identified in the images , with both irregular and spiral galaxies clearly visible , although some galaxies in the field are only a few pixels across . In all , the HDF is thought to contain fewer than twenty galactic foreground stars ; by far the majority of objects in the field are distant galaxies . 
 There are about fifty blue point @-@ like objects in the HDF . Many seem to be associated with nearby galaxies , which together form chains and arcs : these are likely to be regions of intense star formation . Others may be distant quasars . Astronomers initially ruled out the possibility that some of the point @-@ like objects are white dwarfs , because they are too blue to be consistent with theories of white dwarf evolution prevalent at the time . However , more recent work has found that many white dwarfs become bluer as they age , lending support to the idea that the HDF might contain white dwarfs . 
 = = Scientific results = = 
 The HDF data provided extremely rich material for cosmologists to analyse and by late 2014 the associated scientific paper for the image had received over 900 citations . One of the most fundamental findings was the discovery of large numbers of galaxies with high redshift values . 
 As the Universe expands , more distant objects recede from the Earth faster , in what is called the Hubble Flow . The light from very distant galaxies is significantly affected by the cosmological redshift . While quasars with high redshifts were known , very few galaxies with redshifts greater than one were known before the HDF images were produced . The HDF , however , contained many galaxies with redshifts as high as six , corresponding to distances of about 12 billion light @-@ years . Due to redshift the most distant objects in the HDF ( Lyman @-@ break galaxies ) are not actually visible in the Hubble images ; they can only be detected in images of the HDF taken at longer wavelengths by ground @-@ based telescopes . 
 The HDF galaxies contained a considerably larger proportion of disturbed and irregular galaxies than the local universe ; galaxy collisions and mergers were more common in the young universe as it was much smaller than today . It is believed that giant elliptical galaxies form when spirals and irregular galaxies collide . 
 The wealth of galaxies at different stages of their evolution also allowed astronomers to estimate the variation in the rate of star formation over the lifetime of the Universe . While estimates of the redshifts of HDF galaxies are somewhat crude , astronomers believe that star formation was occurring at its maximum rate 8 – 10 billion years ago , and has decreased by a factor of about 10 since then . 
 Another important result from the HDF was the very small number of foreground stars present . For years astronomers had been puzzling over the nature of dark matter , mass which seems to be undetectable but which observations implied made up about 90 % of the mass of the Universe . One theory was that dark matter might consist of Massive Astrophysical Compact Halo Objects ( <unk> ) — faint but massive objects such as red dwarfs and planets in the outer regions of galaxies . The HDF showed , however , that there were not significant numbers of red dwarfs in the outer parts of our galaxy . 
 = = <unk> followup = = 
 Very @-@ high redshift objects ( Lyman @-@ break galaxies ) cannot be seen in visible light and generally are detected in infrared or submillimetre wavelength surveys of the HDF instead . Observations with the Infrared Space Observatory ( ISO ) indicated infrared emission from 13 galaxies visible in the optical images , attributed to large quantities of dust associated with intense star formation . Infrared observations have also been made with the Spitzer Space Telescope . Submillimeter observations of the field have been made with SCUBA on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope , initially detecting 5 sources , although with very low resolution . Observations have also been made with the Subaru telescope in Hawaii . 
 X @-@ ray observations by the Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory revealed six sources in the HDF , which were found to correspond to three elliptical galaxies : one spiral galaxy , one active galactic nucleus and one extremely red object , thought to be a distant galaxy containing a large amount of dust absorbing its blue light emissions . 
 Ground @-@ based radio images taken using the VLA revealed seven radio sources in the HDF , all of which correspond to galaxies visible in the optical images . The field has also been surveyed with the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope and the MERLIN array of radio telescopes at 1 @.@ 4 GHz ; the combination of VLA and MERLIN maps made at wavelengths of 3 @.@ 5 and 20 cm have located 16 radio sources in the HDF @-@ N field , with many more in the flanking fields . Radio images of some individual sources in the field have been made with the European VLBI Network at 1 @.@ 6 GHz with a higher resolution than the Hubble maps . 
 = = Subsequent HST observations = = 
 An HDF counterpart in the southern celestial hemisphere was created in 1998 : the HDF @-@ South . Created using a similar observing strategy , the HDF @-@ S was very similar in appearance to the original HDF . This supports the cosmological principle that at its largest scale the Universe is homogeneous . The HDF @-@ S survey used the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph ( STIS ) and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi @-@ Object Spectrometer ( NICMOS ) instruments installed on the HST in 1997 ; the Hubble Deep Field has since been re @-@ observed several times using WFPC2 , as well as by the NICMOS and STIS instruments . Several supernova events were detected by comparing the first and second epoch observations of the HDF @-@ N. 
 A wider survey , but less sensitive , was carried out as part of the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey ; a section of this was then observed for longer to create the Hubble Ultra @-@ Deep Field , which was the most sensitive optical deep field image for years until the Hubble <unk> Deep Field was completed in 2012 . Images from the Extreme Deep Field , or XDF , were released on 26 September 2012 to a number of media agencies . Images released in the XDF show galaxies which are now believed to have formed in the first 500 million years following the Big Bang . 
 = Laie Hawaii Temple = 
 Laie Hawaii Temple is a temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) located on the northeast shore of the Hawaiian island of Oʻahu . The temple sits on a small hill , a half @-@ mile from the Pacific Ocean , in the town of Lāʻie , 35 miles ( 56 km ) from Honolulu . Along with Brigham Young University – Hawaii and the Polynesian Cultural Center , the Laie Hawaii Temple plays an important role in the town of <unk> <unk> , with the Visitors ' Center attracting more than 100 @,@ 000 people annually . 
 In addition to initial building and construction , the temple has been dedicated for use by several presidents of the LDS Church . The temple site was dedicated by Joseph F. Smith on June 1 , 1915 , with Heber J. Grant dedicating the completed structure on November 27 , 1919 . Spencer W. Kimball rededicated the Temple after significant expansion on June 13 , 1978 . After seismic upgrades and remodeling , Thomas S. Monson rededicated the Temple on November 21 , 2010 . 
 The Laie Hawaii Temple was the first temple built by the LDS Church outside of the continental United States . The temple is also the oldest to operate outside of Utah , and the fifth @-@ oldest LDS temple still in operation . The Laie Hawaii Temple was formerly known as the Hawaiian Temple or the Hawaii Temple until the implementation of the standard naming convention for LDS temples . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sandwich Islands Mission = = = 
 During the California Gold Rush , the first ten Mormon missionaries to Hawaii departed San Francisco on the ship <unk> of Muscat . After 20 days at sea , the ship arrived on December 12 , 1850 , in Honolulu Harbor at what was then known as the " Sandwich Islands " ( Hawaiian Islands ) . A week later , nine missionaries received their assignments ; two headed to the island of Kaua 'i , three to Lahaina on the island of Maui , two to the Big Island of Hawaii , and two stayed behind in Honolulu . These nine missionaries formed the basis of the Sandwich Islands Mission . The first LDS Church congregation in Hawaii was established on the island of Maui in 1851 . Missionaries settled on the island of Lānaʻi in 1854 , and in Lāʻie on the island of Oʻahu in 1865 . 
 = = = Lāʻie = = = 
 In 1865 , the Church purchased a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 24 km2 ) sugarcane plantation as a gathering place for the Latter @-@ day Saints in the area . While on a mission to the Sandwich Islands , Joseph F. Smith first proposed building a temple in Hawaii during a meeting in Lāʻie on February 15 , 1885 . George Q. Cannon , one of the original ten missionaries , visited Lāʻie in 1900 and became revered as a prophet for promoting the idea of a new Hawaiian temple among his congregations . 
 In 1915 , Joseph F. Smith , then sixth president of the LDS Church , announced plans for the first temple outside the continental United States and chose Lāʻie for its construction . According to Mormon folklore , precious materials arrived just in time to complete the building of the temple : Temple builders ran out of wood ( a scarce commodity on the islands ) during initial construction , but local members received lumber when a ship ran aground and needed to unload some of its cargo of wood . The temple builders volunteered to help the ship and were given the lumber out of gratitude . The lumber taken from the ship proved to be just enough to finish the temple . 
 When news of the new Laie Hawaii Temple reached Native Hawaiian converts ( and other Polynesians ) living far from home in the town of Iosepa , Utah , many decided to emigrate back to Hawaii . Although the Hawaiians had lived in Iosepa since 1889 , the closest temple , Salt Lake Temple , was 75 miles away from the colony . Moving to Laie gave the Hawaiians the ability to be closer to the new temple and allowed them to perform sacred ordinances without having to travel great distances . By January 1917 , most of the Hawaiians returned home , leaving Iosepa a ghost town . 
 LDS Church President Heber J. Grant presided over the Hawaiian Temple 's dedication on November 27 , 1919 . Grant called the Hawaiian people " descendants of Lehi " ( a prophet in the Book of Mormon ) , and saw the future of the new temple in Lāʻie as a magnet for Polynesian converts . After the temple was completed , more Polynesians moved to Lāʻie , hoping to participate in temple ordinances . Tourists were also drawn to the area , and guide books of the time compared the Lāʻie temple to the Taj Mahal . 
 The 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor gave rise to another popular tale about the Laie Hawaii Temple in Mormon folklore . According to variations on this story , Japanese aircraft pilots attempted to bomb or strafe the Hawaiian Temple just prior to , or just after , the attack , but were thwarted by mechanical failure or from an unseen protective force . Some stories suggest that the Japanese pilot who attempted to attack the temple was converted to the LDS Church after he saw a picture of the temple in the possession of Mormon missionaries in Japan . Although there is an eyewitness who believes he saw the attempted bombing and a former missionary who says he met the Japanese convert , historians have found little supporting evidence that would substantiate these stories . 
 = = = Renovation = = = 
 Beginning in May 1976 , the temple was closed for a two @-@ year remodeling project , expanding from 10 @,@ 500 square feet ( 980 m2 ) to over 47 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 400 m2 ) . Church president Spencer W. Kimball rededicated the temple on June 13 , 1978 . 
 A $ 5 @.@ 5 million renovation , renewal , and beautification project along Hale <unk> Boulevard leading to the temple began in 2003 , lasting 14 months : Norfolk pines suffering from termite infestation were replaced with royal palms , new decorative lighting was added to the terraces , and landscaped roundabouts were put in place . At the same time , the Visitors ' Center was upgraded with interactive kiosks and new displays . 
 In December 2008 , the Laie Hawaii Temple closed again for structural and seismic upgrades and to restore the ordinance rooms to their original appearance and progressive @-@ style presentation of the endowment ( still using film ) . The baptistry was repaired and renovated . The temple was rededicated on November 21 , 2010 , by Thomas S. Monson . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 LDS Church president Joseph F. Smith wanted the architecture of the Laie Hawaii Temple to resemble Solomon 's Temple referred to in the biblical canon . The temple is often compared to the Cardston Alberta Temple , designed by young architects Hyrum Pope and Harold W. Burton . Pope and Burton 's design was also used for Laie , and their work is rooted in the Prairie style architecture made popular by architect Frank Lloyd Wright in the early twentieth @-@ century . The temples also evoke Mesoamerican architectural motifs , a favored theme of Burton 's . 
 The temple sits on an 11 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) site that was once part of a large sugarcane plantation . Construction of the temple first began in February 1916 . Native materials consisting of crushed lava rock were used to build the temple , along with reinforced concrete . The building 's gleaming white finish was created using pneumatic stone @-@ cutting techniques . The temple has the shape of a cross when seen from the air ; the highest point of the temple is 50 ft ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) , and it measures 102 ft ( 31 @.@ 1 m ) from east to west and 78 ft ( 23 @.@ 8 m ) from north to south . The front exterior was designed in the form of a Greek cross , but lacks a tower , a rarity in LDS Church temples . Apart from the Laie Hawaii Temple , only two other church temples lack towers or spires : the Cardston Alberta Temple and the Mesa Arizona Temple . 
 The exterior of the temple exhibits four large friezes planned by American sculptor J. Leo Fairbanks and built with the help of his brother Avard Fairbanks . Modeled four @-@ fifths lifesize and cast in concrete , the bas @-@ relief friezes depict God ’ s dealings with Man . The north frieze depicts the story of the Book of Mormon . The west frieze shows the people of the Old Testament . The New Testament and the Apostasy are depicted on the southern frieze of the temple , and the restoration of the Church through Joseph Smith is shown on the east frieze . On the grounds of the temple are statues also designed by the Fairbanks brothers , including Joseph being blessed by his father and one of the Prophet Lehi in a scene from the Second Book of Nephi in the Book of Mormon . 
 As visitors approach the temple and pass a number of reflecting pools , a maternity fountain sits in front of the uppermost pool . Designed by the Fairbanks brothers , this bold relief honors Hawaiian Motherhood and depicts a Hawaiian mother holding a giant clam shell while pouring water over her children . The act is supposed to symbolize mothers pouring their love , hope and care onto their children . 
 The landscaped temple grounds contain tropical gardens , with plants such as hibiscus , Brazilian plume , birds of paradise , lantana , red ginger , bougainvillea , <unk> , <unk> , and others . At the base of the temple grounds is a fountain separating an LDS Family History Center and a Visitors ' Center , where a ten @-@ foot sculpture replica of Bertel Thorvaldsen 's Christus stands inside the entrance . 
 The Laie Hawaii Temple is 47 @,@ 224 square feet ( 4 @,@ 387 @.@ 3 m2 ) and houses four ordinance rooms and six sealing rooms . Landscape artist LeConte Stewart designed many of the murals found inside the temple . 
 = = Admittance = = 
 Laie Hawaii Temple is not used for regular Sunday worship . As temples are considered sacred houses of the Lord , only church members who keep gospel covenants are allowed to enter for the purpose of participating in sacred ceremonies such as endowments , baptism for the dead and eternal marriage , a ritual in which couples and families are sealed for time and all eternity . Because of these guidelines , non @-@ Mormons are not allowed inside temples , but public tours of the grounds outside and of the visitors ' centers are available . 
 = = Temple presidents = = 
 Notable temple presidents include Edward L. Clissold ( 1936 – 38 , 1943 – 44 , 1963 – 65 ) ; D. Arthur Haycock ( 1986 – 89 ) ; and J. Richard Clarke ( 1998 – 2001 ) . 
 = Yvon Cormier = 
 Yvon Cormier ( November 3 , 1938 – March 4 , 2009 ) was a Canadian professional wrestler . Competing primarily under the ring name The Beast , he and his three wrestling brothers made up the Cormier wrestling family . He wrestled in many countries but regularly returned to Canada , where he competed for the Eastern Sports Association ( ESA ) and the ESA @-@ promoted International Wrestling ( IW ) . He also competed in the Calgary , Alberta @-@ based Stampede Wrestling for many years . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cormier was born into a family of thirteen children , of which four of the brothers became professional wrestlers , and another became a referee . His wrestling brothers were Leo Burke ( Leonce Cormier ) , Bobby Kay ( Romeo Cormier ) and Rudy Kay ( Jean @-@ Louis Cormier ) . The oldest brother , Malcolm , worked as a referee under the name Mel <unk> . As a teenager , he worked in the woods , shoed horses , and drove heavy equipment . He met Emile Dupré in 1957 , who told him to consider a career in professional wrestling . Cormier began training , and later moved to Indianapolis , Indiana to continue his preparation under trainer Les <unk> , and made his debut in 1963 . At first , he used the ring name Pierre <unk> before switching to Ivan the Lumberjack . In Texas , he was known as Joe Gump . When he later ventured to the Mid @-@ Atlantic territory , Jim Crockett , Sr. named him The Beast . At that time , he had thick , untamed hair and a large , curly beard . 
 The Beast spent part of his early career competing for Stampede Wrestling , where he faced such wrestlers as Stu Hart . He won his first championship there in 1966 . He defeated Stampede veteran Dave Ruhl to win the Calgary version of the NWA Canadian Heavyweight Championship . Later that year , he dropped the title to Ruhl . He gained a different title the following year , however , when he teamed with Bob Sweetan to defeat the Christy Brothers ( Bobby and Jerry ) for the Calgary version of the NWA International Tag Team Championship on July 12 , 1967 . 
 In 1969 , The Beast became the first holder of the IW North American Heavyweight Championship . On August 5 , he gained a second title when he teamed with his brother Rudy Kay to defeat The Fabulous Kangaroos ( Al Costello and Don Kent ) to win the ESA International Tag Team Championship . Three weeks later , he dropped the North American title to The Stomper ( Archie Gouldie ) , who became his longtime rival . He then began competing for the Amarillo , Texas @-@ based territory of the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) . He won the NWA Western States Heavyweight Championship and held it for several months before losing it in a match against Ricky Romero on February 2 , 1970 . 
 Two months later , on April 4 , The Beast teamed with Bull Ramos to win the NWA Western States Tag Team Championship by defeating Terry Funk and Romero . They continued to face Funk and Romero and dropped the title to them later that year . On July 27 , The Beast regained the IW North American Heavyweight Championship from The Stomper and held it for over two months . He lost the championship to Eric Pomeroy that October . While competing in the ESA , The Beast also had another reign as International Tag Team Champion , this time while teaming with his brother Leo Burke . They held the title until dropping it on August 3 , 1971 to The Beast 's former partner Freddie Sweetan and former rival Eric Pomeroy . The Beast had two more reigns with the ESA International Tag Team Championship that year , however . Four weeks after dropping it to Sweetan and Pomeroy , he regained the title from them with the help of his new partner Archie Gouldie , with whom The Beast had once feuded over the North American Heavyweight Championship . The title reign lasted for a little over a month before Pomeroy and Sweetan regained the championship trophy . Pomeroy and Sweetan held the title for only one week , however , as The Beast recruited his brother Rudy Kay to help him win the championship back on October 12 . This time , the brothers ' reign lasted for just over seven months . Sweetan eventually regained the title while teaming with Mike Dubois on May 16 the following year . 
 Over a year passed before The Beast won another championship . In the summer of 1973 , Sweetan was holding the ESA Tag Team Championship with Kurt von Steiger when The Beast teamed with Bobby Kay , the only one of his brothers with whom he had not held a tag team championship , and regained the trophy . Once again , however , Sweetan won the title back on July 31 along with partner Mr. X. During the ESA off @-@ season , The Beast returned to Texas and reformed his tag team partnership with brother Leo Burke . In January 1974 , the brothers defeated Don Fargo and Hank James to win the NWA Western States Tag Team Championship . Within two months , however , they lost the title to long @-@ time rival Romero and his partner Dory Funk , Jr . Returning to the ESA , The Beast and Bobby Kay defeated Sweetan and Dubois to win the vacant Tag Team Championship . The reign lasted for less than one week before Sweetan and Dubois won the trophy in a rematch . The following month , The Beast had another short reign with the IWA North American Heavyweight Championship , winning the title and losing it back to Great Kuma in less than two weeks . He followed this with a victory for the Tag Team Championship with Burke on July 13 , once again winning the title from Sweetan and Dubois . By early August , the brothers had dropped the title to Kuma and Geto Mongol . 
 The Beast and Rudy Kay had one last reign as ESA International Tag Team Champions together . They defeated Bob Brown and The Patriot during the autumn of 1975 to win the trophy . They held the title until the end of the ESA 's 1975 season . The Beast 's final title reign began in Texas on February 20 , 1976 . He and Leo Burke won a tournament for the vacant NWA Western States Tag Team Championship , defeating Romero and his son Silver Streak to win the title . They held it for one week before dropping it to Romero and Silver Streak on February 27 . 
 During his career he wrestled seven different world champions , including six time limit draws . At one point , he wrestled Giant Baba in Japan in front of a crowd of 45 @,@ 000 people . He also participated in numerous chain matches , in which he and an opponent were joined together by a steel chain attached to their wrists . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cormier was known for his physical strength and intense exercise regimen . He was known to bench press 450 pounds with each , and he was once recorded as bench pressing 527 pounds . During one photo session , Cormier lifted a telephone pole from the ground and carried it around while posing for pictures . According to one story , he once got upset with a horse that refused to cooperate and knocked it down with one punch . 
 Like his brothers , Cormier was a lifelong ice hockey fan . He also trained horses for harness racing and had six of his own Percheron horses . He had four sons , all of whom are being trained to wrestle , as well as one daughter . He was married to his wife , Doris , for 44 years until his death . 
 In May 2008 , Cormier was diagnosed with lymphoma . He underwent treatment but suffered a heart attack soon after beginning . Doctors later determined that the cancer had moved into his bone marrow . He died on March 4 , 2009 at a hospital in Moncton , New Brunswick . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Managers 
 Rudy LaBelle 
 Signature and finishing moves 
 Bear hug 
 Knee drop 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 8 times ) - with Rudy Kay ( 3 ) , Leo Burke ( 1 ) , Archie Gouldie ( 1 ) , and Bobby Kay ( 3 ) 
 IW North American Heavyweight Championship ( 4 times ) 
 NWA Western States Sports 
 NWA Western States Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 NWA Western States Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) - with Leo Burke ( 2 ) and Bull Ramos ( 1 ) 
 Stampede Wrestling 
 NWA Canadian Heavyweight Championship ( Calgary version ) ( 1 time ) 
 NWA International Tag Team Championship ( Calgary version ) ( 1 time ) - with Bob Sweetan 
 = Sands Hotel and Casino = 
 The Sands Hotel and Casino was a historic hotel and casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Nevada , United States , that operated from 1952 to 1996 . Designed by the architect Wayne McAllister , with a prominent 56 @-@ foot ( 17 m ) high sign , the Sands was the seventh resort to open on the Strip . During its heyday , the Sands was the center of entertainment and " cool " on the Strip , and hosted many famous entertainers of the day , most notably the Rat Pack . 
 The hotel was established in 1952 by Texan oil tycoon Jake Freedman , who bought up the LaRue Restaurant , which had opened two years earlier . The hotel was opened on December 15 , 1952 as a casino with 200 rooms , and was established less than three months after the opening of another notable landmark , Sahara Hotel and Casino . The hotel rooms were divided into four two @-@ story motel wings , each with fifty rooms , and named after famous race tracks . The opening was widely publicized , and every guest was given a Chamois bag with silver dollars . Crime bosses such as Meyer Lansky and Frank Costello acquired shares in the hotel and attracted Frank Sinatra , who made his performing debut at Sands in October 1953 . Sinatra later bought a share in the hotel himself . Sinatra and Sammy Davis , Jr. were instrumental throughout the late 1950s and early 1960s in bringing a change in racial policy in Sands , and after an incident in 1961 , it began employing blacks . In 1960 the classic caper film Ocean 's 11 was shot at the hotel , and it subsequently attained iconic status , with regular performances by Sinatra , Dean Martin , Sammy Davis . Jr . , Red Skelton and others , who performed regularly in the hotel 's world @-@ renowned Copa Room . Much of the musical success of the Copa Room is credited to the room 's band leader and musical conductor Antonio Morelli , whose house orchestra performed in the recording of hundreds of albums over the years . 
 In the mid 1960s , Sands and its adjacent properties were bought by the reclusive businessman Howard Hughes , who built a 500 @-@ room tower and modernized the hotel . After the 1970s it fell into decline until its final owner , Sheldon Adelson , made the decision to shut it down and to build a brand new resort . The last dice in the casino was rolled by Bob Stupak just after 6pm on June 30 , 1996 . On November 26 of that year , it was finally imploded and demolished , much to the dismay of longtime employees and <unk> . Today , The Venetian stands where the Sands once stood . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The LaRue Restaurant was established in December 1950 by Billy Wilkerson . The following year , oil tycoon Jake Freedman of Houston , Texas bought LaRue for $ 15 @,@ 000 . Freedman 's idea was to build the best hotel and casino in Las Vegas to specifically cater to the glamorous Hollywood film stars and executives in a $ 600 @,@ 000 project . Numerous sources state that organized crime figures Meyer Lansky , Frank Costello and Joseph " Doc " <unk> and illegal bookmakers like Mike Shapiro , Ed Levinson , and Sid Wyman were involved in the financing of Sands and had shares in it . Lansky and his mob assumed ownership of the Flamingo Hotel after the murder of Bugsy Siegel in 1947 , and Lansky and Costello also had business interests in the Thunderbird Hotel and El Cortez Club in Downtown Las Vegas . 
 Construction began on Sands Hotel in early 1952 , built to a design by Wayne McAllister . Freedman had initially intended naming the hotel " Holiday Inn " after the film of the same name starring Bing Crosby , but after noticing that his socks became so full of sand decided to name it Sands . The tag line would be " A Place in the Sun " , named after a recently released film starring Montgomery Clift and Elizabeth Taylor , and quite suitable to the hot desert location of Las Vegas . The hotel was opened on December 15 , 1952 as a casino with 200 rooms , and was established less than three months after the opening of another prominent landmark , Sahara Hotel and Casino . The opening was widely publicized , and the hotel was visited by some 12 @,@ 000 people within a few hours . At the inauguration were 146 journalists and special guests such as Arlene Dahl , Fernando Lamas , Esther Williams , and Terry Moore . Every guest was given a Chamois bag with silver dollars , and Sands ended up losing $ 200 @,@ 000 within the first eight hours . Danny Thomas , Jimmy McHugh and the Copa Girls , labelled " the most beautiful girls in the world " , performed in the Copa Room on opening night , and Ray Sinatra and his Orchestra were the initial house band . Thomas was hired to perform for the first two weeks , but strained his voice on the second night and developed laryngitis , and was replaced with performers such as Jimmy Durante , Frankie Laine , Jane Powell , the Ritz Brothers , and Ray Anthony . 
 Jack Entratter , who was formerly in charge of the New York nightclub , the Copacabana , became the hotel 's manager . Entratter made many show business friends during his time at the nightclub ; he was able to use these connections to sign performers for the Sands Copa Room . Entratter was also able to offer entertainers an additional incentive to perform at the Sands . Headlining stars received " points " , or a percentage of ownership in the hotel and casino . Entratter 's personally selected " Copa Girls " wore $ 12 @,@ 000 worth of costumes on the hotel 's opening night ; this surpassed the salary of the Copa Room 's star , Danny Thomas . 
 In the early years , Freedman and his wife Carolyn were one of its attractions , wearing " matching white , leather outfits , replete with identical cowboy boots and hats " . Freedman offered Carolyn 's father Nathan a 5 % stake in Sands but he declined the offer . 
 = = = The Rat Pack and racial policy = = = 
 It was Lansky and Costello who brought Sands to Frank Sinatra 's attention , and he began staying at the hotel and gambling there during breaks from Hollywood , though some sources state that he was not a hardcore gambler . Sinatra earned a notoriety for " keeping his winnings and ignoring his gambling losses " , but the mobsters running the hotel were not too concerned because Sinatra was great for business . He made his debut performing at the hotel on October 4 , 1953 , after an invitation by the manager Jack Entratter . Sinatra typically played at Sands three times a year , sometimes a two @-@ week stint , which " brought in the big rollers , a lot of oil money from Texas " . The big rollers left Vegas when Sinatra did , and other performers were reluctant to perform after him , feeling intimidated . 
 Entratter replaced Freedman as the president of the Sands Hotel following his death from heart surgery on January 20 , 1958 . Freedman 's last wife Sadie subsequently lived in a suite in the Belmont Park wing into the mid 1960s until her death . Sinatra , who had attempted to buy a share in the hotel soon after first visiting in 1953 , but was denied by the Nevada Tax Commission , was now granted permission to buy a share in the hotel , due to his phenomenal impact upon business in Las Vegas . His share , variously described as from 2 to 9 % , aided Freedman 's wife in paying off her husband 's gambling debts . 
 In 1955 , ( limited ) integration came to heavily segregated Las Vegas when the Sands first allowed Nat King Cole to stay at the hotel and perform . Sinatra noticed that he never saw Cole in the dining room , always eating his meals in solitude in his dressing room . When he asked his valet George to find out why , he learned that " <unk> aren 't allowed in the dining room at the Sands " . Sinatra subsequently saw to it that if blacks were not permitted to eat their meals in the dining room with everybody else he would see to it that all of the waiters and waitresses were fired , and invited Cole to dine with him the following evening . Cole was allowed permission into the casino , as was another black performer , Harry Belafonte , who took a more aggressive approach by walking into the casino on his own accord and sitting at a blackjack table , which was not challenged by the bosses . Belafonte became the " first black man to play cards on the Las Vegas Strip " . 
 Sammy Davis , Jr. was instrumental in bringing about a general change in policy . When the Will Mastin Trio began performing at Sands in 1958 , Davis informed Entratter that his father and uncle must be allowed permission to stay at Sands while he was performing there . Entratter granted them permission but continued his objection to admitting other black guests . In 1961 , an African @-@ American couple entered the lobby of the hotel and were blocked by the security guard , witnessed by Sinatra and Davis . Sinatra told the guards that they were his guests and let them into the hotel . Sinatra subsequently swore profusely down the phone to Sands executive Carl Cohen at how ridiculous the situation was , and the following day , Davis approached Entratter and demanded that Sands begin employing blacks . Shortly afterwards the hotel changed its policy and it began hiring black waiters and <unk> , and began permitting blacks entry into the casino . 
 In the late 1950s , Senator John F. Kennedy was occasionally a guest of Sinatra at the Sands . Arguably the hotel 's biggest claim to fame was a three @-@ week period in 1960 during the filming of Ocean 's 11 , after which it attained iconic status . During that time , the movie 's stars Sinatra , Dean Martin , Davis , Joey Bishop and Peter Lawford performed on stage together in the Copa Room . The performances were called the " Summit at the Sands " and this is considered to be the birth of the Rat Pack . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 When Howard Hughes purchased the hotel in the mid @-@ 1960s for $ 14 @.@ 6 million , the architect Martin Stern , Jr. added a 500 @-@ room circular tower , which opened in 1967 , and the hotel became a Las Vegas landmark . Hughes grew particularly annoyed every time the Rat Pack were in his hotel , due to a hatred of Frank Sinatra which stemmed from the fact that he had been in love with Ava Gardner in the 50s and she had run off to marry him . The ill feeling was reciprocated by Sinatra . Hughes plotted to oust Sinatra from the Sands for good , and asked Robert <unk> to draw up a plan shortly after the new hotel opened in 1967 . The hotel imposed restrictions on what Sinatra could gamble in the casino , to just $ 3000 a night . Under previous management , Sinatra had no limits on the amount of credit extended to him by the Sands casino . His IOUs , chits or " markers " were torn up at the end of Sinatra 's engagements because he was considered to be good for business @-@ bringing the hotel more monetary value than the worth of his gambling losses . Hughes put a stop to this system , telling Jack Entratter to inform Sinatra of the new policy ; Entratter did not do so because he was afraid . 
 Fuming , Sinatra began what The Los Angeles Times describes as a " weekend @-@ long tirade " against the " hotel 's management , employees and security forces " . The FBI report says the incident began when Mia Farrow lost US $ 20 @,@ 000 at the Sands casino . Sinatra bought US $ 50 @,@ 000 in chips and made an attempt to win the money back . He lost this sum within a short period of time . Sinatra then asked for credit , which was denied . It culminated when Sinatra reportedly drove a golf cart through the window of the coffee shop where casino manager Carl Cohen was seated and began " screaming obscenities and anti @-@ Semitic remarks " at Cohen . Sinatra reportedly punched Cohen , a heavily built man , who responded with a smack in the mouth , bloodying Sinatra 's nose and knocking two of his teeth out . As a result , Sinatra never performed at Sands again while Hughes owned it , and began performing at Caesars Palace . A number of the staff were not disappointed to see Sinatra leave Sands . Numerous employees had been humiliated or intimidated by the Rat Pack over the years , including a busboy that Sinatra tripped up while he was carrying a tray with dishes . After Sinatra left , the mobsters pulled out of Sands and gradually left Vegas in the 1970s . In the 1970s it became associated with the likes of Wayne Newton and Liberace . At this time some 30 % of the performers at Sands were Italian Americans . Frank Gagliardi became the drummer for the house orchestra in 1964 , starting a twelve @-@ year tenure . 
 In 1968 , Hughes stated that he intended to expand Sands into a 4000 @-@ room resort , but his plans did not materialize . In 1983 , Hughes ' company , the Summa Corporation , sold the Sands to the Pratt Corporation , but subsequently bought it back as they were unable to make a profit . MGM Grand , Inc. bought the hotel along with the neighboring Desert Inn in 1988 for a total of $ 167 million , and the property became known as the MGM Sands . The next year , MGM sold it for $ 110 million to Las Vegas Sands , a new company formed by the owners of The Interface Group , including Sheldon Adelson , Richard <unk> , Ted Cutler , Irwin <unk> and Jordan Shapiro . The same year , it was licensed by the Nevada Gaming Commission , and Adelson became a casino magnate . In the early 1990s , Adelson built the Sands Expo , a 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 @,@ 000 m2 ) convention centre . 
 In its final years , the Sands became a shadow of its former self — a throwback to the old days - and it ultimately could not compete with the newer and more exciting <unk> that were being built on the Strip . A 1990s travel guide though stated that the hotel gardens and pool area still retained the ambiance of the classic Sands days . The decision was eventually made by its final owner , Sheldon Adelson , to shut it down and to build a brand new resort . The last dice in the casino was rolled by Bob Stupak just after 6pm on June 30 , 1996 . On November 26 , 1996 , it was imploded and demolished , much to the dismay of longtime employees and <unk> . Footage of the demolition also appeared in the closing credits of The Cooler . The climactic plane crash in 1997 's Con Air ended with the aircraft crashing into the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ demolished Sands ' lobby . 
 On May 3 , 1999 , the new $ 1 @.@ 5 billion <unk> The Venetian opened where the Sands had formerly been , a 35 @-@ story hotel with 3 @,@ 036 rooms , covering an area of 17 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 m2 ) . It became the largest AAA Five @-@ Diamond landmark in North America . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Wayne McAllister designed the original $ 5 @.@ 5 million Sands Hotel , an exotic @-@ looking terracotta red @-@ painted modern hotel with a prominent porte cochere at the front , surrounded by a zig @-@ zag wall ornamented with tiled planters . The hotel is arguably most associated with its 56 feet ( 17 m ) high sign , made iconic with photographs of the Rat Pack standing underneath it . The name " Sands " , written in elegant italics , featured a 36 feet ( 11 m ) high letter " S " , and the name was sprawled across an egg crate grill , cantilevered from a pillar . The sign was receptive to the light and shadow of the desert , and during night time it was lit up , glowing neon red . It was the tallest sign on the strip for a number of years . Beneath " Sands " was the tagline " A Place in the Sun " , written in smaller capital letters . Below that was the billing of the names of the performers appearing at Sands , very often photographed displaying names such as Frank Sinatra , Dean Martin , Jerry Lewis , Sammy Davis , Jr. and Red Skelton in the late 1950s and early 1960s . Author Alan Hess wrote that the " sleek Modernism of the Sands leaped past the Flamingo to set a higher standard of sophistication for Las Vegas . For the first time , the sign was an integral part of the architectural design " . 
 The porte @-@ cochère of the hotel featured three great sharp @-@ edged pillars jutting out in front of the glass @-@ fronted building , angling down into the ground , which resembled fins . The two @-@ story glass walled entry was bordered by a wall of imported Italian marble , and above the entrance area was a horizontal plane with copper lights suspended from the beams . Rather than being polished , the marble was unusual in that it was rough and grained . Natural and stained cork was used throughout the building . A.J. <unk> of the The New Yorker described the hotel in 1953 : " The main building of the Sands is a great rectangular hall , with the reception desk in one corner , slot machines along one long wall and a bar and cocktail lounge , complete with Latin trio , along the opposite wall . In the middle is a jumble of roulette and craps tables and 21 layouts . " The casino , of substantial size , was accessed by three sets of terrazzo stairs , and was lit by low @-@ hanging chandeliers . The bar featured bas @-@ reliefs with a Western theme , including cowboys , racing wagons and Joshua trees , designed by Allan Stewart of Claremont College , California . The Garden Room restaurant overlooked the hotel 's pool and landscaped grounds . 
 The 200 guest rooms of the original hotel were divided into four two @-@ story motel wings , each with fifty rooms , and named after famous race tracks . They were set out in a hacienda style , and surrounded by a half @-@ moon shaped pool . The suites were luxuriously designed . Plush blue carpets and ivory colored chairs with white ceilings were the norm in the early days . An electric tram service , often attended by pretty showgirls , took the guests to their rooms . A 14 @-@ story tower commenced construction in late 1965 , and was opened in 1967 . It existed until November 1996 when it was demolished . 
 The steam room of the hotel was a place of relaxation and good jest . It became a great place for socializing between the stars after 5 pm , including the Rat Pack , and Jerry Lewis , Steve Lawrence and Don Rickles . On one occasion they were having problems with the TV in the massage room , which was blurry and out of focus . Sinatra yelled " Move back , move back " , and the television was thrown into the pool . Manager Entratter permitted such activities , knowing that if he scolded Sinatra and asked him to pay damages he would not perform at Sands again . 
 = = = Copa Room = = = 
 The Copa Room was the showroom of Sands , named after the famed Copacabana Club in New York City . It contained 385 seats , designed in a Brazilian carnival style . Some of the more famed singers like Sinatra , Martin and Davis , Jr. had to sign contracts to ensure that they headline for a given number of weeks a year . Performers were extremely well paid for the period . It was common for some of them to be paid $ 25 @,@ 000 per week , playing two shows a night , six days a week , and once on a Sunday for two to three weeks . 
 The greatest names in the entertainment industry graced the stage of the Copa Room . Notable performers included Judy Garland , Lena Horne ( one of the first black performers at the hotel , billed as " The Satin Doll " ) , Jimmy Durante , Pat Cooper , Shirley MacLaine , Marlene Dietrich , Tallulah Bankhead , Shecky Greene , Martin and Lewis , Danny Thomas , Bobby Darin , Ethel Merman , Rich Little , Louis Armstrong , Jerry Lee Lewis , Nat King Cole , Robert Merrill , Wayne Newton , Red Skelton , and the " The Copa Girls " . Hollywood celebrities such as Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall , Elizabeth Taylor , Yul Brynner , Kirk Douglas , Lucille Ball and Rosalind Russell were often photographed enjoying the headline acts . 
 A number of notable albums were recorded in the Copa Room . Among them are Dean Martin 's Live At The Sands - An Evening of Music , Laughter and Hard Liquor , Frank Sinatra 's Sinatra at the Sands , and Sammy Davis , Jr . ' s The Sounds of ' 66 and That 's All ! . The Rat Pack : Live at the Sands , a CD released in 2001 , features Martin , Sinatra and Davis in a live performance at the hotel recorded in September 1963 . Live at the Sands is an album featuring Mary Wilson , formerly of The Supremes . Morrissey 's B @-@ side track , " At Amber " ( 1990 ) , takes place at the Sands Hotel , and recounts its by @-@ then aging and somewhat seedy atmosphere . Much of the musical success of the Copa Room is credited to the room 's band leader and musical conductor Antonio Morelli . Morelli not only acted as the band leader and musical conductor for the Copa Room during the Hotel 's Rat Pack heyday in the 1950s and 1960s , but he also played that role on hundreds of recorded albums by those same entertainers who graced the stage of the Copa . Often the festivities would carry over after hours to <unk> 's home in Las Vegas , nicknamed " The Morelli House " , which was eventually relocated and sanctioned an historical landmark by the State of Nevada . 
 = = = Silver Queen Lounge = = = 
 The Silver Queen Lounge was another performing venue at Sands , with nightly acts starting at 5 : 00 pm and running until 6 : 00 am . It was particularly popular with the emerging rock ' n ' roll crowd . The Sands is where Freddie Bell and the Bell Boys performed the rock ' n ' roll @-@ song " Hound Dog " , seen by Elvis Presley . After Presley saw that performance at The Sands , he decided to record the song himself , and it became a hit for him . Roberta Linn and the <unk> and Gene Vincent were also regular performers . 
 = Royal Arms of England = 
 The Royal Arms of England is a coat of arms first adopted as England 's personal arms by the Plantagenet kings who ruled the country in the late 12th century . They have come to symbolise in the popular mind England ( although historically nations never bore arms , only persons did ) and its monarchs . Its blazon is officially Gules , three lions passant guardant in pale or armed and langued azure , meaning three identical gold lions ( also known as leopards ) with blue tongues and claws , walking and facing the observer , arranged in a column on a red background . Although , the azure tincture of tongue and claws is not cited in many <unk> , they are a distinguishing feature of the Arms of England , historically . This coat , designed in the High Middle Ages , has been variously combined with those of France , Scotland , Ireland , Nassau and Hanover , according to dynastic and other political changes affecting England , but has not itself been altered since the reign of King Richard I of England ( 1189 – 1199 ) . 
 Although in England the heraldic charge refers to lions , the French heralds historically used the term leopard to represent the lion passant guardant , and hence the arms of England , no doubt , are more correctly blazoned , Leopards . Practically , however , the same animal was intended , but different names given according to the position ; in later times the name lion was given to both . 
 Royal emblems depicting lions were first used by the Norman dynasty , later a formal and consistent English heraldry system emerged during the 12th century . The escutcheon , or shield featuring three lions is traced to King Richard I 's Great Seal of the Realm , which initially used a single lion rampant , or else two lions , but in 1198 , was permanently altered to depict three lions passant , representing Richard I 's triple ( amongst many more ) position as King of the English , Duke of the Normans , and Duke of the <unk> . In 1340 , King Edward III of England laid claim to the throne of France and signified his pretence by quartering the Royal Arms of England with the Royal Arms of France . This quartering was adjusted , abandoned and restored intermittently throughout the Middle Ages as the relationship between England and France changed . When the French altered their arms from a <unk> ' of fleur @-@ de @-@ lys , to only three on an azure field , the English quartering followed suit . After the Union of the Crowns in 1603 , when England and the Kingdom of Scotland entered a personal union , the arms of England and Scotland were combined in what has now become the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom . It appears in a similar capacity to represent England in the Arms of Canada and the Queen 's Personal Canadian Flag . The coat of three lions continues to represent England on several coins of the pound sterling , forms the basis of several emblems of English national sports teams , and endures as one of the most recognisable national symbols of England . 
 When the Royal Arms is in the format of a heraldic flag , it is variously known as the Royal Banner of England , the Banner of the Royal Arms , the Banner of the King of England , or by the misnomer of the Royal Standard of England . This Royal Banner differs from England 's national flag , St George 's Cross , in that it does not represent any particular area or land , but rather symbolises the sovereignty vested in the rulers thereof . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Lions had previously been used by the Norman dynasty as royal emblems , and Attributed arms have been invented for kings who pre @-@ dated the systematisation of hereditary English heraldry that occurred in the second half of the 12th century . King Henry II of England ( 1133 – 1189 ) had used a coat with a lion on it ; his children experimented with different combinations of lions . King Richard I ( 1189 – 1199 ) used a single lion rampant , or perhaps two lions <unk> , on his first seal , but later used three lions passant in his 1198 Great Seal of England , and thus established the lasting design of the Royal Arms of England . Although King John ( 1199 – 1216 ) had a seal in 1177 , with two lions passant guardant , the three lions passant or on a field gules were used as the Royal Arms ( or King 's Arms ) by Kings John ( 1199 – 1216 ) , Henry III ( 1216 – 1272 ) , Edward I ( 1272 – 1307 ) , and Edward II ( 1307 – 1327 ) . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1340 , following the death of King Charles IV of France , Edward III asserted a claim to the French throne through his mother Isabella of France . In addition to initiating the Hundred Years ' War , Edward III expressed his claim in heraldic form by quartering the royal arms of England with the Arms of France . This quartering continued until 1801 , with intervals in 1360 – 1369 and 1420 – 1422 . 
 Following the death of Queen Elizabeth I of England in 1603 , the throne of England was inherited by the Scottish House of Stuart , resulting in the Union of the Crowns : the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland were united in a personal union under King James VI and I. As a consequence , the Royal Arms of England and Scotland were combined in the king 's new personal arms . Nevertheless , although referencing the personal union with Scotland and Ireland , the Royal Arms of England remained distinct from the Royal Arms of Scotland , until the two realms were joined in a political union in 1707 , leading to a unified Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Union with Scotland and Ireland = = = 
 On 1 May 1707 , the kingdoms of England and Scotland were merged to form that of Great Britain ; this was reflected by impaling their arms in a single quarter . The claim to the French throne continued , albeit passively , until it was mooted by the French Revolution and the formation of the French First Republic in 1792 . During the peace negotiations at the Conference of Lille , from July to November 1797 , the French delegates demanded that the King of Great Britain abandon the title of King of France as a condition of peace . The Acts of Union 1800 united the Kingdom of Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . Under King George III of the United Kingdom , a proclamation of 1 January 1801 set the royal style and titles and modified the Royal Arms , removing the French quarter and putting the arms of England , Scotland and Ireland on the same structural level , with the dynastic arms of Hanover moved to an inescutcheon . 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 English heraldry flourished as a working art up to around the 17th century , when it assumed a mainly ceremonial role . The Royal Arms of England continued to embody information relating to English history . Although the Acts of Union 1707 placed England within the Kingdom of Great Britain , prompting new , British Royal Arms , the Royal Arms of England has continued to endure as one of the national symbols of England , and has a variety of active uses . For instance , the coats of arms of both The Football Association and the England and Wales Cricket Board have a design featuring three lions passant , based on the historic Royal Arms of England . In 1997 ( and again in 2002 ) , the Royal Mint issued a British one pound ( £ 1 ) coin featuring three lions passant to represent England . To celebrate St George 's Day , in 2001 , Royal Mail issued first – and second @-@ class postage stamps with the Royal Crest of England ( a crowned lion ) , and the Royal Arms of England ( three lions passant ) respectively . 
 = = Crest , supporters and other parts of the achievement = = 
 Various accessories to the escutcheon ( shield ) were added and modified by successive English monarchs . These included a crest ( with mantling , helm and crown ) ; supporters ( with a compartment ) ; a motto ; and the insignia of an order of knighthood . These various components made up the full achievement of arms . 
 = = = Royal crest = = = 
 The first addition to the shield was in the form of a crest borne above the shield . It was during the reign of Edward III that the crest began to be widely used in English heraldry . The first representation of a royal crest was in Edward 's third Great Seal , which showed a helm above the arms , and thereon a gold lion passant guardant standing upon a chapeau , and bearing a royal crown on its head . The design underwent minor variations until it took on its present form in the reign of Henry VIII : " The Royal Crown proper , thereon a lion statant guardant Or , royally crowned also proper " . 
 The exact form of crown used in the crest varied over time . Until the reign of Henry VI it was usually shown as an open circlet adorned with fleurs @-@ de @-@ lys or stylised leaves . On Henry 's first seal for foreign affairs the design was altered with the circlet decorated by alternating crosses formy and fleurs @-@ de @-@ lys . From the reign of Edward IV the crown bore a single arch , altered to a double arch by Henry VII . The design varied in details until the late 17th century , but since that time has consisted of a jewelled circlet , above which are alternating crosses formy and fleurs @-@ de @-@ lys . From this spring two arches decorated with pearls , and at their intersection an orb surmounted by a cross formy . A cap of crimson velvet is shown within the crown , with the cap 's ermine lining appearing at the base of the crown in lieu of a torse . The shape of the arches of the crown has been represented differently at different times , and can help to date a depiction of the crest . 
 The helm on which the crest was borne was originally a simple steel design , sometimes with gold embellishments . In the reign of Elizabeth I a pattern of helm unique to the Royal Arms was introduced . This is a gold helm with a barred visor , facing the viewer . The decorative mantling ( a stylised cloth cloak that hangs from the helm ) was originally of red cloth lined with ermine , but was altered to cloth of gold lined ermine by Elizabeth . 
 = = = Supporters = = = 
 Animal supporters , standing on either side of the shield to hold and guard it , first appeared in English heraldry in the 15th century . Originally , they were not regarded as an integral part of arms , and were subject to frequent change . Various animals were sporadically shown supporting the Royal Arms of England , but it was only with the reign of Edward IV that their use became consistent . Supporters fell under the regulation of the Kings of Arms in the Tudor period . The heralds of that time also <unk> created supporters for earlier monarchs , and although these attributed supporters were never used by the monarchs concerned , they were later used to signify them on public buildings or monuments completed after their deaths , for instance at St. George 's Chapel , in Windsor Castle . 
 The boar adopted by Richard III prompted William <unk> 's quip " The Rat , the Cat , and Lovell the Dog , Rule all England under the Hog " , and William Shakespeare 's derision in Richard III . The red dragon , a symbol of the Tudor dynasty , was added upon the accession of the Henry VII . After the Union of the Crowns , the supporters of the arms of the British monarch have remained as the Lion and the Unicorn , representing England and Scotland respectively . 
 = = = Garter and motto = = = 
 Edward III founded the Order of the Garter in about 1348 . Since then , the full achievement of the Royal Arms has included a representation of the Garter , encircling the shield . This is a blue circlet with gold buckle and edging , bearing the order 's Old French motto Honi soit qui mal y pense ( " Shame be to him who thinks evil of it " ) in gold capital letters . 
 A motto , placed on a scroll below the Royal Arms of England , seems to have first been adopted by Henry IV in the early 15th century . His motto was <unk> ( " sovereign " ) . His son , Henry V adopted the motto Dieu et mon droit ( " God and my right " ) . While this motto has been exclusively used since the accession of George I in 1714 , and continues to form part of the Royal Arms of the United Kingdom , other mottoes were used by certain monarchs in the intervening period . Veritas <unk> filia ( " truth is the daughter of time " ) was the motto of Mary I ( 1553 – 1558 ) , Semper <unk> ( " always the same " ) was used by Elizabeth I ( 1558 – 1603 ) and Anne ( 1702 – 1714 ) , James I ( 1603 – 1625 ) sometimes used Beati <unk> ( " blessed are the peacemakers " ) , while William III ( 1689 – 1702 ) used the motto of the House of Orange : Je <unk> ( " I will maintain " ) . 
 = = As a banner = = 
 The Royal Banner of England is the English banner of arms and so has always borne the Royal Arms of England — the personal arms of England 's reigning monarch . When displayed in war or battle , this banner signalled that the sovereign was present in person . Because the Royal Banner depicted the Royal Arms of England , its design and composition changed throughout the Middle Ages . It is variously known as the Royal Banner of England , the Banner of the Royal Arms , the Banner of the King of England , or by the misnomer of the Royal Standard of England ; Arthur Charles Fox @-@ Davies explains that it is " a misnomer to term the banner of the Royal Arms the Royal Standard " , because " the term standard properly refers to the long tapering flag used in battle , by which an overlord mustered his retainers in battle " . The archaeologist and antiquarian Charles Boutell also makes this distinction . This Royal Banner differs from England 's national flag , St George 's Cross , in that it does not represent any particular area or land , but rather symbolises the sovereignty vested in the rulers thereof . 
 When displayed in war or battle , this banner signalled that the sovereign was present in person . Because the Royal Banner depicted the Royal Arms of England , so its design and composition changed throughout the Middle Ages . 
 = = = In other banners = = = 
 = = Other roles and manifestations = = 
 Several ancient English towns displayed the Royal Arms of England upon their seals and , when it occurred to them to adopt insignia of their own , used the Royal Arms , albeit with modification , as their inspiration . For instance , in the arms of New Romney , the field is changed from red to blue . Hereford changes the lions from gold to silver , and in the 17th century was granted a blue border charged with silver <unk> in allusion to its siege by a Scottish army during the English Civil War . The town council of Faversham changes only the hindquarters of the three lions to silver . Berkshire County Council bore arms with two golden lions in reference to its Royal patronage and the Norman kings ' influence upon the early history of Berkshire . 
 The Royal Arms of England features on the tabard , the distinctive traditional garment of English officers of arms . These garments were worn by heralds when performing their original duties — making royal or state proclamations and announcing tournaments . Since 1484 they have been part of the Royal Household . <unk> featuring the Royal Arms continue to be worn at several traditional ceremonies , such as the annual procession and service of the Order of the Garter at Windsor Castle , the State Opening of Parliament at the Palace of Westminster , the coronation of the British monarch at Westminster Abbey , and state funerals in the United Kingdom . 
 = SS Black Osprey = 
 SS Black Osprey was a cargo ship for the American Diamond Lines and the British Cairn Line . She was formerly known as SS West Arrow when she was launched for the USSB during World War I. The ship was inspected by the United States Navy for possible use as USS West Arrow ( ID @-@ 2585 ) but was neither taken into the Navy nor ever commissioned under that name . 
 West Arrow was built in 1918 for the USSB , as a part of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States for the World War I war effort . Information about her early career is largely absent , but by the 1920s , news reports revealed that the ship was sailing on the North Atlantic . By the mid @-@ 1920s , West Arrow was sailing for American Diamond on their cargo service to Rotterdam and Antwerp . In 1935 , American Diamond changed the ship 's name to Black Osprey and the ship continued in Rotterdam service . 
 After the outbreak of World War II , Black Osprey , still under the registry of the still @-@ neutral United States , was detained twice by British authorities , before the <unk> " Neutrality Zone " ended Black Osprey 's Dutch service in late 1939 . Sailing under charter to the Isthmian Line in 1940 , Black Osprey called at various ports in the Pacific Ocean . American Diamond sold Black Osprey to the British Ministry of War Transport in late 1940 . During the ship 's first transatlantic crossing under the British flag , she was sunk by German submarine U @-@ 96 on 18 February 1941 , with the loss of 25 men . The 11 survivors were picked up by a Norwegian ship and landed in at Barry . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the USSB for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Arrow , one of some 24 West ships built by Skinner & Eddy of Seattle , Washington . West Arrow ( Skinner & Eddy No. 12 ) was laid down on 20 September 1917 under the name Jas . G. Eddy , launched as West Arrow on 19 January 1918 , and completed on 26 February 1918 . 
 The ship was 5 @,@ 802 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 409 feet 5 inches ( 124 @.@ 79 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet 2 inches ( 16 @.@ 51 m ) abeam . West Arrow had a steel hull and a deadweight tonnage of 8 @,@ 800 DWT . The ship had a single steam turbine that drove her single screw propeller , and moved the ship at a 10 @.@ 5 @-@ knot ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ) pace . 
 = = Career = = 
 West Arrow was inspected by the 13th Naval District of the United States Navy after completion and was assigned the identification number of 2585 . Had she been commissioned , she would have been known as USS West Arrow ( ID @-@ 2585 ) , but the Navy neither took over the ship nor commissioned her . 
 Little is known of West Arrow 's early career , with almost no information regarding her World War I activities . During that war , many of the West ships carried grain products to the United Kingdom , France , and Italy , but it is not known whether West Arrow did so or not . One early mention of West Arrow in contemporary news accounts is found in The Washington Post , which reported in February 1921 that the cargo ship had delivered 742 " milch cows " to Bremen as a gift from American farmers from Texas and Kansas . The New York Times reported in September 1923 that West Arrow , heading from Liverpool to Boston , had been struck by the White Star Line ocean liner Haverford 1 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ) west of Queenstown , Ireland . Haverford , headed from Philadelphia to Liverpool with passengers , struck the cargo ship on the port side , 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) from the bow . A radio dispatch from West Arrow reported that she was proceeding under her own power and was not taking on any water . By March 1926 , West Arrow was sailing for American Diamond Lines in New York – Rotterdam service on a U.S. government @-@ subsidized mail route . In July 1932 , the ship was moved to a new Baltimore – Antwerp route , but by December 1934 was again sailing to Rotterdam . 
 In 1935 , American Diamond changed the name of West Arrow to Black Osprey , which remained on the Rotterdam route into 1936 . In March of that year , The Wall Street Journal — reporting on a large gold shipment from the United States to Holland — speculated that Black Osprey was the ship that had been selected to carry $ 345 @,@ 000 of gold for export . On 24 March 1938 , Black Osprey was sailing in a dense fog off St. Catherine 's Point on the Isle of Wight when she struck the 311 GRT British cargo ship Chagford , which sank within five minutes . Three of Chagford 's six @-@ man crew were picked up by Black Osprey , whose crew searched in vain for three hours for the other three men . After the fog lifted , the Chagford survivors were transferred to a fishing vessel that landed the crewmen , and Black Osprey resumed her Rotterdam – Philadelphia journey . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , Black Osprey , still registered in the neutral @-@ United States , was seized by British authorities on 6 September and detained at Weymouth . After carefully inspecting the ship for any contraband , the British released the ship after a week . However , on 31 October , the British again seized Black Osprey , and had not yet released her by 8 November , when the U.S. State Department released a list of 40 American ships that had been detained by belligerents . 
 The United States established a " Neutrality Zone " — a zone where American @-@ flagged ships could not enter — in late 1939 . As a result , American Diamond was unable to continue its Dutch route , and chartered the eight vessels it employed in that service ( which included Black Osprey ) to other U.S. companies . Black Osprey was one of several chartered to the Isthmian Line , and made voyages in the Pacific , calling at ports such as Singapore and Honolulu in 1940 . After a typhoon with winds in excess of 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) hit Wake Island in early October , Black Osprey was diverted through heavy seas to check on the welfare of the 35 men on the island , all found to be safe . 
 In November , American Diamond sought the permission of the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) , a successor to the USSB , to sell Black Osprey and seven other ships to the British . The USMC granted the permission , and Black Osprey was sold to the Ministry of War Transport for operation by the Cairn Line of Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne , for about $ 50 per deadweight ton , or around $ 440 @,@ 000 . 
 The deal was completed before Black Osprey 's 10 December sailing from Philadelphia to Baltimore under the British flag . Black Osprey then sailed from Baltimore on 25 January 1941 for Halifax , where she arrived on 30 January . Black Osprey , loaded with a cargo of steel , joined convoy HX 107 that sailed from that port for Liverpool on 3 February . After falling behind in the convoy , Black Osprey was torpedoed by U @-@ 96 under the command of Fregattenkapitän Heinrich Lehmann @-@ <unk> at 02 : 27 on 18 February south of Iceland , near position 61 ° 18 ′ N 18 ° 6 ′ W. The ship 's master and 24 crewmen died in the attack . Black Osprey 's 11 survivors were picked up by the Norwegian refrigerated cargo ship <unk> and landed at Barry . 
 = Ralph W. Aigler = 
 Ralph W. Aigler ( February 12 , 1885 – May 24 , 1964 ) was an American law professor at the University of Michigan from 1910 – 1954 , the University 's faculty representative to the Big Ten Conference from 1917 to 1955 , and chairman of Michigan 's Faculty Board in Control of Athletics from 1917 to 1942 . Aigler was a renowned expert on real property law and one of the advisors to the American Law Institute in the drafting of the Restatement of the Law of Property . He is best known , however , for his contributions to the athletics programs at the University of Michigan . Aigler 's contributions included leading Michigan back into the Big Ten Conference , leading the effort to construct Michigan Stadium , Yost Fieldhouse and other facilities , negotiating the Big Ten 's exclusive contract with the Rose Bowl starting in 1946 , hiring Fritz Crisler as football coach and athletic director , and acting as a spokesman for the University and Big Ten for many years on NCAA rules and eligibility issues . He was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1982 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Aigler was born in Bellevue , Ohio , in 1885 . He received an LL.B. degree from the University of Michigan Law School in 1907 . After graduating , he took a job with the Rosenthal & Hammill law firm in Chicago . 
 = = Law professor = = 
 Aigler joined the faculty of Michigan 's Law School and served as professor of law until 1954 . He was a renowned expert in the area of property law and was one of the advisors to the American Law Institute in the preparation of the first Restatement of the Law on Property in 1936 . Aigler published at least 123 articles on legal topics including real property , negotiable instruments , trusts , banks and banking , and Constitutional law . He also served as the President of the Association of American Law Schools . 
 = = Return to the Big Ten Conference = = 
 In addition to his work as a law professor , Aigler also served as the University 's faculty representative to the Big Ten Conference from 1917 – 1955 , and chairman of Michigan 's Faculty Board in Control of Athletics from 1917 – 1942 . Michigan had left the Big Ten Conference in 1907 , and Aigler led the school back into Conference membership . In June 1917 , The New York Times reported that the Conference 's faculty representatives had voted unanimously to invite Michigan to resume athletic relations with the " Big Nine . " The article noted that " Professor R.W. Aigler , Chairman of Michigan 's Athletic Board of Control " , attended the meeting as Michigan 's representative . 
 = = Construction of Michigan Stadium and other facilities = = 
 Aigler was also a leader in the construction of Michigan Stadium . In July 1926 , Aigler was appointed to the Stadium Building Committee , which was empowered " to appoint the General Engineer for the building of the stadium and to let contracts for the excavation , placing of abutments , drainage , etc . , so that work may proceed immediately . " The stadium was built on time and within its budget , and Aigler presented a detailed report on construction costs to the Board in Control of Athletics ; the total cost was $ 1 @,@ 131 @,@ 733 @.@ 36 . 
 He was also the chairman of the Board in Control of Athletics during the construction of Yost Fieldhouse and the Intramural Building . 
 = = Spokesman for Michigan and Big Ten athletics = = 
 Aigler also became the voice of the University , and at times of the Big Ten , on athletics eligibility and rules issues . In 1925 , Aigler defended intercollegiate athletics against charges that they had a negative effect on institutions of higher learning . Aigler said that the harm done by athletics was almost nothing when compared to the evils caused by " common loafing . " " The greatest vice in American college life today is loafing " , said Aigler . " There is no doubt that this far overshadows the harm created by intercollegiate athletics . No one would be more pleased than I to see a Phi Beta Kappa ( honorary scholarship society ) man receive as much recognition by the public as do our leading athletes . But such a condition would be contrary to human nature . Intellectual attainments do not make such an appeal , and that is why athletics are so prominent in colleges and universities today . " 
 In 1929 and 1930 , with the expulsion of the University of Iowa from the Big Ten for rules violations , Aigler was the spokesman of the Conference . He was also chairman of the Big Ten when Iowa sought reinstatement in 1933 . 
 When Howard J. Savage of the Carnegie Foundation issued " Bulletin 33 " in January 1930 criticizing recruitment and subsidization of athletes , Aigler challenged the fairness of the report . Aigler charged that Savage had " no intention of being fair and accurate " and accused Savage of questionable tactics in sending Michigan 's president a report of conditions different from the report in the bulletin . Aigler also accused Savage of removing letters from the files of the athletic department to which he was allowed full access . He also argued that the report reflected eastern bias : " In a number of places in the Bulletin the so @-@ called Western Conference ( now the Big Nine ) is referred to and , curiously , almost always with a sort of half veiled sneer . The truth apparently is that the Bulletin was written from the point of view of the Eastern athletic man who has it pretty firmly fixed in mind that , athletically , things are pretty raw in the territory generally West of the Alleghenies . " Aigler later issued a 31 @-@ page report on athletic conditions at Michigan , charging the Carnegie Foundation with " muck @-@ raking . " 
 When the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools sought to usurp rule @-@ making powers with regard to athletics , Aigler defended the authority and jurisdiction of the Big Ten . He said : " By agreement of the universities constituting the Big Ten for many years the making of rules and administration of athletic affairs , except that of purely local concern , have been delegated to the conference . This conference was a pioneer in athletic reform movements . Its organization has been the model for many years all over the country and its legislation generally has been widely copied . The aim of the conference not only has been to provide uniform eligibility rules , but also to * * * and keep athletic activities in a proper relationship to the main business of the universities . Recently there has been developed in the North Central association a movement to take hold of matters heretofore handled by the conference . " 
 Aigler came under fire in 1936 for his public statement about moves at the University of Wisconsin to shift oversight of athletics away from the faculty . Aigler issued a statement on behalf of the Big Ten criticizing Wisconsin for establishing a non @-@ faculty governing body . Aigler said , " The evidence before the Conference indicated strongly that the Wisconsin regents for several years have shown a disposition to subordinate faculty desires to the wishes of such outsiders . " In response to Aigler 's charge , one Wisconsin newspaper asked : " Was he Ignorant , or Did he Want Some Publicity ? " 
 As the long @-@ time chairman of the Board in Control of Athletics , Aigler issued annual reports to the University Senate on the state of the athletics programs . In 1921 , Aigler 's report stated that football was the only sport that paid for itself . In that fiscal year , football generated $ 73 @,@ 766 @.@ 76 " while its expenses were $ 41 @,@ 176 @.@ 10 , leaving a profit of $ 32 @,@ 590 @.@ 66 . " Baseball exceeded its revenues by $ 5 @,@ 000 , and track cost $ 8 @,@ 203 above receipts . According to Aigler 's reports total athletic receipts were $ 148 @,@ 000 against disbursements of $ 155 @,@ 000 . In 1937 , Aigler reported football receipts of $ 153 @,@ 836 @.@ 34 , exceeding disbursements by $ 102 @,@ 683 @.@ 42 . Football was again the only sport to pay for itself , and the profit from football was enough to create an overall profit of $ 50 @,@ 000 from the athletic programs . Aigler referred to the football 's team 's three @-@ year losing streak as a " lesson in humility . " 
 = = Hiring of Crisler and retirement of Yost = = 
 Fielding H. Yost became the football coach and then athletic director at the University of Michigan since 1901 . Aigler was also one of the first persons within the University to challenge Yost 's authority . In 1937 , Aigler 's hiring of former Notre Dame head coach Hunk Anderson as assistant football coach was seen as a sign that " the iron hand of Fielding Yost carries less power than it did . " At the time , it was reported : " Prof. Ralph Aigler is said to be rapidly becoming the dominant figure in Michigan 's athletics . " 
 Charges surfaced in November 1937 that Michigan 's freshman athletes had been subsidized with employment through an Ann Arbor manufacturing concern at a higher rate than other employees , and with funds controlled by alumni . When Aigler was reported to have said that " all freshman athletes at Michigan would be presumed to have been subsidized " , it was perceived to be part of political infighting among those in control of Michigan 's athletic programs . 
 Harry Kipke was fired as Michigan 's head coach in December 1937 , and Yost and Aigler were authorized to begin interviewing candidates for Kipke 's job . On February 10 , 1938 , Aigler made a public announcement that Fritz Crisler had been hired as Michigan 's new head football coach . Aigler was reported to have hired Crisler without Yost 's knowledge . In fact , the report of Crisler 's hiring was combined with indications that " the impending retirement of Fielding H. Yost as Michigan 's athletic director will be hastened to put Crisler in complete control . " At that point , " it became clear that Yost no longer ran the athletic department . Uncharacteristically , Yost did not raise a ruckus ; instead , he stepped aside graciously . " 
 The U @-@ M Regents reorganized athletic oversight in 1942 and replaced the Faculty Board of Athletic Control with a new intercollegiate athletics board , and Crisler succeeded Aigler as chairman of the body with ultimate authority to hire and fire coaches . Aigler remained the faculty representative to the Big Ten until 1955 . 
 = = Opposition to athletic scholarships = = 
 For many years , Aigler was an outspoken opponent of athletic scholarships . In 1939 , the Michigan Student Senate adopted a resolution favoring tuition scholarships for varsity athletes with at least a " B " average . The resolution was intended to rid college sports of unseemly under @-@ the @-@ table subsidies and to provide a " fair return for services " to the athletes who made possible the " big business " of college sports . Aigler opposed the move , saying : " You can 't give athletic scholarships without aspiring to the sigma of professionalism . . . . Other schools have tried it , and if the practice enjoys widespread continuance , it will prove the doom of collegiate sport . " Aigler argued that scholarships were a form of payment that undermined the concept of the unpaid student athlete . He said : " Those college teams made up of scholarship holders and the like should be grouped with the Giants , Redskins , Bears , etc . , instead of with those teams made up of bona fide college students to whom athletic participation must be secondary . " On another occasion , he urged schools granting athletic scholarships , though " ostensibly amateur " , to " turn square and associate themselves with the Washington Redskins and Green Bay Packers . " 
 Aigler even proposed that under the <unk> of the NCAA , the non @-@ scholarship colleges and universities should sever athletic relations with institutions refusing to meet the standard . In 1948 , Aigler was one of the drafters and advocates of the NCAA 's " purity " code prohibiting any form of subsidization of student athletes . Aigler later served as the Secretary @-@ Treasurer of the NCAA from 1955 – 1956 . In that role , Aigler eventually relented and worked on the rule changes permitting universities to grant full @-@ ride scholarships to student athletes . 
 = = Big Ten contract with Rose Bowl = = 
 Aigler also played an important role in securing the Big Ten 's long @-@ term contract with the Rose Bowl . Prior to the 1947 season , the visiting spot in the Rose Bowl was open to all conferences , and the Big Ten champion only appeared in the Rose Bowl on rare occasions . In November 1946 , Aigler was appointed to a five @-@ person steering committee assigned to negotiate an exclusive contract with the Rose Bowl . The Big Ten approved the exclusive arrangement by a vote of 7 to 2 , with Illinois and Minnesota the only opponents . The relationship was negotiated at meetings between Aigler and the Big Ten steering committee and the Pacific Coast Conference held in Berkeley , California in November 1946 . Aigler traveled to California again in May 1947 with William Reed to negotiate administrative details of the Rose Bowl arrangement with Pacific Coast Conference representative William C. Ackerman . The University of Michigan was the first Big Ten participant in the new Rose Bowl arrangement , defeating the USC Trojans 49 – 0 in the game held on January 1 , 1948 . 
 Aigler was again part of a five @-@ person committee in 1953 that negotiated the extension of the Big Ten contract with the Rose Bowl . The renewal passed by a vote of 6 – 4 , with Wisconsin , Purdue , and Illinois voting against the deal . 
 = = Later years and <unk> = = 
 Aigler was presented with an Honorary " M " ( normally reserved for varsity athletes ) by the University of Michigan " M " Club for his contributions to the school 's athletic programs . 
 In 1955 , Aigler moved to Tucson , Arizona , joined the faculty of the University of Arizona College of Law , and taught a course in bills and notes . 
 Aigler died in 1964 in at St. Joseph 's Hospital Tucson . He was posthumously inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1982 , as part of the fifth induction class . 
 = Pied @-@ Noir = 
 Pied @-@ Noir ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ] , Black @-@ Foot ) , plural Pieds @-@ Noirs , is a term referring to Christian and Jewish people whose families had migrated from all parts of the Mediterranean to French Algeria , the French protectorate in Morocco , or the French protectorate of Tunisia , where many had lived for several generations , and who were expelled at the end of French rule in North Africa between 1956 and 1962 . The term usually includes the North African Jews , who had been living there for many centuries but were awarded French citizenship by the 1870 <unk> decree . More specifically , the term Pieds @-@ Noirs is used for those of European ancestry who " returned " to mainland France as soon as Algeria gained independence , or in the months following . 
 From the French invasion on 18 June 1830 until its independence , Algeria was administratively part of France ( French departments in 1848 ) and its European population was simply called Algerians or colons ( colonists ) , whereas the Muslim people of Algeria were called Arabs , Muslims or Indigenous . 
 The term Pieds @-@ Noirs began to be used commonly shortly before the end of the Algerian independence war in 1962 . As of the last census in Algeria , taken on 1 June 1960 , there were 1 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 non @-@ Muslim civilians ( mostly Catholic ) in Algeria ( 10 percent of the total population including 130 @,@ 000 Algerian Jews ) . 
 During the Algerian War the Pieds @-@ Noirs overwhelmingly supported colonial French rule in Algeria and were opposed to Algerian nationalist groups such as the Front de libération nationale ( FLN ) and Mouvement national <unk> ( <unk> ) . The roots of the conflict reside in political and economic inequalities perceived as an " alienation " from the French rule as well as a demand for a leading position for the Berber , Arab , and Islamic cultures and rules existing before the French conquest . The conflict contributed to the fall of the French Fourth Republic and the mass exodus of Algerian Europeans and Jews to France . 
 After Algeria became independent in 1962 , about 800 @,@ 000 Pieds @-@ Noirs of French nationality were evacuated to mainland France while about 200 @,@ 000 chose to remain in Algeria . Of the latter , there were still about 100 @,@ 000 in 1965 and about 50 @,@ 000 by the end of the 1960s . 
 Those who moved to France suffered ostracism from the Left for their perceived exploitation of native Muslims and some blamed them for the war , thus the political turmoil surrounding the collapse of the French Fourth Republic . In popular culture , the community is often represented as feeling removed from French culture while longing for Algeria . Thus , the recent history of the pieds @-@ noirs has been imprinted with a theme of double alienation from both their native homeland and their adopted land . Though the term <unk> d <unk> implies that they once lived in France , most pieds @-@ noirs were born in Algeria . Many families had lived there for generations , and the Algerian Jews , who were considered pieds @-@ noirs , were as indigenous to Algeria as its Muslim population . 
 = = Origin of the term = = 
 The actual origin of the term Pied @-@ noir is unknown and therefore debated . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , it refers to " a person of European origin living in Algeria during the period of French rule , especially a French person expatriated after Algeria was granted independence in 1962 . " The Le Robert dictionary states that in 1901 the word indicated a sailor working barefoot in the coal room of a ship , who would find his feet dirtied by the soot and dust . In the Mediterranean , this was often an Algerian native , thus the term was used pejoratively for Algerians until 1955 when it first began referring to " French born in Algeria . " This usage originated from mainland French as a negative nickname . 
 There is also a theory that the term comes from the black boots of French soldiers compared to the barefoot Algerians . Other theories focus on new settlers <unk> their clothing by working in swampy areas , wearing black boots when on horseback , or trampling grapes to make wine . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = French conquest and settlement = = = 
 European settlement of Algeria began during the 1830s , after France had commenced the process of conquest with the military seizure of the city of Algiers in 1830 . The invasion was instigated when the Dey of Algiers struck the French consul with a fly @-@ <unk> in 1827 , although economic reasons are also cited . In 1830 the government of Charles X blockaded Algeria and an armada sailed to Algiers , followed by a land expedition . A troop of 34 @,@ 000 soldiers landed on 18 June 1830 , at Sidi <unk> , 27 kilometres ( 17 mi ) west of Algiers . Following a three @-@ week campaign , the Hussein Dey capitulated on 5 July 1830 , and was exiled . 
 In the 1830s the French controlled only the northern part of the country . Entering the Oran region , they faced resistance from Emir Abd al @-@ Kader , a leader of a Sufi Brotherhood . In 1839 Abd al @-@ Kader began a seven @-@ year war by declaring jihad against the French . The French signed two peace treaties with al @-@ Kader , but they were broken because of a miscommunication between the military and the Parisian government . In response to the breaking of the second treaty , Abd al @-@ Kader drove the French to the coast . In reply , a force of nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops marched to the Algerian countryside and forced Abd al @-@ Kader 's surrender in 1847 . In 1848 Algeria was divided into three départements of France , Alger , Oran , and Constantine , thus becoming part of the French state . 
 The French modeled their colonial system on their predecessors , the Ottomans , by co @-@ opting local tribes . In 1843 the colonists began supervising through Bureaux <unk> operated by military officials with authority over particular domains . This system lasted until the 1880s and the rise of the French Third Republic , when colonization intensified . Large @-@ scale regrouping of lands began when land @-@ speculation companies took advantage of government policy that allowed massive sale of native property . By the 20th century Europeans held 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 hectares ; by 1940 , 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 hectares , about 35 to 40 percent ; and by 1962 it was 2 @,@ 726 @,@ 700 hectares representing 27 percent of the arable land of Algeria . " Settlers came from all over the western Mediterranean region , particularly Italy , France , Spain , and Malta . 
 = = = Relationship to mainland France and Muslim Algeria = = = 
 The Pied @-@ Noir relationship with France and Algeria was marked by alienation . The settlers considered themselves French , but many of the Pieds @-@ Noirs had a tenuous connection to mainland France , which 28 percent of them had never visited . The settlers encompassed a range of socioeconomic strata , ranging from peasants to large landowners , the latter of whom were referred to as grands colons . 
 In Algeria , the Muslims were not considered French and did not share the same political or economic benefits . For example , the indigenous population did not own most of the settlements , farms , or businesses , although they numbered nearly 9 million ( versus roughly one million Pieds @-@ Noirs ) at independence . Politically , the Muslim Algerians had no representation in the Algerian National Assembly and wielded limited influence in local governance . To obtain citizenship , they were required to renounce their Muslim identity . Since this would constitute apostasy , only about 2 @,@ 500 Muslims acquired citizenship before 1930 . The settlers ' politically and economically dominant position worsened relations between the two groups . 
 = = = The Pied Noir population as part of the total Algerian population = = = 
 From roughly the last half of the 19th century until independence , the pied @-@ noirs accounted for approximately 10 % of the total Algerian population . Although they constituted a numerical minority , they were undoubtedly the prime political and economic force of the region . 
 In 1959 , the pieds @-@ noirs numbered 1 @,@ 025 @,@ 000 , and accounted for 10 @.@ 4 % of the total population of Algeria , a percentage gradually diminishing since the peak of 15 @.@ 2 % in 1926 . However , some areas of Algeria had high concentrations of pieds @-@ noirs , such as the regions of Bône ( now Annaba ) , Algiers , and above all the area from Oran to Sidi @-@ Bel @-@ Abbès . Oran had been under European rule since the 17th century , and the population in the Oran metropolitan area was 49 @.@ 3 % European and Jewish in 1959 . In the Algiers metropolitan area , Europeans and Jewish people accounted for 35 @.@ 7 % of the population . In the metropolitan area of Bône they accounted for 40 @.@ 5 % of the population . The département of Oran , a rich European @-@ developed agricultural land of 16 @,@ 520 km ² ( 6 @,@ 378 sq. miles ) stretching between the cities of Oran and Sidi @-@ Bel @-@ Abbès , and including them , was the largest area of pieds @-@ noirs density outside of the cities , with the pieds @-@ noirs accounting for 33 @.@ 6 % of the population of the département in 1959 . 
 = = = Sephardic Jewish community = = = 
 Jews were present in North Africa and Iberia for centuries , some since the time when " Phoenicians and Hebrews , engaged in maritime commerce , founded Hippo Regius ( current Annaba ) , <unk> , Caesarea ( current <unk> ) , and <unk> ( current Algiers ) . " A tradition told they arrived from Judea after the First Jewish @-@ Roman War ( 66 – 73 AD ) while it is known historically many Sephardi Jews came following the Spanish Reconquista . In 1870 , Justice Minister Adolphe Crémieux wrote a proposal , décret Crémieux , giving French citizenship to Algerian Jews . Thus , the Jews of Algeria came to be considered part of the Pied @-@ Noir community . This advancement was resisted by part of the larger Pied @-@ Noir community . In 1897 a wave of anti @-@ Semitic riots occurred in Algeria . During World War II the décret Crémieux was abolished under the Vichy regime , and Jews were barred from professional jobs between 1940 and 1943 . Citizenship was restored in 1943 . Many Jews fled the country to France in 1962 , alongside most other Pieds @-@ Noirs , after the Algerian War . 
 = = = Algerian War and exodus = = = 
 = = = = Algerian War = = = = 
 For more than a century France maintained colonial rule in Algerian territory . This allowed exceptions to republican law , including Sharia laws applied by Islamic customary courts to Muslim women which gave women certain rights to property and inheritance which they did not have under French law . Discontent among the Muslim Algerians grew after the World Wars , in which the Algerians sustained many casualties . Algerian nationalists began efforts aimed at furthering equality by listing complaints in the Manifesto of the Algerian People , which requested equal representation under the state and access to citizenship , but no equality for all citizens to preserve Islamic precepts . The French response was to grant citizenship to 60 @,@ 000 " meritorious " Muslims . During a reform effort in 1947 , the French created a bicameral legislature with one house for the French citizens and another for the Muslims but made a European 's vote equal seven times a Muslim 's vote . Paramilitary groups such as the Front de Libération nationale ( FLN ) appeared , claiming an Arabo @-@ Islamic brotherhood and state . This led to the outbreak of a war for independence , the Algerian War , in 1954 . 
 From the first armed operations of November 1954 , ' Pieds @-@ Noirs ' civilians have always been targets for FLN , either by assassination , bombing bars and cinemas and mass massacres , torture and rapes in farms . At the onset of the war , the Pieds @-@ noirs believed the French military would be able to overcome opposition . In May 1958 a demonstration for French Algeria , led by Pieds @-@ Noirs but including many Muslims , occupied an Algerian government building . General <unk> controlled the riot by forming a Committee of Public Safety demanding that his acquaintance Charles de Gaulle be named president of the French Fourth Republic , to prevent the " abandonment of Algeria " . This eventually led to the fall of the Republic . In response , the French Parliament voted 329 to 224 to place de Gaulle in power . Once de Gaulle assumed leadership , he attempted peace by visiting Algeria within three days of his appointment claiming " French Algeria ! " but in September 1959 he planned a referendum for Algerian self @-@ determination that passed overwhelmingly . Many French political and military leaders in Algeria viewed this as betrayal and formed the Organisation de l 'armée <unk> ( OAS ) that had much support among ' Pieds @-@ Noirs ' . This paramilitary group began attacking officials representing de Gaulle 's authority , Muslims , and de Gaulle himself . The OAS was also accused of murders and bombings nullifying reconciliation opportunities between the communities , while ' Pieds @-@ Noirs ' themselves never believed such reconciliation possible as their community was targeted from the start . 
 The opposition culminated in 1961 during the Algiers putsch of 1961 , led by retired generals . After this failure , on 18 March 1962 , de Gaulle and the FLN signed a cease @-@ fire agreement , the Évian Accords , and held a referendum . In July , Algerians voted 5 @,@ 975 @,@ 581 to 16 @,@ 534 to become independent from France . This was an occasion for a massacre of ' Pieds @-@ Noirs ' in Oran by a suburban Muslim population . European people were shot , molested and brought to Petit @-@ Lac slaughterhouse where they were tortured and executed . 
 = = = = Exodus = = = = 
 The exodus began once it became clear that Algeria would become independent . In Algiers , it was reported that by May 1961 the Pieds @-@ Noirs ' morale had sunk because of violence and allegations that the entire community of French nationals had been responsible for " terrorism , torture , colonial racism , and ongoing violence in general " and because the group felt " rejected by the nation as Pieds @-@ Noirs " . These factors , the Oran Massacre , and the referendum for independence caused the Pied @-@ Noir exodus to begin in earnest . 
 The number of Pied @-@ Noirs who fled Algeria totaled more than 800 @,@ 000 between 1962 and 1964 . Many Pieds @-@ Noirs left only with what they could carry in a suitcase . Adding to the confusion , the de Gaulle government ordered the French Navy not to help with transportation of French citizens . By September 1962 , cities such as Oran , Bône , and Sidi Bel Abbès were half @-@ empty . All administration , police , schools , justice , and commercial activities stopped within three months after many were told to choose either " la valise ou le <unk> " ( the suitcase or the coffin ) . 200 @,@ 000 Pieds @-@ Noirs chose to remain , but they gradually left through the following decade ; by the 1980s only a few thousand Pieds @-@ Noirs remained in Algeria . 
 The flight of the Pied @-@ Noirs dwarfed that of the Muslim <unk> who had fought on the French side during the Algerian War . Of approximately 250 @,@ 000 Muslim loyalists only about 90 @,@ 000 , including dependents , were able to escape to France and of those who remained many thousands were killed by lynch mobs or executed as traitors by the <unk> In contrast to the treatment of the European Pied @-@ Noirs , little effort was made by the French government to extend protection to the <unk> or to arrange their organised evacuation . 
 = = = = Flight to mainland France = = = = 
 The French government claimed that it had not anticipated that such a massive number would leave ; it believed that perhaps 300 @,@ 000 might choose to depart temporarily and that a large portion would return to Algeria . The administration had set aside funds for absorption of those they called " repatriates " to partly reimburse them for property losses . The administration avoided acknowledging the true numbers of refugees in order to avoid upsetting its Algeria policies . Consequently , few plans were made for their return , and , psychologically at least , many of the Pieds @-@ Noirs were alienated from both Algeria and France . 
 Many Pieds @-@ Noirs settled in continental France , while others migrated to New Caledonia , Australia , Italy , Spain , the United States , Canada , Israel , and Argentina . In France , many relocated to the south , which offered a climate similar to North Africa . The influx of new citizens bolstered the local economies ; however , the newcomers also competed for jobs , which caused resentment . In some ways , the Pieds @-@ Noirs were able to integrate well into the French community , relative to their Muslim counterparts . Their resettlement was made easier by the economic boom of the 1960s . However , the ease of assimilation depended on socioeconomic class . Integration was easier for the upper classes , many of whom found the transformation less stressful than the lower classes , who had no other capital than all they left in Algeria . Many were surprised that they were often treated as an " underclass or outsider @-@ group " with difficulties to get advancement in their careers . Also , many Pieds @-@ Noirs contended that the money allocated by the government to assist in relocation and reimbursement was insufficient regarding their loss . 
 Thus , the repatriated Pieds @-@ Noirs frequently felt " disaffected " from French society . They also suffered from a sense of alienation stemming from the French government 's changed position towards Algeria . Until independence , Algeria was legally a part of France ; after independence many felt that they had been betrayed and were now portrayed as an " embarrassment " to their country or to blame for the war . 
 = = The Song of the Africans = = 
 The pied @-@ noir community has adopted , as both an unofficial anthem and as a symbol of its identity , Captain Félix Boyer 's 1943 version of Le Chant des <unk> ( lit . " The Song of the Africans " ) . This was a 1915 Infanterie de Marine marching song , originally titled C 'est nous les Marocains ( lit . " We are the Moroccans " ) and dedicated to Colonel Van Hecke , commander of the WWI cavalry <unk> régiment de chasseurs d 'Afrique ( " 7th African Light Cavalry Regiment " ) . Boyer 's song was adopted by General de Lattre 's First Army ; drawn from units of the Army of Africa and including many pied @-@ noirs . The First Army used it during the World War II liberation campaign in Europe . The music and words were later utilized by the pied @-@ noirs to proclaim their allegiance to France . ( listen to the Chant des <unk> ) 
 The " Song of the Africans " was banned as official military music at the end of the Algerian War in 1962 until August 1969 , when the French Minister of Veterans Affairs ( Ministre des <unk> <unk> ) under Georges Pompidou , Henri <unk> , lifted the prohibition . 
 = = Notable Pieds @-@ Noirs = = 
 Louis Althusser , philosopher 
 Jacques <unk> , economist , writer 
 Paul Belmondo , sculptor , father of the actor Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo 
 Patrick <unk> , filmmaker 
 Patrick <unk> , singer 
 Albert Camus , author 
 Étienne <unk> , singer 
 Jacques Derrida , philosopher 
 Annie <unk> , circus clown 
 Tony Gatlif , filmmaker 
 Marlène Jobert , actress and author 
 Alphonse Juin , Marshal of France 
 Marcel Cerdan , boxer 
 Jean @-@ François <unk> , footballer 
 Enrico Macias , singer 
 Jean <unk> , author 
 Emmanuel <unk> , author 
 Yves Saint Laurent , fashion designer 
 = New Carissa = 
 MV New Carissa was a freighter that ran aground on a beach near Coos Bay , Oregon , United States , during a storm in February 1999 and subsequently broke apart . An attempt to tow the bow section of the ship out to sea failed when the tow line broke , and the bow was grounded again . Eventually , the bow was successfully towed out to sea and sunk . The stern section remained on the beach near Coos Bay . Fuel on board the ship was burned off in situ , but a significant amount was also spilled from the wreckage , causing ecological damage to the coastline . 
 The United States Coast Guard performed an investigation and found that captain 's error was the main cause of the wreck ; however , no criminal liability was established and the captain and crew were not charged . There were significant legal and financial consequences for the ship 's owners and insurer . 
 The stern section remained aground for over nine years . It was dismantled and removed from the beach in 2008 . 
 = = Vessel = = 
 New Carissa was a Panamanian @-@ flagged dry bulk freighter optimized for carriage of woodchips . She was owned by the Japanese shipping concern Nippon Yusen Kaisha via a subsidiary , Green Atlas Shipping . The ship 's operator and manager , <unk> <unk> Co . Ltd. and TMM Co . Ltd. respectively , were also based in Japan . The vessel was built by Imabari Shipbuilding Co. in Japan using an all @-@ steel construction , and was laid down on August 30 , 1989 . The freighter was 195 meters ( 639 ft ) long and 32 meters ( 106 ft ) wide , with a draft of 10 @.@ 8 m ( 35 @.@ 5 ft ) when fully loaded . She had a gross tonnage of 36 @,@ 571 tons , a net tonnage of 16 @,@ 524 tons , and was powered by an 8 @,@ 200 bhp ( 6 @,@ 100 kW ) direct @-@ drive diesel engine . She had a maximum crew complement of 26 sailors , and was in service hauling woodchips ( used for paper pulp production ) . The ship 's home port was Manila , Philippines , and her crew at the time of her grounding consisted entirely of Philippine nationals , commanded by Benjamin Morgado . New Carissa 's protection and indemnity insurance was provided by The Britannia Steam Ship Insurance Association Ltd . The ship 's Certificate of Financial Responsibility , which is required by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 and included USD $ 23 million of environmental liability insurance , was provided by <unk> Insurance and Guaranty Company Ltd . ( <unk> ) of Hamilton , Bermuda . 
 = = Grounding = = 
 On 4 February 1999 , New Carissa was bound for the Port of Coos Bay to pick up a load of wood chips . The ship 's crew was informed by the local bar pilots that weather conditions would prevent the ship ( which was empty at the time ) from entering Coos Bay harbor until the next morning . The captain ordered the ship to drop anchor 1 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) off the coast in order to ride out the storm . The crew used a single anchor to secure the ship . According to a United States Coast Guard review of the incident , the chain used was too short . The short chain and the weather conditions , including winds of 20 – 25 knots ( 37 – 46 km / h ) , caused the ship to drag her anchor . Poor navigational techniques and inadequate <unk> led to the crew 's failure to notice that the ship was moving . Once movement was detected , the crew attempted to raise anchor and maneuver away from the shore , but the weather and sea conditions made this difficult . By the time the anchor was raised , the ship had been pushed too close to the shore to recover . 
 The ship ran aground on the beach 2 @.@ 7 statute miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) north of the entrance to Coos Bay , and attempts to refloat her failed . Two of the five fuel tanks on the ship began to leak fuel onto the beach , eventually spilling approximately 70 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 260 m3 ) of viscous " bunker C " fuel oil and diesel onto the beach and into the water . 
 Neither the captain nor any of the 22 @-@ man crew was injured in the incident . 
 = = Rescue and recovery operations = = 
 Recovery operations began immediately when the grounding was first reported by the ship 's crew . Several factors combined to severely complicate the operation . A Unified Command for the operation , consisting of representatives from the Coast Guard , the State of Oregon , and rescue party operations , was quickly established . 
 = = = Initial rescue attempts = = = 
 Initial rescue operations were hampered by inclement weather . Attempts to move New Carissa under her own power failed , and tugboat assistance was not available immediately after the grounding . Only one tugboat was available locally , but she was unable to cross the Coos Bay bar because of safety concerns . It was also uncertain whether or not the locally available tugboat could have successfully rescued New Carissa . The nearest salvage tugboat capable of towing a large ship off a beach , Salvage Chief , was moored at her home port of Astoria , Oregon , 200 statute miles ( 320 km ) to the north , a 24 @-@ hour journey away . Salvage Chief had not sailed in over a year , and it took 18 hours to fuel , provision , and find a crew for the ship . Once mobilized , poor weather in the Astoria area prevented the tugboat from crossing the treacherous Columbia River bar for an additional two days . Salvage Chief did not arrive in the area until 8 February four days after the grounding occurred . 
 Continued poor weather drove New Carissa closer to the shore . Technical teams from two salvage contractors , Smit International and Salvage Master , had been working with the Coast Guard since February 5 and had drawn up plans to attempt to refloat the vessel , but when cracks in the hull and oil leaks were observed on February 8 , any refloating attempts were precluded by the focus on preventing of a large @-@ scale oil spill . In addition , Salvage Chief , upon her arrival , was unable to reach New Carissa with her tow gear . On 10 February New Carissa suffered major structural failure when the hull breached near the engine room , flooding the engines with seawater ( and thus disabling them ) . The ship 's insurers declared the vessel to be a total loss . As a result , New Carissa was no longer a salvageable vessel ; instead , she had effectively become a shipwreck . 
 = = = Wreck recovery operations = = = 
 Since the vessel was no longer seaworthy and could not move under its own power , even if freed from the beach , the focus of the operation changed . Oil from the ship 's fuel tanks continued to pose an environmental hazard , a situation exacerbated by both the ship 's structural failure and continuing pounding from the surf . In order to mitigate the situation , the Unified Command decided to set the fuel tanks on fire in order to burn off the oil . The first attempt was made on February 10 . Napalm and other incendiary devices were used to ignite the fuel , but only one of the diesel tanks was burned effectively . A second attempt was made on February 11 when US Navy explosive experts placed 39 shaped charges to breach the top of the fuel tanks from within the cargo holds . 2 @,@ 280 liters of napalm and nearly 180 kg of plastic explosives were also used to ignite the fuel on board . The ship burned for approximately 33 hours . Additional smaller @-@ scale attempts were made to burn more oil over the next two days , with limited success . The total amount of oil that was burned is estimated to be between 165 @,@ 000 and 255 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 620 and 970 m3 ) . The structural stress caused by the fire , combined with continued severe weather , caused the vessel to break into two sections around midnight on February 11 . 
 After additional weather @-@ related delays , on February 26 salvors managed to float the 440 – foot ( 132 m ) bow section and began the process of towing it out to sea for disposal . By March 1 , the tugboat Sea Victory had towed the bow from the beach and out to sea , initially followed by an oil skimmer vessel , <unk> Oregon <unk> . However , another severe storm forced the skimmer back to port , and when the tug was 50 miles ( 65 km ) off the coast , the tow line broke . The bow section floated for fourteen hours until it ran aground near <unk> , Oregon on March 3 , approximately 80 miles ( 130 km ) to the north of the original grounding site . On March 8 , the bow was again refloated , and by March 11 it was successfully towed 280 miles ( 450 km ) off the coast by Sea Victory and a second tug , <unk> . At this location , the Pacific Ocean is approximately 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) deep . The bow was sunk by two US Navy ships , the destroyer USS David R. Ray and the submarine USS Bremerton . Four hundred pounds ( 180 kg ) of high explosives were attached to the bow and detonated . Sixty @-@ nine rounds of gunfire from David R. Ray 's 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) deck guns then punctured the hull . After 40 minutes , the ship was still afloat with darkness and a storm approaching . To expedite the sinking , Bremerton fired a Mark 48 torpedo at the underside of the ship . Within ten minutes , the bow section flooded and sank stern @-@ first , trapping the remaining oil within . 
 The stern section remained aground , but did not pose a significant oil spill threat as the majority of the oil on board had already leaked or burned . Some remaining oil that was found on board was skimmed or pumped out manually . In June 1999 , Green Atlas awarded a ship breaking contract to <unk> Marine Co. and Fred Devine Diving and Salvage . Although the two companies were able to remove approximately one @-@ third of the stern , their attempts to dismantle the largest section or tow it to sea were unsuccessful and had to be abandoned over the winter . However , work did not resume in the spring of 2000 , and in 2001 , a salvage expert hired by Green Atlas claimed the stern should not be removed because it would create a dangerous work environment . The state later accused Green Atlas of sabotaging the stern removal effort in order to save money ; a protracted legal battle ensued . 
 = = Dismantling and removal of stern section = = 
 Although the initial attempts to dismantle or tow the stern to sea failed , the State of Oregon still intended to see the remainder of the vessel removed from the beach . In 2006 , the state 's lawsuit against the ship 's owners was settled , clearing the legal obstacles that prevented removal and providing the funds necessary to finance the project . Removal plans were complicated by the fact that the stern had become deeply embedded in the sand in the seven years since the wreck , with some portions of the stern estimated to be 20 – 30 feet ( 6 – 9 m ) below the sand line . 
 A project to remove the stern by dismantling it on the beach was started in June 2008 , after Oregon legislative approval . The dismantling , expected to cost USD $ 18 million , was approved by the State Legislative Emergency Board in September 2006 . The move was originally scheduled for 2007 , but delays in the negotiations pushed the project back a year . Due to weather and surf conditions , the project had to be undertaken during the spring and summer months . Titan Maritime Company , a subsidiary of Crowley Maritime Corporation , signed a USD $ 16 @.@ 4 million contract with the Oregon Department of State Lands . Titan Maritime used large <unk> barges , Karlissa A and Karlissa B , for the New Carissa dismantling project . Once the barges were in place , a cable car system was installed to allow the crews and their equipment access to the barges from the beach . The barges allowed the crews to access the wreck from 40 ft ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) above the surf . The crews cut New Carissa into removable pieces and then lifted them to the barges with cranes . The cutting portion of Titan 's plan was largely completed by July 31 , 2008 , and the company then focused on pulling the stern from the sand , a process that was measured in inches . The project 's managing director expressed confidence that the removal deadline of October 1 , 2008 would be met . By September 2008 , Titan had successfully removed the majority of the wreck ; no part of the ship was visible from above the water , and only a few relatively small pieces remained submerged . Karlissa A and Karlissa B were relocated on October 12 , 2008 , and Titan 's shore operations were completely removed by November 2008 . 
 = = = Debate about removal = = = 
 Prior to the dismantling project , there was debate by local residents on whether the wrecked stern should be removed . Some local officials believed the stern , which lay on a remote area of the beach , was not a hazard or an eyesore . Arnie <unk> , a state representative from Coos Bay , called the wreck a potential tourist attraction . For some residents , uncertainty remained surrounding Titan 's removal plan , with the worry that the stern would be unable to withstand the force of the hydraulic pullers and that parts of the ship already buried in the sand would be unmovable . The president of the Coos Bay city council expressed concern that the proposed removal operation could cause ecological damage that would not occur if the ship were left on the beach . He further noted that " shipwrecks on the Oregon Coast are part of our history . There are a lot of ways you could better spend the money here . " 
 Many others argued that the ship should be removed . Louise <unk> , the director of the Oregon Department of State Lands , called the removal of the stern a necessary step to demonstrate that the state is " serious about removing wrecks " . She stated that if the stern were not removed , the argument that the ship is trespassing on state property ( used in the state 's lawsuit against New Carissa owners ) would be undermined should another vessel wreck off the Oregon coast . The sentiment was later echoed by Oregon Secretary of State Bill Bradbury , who also noted that the settlement of the lawsuit with the ship 's owners leaves the state exposed to any liability issues concerning the ship . Many environmentalists , as well as federal biologists and residents of the local community , were concerned about the potential for further ecological damage should the vessel leak any of the fuel oil that remained on board . The editorial board of The Oregonian argued that allowing the stern to remain would send a message that the state is willing to " tolerate permanent damage to its beaches " . The newspaper also rejected the notion that the wreckage should be compared to the Peter Iredale , a sailing ship that wrecked on a beach near Astoria in the early 1900s , and whose remnants are a popular tourist draw . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 The wreck of New Carissa caused one of the most serious oil spills to affect the state of Oregon , and the worst since a 1984 spill near Longview , Washington that dumped 200 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 760 m3 ) of oil into the Columbia River . As Oregon has no significant oil refinery facilities , oil tankers do not often dock at its ports , making the state relatively safe from oil spills . Analysis conducted by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service determined that over 3 @,@ 000 shorebirds and seabirds perished . The birds belonged to more than 50 species . Among the birds killed were 262 threatened marbled murrelets and between four and eight endangered western snowy plovers . Harbor seals , fish , and shellfish were also killed or affected . Several beaches were fouled , with <unk> continuing to wash up for more than a month after the wreck . 
 Despite the loss of marine life , the initial burning of the oil and the successful removal of the bow section prevented what could have been a worse spill . Captain Mike Hall of the Coast Guard stated that " at least 82 percent of the oil on board New Carissa never reached the wildlife or the pristine shoreline of Oregon 's coast " . The environmental impact of the sinking of the bow section was thought to be minimized since it was towed out beyond the continental shelf , into very deep water . Any remaining oil on board is unlikely to have affected marine life since the low temperatures at the bottom of the ocean would have caused it to solidify . 
 Prior to the stern section 's removal from the beach , environmentalists and local officials were concerned that the remains posed a continuing environmental and safety hazard . 
 = = Legal aftermath = = 
 Subsequent litigation proved expensive for the ship 's owners and insurers , and an investigation into the incident delayed most of the crew 's return to their home country . 
 = = = Litigation = = = 
 In 2001 , Green Atlas Shipping and its insurer , Britannia Steam Ship Insurance Association , sued the United States for US $ 96 million , claiming negligence on the part of the Coast Guard due to faulty nautical charts . They also alleged failure on the part of the local bar pilots to advise the ship 's crew not to anchor in the area , and that dredging by the United States Army Corps of Engineers had exacerbated the problems with the anchor . The U.S. countersued for US $ 7 million in damages . In 2004 , the two sides reached an agreement in which Green Atlas would pay the U.S. US $ 10 @.@ 5 million to assist with cleanup costs , and the U.S. paid Green Atlas US $ 4 million in settlement of the faulty charts claim . The net result of the settlement was payment of US $ 6 @.@ 5 million to the U.S. Although this was far less than the damages claimed by the U.S. for environmental cleanup and restoration costs , government officials still saw the settlement as a victory since the shipping company was forced to pay for part of the damage . Some Coos County officials were dissatisfied with the settlement , however , stating that it should have instead been paid to local business owners who were negatively impacted by the closure of the beach . 
 The State of Oregon demanded that the ship 's owners or their insurers remove the ship or pay a US $ 25 million bond to cover the cost of removing the ship and for environmental damages . The state also filed a lawsuit in Coos County , demanding removal , storage fees of USD $ 1 @,@ 500 per day , restoration of the beach , and other unspecified damages . The state alleged negligence on the part of Morgado and also accused Green Atlas shipping of attempting to avoid the expense of the stern dismantling . On November 13 , 2002 , a Coos County jury found the ship 's owners guilty of negligent trespass , and awarded the state US $ 25 million in damages . That sum was placed in escrow , pending appeal . On May 23 , 2006 , a settlement was reached in the appeal ; the state kept US $ 20 million of the US $ 25 million in escrow , plus US $ 2 @.@ 1 million in interest earned on the escrow account . The remaining US $ 5 million was returned to Green Atlas Shipping . Of the US $ 22 @.@ 1 million that the state was awarded in the settlement , US $ 3 @.@ 1 million was used to pay the state 's legal fees . The remaining US $ 19 million was reserved for cleanup , including the removal of the vessel 's stern . 
 Numerous private parties , including at least one oyster farmer whose beds were contaminated by oil , successfully sued for damages . 
 = = = Crew investigation = = = 
 The captain and most of the crew of the ship — all nationals of the Philippines — had to face a U.S. Coast Guard Board of Inquiry , which required them to remain in the United States for several weeks after the wreck . In addition , a federal grand jury investigated the incident for criminal wrongdoing . Captain Morgado refused to answer many of the questions posed at the inquiry , citing his Fifth Amendment rights . The crew was released after their testimony and returned to the Philippines . On September 16 , the Coast Guard issued its findings that captain 's error was the primary cause of the wreck , with the first and third officers of the ship also partly responsible . The investigation found no evidence of criminal wrongdoing , and no charges were filed against any member of the New Carissa crew . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Portland @-@ based musician Sarah Dougher 's 2000 album The Walls Ablaze included a song titled " The New Carissa " . 
 = William H. Prescott = 
 William Hickling Prescott ( May 4 , 1796 – January 28 , 1859 ) was an American historian and <unk> , who is widely recognized by historiographers to have been the first American scientific historian . Despite suffering from serious visual impairment , which at times prevented him from reading or writing for himself , Prescott became one of the most eminent historians of 19th century America . He is also noted for his <unk> memory . 
 After an extensive period of study , during which he sporadically contributed to academic journals , Prescott specialized in late Renaissance Spain and the early Spanish Empire . His works on the subject , The History of the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella the Catholic ( 1837 ) , The History of the Conquest of Mexico ( 1843 ) , A History of the Conquest of Peru ( 1847 ) and the unfinished History of the Reign of Phillip II ( 1856 – 1858 ) have become classic works in the field , and have had a great impact on the study of both Spain and Mesoamerica . During his lifetime , he was upheld as one of the greatest living American intellectuals , and knew personally many of the leading political figures of the day , in both the United States and Britain . Prescott has become one of the most widely translated American historians , and was an important figure in the development of history as a rigorous academic discipline . Historians admire Prescott for his exhaustive , careful , and systematic use of archives , his accurate recreation of sequences of events , his balanced judgments and his lively writing style . He was primarily focused on political and military affairs , largely ignoring economic , social , intellectual , and cultural forces that in recent decades historians have focused on . Instead , he wrote narrative history , subsuming unstated causal forces in his driving storyline . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William H. Prescott was born in Salem , Massachusetts on May 4 , 1796 , the first of seven children , although four of his siblings died in infancy . His parents were William Prescott , Jr . , a lawyer , and his wife , née Catherine Greene Hickling . His grandfather William Prescott served as a colonel during the American Revolutionary War . 
 Prescott began formal schooling at the age of seven , studying under Mr. Jacob Knapp . The family moved to Boston , Massachusetts in 1808 , where his father 's earnings substantially increased . His studies continued under Dr. John Gardiner , rector of Trinity Episcopal Church . As a young man , Prescott frequented the Boston Athenæum , which at the time held the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ volume private library of John Quincy Adams , who was on a diplomatic mission to Russia . In 1832 , Prescott became a trustee of the library , a position he held for 15 years . 
 Prescott enrolled at Harvard College as a second year student ( sophomore ) in August 1811 , at the age of 15 . He was not considered academically distinguished , despite showing promise in Latin and Greek . Prescott found mathematics particularly difficult , and resorted to memorizing mathematical demonstrations word @-@ for @-@ word , which he could do with relative ease , in order to hide his ignorance of the subject . Prescott 's eyesight degenerated after being hit in the eye with a crust of bread during a food fight as a student , and it remained weak and unstable throughout the rest of his life . Prescott was admitted to the Phi Beta Kappa Society as a senior , which he considered a great personal honor , and graduated from Harvard in 1814 . After a short period of rheumatic illness , he embarked on an extended tour of Europe . 
 Prescott first traveled to the island of São Miguel in the Azores , where his grandfather and Portuguese grandmother lived . After two weeks , he left for the cooler climate of London , where he stayed with the distinguished surgeon Astley Cooper and the oculist William Adams . Prescott first used a <unk> while staying with Adams ; the tool became a permanent feature of his life , allowing him to write independently in spite of his impaired eyesight . He visited Hampton Court Palace with future American president John Quincy Adams , at the time a diplomat in London , where they saw the Raphael Cartoons . In August 1816 , Prescott traveled to Paris , but later moved on to Italy , where he spent the winter . He returned to Paris in early 1817 , where he chanced to meet the American <unk> George Ticknor , and made another visit to England . Prescott spent some time in Cambridge , where he saw the manuscripts of Isaac Newton 's works , and returned to the United States in the same year . Prescott 's first academic work , an essay submitted anonymously , was rejected by the North American Review in late 1817 . After a short period of courtship , he married Susan Amory , the daughter of Thomas Coffin Amory and Hannah Rowe Linzee , on May 4 , 1820 . 
