 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career : The History of Ferdinand and Isabella = = = 
 In 1821 , Prescott abandoned the idea of a legal career because of the continued deterioration of his eyesight , and resolved to devote himself to literature . Although he initially studied a wide range of subjects , including Italian , French , English and Spanish literature , American history , classics and political philosophy , Prescott came to focus on Italian poetry . Among the works he studied during this period were such classics as Dante 's Divine Comedy and Boccacio 's Decameron . His first published works were two essays in the North American Review — both discussing Italian poetry . The first of these , published in 1824 , was titled Italian Narrative Poetry , and became somewhat controversial after it was heavily criticized in an Italian review by Lorenzo Da Ponte , the librettist of Mozart 's Don Giovanni . Prescott wrote a succinct reply to Da Ponte 's fifty @-@ page argument in the North American Review of July 1825 . Da Ponte published the criticisms as an appendix to his translation of <unk> 's Economy of Human life , which resulted in Prescott noticing them rather late . 
 Prescott first became interested in the history of Spain after his friend , the Harvard professor George Ticknor , sent him copies of his lectures on the subject . Prescott 's studies initially remained broad , but he started preparing material on Ferdinand and Isabella in January 1826 . His acquaintance Pascual de Gayangos y Arce helped him construct a sizable personal library of historical books and manuscripts concerning the subject . Alexander Hill Everett , an American diplomat in Spain , also provided him with material which was unavailable to Prescott in Boston . However , progress was stalled almost immediately , due to a sudden deterioration in Prescott 's eyesight . Unable to find a reader fluent in Spanish , Prescott was forced to work through Spanish texts with an assistant who did not understand the language . When Alexander Everett heard of this situation , he provided Prescott with the services of George Lunt , who had adequate knowledge of Spanish for the task . However , this could only be a temporary arrangement , and he was replaced by a man named Hamilton Parker , who held the position for a year . Eventually George Ticknor , who was by then in charge of the department of modern literature at Harvard University , found James L. English , who worked with Prescott until 1831 . Among the books studied by Prescott in this period , Ticknor lists Juan Antonio <unk> 's Historia <unk> de la <unk> de España , Andrés <unk> 's Historia de los Reyes <unk> don Fernando y doña Isabel , Voltaire 's Charles XII and William Roscoe 's Life of Lorenzo de Medici , which were to be the sources on which the History of Ferdinand and Isabella was to be based . In spring 1828 , Prescott visited Washington , where he and Ticknor dined with John Quincy Adams at the White House , and saw Congress in session . 
 Due in part to his own condition , Prescott was interested in aiding the blind and partially sighted . The Perkins School for the Blind , then known as the New England Asylum , had been founded in Boston , Massachusetts by Samuel Gridley Howe , Thomas <unk> Perkins and John Dix Fisher and 28 others in 1829 . Prescott involved himself from the very start of the project , becoming a trustee in 1830 . He published an article in support of education for the blind in the North American Review of July 1830 , and helped to raise $ 50 @,@ 000 for the organization in May 1833 . 
 His work was disturbed in February 1829 by the unexpected death of his eldest daughter Catherine , who was only four years old . This led him to reconsider his position on religion — previously an agnostic , his interest in Christianity was renewed , and having read the Bible , the works of the theologian William Paley as well as more skeptical works such as Hume 's On Miracles , he came to acknowledge the " moral truth " of the gospels , while remaining opposed to the doctrines of orthodox Christianity . Despite this personal tragedy , and his own continued ill health , Prescott had gathered sufficient material to begin drafting the History in October 1829 . At around this time , Prescott read the works of Gabriel Bonnot de Mably , including his historiographical piece De l ’ étude de l ’ histoire . He henceforth aimed to write history to de Mably 's romantic ideal , and on more than one occasion expressed his indebtedness to him . Prescott also encountered <unk> de la <unk> Doña Isabel , by his Spanish contemporary Diego <unk> , which helped shape his views concerning the monarchs ' political roles . Due to further problems with his eyesight , it took him sixteen months to write the first three hundred pages of the History . It was largely finished by 1834 , but Prescott dedicated two years to abridging and redrafting it . He was also briefly engaged in writing a biography of Charles Brockden Brown for Jared Sparks ' Library of American Biography . Prescott was not familiar with American literature , and he based the work on other contemporary biographies of Brown . As a result , the biography has had little academic impact . In 1835 , he took residence in the rural town of Nahant , Massachusetts , due to concerns about his health . He was here accustomed to riding his horses for the purpose of exercise , and he persevered even in sub @-@ zero temperatures . Prescott finished the concluding chapter of the work in July 1836 , and despite the amount of time and effort which he had spent on the work , was at first unsure about publishing it . However , his father argued that refusing to do so would amount to cowardice , and this swayed him . Prescott had previously considered publishing the work in London first , and therefore a printed draft copy of the work was sent to a Colonel Aspinwall for consideration . However , both Longman and Murray , which were at the time the leading British publishers , refused the work , and Prescott decided to postpone . 
 The History of Ferdinand and Isabella was published on Christmas Day , 1837 by the American Stationery Company , Boston , with a print run of 500 copies . It was dedicated to his father . To the surprise of Prescott and the publisher , the book sold very well — the original print run was insufficient to adequately supply Boston 's bookshops , let alone the whole nation 's . It was first published in London by Richard Bentley in early 1838 . The work received excellent critical reviews , both in America and in Britain , where Henry Vassall @-@ Fox and Robert Southey expressed their admiration of the work . It was also noticed in France , despite the fact that a French translation was not available at the time . Prescott was adamant that his work should not be altered by anyone other than himself , and when he heard that his publishers were considering an abridgement of the History of Ferdinand and Isabella in June 1839 , he produced an abridgement of the work himself , which resulted in the original project 's cancellation . He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in May 1839 . 
 = = = The Conquest of Mexico = = = 
 Prescott expressed interest in his correspondence in writing a biography of Molière , and Ticknor records that he sent Prescott " a collection of about 50 volumes " of relevant material . However , after writing to Ángel Calderón de la Barca , a Spanish minister living in Mexico , who was able to provide source material , Prescott started research on what was to become the History of the Conquest of Mexico . He extensively read the works of Wilhelm von Humboldt , who had written on Mesoamerica , and started corresponding with the historian Washington Irving , the Swiss writer <unk> and the French historian Jacques Nicolas Augustin Thierry . He also received assistance in collecting sources from a college friend , Middleton , and a Dr. Lembke . In contrast to the lengthy time spent researching the History of Ferdinand and Isabella , Prescott started drafting the History of the Conquest of Mexico in October 1839 . However , Prescott faced difficulties in writing the work which he had not encountered previously . There was relatively little scholarship on Aztec civilization , and Prescott dismissed much of it as " speculation " , and he therefore had to rely almost exclusively on primary sources ( with the exception of Humboldt ) . In particular , he considered Edward King 's theory that the pre @-@ Columbian civilizations were non @-@ indigenous to be fallacious , although he was greatly indebted to him for his anthology of Aztec codices in the Antiquities of Mexico . Prescott also studied Spanish writers contemporary to the conquest , most significantly Torquemada and Toribio de Benavente . 
 Prescott received three honorary degrees in this period — an honorary doctorate in laws from Columbia University in autumn 1840 , the College of William and Mary in July 1841 and South Carolina College in December 1841 . He also helped Frances Inglis find a publisher for her autobiographical work Life in Mexico . Moreover , Frances Inglis was one of Prescott 's most valuable correspondents during the writing of the " History of the Conquest of Mexico . " She is cited by Prescott five times throughout the text , and is described by him as , " one of the most delightful of modern traveller 's . " 
 Prescott found it difficult to evaluate Mesoamerican scientific and mathematical achievements , because of his relative ignorance of those subjects . While working in Boston in 1841 , he met George Howard , who was to stay a close friend for the remainder of his life . Prescott worked industriously throughout 1840 – 1842 , and as a result , the work was finished by August 1843 . It was published by Harper & Brothers , New York in December , Bentley issuing the British edition . His elderly father had suffered a stroke in October , which resulted in temporary paralysis , so Prescott spent most of the winter attending him in Pepperell . The History of the Conquest of Mexico was received extremely well , both critically and by the general public , despite Prescott 's fears to the contrary . Those praising the work included George Hillard in the North American Review , George Ticknor Curtis in the Christian Examiner , Joseph Cogswell in the Methodist Quarterly , as well as the Dean of St. Paul 's , Henry Hart Milman . 
 = = = The Conquest of Peru = = = 
 In 1844 , Prescott was painted by Joseph Alexander Ames , and also commissioned a bust from Richard Saltonstall Greenough . He was not active in researching for the Conquest of Peru until spring 1844 , although he had already decided to write a work concerning Inca civilization while researching pre @-@ Columbian Mexico , and listened to Inca Garcilaso de la Vega 's <unk> Reales de los Incas . He further studied Pedro <unk> de León 's <unk> del Perú , the works of Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa and Diego Fernández 's Primera y <unk> parte de la Historia del Piru . Prescott 's progress was stalled by the unexpected death of his brother Edward at sea . His daughter Elizabeth was seriously ill , so Prescott and his family traveled to Niagara , which he considered a more healthy environment for her . After her recovery , they returned to Nahant in the summer , where Prescott started drafting the Conquest , and , as was his custom , spent the autumn in <unk> . Prescott 's father died at the age of 82 on December 8 , which deeply upset him . He took a two @-@ month break from writing to support his widowed mother and settle matters concerning his father 's estate . His father left numerous stocks , shares and property that amounted to $ 343 @,@ 736 @.@ 86 , almost all of which was shared between Prescott and his sister . Prescott was elected to the Institut de France in February 1845 , in recognition of his accomplishments as a historian . He took the place of Martín Fernández de <unk> , who had died the previous year , after a vote was cast . He was also admitted to the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin . In the summer of 1845 , a collection of articles Prescott had published in the North American Review were published as Biographical and Critical Miscellanies by Bentley in octavo , and an edition was also prepared simultaneously by Harper & Brothers in New York . Prescott was writing 12 pages of the work per day in the summer of 1845 , and completed the first two chapters of the Conquest . He used the inheritance from his father to buy a house on Beacon Street in Boston . The building is now a National Historic Landmark , and is also known as the William Hickling Prescott House . Prescott moved into the house during December 1845 , and set himself a year to finish the Conquest of Peru . In March , his eyesight , which had recovered significantly , suddenly deteriorated . Prescott was also suffering from acute dyspepsia and rheumatism , and he travelled to Nahant to " benefit from the sea @-@ air " . This did not prevent him travelling to Washington , where he dined at the White House with President James K. Polk . He was also entertained by John Y. Mason , the former United States Secretary of the Navy , who informed him that a copy of Prescott 's Conquest of Mexico had been placed in the library of every fighting ship . The Conquest of Peru was completed in March 1847 . As with previous works , it was published by Harper & Brothers in the United States and Bentley in Britain . The original US print run was 7 @,@ 500 copies , and the books were sold for $ 1 each . It was translated into Spanish , French , German and Dutch , and sold excellently . As with his previous works , it was also well @-@ received critically . 
 = = = Research on Philip II = = = 
 Shortly after the publication of the Conquest of Peru , Prescott turned his mind to writing a history of Philip II of Spain , which he had been contemplating for several years . John Lothrop Motley , who planned to write an independent work on the subject , was aided by Prescott , who gave him access to his library . Although the two corresponded , there seems to have been little collaboration on their respective works . Prescott had started searching for sources as early as 1842 , but a number of difficulties confronted him in his study of Philip II . The principal archives of historical material were held in <unk> , but neither Lembke ( who had collected materials for the Conquest of Mexico ) nor Middleton were able to gain access to them . They had been informed that the library was so disordered as to make productive research impossible , even if access had been gained . However , Lembke , who as a diplomat had been expelled from Spain , made the acquaintance of two wealthy Parisian scholars , Mignet and <unk> @-@ Compans , who offered him access to their manuscript collections . Furthermore , de Gayangos assisted greatly by locating important documents in the British Museum and in the collection of the <unk> Thomas Phillipps , who owned around 60 @,@ 000 manuscripts . He also borrowed several manuscripts from the archives in Brussels , having received letters from the respected Belgian diplomat Sylvain Van de Weyer in London. de Gayangos became Professor of Arabic literature at the Complutense University of Madrid in late 1842 , and subsequently lent Prescott rare books and manuscripts from the university library . By the summer of 1848 , Prescott had over 300 works on the subject at his disposal , but he continued to have serious problems with his eyesight ; an examination by an oculist confirmed that there was untreatable damage to his retina . Prescott had been commissioned by the Massachusetts Historical Society to write a biography of the scholar John Pickering in 1848 , which he wrote for publication later in that year . Prescott was invited to write a history of the Mexican – American War , but declined , as he was uninterested in writing on contemporary events . 
 Prescott 's main secondary source for the history was Leopold von Ranke 's <unk> und Völker von Süd @-@ Europa im <unk> und <unk> Jahrhundert , a comprehensive work which included a detailed history of the papacy . Prescott admired Ranke 's empirical historical method , and considered his work to be the best of his predecessors on the subject . He had four copies of the relevant sections of the work reprinted in a large typeface so he could read it without assistance . He had made a broad plan of the work by February 1849 . Prescott started writing the draft on July 26 . At this time , Prescott was a creditor of John White Webster , the chemist and murderer , and he was subsequently involved in his trial . 
 = = = Visits to Washington and Europe = = = 
 Prescott visited Washington D.C. in spring 1850 , where he met Zachary Taylor , then President of the United States , as well as numerous other prominent figures , including Henry Bulwer , the British ambassador , and Daniel Webster , the former Secretary of State , who had been a friend of Prescott 's father . Soon afterward , he decided to visit England . He embarked from New York on May 22 , and arrived at Liverpool on June 3 . There he stayed with an old friend , Alexander Smith , and became reacquainted with Mary Lyell , the wife of the geologist Charles Lyell . He traveled with the <unk> to London , where they stayed in Mivart 's Hotel . Prescott was greeted in London , as in Washington , by the most important members of society — he dined with the Foreign Secretary and future Prime Minister Henry Temple , the former Prime Minister Robert Peel , as well as the elderly Duke of Wellington . He went to the races at Ascot , and was presented at court to Queen Victoria . On June 22 , he traveled to Oxford to receive an honorary doctorate in law . In Oxford , he stayed at Cuddesdon Palace , the home of the Bishop of Oxford , Samuel Wilberforce , who was absent because of the christening of the infant Prince Arthur . Prescott met Spencer Compton , the president of the Royal Society , who was also receiving an honorary degree . He left London for Paris , where he arrived on July 20 . Two days later , he traveled to Brussels , where he stayed in Coudenberg , the site of a residence of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V , returning to London on July 29 . Traveling north , Prescott visited Alnwick Castle and the ruins of <unk> Abbey in Northumbria . On his arrival in Edinburgh , he met the geologists Adam Sedgwick and Roderick Murchison , whom he accompanied to Inveraray , where he visited Inveraray Castle . Prescott then traveled south , through Staffordshire , where he was entertained by George Sutherland @-@ Leveson @-@ Gower . He embarked for New York on September 14 , arriving on September 27 . 
 = = = Final works = = = 
 Prescott spent the winter in Boston , and returned to the composition of his work . He gradually changed the focus of the History , deciding that he was a better writer of history than biography and worked solidly for the next two years , alternating between Boston and Nahant . This period was interrupted only by the marriage of his daughter Elizabeth in early 1852 . Her husband was James Alexander ; they settled in a house near the family home in Pepperell . Prescott 's mother fell ill on May 17 and died soon after , which caused Prescott to fall into a bout of depression that lasted until the winter . He returned to his work , and continued at the pace that he was able through the remainder of 1852 and 1853 , which passed uneventfully . Prescott started to suffer seriously from rheumatism during the former year , and as a result he abandoned his residence at Nahant . He bought a house in the then rural town of Lynn , Massachusetts , where he was visited by Charles Lyell and his family in June 1853 . On August 22 , he finished the second volume of the History . The first two volumes were finished by May 1855 , but not immediately published . Changes in British copyright law and a change of publishers caused Prescott to delay publication until November . Compared to his previous works , the History received little coverage in the press or in academic journals . It was suggested to him at this time that he should write a biography of Charles V , but he declined , as he regarded the work of William Robertson on the subject to be definitive . However , he wrote an appendix to Robertson 's The History of the reign of Charles V in May 1855 ; it was published in December 1856 . Previously uninterested in politics ( although he had predicted the Whig victory in 1840 , ) Prescott supported and voted for the Republican John C. Frémont in the 1856 Presidential election . He continued to work on the third volume of the History until he suffered a stroke on 3 February 1858 . Prescott recovered , but his health was permanently affected , and he decided to temporarily retire from writing . The third volume was therefore published in April , and its scope was more limited than Prescott had originally planned . He worked on the Spanish translation of the Conquest of Mexico , which had been prepared by José Fernando Ramírez and Lucas <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 William H. Prescott and Susan Amory Prescott ( c . 1799 – 1859 ) had four children ; the first , Catherine Prescott ( 23 September 1824 – 1 February 1829 ) died of a childhood illness . William Gardiner Prescott ( 27 January 1826 – 15 August 1895 ) attended Harvard from 1841 to 1844 and worked as a lawyer in Boston . He married Josephine Augusta Peabody on 6 November 1851 , and inherited Headquarters House . William Gardiner 's daughter Catherine Elizabeth Prescott married a Hebert Timmins on 22 February 1887 . Elizabeth ( 27 July 1828 – 24 May 1864 ) married James Lawrence , a distant cousin . The youngest was William Amory ( 25 January 1830 – 13 March 1867 ) . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In January 1859 , Prescott decided to resume his work on Philip II , with the goal of writing a final fourth volume . On January 29 , he suffered a second stroke , which resulted in his immediate death . He was buried with his parents in St. Paul 's Church , and his funeral was attended by representatives , among others , of Harvard University , the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Essex Institute . 
 Prescott 's work has remained popular and influential to the present day , and his meticulous use of sources , bibliographical citations and critical notes was unprecedented among American historians . As the work of an amateur historian , the History of Ferdinand and Isabella was an outstanding achievement , and it arguably was the best English @-@ language work on the subject published until then . The major problems with the work to the modern day historian are not related to the quality of the research or Prescott 's understanding of the period , but rather that his focus is on the major political and military events as opposed to social and economic conditions . It has also been argued that Prescott partially subscribed to the Great Man theory . The Conquest of Mexico has endured more than any other of Prescott 's work : it is regarded as his greatest literary accomplishment . However , modern scholarship agrees that there are problems with Prescott 's characterization of the conquest . David Levin has argued that the Conquest shows " inadequate attention to detail " and remains a broad and general account of events . In contrast to the Conquest of Mexico , the Conquest of Peru has received relatively little modern scholarly attention , perhaps due to some key similarities in style and structure . However , it is generally thought that the work was the authoritative account until the 20th century , and that Prescott used a broader range of source material than any previous writer on the subject . However , the archeological and anthropological aspects of both works have been heavily criticized by historians since the end of the 19th century . Prescott had never visited archeological sites in Mesoamerica and his understanding of Inca and Aztec culture was weak . In defense of Prescott , it has been argued that despite advances in archeological understanding , and a <unk> of the nature of pre @-@ Columbian society , the works remain broadly historically accurate , and Prescott 's elaborations on fact were due to a fundamental lack of source material . In contrast , Phillip the Second is considered essentially an inferior piece — it lacks the epic structure and literary merits of Prescott 's other work , and the work has not received more critical attention than other contemporary accounts of the monarch 's life . 
 There is a popular misconception that Prescott was completely blind , which seems to have stemmed from a misunderstanding of his comment in the preface to The Conquest of Mexico , in which he stated , " Nor have I ever corrected , or even read , my own original draft " . The myth was further propagated by a contemporary New York review of the Conquest , and has been a common theme in popular accounts of his work . Other related embellishments of Prescott 's disability have also occurred — Samuel Eliot Morison , writing in a 1959 article for The Atlantic Monthly , claimed that Prescott had an artificial eye , although there is no evidence to suggest this . It has been argued that Prescott 's biographers have naturally been drawn to romanticize his life due to Prescott 's own romantic style of history . 
 Four biographies of Prescott have been written . In 1864 , George Ticknor published a biography based on Prescott 's then @-@ unpublished correspondence , to which the later biographers have been greatly indebted . Rollo Ogden 's 1904 account is more a stylistic modernization of Ticknor 's work . Harry Thurston Peck 's 1905 account is considered academically inferior due to its essentially derivative nature . C.G. Gardiner 's 1969 work is considered the definitive critical biography of Prescott , taking into account a wide range of unpublished documents that were unavailable to earlier biographers . 
 The City of Prescott in Arizona was named in his honor , as was the William H. Prescott House ( Headquarters House ) , which was designated a National Historic Landmark for its association with him . Colegio Anglo Americano Prescott , a school in Arequipa , Peru , also bears his name . Prescott Street , two blocks from Harvard Yard in Cambridge , Massachusetts , is named after him . 
 = Quagmire 's Dad = 
 " Quagmire 's Dad " is the 18th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 9 , 2010 . The episode features Quagmire after his father , Dan Quagmire , returns to Quahog and states he is " a woman trapped in a man 's body " . Dan has decided to have sex reassignment surgery to become physically female . Meanwhile , Brian travels to a seminar and , upon returning , has a sexual affair with " Ida , " whom he does not realize is Quagmire 's post @-@ operative father . 
 The episode was written by Tom Devanney and directed by Pete Michels . It was rated TV @-@ 14 for intensely suggestive dialogue ( D ) , strong coarse language ( L ) and intense violence ( V ) . It received generally mixed reviews , in addition to receiving some criticism for its portrayal of transgenderism , including from the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) and the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 22 million homes in its original unedited airing . The episode featured a guest performance by Wally Wingert , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Quagmire 's Dad " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter and Joe visit Quagmire and are introduced to his father , Lieutenant Commander Dan Quagmire . Expecting to see the inspiration for Quagmire 's wanton sexual behavior , they are surprised by Dan 's stereotypically gay mannerisms and begin texting each other of how gay Dan is . The following morning , Quagmire invites Peter and Lois to the Naval Ball being held to honor his father , but soon begins arguing with Peter about his father 's sexuality . At the ball that night , members of the Navy bombard Quagmire with compliments about his war @-@ hero father , most of which can be taken as double entendres about Dan 's alleged non @-@ heterosexuality . Concerned that his dad may be gay , Quagmire confronts him and Dan states that he is not gay , but is instead " a woman trapped in a man 's body " and that he plans to have a sex change operation during his stay in Quahog . At first Peter and Lois conflate gender identity and sexual orientation , then at Lois ' suggestion , Peter waits with Quagmire during the operation . The surgery is a success , with Quagmire 's Dad emerging as the newly named Ida Davis , an attractive blond woman . That night , Ida and Quagmire join the Griffins for dinner . As the dinner begins , however , Quagmire becomes frustrated when the Griffins turn the conversation towards Ida 's surgery and other related topics , and storms out of the room . At Quagmire 's home , Quagmire tells Ida that he is not sure he can deal with her new gender identity . Saddened , Ida leaves Quagmire 's home and decides to stay at a nearby Marriott Hotel . 
 Meanwhile , Brian has been out of town attending a seminar on creating a web series and is unaware of what has transpired . On his way home , Brian stops at the Marriott , meets Ida , and starts having drinks with her . Quickly bonding , they retire to Ida 's room for sex , with Ida leaving first , then Brian after telling the barman to bill the drinks to her room . The next morning , Brian shares his newfound love with Peter and Lois before showing them a picture of Ida on his cellphone . Peter and Lois go into hysterics , while Brian , unaware of Ida 's operation , believes they are just jealous . After Stewie tells him that Quagmire 's father has had a sex change and reveals Ida 's name , Brian realizes that he has had sex with Quagmire 's transsexual father and vomits for 29 uninterrupted seconds before the two of them panic . At the same time , Ida returns to Quagmire 's home and apologizes , and Quagmire returns the favor , reconciling their relationship . Ida tells Quagmire that she met someone , and when she says it was Brian , whom Quagmire despises , he becomes furious . Brian is traumatized after finding out about Ida and , when he hears Quagmire come inside the house , he tries to hide under Peter and Lois ' bed , but Quagmire finds him easily , because Brian 's feet were sticking out from under the bed , and brutally beats him , thus threatening to blow his head off if he goes near Quagmire 's house . Brian gets the final word — " Hey , I fucked your dad . " — and angrily slams the door shut . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by Tom Devanney and directed by series regular Pete Michels . It is the second episode of the season Devanney and Michels worked on , the first being " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " , before the conclusion of season 8 . The episode saw the introduction of Quagmire 's father , Lieutenant Commander Dan Quagmire , a former officer with the United States Navy who later becomes Ida Quagmire . The character was voiced by main cast member , series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter working as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Quagmire 's Dad " . The original design of Ida Quagmire was created by MacFarlane , and designed to resemble English actor Paul Bettany . It was later adapted upon by Pete Michels . 
 " Quagmire 's Dad " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Wally Wingert guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actor Ralph Garman , and writers Chris Sheridan , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and John Viener made minor appearances . Recurring guest voice actor Patrick Warburton reprises his role of Joe Swanson . 
 The bit of Peter and Joe texting each other exists in two versions : one with Peter texting Joe back but was <unk> , or using the term " <unk> " to describe how gay Quagmire 's father is . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 After announcing that his father is being honored by the Navy , Quagmire says his father was his greatest hero growing up . Peter then claims that his own hero while growing up was DC Comics superhero Aquaman , in addition to his alter ego Arthur Curry . When Quagmire introduces his father to Peter and Joe , Nancy Sinatra 's single " These Boots Are Made for Walkin ' " begins playing on Quagmire 's stereo while Dan Quagmire dances down the stairs . Upon emerging from her surgery , Ida asks what Quagmire and Peter think of the operation and Peter , as he had suggested to Quagmire during the surgery , sings the hit single " Walking on Sunshine " by Katrina and the Waves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 22 million homes in its original airing , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , Celebrity Apprentice on NBC , and the television film Jesse Stone : No Remorse on CBS . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! in both ratings and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were generally mixed . Ramsey Isler of IGN noted his enjoyment of Dan Quagmire 's character traits : " I 'll give the writing team credit for this little plot twist , as I 'm sure we were all expecting the elder Quagmire to be even more of a womanizer than his son . " Regarding the episode 's treatment of LGBT issues , Jason Hughes of TV Squad stated , " there 's a gold mine of material to dig into for satire and comedy ; comedy which will likely offend as many people as the real issues do . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the scenes between Quagmire and his father " surprisingly well @-@ done " while noting , " the scenes where the mockery seemed a little too mean @-@ spirited were definitely out of the show 's worst sections of its toolkit " . 
 The episode was criticized for its portrayal of transgenderism , particularly regarding the way Ida was treated by other characters . Food Ida prepared for the dinner party at the Griffin house was thrown out and Brian 's learning of her sex @-@ reassignment surgery after he had sex with her caused him to " violently " vomit for 30 unbroken seconds . Speaking with LGBT media website AfterElton.com in January 2010 , series creator Seth MacFarlane mentioned the episode in response to concerns over how his animated series have portrayed LGBT characters . " It always distresses me when I hear that the gay community is upset with us , because that 's one group of people I hope would know we 're on their side . I can safely say that the transsexual community will be very , very happy with the ' Quagmire ' episode that we have coming up in a couple of months . It 's probably the most sympathetic portrayal of a <unk> [ sic ] character that has ever been on television , dare I say . " In a subsequent review , AfterElton.com writer Brent Hartinger graded the episode negatively . While noting that the episode deserves credit for making important points about transgender people , he found its inclusion of the vomiting scene and Lois and Peter 's transphobic remarks about Ida to be " shockingly insensitive " . Hartinger continued , " Frankly , it 's literally impossible for me to reconcile last night 's episode with MacFarlane 's words , unless I come to the conclusion that the man is pretty much a complete idiot . " The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation , an LGBT media watchdog organization , released a statement about the episode , noting that " GLAAD shares the serious concerns being voiced from members of the community and GLAAD ’ s Entertainment Media Team is addressing these with Fox . Next steps will be decided at that point . " In a September 2010 interview in Details , MacFarlane expressed surprise at the negative reaction , stating " I don 't meet a lot of stupid homosexuals . " He repeated that he still felt Ida was a " very sympathetic portrayal of a transsexual character " . He also defended Brian 's vomiting after discovering he had sex with someone who had undergone sex reassignment surgery noting Brian 's character is heterosexual and " If I found out that I had slept with a transsexual , I might throw up in the same way that a gay guy looks at a vagina and goes , ' Oh , my God , that 's disgusting . ' " 
 The Parents Television Council , a conservative campaigning group and frequent critic of MacFarlane 's work , named " Quagmire 's Dad " as its " Worst TV Show of the Week " citing Dan Quagmire 's " outrageously stereotyped gay " character , violence and sexual innuendo . The PTC specifically cited the innuendo @-@ laced dialogue throughout the episode , a " straight 30 straight seconds [ sic ] " of vomiting after Brian learns of Ida 's previous identity , Quagmire 's erection while embracing Ida and the violence of the final scene . 
 = Winter in America = 
 Winter in America is a studio album by American vocalist Gil Scott @-@ Heron and keyboardist Brian Jackson , released in May 1974 on Strata @-@ East Records . They recorded the album during September to October 1973 at D & B Sound Studio in Silver Spring , Maryland . While Jackson 's piano @-@ based arrangements were rooted in jazz and the blues , their stripped @-@ down production for the album resulted in a reliance on more traditional African and R & B sounds . The subject matter on Winter in America deals with the African @-@ American community and inner city in the 1970s . 
 The album serves as Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's debut release for Strata @-@ East Records , following a dispute with their former label and departure . It proved to be their sole release for the independent jazz label . Upon its release , Winter in America featured limited distribution in the United States and quickly became rare in print . However , with promotional help from its only single " The Bottle " , it obtained considerably larger commercial success than Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's previous work . The album debuted at number six on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart and ultimately sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 While it was critically overlooked upon its release , Winter in America earned retrospective acclaim from several writers and music critics as Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's greatest work together . Along with its critical recognition , it has been noted by several critics for its influence on derivative music forms such as neo soul and hip hop music , as many artists of the genres have been influenced by Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's lyrical and musical approach on the album . On March 10 , 1998 , Winter in America was reissued on compact disc for the first time in the United States through Scott @-@ Heron 's Rumal @-@ Gia Records . 
 = = Background = = 
 After leaving his former label Flying Dutchman Records , Gil Scott @-@ Heron signed with the New York City jazz @-@ based Strata @-@ East label in early 1973 , accompanied by jazz keyboardist and songwriter Brian Jackson , with whom he had worked with on his previous studio albums , Pieces of a Man ( 1971 ) and Free Will ( 1972 ) . While some sources allege this may have been over financial or creative differences , Scott @-@ Heron maintained the switch was due to producer Bob Thiele 's unwillingness to give Jackson co @-@ billing . By the time of their move to Strata @-@ East , Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson had achieved underground notice among R & B and soul music listeners , particularly for the political and social nature of their music 's themes , as well as Scott @-@ Heron 's emphasis on African @-@ American culture and social plight in his compositions . Their musical fusion of jazz , blues , soul and spoken word styles helped them earn some notice among less @-@ mainstream black music listeners at the time . 
 Social circumstances and musical events preceded Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's signing with Strata @-@ East . After the decline of popularity in traditional jazz forms and the civil rights struggle , which had sought racial equality during the late 1950s and 1960s , black pride and Afrocentric sentiment by many black Americans emerged . During 1970 to 1974 , the Black Panthers organization had been neutralized and pan @-@ Africanism came into vogue . Following the free jazz and avant @-@ garde breakthroughs of Ornette Coleman and John Coltrane , a creative stasis among most jazz musicians set in during the decade that led to an eclecticism where no style or conception of jazz maintained a zeitgeist among players . However , jazz fusion had gained mainstream notice for its stylistic adoption of rock and funk music , despite being the subject of controversy in jazz purist circles . <unk> by the works of Roy Ayers , Herbie Hancock , and Donald Byrd , jazz @-@ funk also emerged in response to the growing popularity of funk , leading to a trend of funk rhythms among jazz musicians formerly of the hard bop tradition as an attempt to reconnect with their African @-@ American audience . This factored into the popularity of Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's work in the black underground scene , with the former obtaining a reputation as a " street poet " , while his work with Jackson served as an early recording of jazz poetry . 
 Scott @-@ Heron had looked to expand on his socially conscious , pro black @-@ oriented themes and independently produce a more conceptual album than his previous work had envisioned . Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's search for more creative control over their recordings prompted them to sign with Strata @-@ East Records . Established in 1971 by jazz musicians Charles Tolliver and Stanley Cowell , in response to major record companies ' lack of interest in their recordings , the Strata @-@ East label had become known for signing artists who recorded with diverse styles of jazz music with themes of social consciousness and black nationalism , as well as " minimal but eye @-@ grabbing graphic design " for its releases . 
 The label had also been known for carrying out the management concept of " condominium " . Originally conceived and penned by Cowell , it gave artists authority and responsibility over their recorded material independently , as well as the ability to assign the master tapes over to the label for distribution . Strata @-@ East artists had more control over their recordings than major labels at the time had offered . Music journalist Kevin Moist later wrote of the label 's " condominium " concept , " The idea was to try and develop an independent cultural space outside of the mainstream that could function self @-@ sufficiently and be genuinely participatory for its members . The goal was to live in an engaged way where art , society , spirituality , and politics could all come together holistically in an integrated existence . That ( sub ) cultural renewal is embodied in the kind of music <unk> by Strata @-@ East . " The label 's philosophy for artist management and recording ethic worked to the advantage of artists such as Gil Scott @-@ Heron and Brian Jackson . Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson were able to release more aesthetically personalized recordings for Strata @-@ East than most mainstream labels would allow . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 To record the album , Jackson suggested a small studio located outside of Washington , D.C. in Silver Spring , Maryland . The sessions took place in September and October 1973 at Silver Spring 's D & B Sound Studios . According to Scott @-@ Heron , the studio 's main room was so small that when the two musicians recorded , Jackson was forced out next to the cooler , playing flute in the studio 's hallway while Scott @-@ Heron sang in the main room . However , Scott @-@ Heron felt comfortable in the small studio . Jose Williams was enlisted as the recording engineer for the album . Williams assisted Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson , who were credited for production under the title <unk> @-@ Fall Music , Inc . , with production , and he engineered the album 's recordings entirely himself . 
 The recording sessions served as the first production credit for Scott @-@ Heron , Jackson , and Jose Williams . As the third unofficial collaboration between Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson , the album 's recording featured more of Jackson 's input than before . Jackson recounted the experience in an interview for All About Jazz , stating " He had this way with words and I thought to myself , ' People have to hear this stuff ' . What I had to offer was the music and I figured if we can take his words and make this tribal knowledge rhythmic and musical , we can draw people to hear it . " 
 In contrast to their Flying Dutchman recordings and subsequent Arista recordings , Winter in America utilized a sparse production quality and small number of sessions musicians . A small supporting line @-@ up , featuring drummer Bob Adams and bassist Danny Bowens , contributed on a few cuts . Adams and Bowens , who studied with Scott @-@ Heron at Lincoln University , arrived from the Pennsylvania @-@ based college on the last day of recording on October 15 , 1973 . Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson handled most of the vocals , songwriting , and instrumentation , and they were assisted by Williams with the production . 
 The September 4 and 5 sessions featured only Jackson and Scott @-@ Heron playing and recording . The limited personnel during these sessions allowed them to rely mostly on traditional African and R & B sounds and influences , along with more creative and artistic control of the project . More than half of the album 's songs were co @-@ written and produced by Jackson . His input also helped solidify his partnership with Scott @-@ Heron , leading to further records together before their split in 1978 . 
 = = Title and concept = = 
 The original name of the album was intended to be Supernatural Corner , named after the cover art , but was later changed to Winter in America by Scott @-@ Heron . Both the title and the song " Supernatural Corner " were left off the album , as the name would not be understandable to people who had not seen the house to which the title was alluding . According to Gil Scott @-@ Heron , the original title referred to what appeared to him to be a haunted house in the Logan Circle neighborhood of Washington , D.C. , in which Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson moved into prior to recording in 1973 . The cover artwork features a collage @-@ type painting with oriental graphic designs and a small figure version of whom appears to be Brian Jackson . It was created by Eugene Coles , a friend and colleague of Jackson 's and Scott @-@ Heron 's from the historically black college Morgan State University . Supernatural Corner by Coles was used as the album 's cover art , as Scott @-@ Heron had originally commissioned Coles to design the collage . 
 The revised title of Winter in America was intended to represent Scott @-@ Heron 's use of the season of winter as a metaphor and concept of his view of the issues facing society during his time . The title was also meant to represent the urban sociological themes featured on the album , which had surfaced on most of Scott @-@ Heron 's previous work . Scott @-@ Heron referred to the title as the " overall atmosphere of the album " , as well as the metaphor for the overall theme of the album . Winter was conceived amid social , economic and political issues in the United States during the early 1970s , including stagflation , the 1973 oil crisis that had great effect during the winter , the 1973 stock market crash , the Watergate scandal , and urban decay . He further elaborated on the social concept of winter and <unk> , as it relates to living during times such as these and how the title reflects on the time itself , in the original LP liner notes : 
 In a February 2009 interview with <unk> Burrell of Vibe magazine , Gil Scott @-@ Heron discussed the album 's concept and title , as well as the social and political atmosphere at the time of Winter in America 's recording . In retrospect , he stated " We felt as though we had come across something that people did not understand or did not recognize but that 's the season that we were going into , not for three months but for an extended period of time . A lot of the folks who represented summer and spring and fall had been killed and assassinated . The only season left is winter . ... Bobby Kennedy and Dr. King and John Kennedy , those were folks who represented spring and summer , and they killed them . So we wanted to do an album about where we were . And we weren 't trying to depress people , hell , they were living it , they already knew but we were trying to describe it and were certainly not alone ... we felt as though a part of it was the folks in charge of the political structure . They were snowmen ... " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Similar to his studio debut album Pieces of a Man , Winter in America has Scott @-@ Heron exercising his baritone and deep tenor @-@ singing abilities with some spoken @-@ word elements . The album served as a move into more conventional song structures , in contrast to the Scott @-@ Heron 's debut live album , A New Black Poet - Small Talk at 125th and Lenox ( 1970 ) , which was composed entirely of spoken @-@ word poetry , and the rapping style of his previous album Free Will . According to music writer Karl Keely , Pieces of a Man and Winter in America exhibit further departure by Scott @-@ Heron from his prominent " angry and militant poet " persona . BBC Online writer Daryl Easlea wrote that it " captures Scott Heron at a turning point , largely leaving his heavier raps behind in favour of a floating ambience , with his poetry and song being illuminated by Jackson 's superb instrumentation " . In addition , the album features more themes of social commentary , Afrocentrism and balladry than Pieces of a Man . Winter in America features a more stripped @-@ down production and melancholy mood along with songs that exceeded four minutes , as opposed to Free Will , which was criticized for its brevity and time constraints . 
 Scott @-@ Heron 's characteristic sound on the album is rooted in the blues , jazz , and soul music . He referred to his mellow fusion of style as " <unk> , the science of how things feel . " Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's compositions for Winter in America incorporate elements of African music , heavy percussion , and chants . They also feature scene @-@ setting , spoken word intros and mystical interludes , which were influenced by the free jazz stylings of contemporary artists such as Pharoah Sanders and Abdullah Ibrahim . Jackson wrote arrangements that tended to be more straight @-@ ahead material , incorporating classic jazz bridges in his compositions . Scott @-@ Heron , as the main lyricist and vocalist , exhibited more pop sensibilities with his compositions and created indelible hooks that were influenced by the black popular music of the time . By combining their distinct approaches to composing , Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson produced a multicultural , diffused sound that evoked the afrobeat and world music style of artists such as Fela Kuti during the African music scene 's popularity . 
 Winter in America juxtaposes themes of nostalgic hope to the social problems of the early 1970s , particularly in the African @-@ American community and inner cities . Also a prominent theme in Scott @-@ Heron 's lyrics is people 's faith in their culture in a bleak , impoverished environment . The album features Scott @-@ Heron 's examination of maintaining one 's cultural roots in a discouraging environment . Other themes include love , fatherhood , freedom , alcoholism , and political scandal . The themes of social disillusionment and the human condition featured on the album are also depicted on the Winter collage , representing the grim , sullen images of poverty , decay , and death in generally urban areas and ghettos . Created by artist Peggy Harris , the collage was featured on the original LP 's inner sleeve and in the liner booklet of Winter in America 's CD reissue . 
 The album 's style and themes are exemplified by the bookending track " Peace Go with You , Brother " , with Scott @-@ Heron 's bluesy , jazzy vocals and Afrocentric lyrics accompanied by Jackson 's soulful piano arrangements . It features a dreamy , moody soundscape , produced by Jackson 's Rhodes electric piano , which evokes the In a Silent Way @-@ era jazz of Miles Davis . " Peace Go with You , Brother " has Scott @-@ Heron criticizing the selfishness of certain members of his generation , as well as people for forgetting their common humanity . The song continues to examine the significance of a person 's cultural roots , regardless of where they prove to blossom . " Rivers of My Fathers " is the album 's longest track and features drummer Bob Adams ' swing @-@ style drum rim shots and pianist Jackson ’ s wide , blocky chords , play in a blue @-@ influenced style . Scott @-@ Heron uses the water motif , a common metaphor in African @-@ American culture , to evoke feelings of home and freedom and represent faith , amid the frustrations of a modern black man . As the opening verse and chorus suggest , " Looking for a way out of this confusion / I 'm looking for a sign , carry me home / Let me lay down by a stream and let me be miles from everything / Rivers of my fathers , could you carry me home . " The narrator beseeches the " river " to deliver him home , which is revealed at the last seconds of the song as Scott @-@ Heron silently whispers " Africa " . 
 The melancholy , nostalgic love song " A Very Precious Time " contains an uplifting timbre of Jackson 's flute with joyful singing by Scott @-@ Heron . While his lyrics depict a requiem to innocence and first love , the song 's general message explores the concept of nostalgia as a means to remain in the present , despite the loss of hope or faith that can be brought on by the struggle of the present as opposed to the past . The tempo of the album is picked up by the opening vamp of " Back Home " , which contains the concept of family and its positive values . " The Bottle " is a commentary on alcohol abuse with a Caribbean beat and flute harmonies by Jackson . It became a popular song played at parties at the time . French music critic Pierre Jean @-@ <unk> calls it " an epic song [ ... ] whose infectious groove can still set dance floors alight over thirty years later . " The song 's dance and popular music sensibilities and social message engendered its appeal to listeners following its release as a single . Scott @-@ Heron later said of the single 's success and style , " Pop music doesn 't necessarily have to be shit . " " The Bottle " also addresses problems of drug addiction , abortion , and incarceration , and features Scott @-@ Heron on keyboards . Despite its grim observations , " The Bottle " became a concert favorite and one of Scott @-@ Heron 's most popular songs . It is followed by soulful , low @-@ tempo tracks " Song for Bobby Smith " and " Your Daddy Loves You " ; the latter is an introspective ballad and ode to Scott @-@ Heron 's daughter Gia Louise . 
 During the October 15 , 1973 session , drummer Bob Adams and bassist Danny Bowens contributed to the tracks " Peace Go with You " , " Rivers of My Fathers " , " Back Home " , and " The Bottle " . Adams , however , was disappointed that " H ² Ogate Blues " was to be left off the album . The song originally served as an opening monologue concerning the Watergate incident used by Scott @-@ Heron at his concerts , and it contains proto @-@ rap and talking blues elements , in which rhythmic speech or near @-@ speech is accompanied by a free melody and strict rhythm . The studio version , which was recorded during the album 's sessions , was not intended to be for the album prior to Adams ' objection , as Scott @-@ Heron said that " nobody outside of Washington seemed to know what the hell I was talking about . " Scott @-@ Heron later revisited the experience in the liner notes of the album 's 1998 reissue . On Adams ' opinion of " H ² Ogate Blues " , he wrote that " His reply was that even if people didn ’ t understand the politics it ’ s still funny as hell . " On the recording , Scott @-@ Heron stated : 
 The resulting track features sharp criticism by Scott @-@ Heron of then @-@ US president Richard Nixon and his vice @-@ president Spiro Agnew , among other politicians involved in the scandal ; the Watergate incident had yet to reach its conclusion when the song was recorded . Scott @-@ Heron introduces the song with a short speech discussing the blues and referencing current events : " But lately we had Frank Rizzo with the ' Lie Detector Blues ' / We done had the United States government talkin bout the ' Energy Crisis Blues ' " . The final chorus line directly references Nixon and the scandal : " And there are those who swear that 've seen King Richard / Beneath that cesspool – Watergate " . His lyrics range from humor to critical diatribes of political corruption and social issues . It shares lyrical similarities to Stevie Wonder 's anti @-@ Nixon song " You Haven 't Done Nothin ' " ( 1974 ) . The album concludes with a reprisal of the opening track . Music writer Karl Keely said of its significance , " The return of the refrain from ' Peace Go with You Brother ' adds a sense of wholeness to end the record , an idea that the album has travelled through Gil Scott @-@ Heron 's worries , fears , pleasures , hopes , and finally , his pronounced disliking of Richard Nixon , before returning to the opening statement , in the hopes that the record may have made that selfish brother think more about his world and those in it , instead of moving along in a self @-@ imposed bubble . " 
 The title track , which was not featured on the original LP , was recorded after the album 's release at the suggestion of Peggy Harris , the artist who designed the Winter collage for the inner sleeve of the LP . Initially , Scott @-@ Heron and Jackson meant for Winter in America to lack a title track , which contrasted their previous label 's trend of having their work include title tracks . The album title 's purpose meant only to describe the general theme of Winter in America 's songs . According to Scott @-@ Heron , a title track " separates from the rest of the lyrics , better , or worse or different . " The studio version of " Winter in America " was released on his following album , The First Minute of a New Day ( 1975 ) , while a live version , recorded in 1982 at Washington , D.C. ' s Black Wax Club , was included on the 1998 CD reissue of Winter in America . The song features Scott @-@ Heron 's poetic references and lyrics that portray America in a dystopian state where " democracy is rag @-@ time on the corner " , " the forest is buried beneath the highway " , " robins are perched in barren treetops " , and , in conclusion , " no one is fighting because no one knows what to say . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Upon its original stereo LP release in May 1974 , the album had a short supply and distribution due to the Strata @-@ East label 's independent distribution policy of their artists ' releases . Consequently , Winter in America became considered by many fans to be the great " lost " Gil Scott @-@ Heron album , before a proper reissue on compact disc thirty years following its original issue . The album served as the first of their collaborations to have Jackson receive co @-@ billing for a release . Unlike Scott @-@ Heron 's previous albums , Winter in America experienced some commercial success with the help of promotional resources in the form of underground music deejays and club promoters , in spite of the album 's limited distribution . While it did not chart on the U.S. Billboard Pop Albums chart , the album charted on the Top Jazz Albums chart and peaked at number six . Winter in America entered the Top Jazz Albums on June 29 , 1974 and remained there for 40 weeks , until March 29 , 1975 . According to a 1990 Los Angeles Times article on Scott @-@ Heron , the album ended up selling more than 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Winter in America 's only single release , " The Bottle " , soon became an underground and cult hit following its issue . Despite its underground reputation , the song became one of Scott @-@ Heron 's most successful singles , as it reached the number 15 spot on the R & B Singles Chart . According to an article on Scott @-@ Heron for a November 1974 issue of Billboard , the success of the single " has made his most recent album , ' Winter in America ' , a national best @-@ seller and heralds his wide @-@ ranging appeal . " The success of " The Bottle " also helped lead to Jackson 's and Scott @-@ Heron 's following recording contract with Arista Records , which had been established in late 1974 , the label at which they would enjoy further success and a larger amount of commercial notice . Upon signing them , Arista executive Clive Davis said of Scott @-@ Heron in an interview with Rolling Stone , " Not only is he an excellent poet , musician and performer — three qualities I look for that are rarely combined — but he 's a leader of social thought . " Along with approval from Arista executives , Winter in America was well received by the underground music scene , in which Scott @-@ Heron earned the majority of his fan base , and added to Scott @-@ Heron 's reputation as a socially aware and conscious artist . 
 In retrospective reviews , Winter in America was well received by critics , who cite it as one of Scott @-@ Heron 's best albums . Uncut magazine 's Barney Hoskyns praised the album , calling it an " introspective seasonal offering from black poet @-@ singer and collaborating pianist " . He also lauded its critical content and called it " a masterwork of ghetto melancholia and stark political gravitas " . Ron Wynn of AllMusic wrote of Scott @-@ Heron 's performance , in that he was " at his most righteous and provocative on this album " , while acknowledging Jackson 's contributions as well . BBC Online 's Daryl Easlea called the album " an affecting work " and wrote that its title track " should be played as standard on all modern history courses as a snapshot of the stilted hopes and aspirations in the post Watergate and Vietnam War mid 70s America " . The Washington Post 's Richard Harrington cited " The Bottle " and " H ² Ogate Blues " as " classic Scott @-@ Heron works " in a review of its reissue . Los Angeles Times writer Mike Boehm viewed that its title track " sounded a sad death @-@ knell for ' 60s hopes of transforming change " , while calling it a " wonderful mood piece , capturing what it 's like to feel oppressed in your soul by outer @-@ world events that seem out of control " . Danny Eccleston of Mojo called it an " alloy of Rhodes @-@ laden <unk> with [ Scott @-@ Heron ] ' s razor @-@ sharp beat @-@ poetry " and quipped , " Anger , radicalism , humour and funk from the proto @-@ rapper , thankfully restored to health and liberty . " 
 Dream magazine columnist Kevin Moist stated that the album " further <unk> his mixture of street poetry , soulful spirit , political commitment , and Black cultural expression . " He also noted the history of the Strata @-@ East label , and summed up Winter in America 's significance , stating " <unk> charged but musically mostly stark and low @-@ key , melodic and soulful as hell , sometimes full band flow while at others just voice and piano , all hanging tight under a melancholy cloud of <unk> [ ... ] Thematically , the album reaches back even further than its predecessors in drawing on Black cultural energy as a source of power for facing down the coming political / cultural Ice Age in America . But Scott @-@ Heron was never a one @-@ dimensional <unk> , and his pen is as double @-@ edged here as it ever was , slicing into the growing self @-@ destructiveness and sell @-@ out / buy @-@ in tendencies that were fragmenting the Black community , as incisively as it stabs at the jowls of evil in the White House . As badass as it is understated , and really hasn ’ t dated just a little bit . " The Observer called the album a " jazz fusion pillar stone , with a social conscience to boot " . Music writer Karl Keely praised Scott @-@ Heron 's vocal maturity from his previous work , and noted Jackson 's influence for improving and expanding the music 's melodic content . Keely commented that it demonstrates " the evolution of Scott @-@ Heron from politicised poet to soulful singer " . 
 However , Houston Press writer Paul J. MacArthur expressed a mixed response towards its production quality and called Winter in America the " most dated " of the Scott @-@ Heron reissues . Robert Christgau said with the exception of the danceable " The Bottle " , Scott @-@ Heron " had a better beat and just slightly less melody " when he was reciting in spoken word . In a 1975 article for The Village Voice , he commended the album 's title track as " an evocation of our despondency that is as flawless as it is ambitious " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Winter in America has been recognized by music writers as one of the prominent examples of early rap , along with the early work of The Watts Prophets and The Last Poets . " The Bottle " was covered by latin soul musician Joe Bataan for his album <unk> ( 1975 ) . Recordings featured on the album , along with other Scott @-@ Heron / Jackson compositions , were sampled by hip hop artists . This further expanded Scott @-@ Heron 's legacy as one of the progenitors of hip hop . The diverse sound and mellow instrumentation featured on the album , referred to by Scott @-@ Heron as <unk> , later inspired neo soul artists in the 1990s and helped solidify Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's legacy in the genre . On Jackson 's legacy , All About Jazz described him as " one of the early architects of the neo @-@ soul " , while citing his early work with Scott @-@ Heron as " an inspirational and musical Rosetta stone for the neo @-@ soul movement " . Pierre Jean @-@ <unk> of the French music magazine Vibrations wrote of Scott @-@ Heron and the album , stating " As an artist who conceives his albums as newspapers and similar testimonies , Gil Scott @-@ Heron is one of America 's finest observers and commentators of social reality as well as being one of the most creative and influential figures in African @-@ American music , and this landmark album announced his arrival . " 
 The album also marked the transition of Scott @-@ Heron from beat poet to singer @-@ songwriter with a full @-@ scale band . He further developed this melodic approach with his following work with Brian Jackson , The First Minute of a New Day ( 1975 ) and From South Africa to South Carolina ( 1976 ) . While the album did not have a direct impact on the black music scene at the time , it proved to become one of the Strata @-@ East label 's most successful LP releases , in terms of sales and appeal to their target audience . While serving as Scott @-@ Heron 's and Jackson 's only album for the independent label , Winter in America helped Strata @-@ East Records achieve considerable notability among other New York City distributors of soul and jazz music during the 1970s , while the latter genre had been viewed by many jazz purists to be in a period of creative confusion and decline . In describing the label and its issued musical works , Dream magazine 's Kevin Moist stated " The diversity and experimentation of the music , plus the great quality of many of those experiments , make it seem like more like a creative golden age in which the dominant idea was new ideas mixing and blending cultural styles and artistic genres or pushing existing styles into new extremes . " According to Nick <unk> of Rhapsody , Winter in America had impact elsewhere , stating " this deeply felt ( and sometimes deeply funky ) album helped break the pioneer of protest jazz @-@ soul and rap to the general public with hit single ' The Bottle ' " . 
 The album was re @-@ released with previously unreleased bonus material by Scott @-@ Heron 's Rumal @-@ Gia label in 1998 , following a reissue project headed by Scott @-@ Heron after he had received ownership of his 1970s recordings . The record 's significance and influence in music has led to much retrospective favor of it among music writers and critics , as shown in Winter 's rankings in several " best of " publication polls . Winter in America was ranked number 67 on New Nation 's June 2004 list of The Top 100 Black Albums . The album was also listed in the music reference book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die ( 2006 ) . " The Bottle " was later ranked number 92 on NME magazine 's list of The Top 150 Singles of All @-@ Time and was included in Q magazine 's 1010 Songs You Must Own ! publication . The title track was included on music writer Bruce Pollock 's 2005 list of The 7 @,@ 500 Most Important Songs of 1944 @-@ 2000 , and it was ranked number 82 on Blow Up 's list of 100 Songs to Remember . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 1998 compact disc reissue bonus tracks . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Winter in America adapted from liner notes . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Gil Scott @-@ Heron – vocals , electric piano 
 Brian Jackson – electric piano , acoustic piano , flute , vocals 
 Danny Bowens – fender bass 
 Bob Adams – drums ( traps ) 
 = = = Production = = = 
 <unk> @-@ Fall Music , Inc . – producer 
 Jose Williams – engineer 
 Malcolm Cecil – remastering 
 Vera Savcic , Adam Shore – reissue <unk> producer 
 Dan Henderson – manager 
 Eugene Coles – cover painting 
 Peggy Harris – liner collage 
 Monique de la Tour / Rumal @-@ Gia , David Lau – reissue art direction 
 Scott Townsend – reissue design 
 Tony <unk> , Gary Price – liner photos 
 = = Charts = = 
 U.S. Billboard Music Charts ( North America ) – Winter in America 
 1974 : Top Jazz Albums – # 6 
 U.S. Billboard Music Charts ( North America ) – " The Bottle " 
 1974 : Top R & B Singles – # 15 
 = = Release history = = 
 Winter in America was originally released as a 12 " vinyl record , in stereo format only . Released in May 1974 with a limited supply , the record remained out of print for nearly twenty five years in the United States until 1998 , when Scott @-@ Heron acquired ownership of his recordings , with the exception of his material for the Flying Dutchman label . Afterwards , he initiated a reissue project through his own Rumal @-@ Gia label , which had obtained a distribution deal with TVT Records . The compact disc reissue contains bonus tracks , including the live version of the title track , and the original and new liner notes written by Gil Scott @-@ Heron . Prior to this , a German release of Winter in America was issued in 1992 as was a remastered LP in 1996 . However , they did not include these features . Other remasters were also released in Europe , as listed below . 
 = Maggie Gyllenhaal = 
 Margalit Ruth " Maggie " Gyllenhaal ( / <unk> / ; born November 16 , 1977 ) is an American actress . She is the daughter of filmmakers Stephen Gyllenhaal and Naomi Achs and the older sister of actor Jake Gyllenhaal . She began her film career as a teenager with roles in her father 's films and appeared alongside her brother in the psychological horror film Donnie Darko ( 2001 ) . She garnered critical praise for starring as Lee Holloway in Secretary ( 2002 ) , for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award . For her performance in Sherrybaby ( 2006 ) , she was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama . She also received recognition for starring as Rachel Dawes in The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) . For her performance in the musical @-@ drama Crazy Heart ( 2009 ) , she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress . She subsequently starred in Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang ( 2010 ) , Won 't Back Down ( 2012 ) and Frank ( 2014 ) , for which she was nominated for a <unk> Award . 
 In 2014 , she made her Broadway debut in a revival of The Real Thing , and also starred in the television BBC miniseries The Honourable Woman . For her performance in the latter she won a Golden Globe Award and was nominated for an Emmy Award . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gyllenhaal was born in New York City , the daughter of Naomi Foner Gyllenhaal ( née Achs ) and Stephen Gyllenhaal . Her father is a film director and writer and her mother is a screenwriter . She has one sibling , actor Jake Gyllenhaal . Her father , who was raised in the Swedenborgian religion , is of Swedish and English ancestry , and is a member of the Gyllenhaal family . Her last native Swedish ancestor was her great @-@ great @-@ grandfather Anders Leonard Gyllenhaal , a descendant of Leonard Gyllenhaal , a leading Swedenborgian who supported the printing and spreading of Swedenborg 's writings . Her mother was born in New York City , and is from a Jewish family which emigrated from Russia and Poland . Her mother 's first husband was Eric Foner , a noted historian and history professor at Columbia University . Gyllenhaal has stated that she " grew up mostly Jewish , culturally " , though she did not attend Hebrew school . Her parents married in 1977 , and filed for divorce in October 2008 . The first name on Maggie 's birth certificate is " Margalit " , which she did not discover until 2013 , when she officially changed it to " Maggie " . Margalit ( <unk> ) is a Hebrew word meaning " pearl " ; some news stories have spelled it " <unk> " . 
 Gyllenhaal grew up in Los Angeles , and studied at the Harvard – Westlake prep school . In 1995 , she graduated from Harvard – Westlake and moved to New York to attend Columbia University , where she studied literature and Eastern religions . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Gyllenhaal 's first films — her feature film debut at the age of 15 , Waterland ( 1992 ) ; A Dangerous Woman ( 1993 ) ; and Homegrown ( 1998 ) — were directed by her father ; the last two also featured her brother ; they had supporting roles as children . With their mother , she and Jake appeared in two episodes of Molto Mario , an Italian cooking show on the Food Network . After graduating from college , she played supporting roles in films like Cecil B. <unk> ( 2000 ) and Riding in Cars with Boys ( 2001 ) . Gyllenhaal later achieved recognition in her own right playing her real brother 's on @-@ screen sister in the indie cult hit Donnie Darko ( 2001 ) . 
 She made her theatrical debut in the Berkeley Repertory Theatre production of Patrick Marber 's Closer , for which she received favorable reviews . Production started in May 2000 and ended in mid @-@ July of that year . Gyllenhaal has performed in several other plays , including The Tempest , Antony and Cleopatra , The Butterfly Project , and No Exit . 
 = = = 2002 – 2005 = = = 
 Gyllenhaal 's break @-@ out role was in the black comedy Secretary ( 2002 ) , a film about two people who embark on a mutually fulfilling BDSM lifestyle . The New York Times critic Stephen Holden noted : " The role of Lee , which Maggie Gyllenhaal imbues with a restrained comic delicacy and sweetness , should make her a star . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote : " Maggie Gyllenhaal , as the self @-@ destructive secretary , is enigmatic and , at moments , sympathetic . " The film received generally favorable reviews , and Gyllenhaal 's performance earned her the Best Breakthrough Performance by an Actress award from the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures , her first Golden Globe nomination , and an Independent Spirit Award nomination . Secretary was Gyllenhaal 's first film role which featured full frontal nudity . Although impressed with the script , she initially had some qualms about doing the film , which she believed could deliver an anti @-@ feminist message . Yet after carefully discussing the script with the film 's director , Steven Shainberg , she agreed to join the project . Although insisting Shainberg did not exploit her , Gyllenhaal has said she felt " scared when filming began " and that " in the wrong hands ... even in just slightly less intelligent hands , this movie could say something really weird . " Since then , she is guarded about discussing her role in the film , saying only that " despite myself , sometimes the dynamic that you are exploring in your work spills over into your life . " 
 She next played a supporting role in the comedy @-@ drama Adaptation . ( 2002 ) , a film that tells the story of screenwriter Charlie Kaufman 's struggle to adapt The Orchid Thief into a film . She later appeared in the unauthorized biography Confessions of a Dangerous Mind ( 2002 ) , part of an ensemble cast that included Sam Rockwell , Drew Barrymore , George Clooney , and Julia Roberts . The movie grossed US $ 33 million worldwide . That same year , she had a small role in the comedy 40 Days and 40 Nights . 
 In 2003 , she co @-@ starred with Julia Roberts in Mona Lisa Smile in the role of Giselle . In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , she revealed the reason for accepting the role was " to play somebody who feels confident in herself as a sexy , beautiful woman " . The film generated mostly critical reviews , with Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times describing it as " smug and reductive " . Her next roles were in smaller independent films : Casa de los Babys ( 2003 ) , a story about six American women impatiently waiting out their lengthy residency requirements in an unidentified South American country before picking up their adoptive babies , and Criminal ( 2004 ) , a remake of the Argentinian film Nine Queens , with John C. Reilly and Diego Luna . Gyllenhaal plays an honest hotel manager forced to help her crooked brother ( Reilly ) by seducing one of his victims . Gyllenhaal was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in 2004 . She starred in the HBO film Strip Search ( 2004 ) , where she portrayed an American student in China suspected of terrorism . 
 In 2004 , Gyllenhaal returned to theater in a Los Angeles production of Tony Kushner 's Homebody / Kabul as Priscilla , the Homebody 's daughter , who spends most of the play searching for her elusive mother in Kabul , Afghanistan . Kushner gave her the role in Homebody / Kabul on the strength of her performance in Closer . Ben Brantley of The New York Times wrote : " Ms. Gyllenhaal provides the essential bridge between the parts of the play 's title . " John <unk> of The New York Observer noted that Gyllenhaal 's performance was " compelling " . Viewed as a sex symbol , she was ranked in the " Hot 100 List " by Maxim magazine in 2004 and 2005 . 
 Gyllenhaal 's next film role was in the 2005 comedy @-@ drama Happy Endings , in which she played an adventuress singer who seduces a young gay musician ( Jason Ritter ) as well as his rich father ( Tom Arnold ) . She recorded songs for the movie 's soundtrack , calling the role the " roughest , scariest acting ever " and adding she is more natural when singing on screen than when acting . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly declared Gyllenhaal 's performance " as wonderfully , naturally slouchy @-@ sexy as her character is artificial " . 
 = = = 2006 – 2009 = = = 
 Following Happy Endings , she starred in the 2006 films Trust the Man , Stranger than Fiction , Monster House , World Trade Center , and Sherrybaby . In Trust the Man , featuring Julianne Moore , David Duchovny , and Billy Crudup , she played Elaine , who has been dating Tobey , Crudup 's character , for seven years and has begun to feel that it is time for her to settle down and start a family . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . Ethan Alter of Premiere felt that the performances by Gyllenhaal and Duchovny were " much more at ease " and concluded with " that 's probably because they 're [ sic ] played these characters many times before " . In Stranger than Fiction , Gyllenhaal played a love interest of Harold Crick , played by Will Ferrell . Her performance in the film received favorable reviews ; Mike <unk> of Fox News wrote : " Gyllenhaal has never been sexier in any film before and her interplay with Ferrell will propel her to more A @-@ list films , leaving her indie @-@ darling days behind , no doubt . " She voiced Elizabeth " Zee " in the computer animated horror film Monster House . Gyllenhaal played Allison Jimeno , the wife of Port Authority officer Will Jimeno , in Oliver Stone 's World Trade Center , based on the September 11 attacks in New York City . She regarded this as " one of the films she most enjoyed making " . The film received favorable reviews and proved to be an international success , earning US $ 162 million worldwide . 
 In Sherrybaby , Gyllenhaal played a young drug @-@ addicted thief trying to put her life in order after prison so she can reconcile with her daughter . During promotion of the film , she noted of her portrayal of the character : " I think she 's in such dire straights [ sic ] that all she has are these kind of naive , fierce hope . And while I was playing the part I was looking for pleasure and hope in everything , even in these really bleak things . And so it was really mostly after I finished the movie that I felt pain . " Her performance in the film was well received : David Germain of the Associated Press wrote , " Gyllenhaal humanizes her so deeply and richly ... that Sherry elicits sympathy even in her darkest and weakest moments " , and Dennis Harvey of Variety called her performance " naturalistic " . For her work , Gyllenhaal earned her second Golden Globe Best Actress nomination and won the Best Actress category award at the 2006 Stockholm International Film Festival . 
 She appeared in The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) , the sequel to Batman Begins ( 2005 ) , in which she replaced Katie Holmes as Assistant District Attorney , Rachel Dawes . Gyllenhaal acknowledged her character was a damsel in distress to an extent , but said director Christopher Nolan sought ways to empower her character , so " Rachel 's really clear about what 's important to her and unwilling to compromise her morals , which made a nice change " from the many conflicted characters she had previously portrayed . The Dark Knight was a financial and critical success , setting a new opening weekend box office record for North America . With revenue of US $ 1 billion worldwide , it became the fourth @-@ highest grossing film of all time , and remains Gyllenhaal 's most commercially successful picture to date . In a Salon review of the film , Stephanie Zacharek called Gyllenhaal 's character " a tough cookie in a Stanwyck @-@ style bias @-@ cut gown " and stated that " the movie feels smarter and more supple when she 's on @-@ screen " . IGN film critic Todd Gilchrist wrote , " Gyllenhaal adds real depth and energy to Rachel Dawes " . 
 Gyllenhaal played Yelena <unk> in the Classic Stage Company 's 2009 Off @-@ Broadway production of Anton Chekhov 's Uncle Vanya in New York City . The cast also included Peter Sarsgaard , Mamie Gummer , Denis Leary , and George Foreman . The production , directed by Martin Scorsese , began previews on January 17 and ended its limited run on March 1 . Joe Dziemianowicz of the New York Daily News was less than enthusiastic about her performance , writing : " Gyllenhaal , who was so dynamic as a druggie in the film Sherrybaby , plays Yelena with a slow @-@ mo <unk> and monotonous pasted @-@ on smile that makes it seem as if she 's been in Sherry 's stash . " However , Malcolm Johnson of the Hartford Courant was complimentary , noting that she " ultimately blossoms " as the character . 
 Gyllenhaal agreed to appear in the comedy film Away We Go , where she plays a bohemian college professor who is an old friend of John Krasinski 's character . The film generated broadly mixed reviews , with Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly describing Gyllenhaal 's subplot as " over @-@ the @-@ top " . However , A. O. Scott of The New York Times praised Gyllenhaal and co @-@ star Allison Janney for their performances , writing that " both [ are ] quite funny " . Scott concluded with , " Ms. Gyllenhaal 's line about sex roles in ' the seahorse community ' is the screenplay 's one clean satirical bull 's @-@ eye " . Her next role came in the musical @-@ drama Crazy Heart , in which she played journalist Jean Craddock , who falls for musician Bad Blake , played by Jeff Bridges . The movie received favorable reviews , with Gyllenhaal receiving praise from critics . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone reported that Gyllenhaal was " funny , touching and vital as Jean " and that her part was " conventionally conceived , but Gyllenhaal plays it with a tough core of intelligence and feeling . " Her performance earned her an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress . 
 = = = 2010 – present = = = 
 In 2010 , Gyllenhaal appeared in Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang , the sequel to the 2005 film Nanny McPhee . The role required her to speak with an English accent . The feature received mixed reviews , and earned US $ 93 million worldwide . Away from acting , she served as host of the PBS television documentary series Independent Lens . Gyllenhaal also appeared in Hysteria , an independent movie focusing on the creation of the vibrator . 
 In February 2011 , Gyllenhaal starred in another Anton Chekhov production as the character Masha in Austin Pendleton 's Three Sisters at the Classic Stage Company . The play focuses on the <unk> sisters ( Gyllenhaal , Jessica Hecht , and Juliet Rylance ) " unlucky in love , unhappy in the provinces and longing to return to Moscow " , as summarized by Bloomberg 's Jeremy Gerard . The off @-@ Broadway production began preview performances on January 12 , with a limited engagement through March 6 . 
 In the 2012 film Won 't Back Down , she played a parent involved in a parent trigger takeover of her child 's school . She appeared as a Secret Service agent in the action @-@ thriller White House Down ( 2013 ) . In 2014 , she played the title role as an Anglo @-@ Israeli business @-@ woman in the BBC Television series , The Honourable Woman . Also in 2014 she played <unk> in Matthew Barney and Jonathan <unk> 's River of <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gyllenhaal began a relationship with actor Peter Sarsgaard , a close friend of her brother Jake , in 2002 . They announced their engagement in April 2006 , and married on May 2 , 2009 , in a small chapel in Brindisi , Italy . They have two daughters , Ramona ( b . 2006 ) and Gloria Ray Sarsgaard ( b . 2012 ) . The family lives in Brooklyn , New York . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Gyllenhaal is politically active . At the 18th Independent Spirit Awards , she spoke out against the Iraq war , stating the reason for the invasion was " oil and imperialism " . In 2005 , Gyllenhaal drew controversy for her statement that the September 11 attacks were " an occasion to be brave enough to ask some serious questions about America 's role in the world ... It is always useful as individuals or nations to ask how we may have knowingly or unknowingly contributed to this conflict . " Gyllenhaal took part in Artists United to Win Without War , a campaign started by Robert Greenwald with the aim of advancing progressive causes and voicing opposition to the Iraq War . She and her brother Jake filmed a commercial for Rock the Vote , and visited the University of Southern California ( USC ) campus to encourage students to vote in the 2004 U.S. presidential election , in which she supported John Kerry . Gyllenhaal supported Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential election . She has campaigned on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) , an organization her family strongly supports . 
 In June 2013 , Gyllenhaal and numerous other celebrities appeared in a video showing support for Chelsea Manning . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 Gyllenhaal is also a supporter of Witness , a non @-@ profit organization that uses video and online technologies to expose human rights violations . She co @-@ hosted a benefit dinner with founder Peter Gabriel in November 2007 . Gyllenhaal helped raise funds for <unk> , a non @-@ profit organization that helps impoverished people start a micro @-@ enterprise . For one of the fundraisers , Gyllenhaal helped design and promote a necklace that sold for US $ 100 ; all proceeds from sales went to the charity . Since 2008 , Gyllenhaal has been supporting the Hear the World Foundation as ambassador . In her role she is advocating for equal opportunities and better quality of life for people with hearing loss . In October 2008 she hosted a fashion show event called " Fashionably Natural " , which was presented by Gen Art and <unk> in Los Angeles . The show featured four up @-@ and @-@ coming designers who worked only with all @-@ natural and eco @-@ friendly fabrics and materials . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Operation Tungsten = 
 Operation Tungsten was a Second World War Royal Navy air raid that targeted the German battleship Tirpitz . The operation sought to damage or destroy Tirpitz at her base in Kaafjord in the far north of Norway before she could become fully operational again following a period of repairs . 
 The British decision to strike Kaafjord was motivated by fears that the battleship , upon re @-@ entering service , would attack strategically important convoys carrying supplies to the Soviet Union . Removing the threat posed by Tirpitz would also allow the Allies to redeploy the capital ships which had to be held in the North Sea to counter her . After four months of training and preparations , the British Home Fleet sailed on 30 March 1944 and aircraft launched from five aircraft carriers struck Kaafjord on 3 April . The raid achieved surprise , and the British aircraft met little opposition . Fifteen bombs hit the battleship , and strafing by fighter aircraft inflicted heavy casualties on her gun crews . Four British aircraft and nine airmen were lost during the operation . 
 The damage inflicted during the attack was not sufficient to sink or disable Tirpitz , but 122 members of her crew died and 316 were wounded . The German Kriegsmarine decided to repair the battleship , and works were completed by mid @-@ July . The British conducted further carrier raids against Tirpitz between April and August 1944 in the hope of prolonging the period she was out of service , but none were successful . Tirpitz was eventually disabled and then sunk by Royal Air Force heavy bombers in late 1944 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The threat Tirpitz had an important influence on British naval strategy during the Second World War . She was commissioned in February 1941 and completed her crew training late that year . At about the same time the German high command decided to station the battleship in Norway ; this deployment was intended to deter a feared Allied invasion of Norway and threaten the convoys which regularly sailed through the Arctic Sea to the Soviet Union . These convoys carried large quantities of war material from ports in the UK and Iceland , and were frequently attacked by the German air and naval units stationed in Norway . Tirpitz arrived in Norway in January 1942 and operated from anchorages located in fjords . While she was operational the Allies had to keep a powerful force of warships with the British Home Fleet to guard against the possibility of a sortie against the Arctic convoys , and capital ships accompanied most convoys part of the way to the Soviet Union . 
 The British attacked Tirpitz several times during 1942 and 1943 . When the battleship sortied to intercept Convoy PQ 12 on 6 March 1942 HMS Victorious , which formed part of the convoy 's escort , attempted to attack her using torpedo bombers . These aircraft launched twenty torpedoes at the battleship but all missed . On several occasions during 1942 and 1943 bombers from the Royal Air Force and Soviet Air Forces attempted to strike Tirpitz in her anchorages without success . On 23 September 1943 two British X @-@ class midget submarines succeeded in penetrating the defences around the battleship at her main anchorage at Kaafjord in northern Norway during Operation Source , and placed explosive charges in the water beneath her . This attack caused extensive damage to Tirpitz , putting her out of service for six months . 
 Repairs to Tirpitz were carried out using improvised facilities at Kaafjord as it was considered too risky to attempt to move the damaged warship to Germany . Instead , equipment and work crews were shipped to the fjord from German ports . On the night of 10 / 11 February 1944 , 15 Soviet aircraft attacked the battleship , but did not cause any damage . By 17 March , the repairs to Tirpitz 's armament , machinery and hull were complete , but several minor repair tasks were outstanding . During the period the ship was under repair , Scharnhorst , the only remaining operational German battleship , was sunk on 26 December during the Battle of the North Cape . Following this engagement the Royal Navy stopped deploying battleships to cover convoys travelling to and from the Soviet Union . By this stage of the war the Allies also had large numbers of anti @-@ submarine and anti @-@ aircraft escort ships available , and were able to assign strong forces to protect all of the Arctic convoys . German submarines operating in the Norwegian Sea were rarely able to evade the convoy escorts , and few merchant vessels suffered damage from enemy attack . 
 The British Government and Royal Navy were concerned about the threat Tirpitz posed once she re @-@ entered service . Allied intelligence tracked the progress of work on the battleship using decrypted German radio signals , photo reconnaissance flights and eyewitness reports from agents in Norway . It was feared the battleship could sortie and attack convoys in the Norwegian Sea or Atlantic Ocean after the repairs were completed . The need to guard against this possibility would also occupy warships needed to support the planned invasion of France . As a result , it was decided in late 1943 to make further attempts to sink the battleship . 
 Despite Allied concerns , Tirpitz posed only a limited danger to Allied shipping . From late 1943 the battleship was unable to put to sea for crew training due to the threat of Allied attack and fuel shortages . These shortages also meant the Germans were unable to move the battleship between anchorages to make her more difficult to locate and attack . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The options for attacking Tirpitz at Kaafjord were limited . Another submarine @-@ borne raid was considered impractical as intelligence gathered from intercepted radio transmissions and field agents indicated that the battleship 's underwater defences had been improved and more aerial reconnaissance patrols of the region were being flown . The commander of the Royal Air Force 's Bomber Command , Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris , also refused to attempt a heavy bomber raid on Tirpitz on the grounds that the Kaafjord area was beyond the effective range of these aircraft and the battleship 's guns would cause heavy casualties . After these two options were ruled out , the task was assigned to the Home Fleet 's aircraft carriers . At this time the large fleet carriers HMS Furious and Victorious and four smaller escort carriers were ready . 
 Planning for the raid on Kaafjord began in December 1943 . Vice Admiral Bruce Fraser , the commander of the Home Fleet , was not optimistic about the prospects for success , and had to be persuaded to undertake the operation by First Sea Lord Sir Andrew Cunningham . Fraser gave his second in command , Vice Admiral Sir Henry Moore , responsibility for planning and leading the raid . The operation was initially designated " Operational <unk> " , but was later renamed " Operation Tungsten " . The attack was originally scheduled for mid @-@ March 1944 , shortly before the time Allied intelligence believed Tirpitz would become operational . However , it was delayed by two weeks while Victorious was fitted with new radars . The British considered cancelling Operation Tungsten in February as Victorious was also needed in the Indian Ocean to counter a build @-@ up of Japanese warships at Singapore . To enable the attack to proceed , the United States Navy agreed to temporarily transfer USS Saratoga to the Eastern Fleet so that Victorious could be retained in the North Sea . 
 The plans for the raid were centred on two dive @-@ bombing attacks by Fleet Air Arm Fairey Barracuda aircraft . Each of the attacks was to involve 21 Barracudas escorted by 40 fighters ; Vought F4U Corsairs flying from Victorious would provide protection against German aircraft while Grumman F4F Wildcat and F6F Hellcats operating from Furious and the escort carriers HMS Emperor , Pursuer and Searcher were to strafe anti @-@ aircraft batteries near Tirpitz , as well as the battleship herself . Further aircraft flying from Furious and the escort carrier HMS Fencer would protect the fleet against attack by German aircraft or submarines . While carrier aircraft had previously lacked a bomb capable of penetrating a battleship 's thick deck armour , it was hoped that the recently developed 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound ( 730 kg ) armour @-@ piercing bomb would be able to pierce at least the first layer of Tirpitz 's armour if they were dropped from an altitude of 3 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) or higher . The damage caused by such hits was expected to put the battleship out of service . Nine of the Barracudas were to be armed with 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound bombs and a further 22 would each carry three 500 @-@ pound semi @-@ armour @-@ piercing bombs that were capable of penetrating the lightly protected upper decks of the ship if dropped from above 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . The remaining ten aircraft would be armed with 500- and 600 @-@ pound general @-@ purpose bombs and with anti @-@ submarine bombs intended to inflict casualties among the battleship 's crew and cause underwater damage if they exploded in the water near her hull . The aircraft carrying high @-@ explosive bombs were to initiate the dive bombing of Tirpitz as it was hoped that these weapons would knock out at least some of the battleship 's anti @-@ aircraft guns before the main attack commenced . 
 The Fleet Air Arm units selected for Operation Tungsten conducted intensive training from February 1944 . A high proportion of the airmen were inexperienced , and the captain of Victorious estimated that 85 per cent of the aircrew embarked on his ship had not previously operated at sea . The training program was centred on Loch Eriboll in northern Scotland which , like Kaafjord , was surrounded by steep hills . Flying from RNAS Hatston in the Orkney Islands , the aircrew practiced manoeuvring around this terrain to familiarise themselves with the tactics needed to avoid German anti @-@ aircraft guns and successfully attack Tirpitz . The Royal Navy drew on intelligence on the defences of Kaafjord to make the exercise range as similar to the conditions around Tirpitz as was possible , and the aircrew were extensively briefed on the locations of German positions . An area the size of the battleship was also marked out on an island in the centre of the loch and repeatedly bombed . 
 While these preparations were under way , the Allies continued to monitor Tirpitz . In late February the escort carrier HMS Chaser transported photo analysts and the ground crews for a Royal Air Force photo reconnaissance detachment to <unk> airfield in northern Russia . These personnel were joined by three Supermarine Spitfires fitted for photo reconnaissance work and a single Consolidated PBY Catalina in March . The Spitfires flew regular sorties over Kaafjord and took very detailed photographs of Tirpitz and the nearby anti @-@ aircraft batteries on 12 and 13 March ; after being developed the Catalina flew these images to the UK . Although the German forces in northern Norway detected the Spitfire flights , the Kaafjord area 's defences were not increased or placed on alert . On 16 March eight British , Dutch and Norwegian submarines were directed to take up positions off the Norwegian coast after decrypted German radio messages indicated that Tirpitz may have been preparing to depart Kaafjord for Germany to complete her repairs . A further eight British and Dutch submarines were dispatched on 18 March , but two days later it was concluded that Tirpitz was not about to put to sea and the submarines were diverted to other tasks or ordered back to port . On 21 March British intelligence warned the Admiralty that due to recent Soviet advances on the Eastern Front , the Germans were placing a strong emphasis on disrupting the flow of supplies to the Soviet Union and could dispatch Tirpitz to attack any convoys not escorted by capital ships . In response , Fraser was directed to provide battleship protection for the next Arctic Convoy . 
 The final decision to undertake Operation Tungsten was made in mid @-@ March on the basis of a decrypted radio message that indicated that Tirpitz was almost ready for combat and would conduct high @-@ speed trials on 1 April . As a result of the delays to the operation , the sailing of the attack force coincided with the departure of Convoy JW 58 for the Soviet Union . It was hoped that if German forces spotted the British fleet it would be assumed that the warships were supporting the convoy . As part of the final preparations for the attack a full @-@ scale rehearsal was conducted using the training range at Loch Eriboll on 28 March . From 1 April onwards , the Admiralty received hourly weather reports from a group of Norwegian Secret Intelligence Service agents in Alta , near Kaafjord . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 The Royal Navy assembled a powerful force for Operation Tungsten . The main striking force was made up of two wings of Barracudas : 8 Wing comprising 827 and 830 Naval Air Squadrons , and 52 Wing with 829 and 831 Naval Air Squadrons . While 8 Wing was normally based on board Furious and 52 Wing on Victorious , Moore chose to station a squadron from each of the wings on each carrier so they could launch simultaneously and go into battle as formed units . The 163 Fleet Air Arm airmen in the attacking units included 28 New Zealanders , three Canadians , two Australians , and one South African ; the remainder were British . 
 The large number of warships assigned to the operation were initially split into two groups . Force One was personally commanded by Fraser on board the battleship HMS Duke of York , and also included Victorious , the battleship HMS Anson ( with Moore and his staff on board ) , a light cruiser and five destroyers . Force Two was commanded by Rear Admiral Arthur La Touche Bisset and comprised Furious , the four escort carriers , five destroyers and two tankers . It was planned that Force One would initially provide support for Convoy JW 58 and Force Two would sail separately and proceed directly to a point off Norway where it would be joined by Anson and Victorious on 3 April and conduct the raid the next day . 
 Tirpitz 's anchorage at Kaafjord was protected by anti @-@ aircraft batteries and fighter aircraft . At the time of Operation Tungsten , four batteries of heavy anti @-@ aircraft guns and seven batteries of light guns were located on the shore near the battleship . Several anti @-@ aircraft vessels and destroyers were also usually moored near Tirpitz . The battleship herself was fitted with 68 anti @-@ aircraft guns . Equipment capable of generating an artificial smokescreen to hide Tirpitz from aircraft had also been installed around Kaafjord . The German Air Force ( Luftwaffe ) had only a small number of fighters stationed at bases near Kaafjord , and their operations were constrained by a lack of fuel . British intelligence believed that the German fighter force in the area could be rapidly expanded in the event of an emergency . The Luftwaffe typically conducted three reconnaissance flights into the Arctic Sea each day . 
 = = Attack = = 
 Force One departed the Home Fleet 's base at Scapa Flow in the Orkney Islands on 30 March , three days after JW 58 had sailed from Loch Ewe in Scotland . Force Two departed separately later that day . The convoy comprised 49 merchant ships escorted by a powerful force of 33 warships , including two escort carriers . German reconnaissance aircraft located JW 58 on 30 March , and all of the U @-@ boats in the Norwegian Sea were directed to intercept it . The German aircraft did not conduct wider @-@ ranging sorties in search of the convoy 's battleship covering force or other Allied ships . A total of 17 U @-@ boats attacked JW 58 between 1 and 3 April without success ; none of the Allied ships suffered any damage , and the escorts sank four U @-@ boats and shot down six German aircraft during the convoy 's voyage from Scotland to the Soviet Union . JW 58 reached its destination at Kola Bay on 6 April . While several Allied aircraft were lost during the voyage , mostly to flying accidents , all of the ships arrived unscathed . 
 Owing to a combination of favourable factors , Fraser decided on 1 April to bring the raid on Kaafjord forward by 24 hours . <unk> German signals indicated that Tirpitz 's trials had been delayed until 3 April , and Fraser hoped that an attack on this date would catch the battleship away from her usual well @-@ protected mooring . Moreover , as JW 58 's escorts were performing well and there was no indication that Tirpitz would sortie into the open sea , Fraser judged that Force One no longer needed to provide support for the transports . Weather conditions were also unusually good for the Norwegian Sea in early Spring and were well suited to flying operations . After the decision to attack was made both tankers and two escorting destroyers detached from Force Two and proceeded to a point 300 miles ( 480 km ) north @-@ west of Kaafjord where they remained to supply any destroyers that ran low on fuel . The rest of Force Two altered course to rendezvous with Force One , and this was achieved at 4 : 20 pm on 2 April . After the two forces met Duke of York , with Fraser on board , and two destroyers sailed to the north @-@ west and took up a position where they would be able to intercept Tirpitz in the event that she had sailed from Kaafjord without being detected . The remainder of the Home Fleet proceeded to the strike 's launching point . 
 The attack was launched during the early hours of 3 April . All the airmen were woken shortly after midnight , and attended a final briefing from 1 : 15 am . The aircraft to be used in the strike were armed at this time , with all of the bombs being marked with messages for Tirpitz in chalk . The aircrew began boarding their aircraft at 4 : 00 am and flying @-@ off operations started 15 minutes later ; at this time the warships were 120 miles ( 190 km ) from Kaafjord . Ten Corsairs drawn from 1834 and 1836 Naval Air Squadrons were the first aircraft to be launched and were followed by the 21 Barracudas of 8 Wing ; 827 Squadron was launched from Victorious and 830 Squadron departed from Furious . Seven of the Barracudas were armed with a 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound bomb , and the remainder carried multiple 500 or 600 @-@ pound weapons . Once the Barracudas were airborne the remaining escort fighters – 30 Wildcats and Hellcats from 800 , 881 and 882 Naval Air Squadrons – were launched . All the aircraft of the first wave were dispatched successfully , and the force completed forming up at 4 : 37 am . Flying conditions remained perfect , and German forces had not detected the British fleet during its approach . 
 The first wave headed for Norway at low altitude , flying just 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the sea to avoid detection by German radar . The aircraft began to climb to a higher altitude when they reached a point 20 miles ( 32 km ) from the coast , and had reached 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) by the time they made landfall at 5 : 08 am . The force approached Altenfjord from the west , passing over the western end of <unk> before turning south , then looping to the north and attacking the battleship over the hills on the southern shore of Kaafjord shortly before 5 : 30 am . 
 The arrival of the British force caught Tirpitz by surprise . While the aircraft had first been picked up by a German radar station shortly after they crossed the Norwegian coastline , the battleship was not immediately warned . At the time of the attack Tirpitz was preparing to sail for her high @-@ speed trials , and her crew were busy unmooring the vessel . Her five protective destroyers had already departed for the trials area in <unk> Sound . The warning from the radar station arrived shortly before the British aircraft appeared over Kaafjord , and the battleship 's crew were still in the process of moving to their battle stations when the attack commenced ; at this time not all of the watertight doors were closed and some damage @-@ control stations were not fully manned . 
 As planned , the British raid began with Hellcat and Wildcat fighters strafing Tirpitz 's anti @-@ aircraft guns and batteries located on the shore ; this attack inflicted heavy casualties on the battleship 's gunners , disabled her main anti @-@ aircraft control centre and damaged several guns . The fighters also strafed several anti @-@ aircraft ships in Kaafjord . The 21 Barracudas began their attack shortly afterwards , and hit Tirpitz with a general purpose bomb , three 500 @-@ pound semi @-@ armour @-@ piercing bombs and three 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound bombs within 60 seconds . Overall , ten bombs struck the battleship during the first attack . Most of these bombs did not penetrate the ship 's armoured deck as they had been dropped from too low an altitude . Hundreds of members of the ship 's crew died or were wounded ; her commanding officer , Captain Hans Meyer , was among the wounded and another officer assumed command . The battleship also drifted into the western shore of Kaafjord and ran aground , but was quickly refloated . One of 830 Squadron 's Barracudas crashed following the attack with the loss of all three members of its crew . The surviving aircraft of the first wave began landing on the carriers at 6 : 19 am , and all were recovered by 6 : 42 . 
 The first aircraft of the second wave took to the air at 5 : 25 am . One of 829 Squadron 's Barracudas crashed shortly after take @-@ off , resulting in the deaths of its crew of three , and another aircraft from this squadron was not launched due to engine problems . Only two of the Barracudas in this wave were armed with 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound bombs . As with the first strike , 40 fighters accompanied the torpedo bombers ; these comprised 10 Corsairs from 1834 and 1836 Naval Air Squadrons , all of the 20 Wildcats assigned to 896 and 898 Naval Air Squadrons and 10 Hellcats from 804 Naval Air Squadron . All aircraft were launched by 5 : 37 am , and the force had an uneventful flight to the Kaafjord area . While the German defences were now alert , the artificial smoke screen being generated around Kaafjord was not yet sufficient to hide Tirpitz from view . 
 The second attack on Tirpitz was similar to the first . It began with Hellcat fighters strafing the anti @-@ aircraft batteries while Wildcats attacked the battleship . The fighters also attacked German ships in Kaafjord and a radio or radio direction finding station . The Barracudas executed their dive bombing attack at 6 : 36 am and struck Tirpitz with a 1 @,@ 600 pound bomb and four 500 @-@ pound bombs within a minute . The German defences at Kaafjord received little warning of the incoming raid , and the smokescreen hid the British aircraft from sight . As a result , the gunners had to fire blindly and only shot down one of the Barracudas ; all three airmen died . The second wave landed on the carriers between 7 : 20 and 7 : 58 am . A damaged Hellcat had to ditch near the Canadian destroyer HMCS Algonquin and one of the Corsairs suffered heavy damage as a result of a landing accident ; both pilots survived . 
 During the period in which the air strikes were conducted , a force of 25 Wildcat and Supermarine Seafire fighters from 801 , 842 and 880 Naval Air Squadrons provided air defence for the Home Fleet . Nine Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers , which were also operated by 842 Naval Air Squadron , conducted anti @-@ submarine patrols . No threat to the fleet developed , and Corsairs took over air defence duties at the conclusion of the two attacks . 
 During the early afternoon of 3 April , Moore considered conducting a further raid on Kaafjord the next day . He decided against doing so as the preliminary assessment of photos taken during the attack had concluded that Tirpitz was badly damaged . Moore was also aware that his aircrew were fatigued , and was reluctant to expose them to what would now be alert defences . Accordingly , he ordered that the fleet return to base , and it arrived at Scapa Flow in the afternoon of 6 April . King George VI and Prime Minister Winston Churchill sent congratulatory messages to the fleet , but both Churchill and Cunningham were concerned that Tirpitz could be returned to service . Cunningham also regretted Moore 's decision not to launch a further strike on 4 April . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The two attacks on Tirpitz largely went to plan . The airmen found the defences and geography at Kaafjord to be very similar to the Loch Eriboll training range , and one of the post @-@ attack reports stated that the operation had been " almost an exercise which they [ the aircrew ] had frequently carried out before " . The official historian of the Royal Navy 's role in the Second World War , Stephen Roskill , also judged that the strikes were " beautifully co @-@ ordinated and fearlessly executed " . The most important discrepancy between the plans for the operation and its execution was that many pilots dropped their bombs below the specified minimum altitude of 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) in an attempt to improve their chances of hitting Tirpitz . The shorter than optimum flight times may have meant that some of the bombs which struck the battleship lacked the necessary velocity to penetrate her deck armour . Nine Royal Navy airmen died during the raid . 
 Tirpitz 's crew suffered heavy casualties in the attack , but the battleship was not badly damaged . Overall , 122 sailors died and 316 were wounded ; these casualties represented 15 percent of the battleship 's crew . Many of the casualties were anti @-@ aircraft gunners who were killed or wounded by machine @-@ gun fire from the British fighters . While two bombs that exploded in the water near Tirpitz opened holes in her hull and caused flooding , none of the 15 bombs that struck the battleship penetrated her main deck armour belt . As a result , her guns , magazines , and machinery did not suffer serious damage . Most of the damaged areas of the battleship were located in her superstructure and between her armoured decks . The starboard aircraft catapult and crane were destroyed , as were both Tirpitz 's Arado floatplanes . The number two starboard 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) gun turret was knocked out , and the number three port 150 mm turret incurred significant damage . The officers ' mess and several galleys were wrecked , and the ship was filled with smoke . Tirpitz 's funnel was also struck by bomb fragments that badly damaged all of the boiler intakes . While the starboard turbine was knocked out by shock damage and two of the boilers were disabled after being contaminated by salt water used for firefighting , the battleship was still capable of steaming within Kaafjord . The British fighters also damaged four patrol craft and a large repair ship ; the captain of an armed trawler died and 13 other sailors on board these vessels suffered wounds . Torstein <unk> of the Allied Secret Intelligence Service group in Alta reported a few hours after the raid , that no civilian casualties had resulted from the attack , and that the local population was " ... extremely impressed by the bombing . " A further report six days after the operation relayed that the Germans estimated that it would take months to repair the damage inflicted on Tirpitz . 
 The commander of the Kriegsmarine , Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , directed that the damage caused to Tirpitz during Operation Tungsten be repaired . Although the battleship was no longer capable of operating against Allied convoys for lack of air support , it was considered desirable to retain her in service in order to tie down Allied naval resources . Repair work began in early May after a destroyer transported equipment and workmen to Kaafjord from Germany , and Tirpitz was able to steam under her own power by 2 June . She was capable of undertaking gunnery practice by the end of June , and all repairs were completed in mid @-@ July . During this period the battleship 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented by fitting her with additional 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannons , modifying the 150 mm guns so they could be used to attack aircraft and supplying anti @-@ aircraft shells for her 380 @-@ millimetre ( 15 in ) main guns . The defences of Kaafjord were also improved during this period . Additional radar stations and observation posts were established , and the number of smoke generators located around Tirpitz was increased . 
 Following Operation Tungsten , British intelligence assessed that Tirpitz would be repaired within six months . Accordingly , Cunningham directed Fraser on 13 April to launch another attack on the battleship . While Cunningham did not believe that Barracudas could carry weapons capable of sinking Tirpitz , he hoped that further air strikes would increase the period the battleship was out of service and harm her crew 's morale . Fraser initially resisted Cunningham 's order , arguing that the prospects for a successful raid were poor as the Germans would have reinforced the defences around Tirpitz and weather conditions were likely to be worse than those encountered during Operation Tungsten . He eventually relented , and Moore sailed from Scapa Flow on 21 April to attack Kaafjord again . This raid , designated Operation Planet , was called off on 24 April due to bad weather over the target area . Two other attacks , Operation Brawn and Operation Tiger Claw , also had to be cancelled on 15 and 28 May respectively because of adverse weather . Further carrier raids were attempted in July and August after Allied intelligence determined that the repairs to Tirpitz were nearing completion . During Operation Mascot a force of 42 Barracudas and 40 fighters attacked Tirpitz on 17 July , but did not score any hits as the battleship was hidden by a smokescreen . A further four carrier raids were conducted against Kaafjord between 22 and 29 August during Operation Goodwood , but these caused only light damage to the battleship . 
 In late August it was decided that further Fleet Air Arm attacks should not be attempted as the Germans were now able to cover Tirpitz in smoke before Barracudas could reach the battleship , and these aircraft could not carry bombs large enough to inflict heavy damage . As it was still seen as desirable to destroy Tirpitz , the task was assigned to Bomber Command . On 15 September a force of heavy bombers attacked Kaafjord after refuelling at bases in northern Russia and inflicted irreparable damage on the battleship . Following this raid she was towed to an anchorage near Tromsø to be used as an immobile coastal defence battery . Another heavy bomber attack on 29 October caused only minor damage , and a third raid was mounted on 12 November in which Tirpitz was struck by several Tallboy bombs and capsized with heavy loss of life among her crew . 
 = Elizabeth I of England = 
 Elizabeth I ( 7 September 1533 – 24 March 1603 ) was Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death . Sometimes called The Virgin Queen , Gloriana or Good Queen Bess , the childless Elizabeth was the fifth and last monarch of the Tudor dynasty . 
 Elizabeth was the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn , his second wife , who was executed two and a half years after Elizabeth 's birth . Anne 's marriage to Henry VIII was annulled , and Elizabeth was declared illegitimate . Her half @-@ brother , Edward VI , ruled until his death in 1553 , bequeathing the crown to Lady Jane Grey and ignoring the claims of his two half @-@ sisters , Elizabeth and the Roman Catholic Mary , in spite of statute law to the contrary . Edward 's will was set aside and Mary became queen , deposing Lady Jane Grey . During Mary 's reign , Elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant rebels . 
 In 1558 , Elizabeth succeeded her half @-@ sister to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel . She depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers , led by William Cecil , Baron Burghley . One of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an English Protestant church , of which she became the Supreme Governor . This Elizabethan Religious Settlement was to evolve into the Church of England . It was expected that Elizabeth would marry and produce an heir to continue the Tudor line . She never did , despite numerous courtships . As she grew older , Elizabeth became famous for her virginity . A cult grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits , pageants , and literature of the day . 
 In government , Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and half @-@ siblings had been . One of her mottoes was " video et <unk> " ( " I see but say nothing " ) . In religion , she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution . After the pope declared her illegitimate in 1570 and released her subjects from obedience to her , several conspiracies threatened her life , all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers ' secret service . Elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs , manoeuvring between the major powers of France and Spain . She only half @-@ heartedly supported a number of ineffective , poorly resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands , France , and Ireland . By the mid @-@ 1580s , England could no longer avoid war with Spain . England 's defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 associated Elizabeth with one of the greatest military victories in English history . 
 Elizabeth 's reign is known as the Elizabethan era . The period is famous for the flourishing of English drama , led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe , and for the seafaring prowess of English adventurers such as Francis Drake . Some historians depict Elizabeth as a short @-@ tempered , sometimes indecisive ruler , who enjoyed more than her share of luck . Towards the end of her reign , a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity . Elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer and a dogged survivor in an era when government was ramshackle and limited , and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones . Such was the case with Elizabeth 's rival , Mary , Queen of Scots , whom she imprisoned in 1568 and had executed in 1587 . After the short reigns of Elizabeth 's half @-@ siblings , her 44 years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped forge a sense of national identity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elizabeth was born at Greenwich Palace and was named after both her grandmothers , Elizabeth of York and Elizabeth Howard . She was the second child of Henry VIII of England born in wedlock to survive infancy . Her mother was Henry 's second wife , Anne Boleyn . At birth , Elizabeth was the heiress presumptive to the throne of England . Her older half @-@ sister , Mary , had lost her position as a legitimate heir when Henry annulled his marriage to Mary 's mother , Catherine of Aragon , to marry Anne , with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the Tudor succession . Elizabeth was baptised on 10 September ; Archbishop Thomas Cranmer , the Marquess of Exeter , the Duchess of Norfolk and the Dowager Marchioness of Dorset stood as her godparents . 
 When Elizabeth was two years and eight months old , her mother was executed on 19 May 1536 . Elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession . Eleven days after Anne Boleyn 's death , Henry married Jane Seymour , but she died shortly after the birth of their son , Prince Edward , in 1537 . From his birth , Edward was undisputed heir apparent to the throne . Elizabeth was placed in his household and carried the <unk> , or baptismal cloth , at his christening . 
 Elizabeth 's first governess or Lady Mistress , Margaret Bryan , wrote that she was " as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my life " . By the autumn of 1537 , Elizabeth was in the care of Blanche Herbert , Lady Troy , who remained her Lady Mistress until her retirement in late 1545 or early 1546 . Catherine Champernowne , better known by her later , married name of Catherine " Kat " Ashley , was appointed as Elizabeth 's governess in 1537 , and she remained Elizabeth 's friend until her death in 1565 , when Blanche Parry succeeded her as Chief Gentlewoman of the Privy Chamber . Champernowne taught Elizabeth four languages : French , Flemish , Italian and Spanish . By the time William Grindal became her tutor in 1544 , Elizabeth could write English , Latin , and Italian . Under Grindal , a talented and skilful tutor , she also progressed in French and Greek . After Grindal died in 1548 , Elizabeth received her education under Roger Ascham , a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging . By the time her formal education ended in 1550 , she was one of the best educated women of her generation . By the end of her life , Elizabeth was also believed to speak Welsh , Cornish , Scottish and Irish in addition to English . The Venetian ambassador stated in 1603 that she " possessed [ these ] languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue " . Historian Mark <unk> suggests that she was probably taught Cornish by William Killigrew , Groom of the Privy Chamber and later Chamberlain of the Exchequer . 
 = = Thomas Seymour = = 
 Henry VIII died in 1547 and Elizabeth 's half @-@ brother , Edward VI , became king at age nine . Catherine Parr , Henry 's widow , soon married Thomas Seymour of Sudeley , Edward VI 's uncle and the brother of the Lord Protector , Edward Seymour , Duke of Somerset . The couple took Elizabeth into their household at Chelsea . There Elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life . Thomas Seymour , approaching age 40 but having charm and " a powerful sex appeal " , engaged in romps and horseplay with the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Elizabeth . These included entering her bedroom in his nightgown , tickling her and slapping her on the buttocks . Parr , rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities , joined in . Twice she accompanied him in tickling Elizabeth , and once held her while he cut her black gown " into a thousand pieces . " However , after Parr discovered the pair in an embrace , she ended this state of affairs . In May 1548 , Elizabeth was sent away . 
 However , Thomas Seymour continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the King 's person . When Parr died after childbirth on 5 September 1548 , he renewed his attentions towards Elizabeth , intent on marrying her . The details of his former behaviour towards Elizabeth emerged , and for his brother and the king 's council , this was the last straw . In January 1549 , Seymour was arrested on suspicion of plotting to marry Elizabeth and overthrow the Lord Protector . Elizabeth , living at Hatfield House , would admit nothing . Her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator , Sir Robert Tyrwhitt , who reported , " I do see it in her face that she is guilty " . Seymour was beheaded on 20 March 1549 . 
 = = Mary I 's reign = = 
 Edward VI died on 6 July 1553 , aged 15 . His will swept aside the Succession to the Crown Act 1543 , excluded both Mary and Elizabeth from the succession , and instead declared as his heir Lady Jane Grey , granddaughter of Henry VIII 's sister Mary , Duchess of Suffolk . Lady Jane was proclaimed queen by the Privy Council , but her support quickly crumbled , and she was deposed after nine days . On 3 August 1553 , Mary rode triumphantly into London , with Elizabeth at her side . 
 The show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long . Mary , a devout Catholic , was determined to crush the Protestant faith in which Elizabeth had been educated , and she ordered that everyone attend Catholic Mass ; Elizabeth had to outwardly conform . Mary 's initial popularity ebbed away in 1554 when she announced plans to marry Prince Philip of Spain , the son of Emperor Charles V and an active Catholic . Discontent spread rapidly through the country , and many looked to Elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to Mary 's religious policies . 
 In January and February 1554 , Wyatt 's rebellion broke out ; it was soon suppressed . Elizabeth was brought to court , and interrogated regarding her role , and on 18 March , she was imprisoned in the Tower of London . Elizabeth fervently protested her innocence . Though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels , some of them were known to have approached her . Mary 's closest confidant , Charles V 's ambassador Simon Renard , argued that her throne would never be safe while Elizabeth lived ; and the Chancellor , Stephen Gardiner , worked to have Elizabeth put on trial . Elizabeth 's supporters in the government , including Lord Paget , convinced Mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her . Instead , on 22 May , Elizabeth was moved from the Tower to Woodstock , where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of Sir Henry Bedingfield . Crowds cheered her all along the way . 
 On 17 April 1555 , Elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of Mary 's apparent pregnancy . If Mary and her child died , Elizabeth would become queen . If , on the other hand , Mary gave birth to a healthy child , Elizabeth 's chances of becoming queen would recede sharply . When it became clear that Mary was not pregnant , no one believed any longer that she could have a child . Elizabeth 's succession seemed assured . 
 King Philip , who ascended the Spanish throne in 1556 , acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sister @-@ in @-@ law . She was a better ally than the chief alternative , Mary , Queen of Scots , who had grown up in France and was betrothed to the Dauphin of France . When his wife fell ill in 1558 , King Philip sent the Count of Feria to consult with Elizabeth . This interview was conducted at Hatfield House , where she had returned to live in October 1555 . By October 1558 , Elizabeth was already making plans for her government . On 6 November , Mary recognised Elizabeth as her heir . On 17 November 1558 , Mary died and Elizabeth succeeded to the throne . 
 = = Accession = = 
 Elizabeth became queen at the age of 25 , and declared her intentions to her Council and other peers who had come to Hatfield to swear allegiance . The speech contains the first record of her adoption of the mediaeval political theology of the sovereign 's " two bodies " : the body natural and the body politic : 
 My lords , the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister ; the burden that is fallen upon me makes me amazed , and yet , considering I am God 's creature , ordained to obey His appointment , I will thereto yield , desiring from the bottom of my heart that I may have assistance of His grace to be the minister of His heavenly will in this office now committed to me . And as I am but one body naturally considered , though by His permission a body politic to govern , so shall I desire you all ... to be assistant to me , that I with my ruling and you with your service may make a good account to Almighty God and leave some comfort to our posterity on earth . I mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel . 
 As her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony , she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants , most with a strong Protestant flavour . Elizabeth 's open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators , who were " wonderfully ravished " . The following day , 15 January 1559 , Elizabeth was crowned and anointed by Owen Oglethorpe , the Catholic bishop of Carlisle , in Westminster Abbey . She was then presented for the people 's acceptance , amidst a deafening noise of organs , fifes , trumpets , drums , and bells . 
 = = Church settlement = = 
 Elizabeth 's personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars . She was a Protestant , but kept Catholic symbols ( such as the crucifix ) , and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key Protestant belief . 
 In terms of public policy she favoured pragmatism in dealing with religious matters . The question of her legitimacy was a key concern : although she was technically illegitimate under both Protestant and Catholic law , her retroactively declared illegitimacy under the English church was not a serious bar compared to having never been legitimate as the Catholics claimed she was . For this reason alone , it was never in serious doubt that Elizabeth would embrace Protestantism . 
 Elizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a Catholic crusade against heretical England . Elizabeth therefore sought a Protestant solution that would not offend Catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of English Protestants ; she would not tolerate the more radical Puritans though , who were pushing for far @-@ reaching reforms . As a result , the parliament of 1559 started to legislate for a church based on the Protestant settlement of Edward VI , with the monarch as its head , but with many Catholic elements , such as priestly vestments . 
 The House of Commons backed the proposals strongly , but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the House of Lords , particularly from the bishops . Elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time , including the Archbishopric of Canterbury . This enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers . Nevertheless , Elizabeth was forced to accept the title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England rather than the more contentious title of Supreme Head , which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear . The new Act of Supremacy became law on 8 May 1559 . All public officials were to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office ; the heresy laws were repealed , to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters practised by Mary . At the same time , a new Act of Uniformity was passed , which made attendance at church and the use of an adapted version of the 1552 Book of Common Prayer compulsory , though the penalties for recusancy , or failure to attend and conform , were not extreme . 
 = = Marriage question = = 
 From the start of Elizabeth 's reign , it was expected that she would marry and the question arose to whom . She never did , although she received many offers for her hand ; the reasons for this are not clear . Historians have speculated that Thomas Seymour had put her off sexual relationships , or that she knew herself to be infertile . She considered several suitors until she was about fifty . Her last courtship was with Francis , Duke of Anjou , 22 years her junior . While risking possible loss of power like her sister , who played into the hands of King Philip II of Spain , marriage offered the chance of an heir . However , the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection . 
 = = = Robert Dudley = = = 
 In the spring of 1559 , it became evident that Elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend Robert Dudley . It was said that Amy Robsart , his wife , was suffering from a " malady in one of her breasts " and that the Queen would like to marry Dudley if his wife should die . By the autumn of 1559 , several foreign suitors were vying for Elizabeth 's hand ; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in England : " There is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation ... she will marry none but the favoured Robert " . Amy Dudley died in September 1560 , from a fall from a flight of stairs and , despite the coroner 's inquest finding of accident , many people suspected Dudley of having arranged her death so that he could marry the queen . Elizabeth seriously considered marrying Dudley for some time . However , William Cecil , Nicholas Throckmorton , and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear . There were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place . 
 Among other marriage candidates being considered for the queen , Robert Dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade . Elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections , even when she no longer meant to marry him herself . In 1564 , Elizabeth raised Dudley to the peerage as Earl of Leicester . He finally remarried in 1578 , to which the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred towards his wife , Lettice Knollys . Still , Dudley always " remained at the centre of [ Elizabeth 's ] emotional life " , as historian Susan Doran has described the situation . He died shortly after the defeat of the Armada . After Elizabeth 's own death , a note from him was found among her most personal belongings , marked " his last letter " in her handwriting . 
 = = = Foreign candidates = = = 
 Marriage negotiations constituted a key element in Elizabeth 's foreign policy . She turned down Philip II 's own hand early in 1559 but for several years entertained the proposal of King Eric XIV of Sweden . For several years she also seriously negotiated to marry Philip II 's cousin Archduke Charles of Austria . By 1569 , relations with the Habsburgs had deteriorated , and Elizabeth considered marriage to two French Valois princes in turn , first Henry , Duke of Anjou , and later , from 1572 to 1581 , his brother Francis , Duke of Anjou , formerly Duke of Alençon . This last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against Spanish control of the Southern Netherlands . Elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time , and wore a frog @-@ shaped earring that Anjou had sent her . 
 In 1563 , Elizabeth told an imperial envoy : " If I follow the inclination of my nature , it is this : beggar @-@ woman and single , far rather than queen and married " . Later in the year , following Elizabeth 's illness with smallpox , the succession question became a heated issue in Parliament . They urged the queen to marry or nominate an heir , to prevent a civil war upon her death . She refused to do either . In April she prorogued the Parliament , which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in 1566 . Having promised to marry previously , she told an unruly House : 
 I will never break the word of a prince spoken in public place , for my honour 's sake . And therefore I say again , I will marry as soon as I can conveniently , if God take not him away with whom I mind to marry , or myself , or else some other great let happen . 
 By 1570 , senior figures in the government privately accepted that Elizabeth would never marry or name a successor . William Cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem . For her failure to marry , Elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility . Her silence , however , strengthened her own political security : she knew that if she named an heir , her throne would be vulnerable to a coup ; she remembered that the way " a second person , as I have been " had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor . 
 Elizabeth 's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity . In poetry and portraiture , she was depicted as a virgin or a goddess or both , not as a normal woman . At first , only Elizabeth made a virtue of her virginity : in 1559 , she told the Commons , " And , in the end , this shall be for me sufficient , that a marble stone shall declare that a queen , having reigned such a time , lived and died a virgin " . Later on , poets and writers took up the theme and turned it into an iconography that exalted Elizabeth . Public tributes to the Virgin by 1578 acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queen 's marriage negotiations with the Duke of Alençon . 
 Ultimately , Elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects , under divine protection . In 1599 , she spoke of " all my husbands , my good people " . 
 = = Mary , Queen of Scots = = 
 Elizabeth 's first policy toward Scotland was to oppose the French presence there . She feared that the French planned to invade England and put Mary , Queen of Scots , who was considered by many to be the heir to the English crown , on the throne . Elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into Scotland to aid the Protestant rebels , and though the campaign was inept , the resulting Treaty of Edinburgh of July 1560 removed the French threat in the north . When Mary returned to Scotland in 1561 to take up the reins of power , the country had an established Protestant church and was run by a council of Protestant nobles supported by Elizabeth . Mary refused to ratify the treaty . 
 In 1563 Elizabeth proposed her own suitor , Robert Dudley , as a husband for Mary , without asking either of the two people concerned . Both proved unenthusiastic , and in 1565 Mary married Henry Stuart , Lord Darnley , who carried his own claim to the English throne . The marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by Mary that handed the victory to the Scottish Protestants and to Elizabeth . Darnley quickly became unpopular in Scotland and then infamous for presiding over the murder of Mary 's Italian secretary David Rizzio . In February 1567 , Darnley was murdered by conspirators almost certainly led by James Hepburn , Earl of Bothwell . Shortly afterwards , on 15 May 1567 , Mary married Bothwell , arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband . Elizabeth wrote to her : 
 How could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry such a subject , who besides other and notorious lacks , public fame has charged with the murder of your late husband , besides the touching of yourself also in some part , though we trust in that behalf falsely . 
 These events led rapidly to Mary 's defeat and imprisonment in Loch Leven Castle . The Scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her son James , who had been born in June 1566 . James was taken to Stirling Castle to be raised as a Protestant . Mary escaped from Loch Leven in 1568 but after another defeat fled across the border into England , where she had once been assured of support from Elizabeth . Elizabeth 's first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch ; but she and her council instead chose to play safe . Rather than risk returning Mary to Scotland with an English army or sending her to France and the Catholic enemies of England , they detained her in England , where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years . 
 = = = Mary and the Catholic cause = = = 
 Mary was soon the focus for rebellion . In 1569 there was a major Catholic rising in the North ; the goal was to free Mary , marry her to Thomas Howard , 4th Duke of Norfolk , and put her on the English throne . After the rebels ' defeat , over 750 of them were executed on Elizabeth 's orders . In the belief that the revolt had been successful , Pope Pius V issued a bull in 1570 , titled <unk> in Excelsis , which declared " Elizabeth , the pretended Queen of England and the servant of crime " to be excommunicate and a heretic , releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her . Catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication . The papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against Catholics by Parliament , which were however mitigated by Elizabeth 's intervention . In 1581 , to convert English subjects to Catholicism with " the intent " to withdraw them from their allegiance to Elizabeth was made a treasonable offence , carrying the death penalty . From the 1570s missionary priests from continental seminaries came to England secretly in the cause of the " reconversion of England " . Many suffered execution , engendering a cult of martyrdom . 
 <unk> in Excelsis gave English Catholics a strong incentive to look to Mary Stuart as the true sovereign of England . Mary may not have been told of every Catholic plot to put her on the English throne , but from the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 ( which caused Mary 's suitor , the Duke of Norfolk , to lose his head ) to the Babington Plot of 1586 , Elizabeth 's spymaster Sir Francis Walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her . At first , Elizabeth resisted calls for Mary 's death . By late 1586 she had been persuaded to sanction her trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the Babington Plot . Elizabeth 's proclamation of the sentence announced that " the said Mary , pretending title to the same Crown , had compassed and imagined within the same realm divers things tending to the hurt , death and destruction of our royal person . " On 8 February 1587 , Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle , Northamptonshire . After Mary 's execution , Elizabeth claimed not to have ordered it and indeed most accounts have her telling Secretary Davidson , who brought her the warrant to sign , not to dispatch the warrant even though she had signed it . The sincerity of Elizabeth 's remorse and her motives for telling Davidson not to execute the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians . 
 = = Wars and overseas trade = = 
 Elizabeth 's foreign policy was largely defensive . The exception was the English occupation of Le Havre from October 1562 to June 1563 , which ended in failure when Elizabeth 's Huguenot allies joined with the Catholics to retake the port . Elizabeth 's intention had been to exchange Le Havre for Calais , lost to France in January 1558 . Only through the activities of her fleets did Elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy . This paid off in the war against Spain , 80 % of which was fought at sea . She knighted Francis Drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from 1577 to 1580 , and he won fame for his raids on Spanish ports and fleets . An element of piracy and self @-@ enrichment drove Elizabethan seafarers , over which the queen had little control . 
 = = = Netherlands expedition = = = 
 After the occupation and loss of Le Havre in 1562 – 1563 , Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585 , when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II . This followed the deaths in 1584 of the allies William the Silent , Prince of Orange , and Francis , Duke of Anjou , and the surrender of a series of Dutch towns to Alexander Farnese , Duke of Parma , Philip 's governor of the Spanish Netherlands . In December 1584 , an alliance between Philip II and the French Catholic League at Joinville undermined the ability of Anjou 's brother , Henry III of France , to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands . It also extended Spanish influence along the channel coast of France , where the Catholic League was strong , and exposed England to invasion . The siege of Antwerp in the summer of 1585 by the Duke of Parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the English and the Dutch . The outcome was the Treaty of Nonsuch of August 1585 , in which Elizabeth promised military support to the Dutch . The treaty marked the beginning of the Anglo @-@ Spanish War , which lasted until the Treaty of London in 1604 . 
 The expedition was led by her former suitor , Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester . Elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action . Her strategy , to support the Dutch on the surface with an English army , while beginning secret peace talks with Spain within days of Leicester 's arrival in Holland , had necessarily to be at odds with Leicester 's , who wanted and was expected by the Dutch to fight an active campaign . Elizabeth on the other hand , wanted him " to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy " . He enraged Elizabeth by accepting the post of Governor @-@ General from the Dutch States General . Elizabeth saw this as a Dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the Netherlands , which so far she had always declined . She wrote to Leicester : 
 We could never have imagined ( had we not seen it fall out in experience ) that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us , above any other subject of this land , would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour ... And therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that , all delays and excuses laid apart , you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer <unk> shall direct you to do in our name . Whereof fail you not , as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril . 
 Elizabeth 's " commandment " was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the Dutch Council of State , Leicester having to stand nearby . This public humiliation of her " Lieutenant @-@ General " combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with Spain , irreversibly undermined his standing among the Dutch . The military campaign was severely hampered by Elizabeth 's repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers . Her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause , Leicester 's own shortcomings as a political and military leader and the faction @-@ ridden and chaotic situation of Dutch politics were reasons for the campaign 's failure . Leicester finally resigned his command in December 1587 . 
 = = = Spanish Armada = = = 
 Meanwhile , Sir Francis Drake had undertaken a major voyage against Spanish ports and ships to the Caribbean in 1585 and 1586 , and in 1587 had made a successful raid on Cadiz , destroying the Spanish fleet of war ships intended for the Enterprise of England : Philip II had decided to take the war to England . 
 On 12 July 1588 , the Spanish Armada , a great fleet of ships , set sail for the channel , planning to ferry a Spanish invasion force under the Duke of Parma to the coast of southeast England from the Netherlands . A combination of miscalculation , misfortune , and an attack of English fire ships on 29 July off Gravelines which dispersed the Spanish ships to the northeast defeated the Armada . The Armada straggled home to Spain in shattered remnants , after disastrous losses on the coast of Ireland ( after some ships had tried to struggle back to Spain via the North Sea , and then back south past the west coast of Ireland ) . Unaware of the Armada 's fate , English militias mustered to defend the country under the Earl of Leicester 's command . He invited Elizabeth to inspect her troops at Tilbury in Essex on 8 August . Wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress , she addressed them in one of her most famous speeches : 
 My loving people , we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety , to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of treachery ; but I assure you , I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people ... I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman , but I have the heart and stomach of a king , and of a King of England too , and think foul scorn that Parma or Spain , or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade the borders of my realm . 
 When no invasion came , the nation rejoiced . Elizabeth 's procession to a thanksgiving service at St Paul 's Cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle . The defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory , both for Elizabeth and for Protestant England . The English took their delivery as a symbol of God 's favour and of the nation 's inviolability under a virgin queen . However , the victory was not a turning point in the war , which continued and often favoured Spain . The Spanish still controlled the southern provinces of the Netherlands , and the threat of invasion remained . Sir Walter Raleigh claimed after her death that Elizabeth 's caution had impeded the war against Spain : 
 If the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes , we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of figs and oranges as in old times . But her Majesty did all by halves , and by petty invasions taught the Spaniard how to defend himself , and to see his own weakness . 
 Though some historians have criticised Elizabeth on similar grounds , Raleigh 's verdict has more often been judged unfair . Elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders , who once in action tended , as she put it herself , " to be transported with an <unk> of vainglory " . 
 = = = Supporting Henry IV of France = = = 
 When the Protestant Henry IV inherited the French throne in 1589 , Elizabeth sent him military support . It was her first venture into France since the retreat from Le Havre in 1563 . Henry 's succession was strongly contested by the Catholic League and by Philip II , and Elizabeth feared a Spanish takeover of the channel ports . The subsequent English campaigns in France , however , were disorganised and ineffective . Lord Willoughby , largely ignoring Elizabeth 's orders , roamed northern France to little effect , with an army of 4 @,@ 000 men . He withdrew in disarray in December 1589 , having lost half his troops . In 1591 , the campaign of John Norreys , who led 3 @,@ 000 men to Brittany , was even more of a disaster . As for all such expeditions , Elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders . Norreys left for London to plead in person for more support . In his absence , a Catholic League army almost destroyed the remains of his army at Craon , north @-@ west France , in May 1591 . In July , Elizabeth sent out another force under Robert Devereux , Earl of Essex , to help Henry IV in besieging Rouen . The result was just as dismal . Essex accomplished nothing and returned home in January 1592 . Henry abandoned the siege in April . As usual , Elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad . " Where he is , or what he doth , or what he is to do , " she wrote of Essex , " we are ignorant " . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 Although Ireland was one of her two kingdoms , Elizabeth faced a hostile , and in places virtually autonomous , Irish population that adhered to Catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies . Her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving Spain a base from which to attack England . In the course of a series of uprisings , Crown forces pursued scorched @-@ earth tactics , burning the land and slaughtering man , woman and child . During a revolt in Munster led by Gerald FitzGerald , Earl of Desmond , in 1582 , an estimated 30 @,@ 000 Irish people starved to death . The poet and colonist Edmund Spenser wrote that the victims " were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same " . Elizabeth advised her commanders that the Irish , " that rude and barbarous nation " , be well treated ; but she showed no remorse when force and bloodshed were deemed necessary . 
 Between 1594 and 1603 , Elizabeth faced her most severe test in Ireland during the Nine Years ' War , a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with Spain , who backed the rebel leader , Hugh O 'Neill , Earl of Tyrone . In spring 1599 , Elizabeth sent Robert Devereux , 2nd Earl of Essex , to put the revolt down . To her frustration , he made little progress and returned to England in defiance of her orders . He was replaced by Charles Blount , Lord Mountjoy , who took three years to defeat the rebels . O 'Neill finally surrendered in 1603 , a few days after Elizabeth 's death . Soon afterwards , a peace treaty was signed between England and Spain . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Elizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the Tsardom of Russia originally established by her deceased brother . She often wrote to Ivan IV ( " Ivan the Terrible " ) , on amicable terms , though the Tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance . The Tsar even proposed to her once , and during his later reign , asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England should his rule be jeopardised . Upon Ivan 's death , he was succeeded by his simple @-@ minded son Feodor . Unlike his father , Feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with England . Feodor declared his kingdom open to all foreigners , and dismissed the English ambassador Sir Jerome Bowes , whose pomposity had been tolerated by the new Tsar 's late father . Elizabeth sent a new ambassador , Dr. Giles Fletcher , to demand from the regent Boris Godunov that he convince the Tsar to reconsider . The negotiations failed , due to Fletcher addressing Feodor with two of his titles omitted . Elizabeth continued to appeal to Feodor in half appealing , half reproachful letters . She proposed an alliance , something which she had refused to do when offered one by Feodor 's father , but was turned down . 
 = = = Barbary states , Ottoman Empire = = = 
 Trade and diplomatic relations developed between England and the Barbary states during the rule of Elizabeth . England established a trading relationship with Morocco in opposition to Spain , selling armour , ammunition , timber , and metal in exchange for Moroccan sugar , in spite of a Papal ban . In 1600 , Abd el @-@ <unk> ben <unk> , the principal secretary to the Moroccan ruler Mulai Ahmad al @-@ Mansur , visited England as an ambassador to the court of Queen Elizabeth I , to negotiate an Anglo @-@ Moroccan alliance against Spain . Elizabeth " agreed to sell munitions supplies to Morocco , and she and Mulai Ahmad al @-@ Mansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the Spanish " . Discussions however remained inconclusive , and both rulers died within two years of the embassy . 
 Diplomatic relations were also established with the Ottoman Empire with the chartering of the Levant Company and the dispatch of the first English ambassador to the Porte , William Harborne , in 1578 . For the first time , a Treaty of Commerce was signed in 1580 . Numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and <unk> exchanges occurred between Elizabeth and Sultan Murad III . In one correspondence , Murad entertained the notion that Islam and Protestantism had " much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism , as both rejected the worship of idols " , and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire . To the dismay of Catholic Europe , England exported tin and lead ( for cannon @-@ casting ) and ammunitions to the Ottoman Empire , and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585 , as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy . 
 = = Later years = = 
 The period after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 brought new difficulties for Elizabeth that lasted the fifteen years until the end of her reign . The conflicts with Spain and in Ireland dragged on , the tax burden grew heavier , and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war . Prices rose and the standard of living fell . During this time , repression of Catholics intensified , and Elizabeth authorised commissions in 1591 to interrogate and monitor Catholic householders . To maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity , she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda . In her last years , mounting criticism reflected a decline in the public 's affection for her . 
 One of the causes for this " second reign " of Elizabeth , as it is sometimes called , was the changed character of Elizabeth 's governing body , the privy council in the 1590s . A new generation was in power . With the exception of Lord Burghley , the most important politicians had died around 1590 : the Earl of Leicester in 1588 ; Sir Francis Walsingham in 1590 ; and Sir Christopher Hatton in 1591 . Factional strife in the government , which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the 1590s , now became its hallmark . A bitter rivalry arose between the Earl of Essex and Robert Cecil , son of Lord Burghley and their respective adherents , and the struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred politics . The queen 's personal authority was lessening , as is shown in the 1594 affair of Dr. Lopez , her trusted physician . When he was wrongly accused by the Earl of Essex of treason out of personal pique , she could not prevent his execution , although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt . 
 During the last years of her reign , Elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a cost @-@ free system of patronage , rather than asking Parliament for more subsidies in a time of war . The practice soon led to price @-@ fixing , the enrichment of courtiers at the public 's expense , and widespread resentment . This culminated in agitation in the House of Commons during the parliament of 1601 . In her famous " Golden Speech " of 30 November 1601 at Whitehall Palace to a deputation of 140 members , Elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses , and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions : 
 Who keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error , in which , by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen , what thank they deserve , we know , though you may guess . And as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects ' hearts , what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality , the <unk> of our people , the <unk> of the poor , had not been told us ! 
 This same period of economic and political uncertainty , however , produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in England . The first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of Elizabeth 's reign , with John Lyly 's <unk> and Edmund Spenser 's The Shepheardes <unk> in 1578 . During the 1590s , some of the great names of English literature entered their maturity , including William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe . During this period and into the Jacobean era that followed , the English theatre reached its highest peaks . The notion of a great Elizabethan age depends largely on the builders , dramatists , poets , and musicians who were active during Elizabeth 's reign . They owed little directly to the queen , who was never a major patron of the arts . 
 As Elizabeth aged her image gradually changed . She was portrayed as <unk> or Astraea , and after the Armada , as Gloriana , the eternally youthful Faerie Queene of Edmund Spenser 's poem . Her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was . In fact , her skin had been scarred by smallpox in 1562 , leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics . Her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech . Sir Walter Raleigh called her " a lady whom time had surprised " . However , the more Elizabeth 's beauty faded , the more her courtiers praised it . 
 Elizabeth was happy to play the part , but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance . She became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young Robert Devereux , Earl of Essex , who was Leicester 's stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him . She repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility . After Essex 's desertion of his command in Ireland in 1599 , Elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies . In February 1601 , the earl tried to raise a rebellion in London . He intended to seize the queen but few rallied to his support , and he was beheaded on 25 February . Elizabeth knew that her own <unk> were partly to blame for this turn of events . An observer reported in 1602 that " Her delight is to sit in the dark , and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail Essex " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Elizabeth 's senior adviser , William Cecil , 1st Baron Burghley , died on 4 August 1598 . His political mantle passed to his son , Robert Cecil , who soon became the leader of the government . One task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession . Since Elizabeth would never name her successor , Cecil was obliged to proceed in secret . He therefore entered into a coded negotiation with James VI of Scotland , who had a strong but unrecognised claim . Cecil coached the impatient James to humour Elizabeth and " secure the heart of the highest , to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions " . The advice worked . James 's tone delighted Elizabeth , who responded : " So trust I that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same , but yield them to you in grateful sort " . In historian J. E. Neale 's view , Elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to James , but she made them known with " unmistakable if veiled phrases " . 
 The Queen 's health remained fair until the autumn of 1602 , when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression . In February 1603 , the death of Catherine Howard , Countess of Nottingham , the niece of her cousin and close friend Catherine , Lady Knollys , came as a particular blow . In March , Elizabeth fell sick and remained in a " settled and <unk> melancholy " . She died on 24 March 1603 at Richmond Palace , between two and three in the morning . A few hours later , Cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed James VI of Scotland as James I of England . 
 Elizabeth 's coffin was carried downriver at night to Whitehall , on a barge lit with torches . At her funeral on 28 April , the coffin was taken to Westminster Abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet . In the words of the chronicler John Stow : 
 Westminster was <unk> with multitudes of all sorts of people in their streets , houses , windows , leads and gutters , that came out to see the <unk> , and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin , there was such a general sighing , groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known in the memory of man . 
 Elizabeth was interred in Westminster Abbey , in a tomb shared with her half @-@ sister , Mary . The Latin inscription on their tomb , " Regno <unk> & <unk> , hic <unk> Elizabetha et Maria <unk> , in spe resurrectionis " , translates to " Consorts in realm and tomb , here we sleep , Elizabeth and Mary , sisters , in hope of resurrection " . 
 = = Legacy and memory = = 
 Elizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects , but others were relieved at her death . Expectations of King James started high but then declined , so by the 1620s there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of Elizabeth . Elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the Protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age . James was depicted as a Catholic sympathiser , presiding over a corrupt court . The <unk> image that Elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign , against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties , was taken at face value and her reputation inflated . Godfrey Goodman , Bishop of Gloucester , recalled : " When we had experience of a Scottish government , the Queen did seem to revive . Then was her memory much magnified . " Elizabeth 's reign became idealised as a time when crown , church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance . 
 The picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th century has proved lasting and influential . Her memory was also revived during the Napoleonic Wars , when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion . In the Victorian era , the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day , and in the mid @-@ 20th century , Elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat . Historians of that period , such as J. E. Neale ( 1934 ) and A. L. Rowse ( 1950 ) , interpreted Elizabeth 's reign as a golden age of progress . Neale and Rowse also idealised the Queen personally : she always did everything right ; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress . 
 Recent historians , however , have taken a more complicated view of Elizabeth . Her reign is famous for the defeat of the Armada , and for successful raids against the Spanish , such as those on Cádiz in 1587 and 1596 , but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea . In Ireland , Elizabeth 's forces ultimately prevailed , but their tactics stain her record . Rather than as a brave defender of the Protestant nations against Spain and the Habsburgs , she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies . She offered very limited aid to foreign Protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad . 
 Elizabeth established an English church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today . Those who praised her later as a Protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of Catholic origin from the Church of England . Historians note that in her day , strict Protestants regarded the Acts of Settlement and Uniformity of 1559 as a compromise . In fact , Elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish , as Francis Bacon put it , to " make windows into men 's hearts and secret thoughts " . 
 Though Elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy , her reign raised England 's status abroad . " She is only a woman , only mistress of half an island , " marvelled Pope Sixtus V , " and yet she makes herself feared by Spain , by France , by the Empire , by all " . Under Elizabeth , the nation gained a new self @-@ confidence and sense of sovereignty , as Christendom fragmented . Elizabeth was the first Tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent . She therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the truth — a style of government that her Stuart successors failed to follow . Some historians have called her lucky ; she believed that God was protecting her . <unk> herself on being " mere English " , Elizabeth trusted in God , honest advice , and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule . In a prayer , she offered thanks to God that : 
 [ At a time ] when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me , my reign hath been <unk> , and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted Church . The love of my people hath appeared firm , and the devices of my enemies frustrate . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 = Hampton National Historic Site = 
 Hampton National Historic Site , tours of the buildings are offered Thursday through Sunday . The grounds are open seven days a week , and offer great opportunities for learning and reflection . Located in the Hampton area north of Towson , Baltimore County , Maryland , USA , preserves a remnant of a vast 18th @-@ century estate , including a Georgian manor house , gardens , grounds , and the original stone slave quarters . The estate was owned by the Ridgely family for seven generations , from 1745 to 1948 . The Hampton Mansion was the largest private home in America when it was completed in 1790 and today is considered to be one of the finest examples of Georgian architecture in the U.S. Its furnishings , together with the estate 's slave quarters and other preserved structures , provide insight into the life of late 18th @-@ century and early 19th @-@ century landowning aristocracy . In 1948 , Hampton was the first site selected as a National Historical Site for its architectural significance by the U.S. National Park Service . The grounds were widely admired in the 19th century for their elaborate parterres or formal gardens , which have been restored to resemble their appearance during the 1820s . Several trees are more than 200 years old . In addition to the mansion and grounds , visitors may tour the overseer 's house and slave quarters . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 The property was originally part of the Northampton land grant given to Col. Henry Darnall ( c . 1645 – 1711 ) , a relative of Lord Baltimore , in 1695 . His heirs sold the land on April 2 , 1745 , to Col. Charles Ridgely ( 1702 – 72 ) , a tobacco farmer and trader . The bill of sale records that the property included " ... houses , tobacco houses ( tobacco barns ) , stables , gardens , and orchards . " 
 By the late 1750s , Hampton extended to more than 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) and included an ironworks . His son , Capt. Charles Ridgely ( 1733 – 90 ) , expanded the family business considerably to include gristmills , apple orchards , and stone quarries . During the American Revolutionary War , the ironworks was a significant source of income for the Ridgelys , producing cannons and ammunition for the Continental Army . In 1783 , Capt. Ridgely began construction of the main house , Hampton Mansion . He said its concept was inspired by Castle Howard in England , owned by relatives of his mother . When it was completed in 1790 , the Hampton Mansion was the largest private home in the United States . 
 When Capt. Ridgely died that same year , his nephew , Charles Carnan Ridgely ( 1760 – 1829 ) , became the second master of Hampton . He had 10 @,@ 590 feet ( 3 @,@ 228 m ) of irrigation pipes laid in 1799 from a nearby spring to provide water to the Mansion and the surrounding gardens , which he was extensively developing . Prominent artisans of the time were hired to design geometric formal gardens , which were planted on the Mansion 's grounds between 1799 and 1801 . An avid horseman , Charles Carnan also began raising Thoroughbred horses at Hampton , where he had a racetrack installed . A 1799 advertisement promoted the stud services of his racehorse , Grey Medley . Another of Ridgely 's racehorses , Post Boy , won the Washington City Jockey Club cup . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Under Charles Carnan Ridgely , Hampton reached its peak of 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 10 @,@ 117 ha ) in the 1820s . The mansion overlooked a grand estate of orchards , ironworks , coal mining , marble quarries , mills , and mercantile interests . The vast farm produced corn , beef cattle , dairy products , hogs , and horses . More than 300 slaves worked the fields and served the household , making Hampton one of Maryland 's largest slaveholding estates . Six parterres were designed on three terraced levels facing the mansion , planted with roses , peonies , and seasonal flowers . In 1820 , an orangery was built on the grounds . 
 Charles Carnan Ridgely frequently entertained prominent guests in the Mansion 's 51 ft. x 21 ft . ( 16 m by 6 @.@ 4 m ) Great Hall , such as Charles Carroll of Carrollton , who was a signer of the Declaration of Independence , and Revolutionary War general , the Marquis de Lafayette . Charles Carnan served as governor of Maryland between 1816 – 19 . When Governor Ridgely died in 1829 , he freed Hampton 's slaves in his will . 
 The Hampton estate was split among various heirs , with his son , John Carnan Ridgely ( 1790 – 1867 ) , inheriting the mansion and 4 @,@ 500 acres ( 18 km2 ) . The ironworks closed and thereafter the Ridgelys ' income was primarily derived from farming , investments , and their stone quarries . John Carnan added plumbing , heating , and gas lighting to the mansion . 
 Eliza Ridgely ( 1803 – 67 ) , John 's wife and the subject of Thomas Sully 's famous portrait , Lady with a Harp , purchased many artworks and furnishings for the mansion . She was a noted horticulturist and had successively larger and more elaborate gardens cultivated on the grounds , with a large variety of flowers and shrubs grown in the estate 's greenhouses and tended by some of the 60 slaves purchased by John Carnan Ridgely . By the mid @-@ 19th century , the Hampton estate had one of the most extensive collections of citrus trees in the U.S. , along with various exotic trees and plants gathered by Eliza Ridgely during her frequent travels to Europe and the Orient . In the warm months , the potted citrus plants were brought outside and arranged around the terraced gardens , then taken into the heated orangery during the winter . She had one section of the garden planted with colorful red , yellow , pink , and maroon <unk> from Asia . In 1859 , Hampton 's fame for lavish style was such that the author of a book on landscaping wrote , " It has been truly said of Hampton that it expresses more grandeur than any other place in America " . 
 In January 1861 , shortly after the election of Abraham Lincoln as President of the United States , Charles Ridgely ( the son of John Carnan and Eliza Ridgely ) formed the pro @-@ Confederate Baltimore County Horse Guards at Hampton with himself as captain of the militia unit that he described as " states ' rights gentlemen . " One of his militia 's cavalry men , Lieut . John Merryman , was subsequently arrested by the Union Army and imprisoned in May 1861 on a charge of treason , sparking the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case , Ex parte Merryman . As the Civil War raged across the farmlands of Maryland and Pennsylvania at the Battle of Antietam ( 1862 ) and the Battle of Gettysburg ( 1863 ) , the Ridgelys ' Hampton estate remained untouched . 
 Although Maryland , as a border state , was exempted from Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation , the Maryland General Assembly eliminated slavery in 1864 . With the end of slavery , Hampton began to decline . A number of the former slaves continued to work at Hampton as paid household servants but the Ridgelys had to hire other hands to work the farm . With the deaths of John and Eliza in 1867 , their son Charles became the next master of Hampton . The mansion and the remaining 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) were subsequently inherited upon Charles ' death in 1872 by Captain John Ridgely ( 1851 – 1938 ) . Prominent guests , including Theodore Roosevelt , continued to visit Hampton and enjoy its grounds . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 As nearby Baltimore grew and local agriculture declined , the Ridgelys found it increasingly difficult to maintain the property . Five of the six parterres were removed and replanted as a grass lawn . Some income was generated by producing cider from the estate 's apple orchards and operating a dairy . In 1929 , Capt. John Ridgely and his son , John Ridgely Jr . , formed the Hampton Development Corporation and sold some of the remaining 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 405 ha ) of land . In 1938 , John Ridgely , Jr . ( 1882 – 1959 ) became the sixth generation of the family to become master of Hampton . His company sold off large portions of the estate to a suburban housing development in the 1930s and 1940s , now known as the fashionable Hampton residential community . 
 The Hampton Mansion remained in the Ridgely family until 1948 , when John Ridgely Jr. moved to the smaller Farm House on the property and the Mansion was acquired by the Avalon Foundation ( now part of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation ) . The seventh and last generation of Ridgelys to live at the mansion was his son , John Ridgely III ( 1911 – 90 ) , who , after marrying Lillian Ketchum ( 1908 – 96 ) in the mid @-@ 1930s , continued to reside at the mansion with his wife until they both entered Army service during World War II . 
 The Hampton Mansion and remaining 43 acres ( 17 ha ) of the Ridgely estate were designated a National Historic Site by the Secretary of the Interior on June 22 , 1948 — the first site to be so selected on the basis of its historical significance and " outstanding merit as an architectural monument " . Hampton Mansion was opened to the public in May 1949 under the care of Preservation Maryland for the next thirty years ( 1949 – 79 ) . Work also began in 1949 to restore four of the site 's six 19th @-@ century parterres . On October 15 , 1966 , Hampton was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . In October 1979 , it was acquired by the National Park Service ( NPS ) , which has operated and managed the estate since . The NPS subsequently acquired additional acreage containing original Ridgely structures , bringing the park to its present 62 @.@ 04 acres ( 25 @.@ 11 ha ) size . In 1998 , the NPS stated its purpose for the historic site : 
 ... to preserve unimpaired the cultural resources of this rare , commercial , industrial , and agricultural estate in the historic Chesapeake region . National events and social change are revealed in the site 's resources and the inter @-@ relationships of the family and workers who lived and labored on the estate as it took shape and changed in the 18th and 19th centuries . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 As part of the General Management Plan adopted by the NPS in 1998 for the estate 's long @-@ term planning and operation , the NPS began studying the mansion 's security , safety , electrical systems , and environmental issues in 2000 . Critical needs were identified , such as the lack of a fire suppression system and climate control . Conservators of the property 's furnishings and paintings said that the need to stabilize temperature and humidity levels inside the mansion was " urgent due to unacceptable environmental stress " . The NPS finalized plans in 2004 , including an environmental impact assessment , for installation of a modern HVAC system and a concealed fire sprinkler system to protect the historic mansion and its irreplaceable contents from loss by fire . 
 Starting in January 2005 , the mansion closed for almost three years as it underwent the major restoration project . As part of the 2005 – 07 renovations , the drawing room and two bedchambers were completely refurbished . The drawing room 's furnishings were extensively researched to reflect accurately the Mansion in the 1830 – 60 period . The ornate cupola atop the mansion was restored , including the spherical ornament above the cupola , which was refinished in gold leaf . The Hampton Mansion re @-@ opened to the public on November 30 , 2007 . 
 The Park Service 's chief ranger for the Hampton National Historic Site said afterwards of the $ 3 million in renovations , " I don 't think the mansion has ever looked better " . " Preservation Maryland " , a statewide preservation advocacy organization , conferred its Stewardship Award in 2007 on the Hampton National Historic Site for refurnishing the mansion 's rooms with historical accuracy while unobtrusively installing the fire suppression and climate control systems . 
 = = National Park Service management = = 
 The remaining 62 @.@ 04 @-@ acre ( 25 @.@ 11 ha ) estate , straddling Hampton Lane , is now managed by the National Park Service and open to the public , with ample free parking , a gift shop , and wheelchair accessibility at the mansion . Visitors are provided a guided tour of the mansion , where the original furnishings owned by the Ridgelys may be seen , along with the family 's collection of oil paintings , silverware , and ceramics comprising some 7 @,@ 000 objects . In addition to the mansion itself , visitors may view nine surviving original structures on the grounds built during the 18th to mid @-@ 19th century period : 
 Farm House – located 1 @,@ 900 feet ( 580 m ) north of the mansion and next to the slave quarters , a portion is believed to predate the Ridgelys ' purchase of the property in 1745 . The Ridgely family lived here while the mansion was being constructed in the 1780s . Thereafter , it was the residence of the farm manager or overseer . After John Ridgely Jr. and his wife Jane vacated the mansion in 1948 , they lived here until their deaths . 
 Slave quarters – two preserved stone buildings adjacent to the Farm House , now provided with interpretive exhibits on slave life at Hampton . Displayed is a newspaper advertisement by Charles Carnan Ridgely offering a reward for the return of a runaway slave , as well as a Christmas gift list kept from 1841 to 1854 by the daughter of John Carnan and Eliza for the slaves ' children . 
 Dairy – built of stone before 1800 
 Mule barn – built of stone c . 1845 
 Long house / granary 
 Ash house , wooden log building , and dovecote 
 Self @-@ guided tours may be made of the grounds during hours when the park is open to the public , including the farm , formal garden , family cemetery , and two stables built of stone for the Ridgely family 's thoroughbred horses . A replica of the original orangery ( built in 1824 ) may also be viewed ( the original wooden orangery , which burned down in 1926 , was reconstructed on the original foundations in 1976 ) . One surviving 34 @-@ foot ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) deep underground icehouse is visible near the mansion and is open to visitors . Among the surviving trees planted by the Ridgelys in the 1820s are a large tulip tree , a European Beech , and <unk> . A prize Cedar of Lebanon , brought back from the Middle East as a seedling by Eliza Ridgely , is one of the largest in the U.S. 
 Numerous special events are scheduled throughout the year , such as chamber music concerts and harpsichord performances presented in the mansion 's ornate Great Hall , milking demonstrations at the dairy by costumed milkmaids , carriage rides , hay harvesting by scythe , corn harvesting , blacksmithing demonstrations , and jousting reenactments . The Baltimore Sun reported that Hampton had 35 @,@ 000 visitors in 2008 . 
 The local community actively supports the site 's preservation through a non @-@ profit friends ' group , " Historic Hampton , " which has assisted the National Park Service in achieving historical accuracy and interpretive potential of the interiors , along with presentation of various activities . In May 2008 , a $ 195 @,@ 000 challenge grant was announced by the National Park Service , matched by an equal amount to be raised by Historic Hampton , for further restoration of the mansion 's interiors . The National Park Service also maintains an on @-@ site archive of Ridgely family papers from 1750 – 1990 for researchers . 
 = = The Tea Room controversy = = 
 When the Hampton estate first opened to the public in 1949 , the mansion 's kitchen was converted into a small restaurant . Known as the Tea Room , it was operated by a concessionaire for the next 50 years , serving lunches featuring Hampton Imperial Crab ( <unk> lump meat from the blue crab , baked and seasoned with spices ) and other Chesapeake Bay seafood delicacies , served with a glass of sherry . A local newspaper columnist described the Tea Room as " offering gentility ... a fireplace nearly as big as a wall and mullioned windows with sills that are nearly 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) thick . The view is rolling lawns ... " 
 When the Tea Room was closed by the National Park Service on January 1 , 1999 , officials said they did so because of the potential fire hazard posed by operating a kitchen in the main park building and the possibility of insect or rodent damage to historic items in the mansion , as stated in the General Management Plan adopted by the NPS the previous year . While it " may be a pleasant place to enjoy a meal ... that is clearly less important than the need to preserve Hampton 's buildings , objects and landscapes for future generations , " the Park Service stated . Officials of Preservation Maryland said they were " disappointed " by the restaurant 's closure , saying it helped attract visitors to the historic site . The former chairwoman of the Hampton women 's committee — which raises money for various projects at Hampton — also criticized the decision . Since 2006 , the women 's group has renewed efforts to have the Tea Room reopened , saying it would draw more visitors and repeat business from locals to the park . A Park Service spokesman was quoted as saying in October , 2006 , that " The mansion is not going to be the site of any food operation , " but has made no further comment since then . 
 = Royal Stag = 
 Royal Stag , also known as Seagram 's Royal Stag , is a brand of Indian whisky , owned by Pernod Ricard India , and launched in 1995 . It is Pernod Ricard 's best selling brand . It is a blend of Indian grain spirits and imported Scotch malts . It is commonly available in 1 L , 750 ml , 375 ml and 180 ml bottles and also available in 90 ml and 60 ml bottles . The brand is named after a species of deer famous for its antlers , that is also featured in its logo . It is produced in several company @-@ owned as well as bottler @-@ owned distilleries . It is the first Indian whisky brand to not use any artificial flavour . 
 Pernod Ricard has identified Royal Stag along with Imperial Blue , Blenders Pride , Chivas Regal and 100 Pipers as the company 's five core brands to build its spirits business in India . Royal Stag sold 12 @.@ 3 million cases in 2011 , toppling Absolut Vodka , to become Pernod Ricard 's biggest selling brand in its global portfolio of alcoholic beverages . Royal Stag sold 16 @.@ 1 million cases in 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 Royal Stag was launched in India in 1995 by Canadian liquor giant Seagram . It is named after a deer species known for long antlers . It is the first Indian whisky brand to not use any artificial flavour . The whisky is a blend of Indian grain spirits and imported Scotch malts . Seagram 's global business was jointly acquired by Pernod Ricard and Diageo in December 2000 . The two companies later split Seagram 's business based on the previously announced framework agreement signed between them . 
 In the calendar year 2001 , Royal Stag was selling over 125 @,@ 000 cases per month and sold approximately 1 @.@ 75 million cases in 2002 . The brand 's annualised sales during the 2004 calendar year crossed 3 million cases , and increased to nearly 4 million cases in 2006 . Royal Stag was ranked second among Indian spirits brands in Impact International 's 2008 list of " Top 100 Brands at Retail Value " with a retail value of US $ 505 million . The brand reported sales of 8 million cases in 2009 and nearly 10 @.@ 6 million cases in 2010 . 
 Royal Stag sold 12 @.@ 3 million cases in 2011 , toppling Absolut Vodka which sold 11 @.@ 3 million cases , to become Pernod Ricard 's biggest selling brand in its global portfolio of alcoholic beverages . 
 Pernod Ricard India launched a more premium version of Royal Stag , called Royal Stag Barrel Select in December 2011 . It is priced significantly higher than Royal Stag and positioned between deluxe and premium segment . It is developed by the UK based international branding and packaging consultants <unk> . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Royal Stag is placed in the deluxe segment of the Indian whisky market and is priced to target the upper middle class aged 25 – 40 years . The brand 's main national competitor , at its price point , is United Spirits Ltd 's McDowell 's No.1 whisky . Royal Stag also faces competition from <unk> <unk> 's 8 PM Royale , Mason & Summers ' " Royal Crown " , United Spirits Ltd 's Royal Mist whiskies and Allied Blenders & Distilleries ( ABD ) ' s Officer 's Choice Black . Pernod Ricard has identified Royal Stag along with Imperial Blue , Blenders Pride , Chivas Regal and 100 Pipers as the company 's five core brands to build its spirits business in India . 5 brands have been divided in 2 categories , Chivas Regal and 100 Pipers come under " lifestyle business " category while rest of brands along with Royal Stag come under India @-@ made foreign liquor ( <unk> ) . It is marketed in 1 L , 750 ml , 375 ml and 180 ml bottles and also available in 90 ml and 60 ml bottles . 
 Advertising alcoholic beverages is banned in India as per the Cable Television Network ( Regulation ) Amendment Bill , which came into effect on 8 September 2000 . To circumvent the ban liquor manufacturers use surrogate advertising or develop associate properties . Royal Stag uses three themes – Mega Movie , Mega Music and Mega Cricket – to promote the brand . According to Seagram India 's vice @-@ president of marketing Bikram Basu , " We 've developed Royal Stag Mega Cricket and Royal Stag Mega Movies to promote the brand " . Mega Cricket sells cricket gear , and sponsors cricket events , and Basu claims that Mega Movies sponsors " around 8 – 10 national releases of Hollywood movies every year . " The brand often uses cricketers and Bollywood stars in its advertising . The brand 's slogan is : " It 's your life , make it large " . 
 = = = Brand ambassadors = = = 
 In 2002 , Seagram signed eight cricketers to endorse Royal Stag , including Harbhajan Singh ( India ) , Marvan Atapattu ( Sri Lanka ) , Wasim Akram ( Pakistan ) , Glenn McGrath ( Australia ) , Jonty Rhodes ( South Africa ) , Mervyn Dillon ( West Indies ) , Stephen Fleming ( New Zealand ) , and Andy Flower ( Zimbabwe ) . The campaign was handled by Ogilvy & Mather . Seagram spent ₹ 2 @.@ 5 crore ( US $ 370 @,@ 000 ) on this promotion . Following this contract , in 2004 , Pakistan Civil Court ruled that Wasim Akram had hurt sentiments of Muslims and was fined 25 @,@ 000 Pakistani rupees ( £ 238 ) and ordered to apologize the nation . While Akram 's lawyer maintained stand that Akram had never appeared in any advertisement of alcoholic product . 
 In 2006 , a Royal Stag advert featuring Harbhajan Singh without his turban , with his hair tumbling down over his shoulders , outraged orthodox Sikhs , who burnt effigies in the city of Amritsar . Sikh clergy and its representative body , the Shiromani Gurdwara <unk> Committee ( <unk> ) demanded an apology from Singh and demanded that Pernod Ricard India withdraw the ad , which the <unk> termed , an " offensive representation which has hurt the feelings of Sikhs . " Singh later apologised saying , " I apologise . In case I have hurt the feelings of my people , it was really not my intention . " 
 Other cricketers that have featured as brand ambassadors or have appeared in Royal Stag advertising include Gautam Gambhir , Jonty Rhodes , Mahendra Singh Dhoni , Ricky Ponting and Yuvraj Singh . 
 On 10 February 2012 , Pernod Ricard India announced its signing of iconic Bollywood star Shahrukh Khan as brand ambassador for Royal Stag . The company said that Shahrukh would work in tandem with another Bollywood actor Saif Ali Khan , who had been the brand ambassador since several years . South Indian movie star Mahesh Babu is also one of the brand ambassador of Royal Stag . 
 In 2014 Pernod Ricard India announced its signing of Bollywood actors Ranveer Singh and Arjun Kapoor as brand ambassadors . General manager of Marketing Raja Banerjee said that , " We firmly believe that the dynamic duo represents the dreams of this country and therefore would reinforce our brand positioning " . However , they maintained that Shah Rukh Khan would continue to promote the brand . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 The Royal Stag brand often sponsors musical and sporting events . It sponsored the Sahara Cup matches in Toronto , Canada from 1996 to 1999 . Under the name " Seagram 's Royal Stag Mega Music " , the brand sponsored a multi @-@ city music tour featuring Strings , along with Saif Ali Khan ( then brand ambassador ) and Indian rock ' n roll band <unk> in January 2008 . Royal Stag is the title sponsor of the Mirchi Music Awards . 
 = = Sales = = 
 In 2002 , Seagram 's Imperial Blue and Royal Stag were emerged as fasted growing brands in domestic market . Royal Stag saw 53 % rise in its sale from 1 @.@ 12 million cases in 2001 to 1 @.@ 75 million case in 2002 . In 2010 , Royal Stag first time crossed the mark of 10 million cases and Pernod Ricard became the first multinational company to cross this mark in India . In 2013 calendar month , Royal Stag first time crossed retail sale worth more than $ 1 billion . It had a total of $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in retail sale . Royal Stag sold 16 @.@ 1 million cases in 2014 and remained the third biggest @-@ selling whisky in India from 2011 behind Officer 's Choice and McDowell 's No.1. 
 The following table shows the annual sales of Royal Stag : 
 = Ohio State Route 633 = 
 State Route 633 ( SR 633 ) is a short north – south state highway in the northeastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . Occupying a portion of Lloyd Road , SR 633 has its southern terminus at a signalized intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Wickliffe . Its northern terminus is also in Wickliffe , but at a signalized intersection with Lakeland Boulevard ( former SR 2 ) , which provides access to current SR 2 freeway by way of a trumpet interchange just to the east . SR 633 was designated in 1946 , and its routing has not changed since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entirety of SR 633 is located within the city limits of Wickliffe in Lake County . The state route begins at a signalized intersection with US 20 ( Euclid Avenue ) , and travels to the northwest from that point . It is bounded by a commercial real estate on the west side , and some small fields and woods on the east side through the Anderson Road intersection , after which commercial businesses appear on that side , as well . SR 633 then crosses a set of CSX and Norfolk Southern railroad tracks . Just after that crossing , the state highway comes to an end at a signalized intersection with Lakeland Boulevard , just three blocks southwest of a trumpet interchange that connects the SR 2 freeway with Lakeland Boulevard . Lloyd Road continues northwest after SR 633 terminates . It crosses underneath SR 2 a very short distance after the intersection . About 6 @,@ 320 vehicles travel on SR 633 on average every day . For its entire length , SR 633 is a three @-@ lane roadway , featuring one through lane in each direction plus a center @-@ turn lane . 
 = = History = = 
 The 1923 Ohio Department of Highways map shows a road running along the corridor of modern SR 2 from Cleveland to Wickliffe , then turning south along the route of Lloyd Road to US 20 in Wickliffe . This routing is designated as a state highway by the 1932 map . On the 1939 map , the northeast @-@ southwest road , now labelled as SR 2 , is extended eastward , but the Lloyd Road section is still designated as a state highway . Starting with the 1946 map , this segment is labelled SR 633 . In approximately 1963 , SR 2 is rerouted onto the Lakeland Freeway , but SR 633 's terminus remains at Lakeland Boulevard . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Wickliffe , Lake County . 
 = Pancake machine = 
 A pancake machine is an electrically @-@ powered machine that automatically produces cooked pancakes . It is believed that the earliest known pancake machine was invented in the United States in 1928 . Several types of pancake machines exist that perform in various manners , for both commercial and home use . Some are fully automatic in operation , while others are semi @-@ automatic . Some companies mass @-@ produce pancake machines , and some have been homemade . The Happy Egg Company constructed a novelty pancake machine in 2013 in commemoration of Pancake Day in the United Kingdom . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1928 , a man in Portland , Oregon , invented an electric pancake machine that operated by the process of batter being dropped onto a revolving heated flattop grill from a storage cylinder atop the grill . The grill was heated using electricity . The amount of batter dropped was controlled by using controlled amounts of compressed air , which pushed batter out of the storage cylinder . As the batter revolved on the hot grill , the pancake was flipped halfway through the cooking process by a shelf atop the grill . After being flipped , the completed pancake was ejected from the machine upon contact with a gate . 
 In 1955 in the United States , an automatic pancake machine was developed by <unk> , which used a specially formulated pancake batter mix that was manufactured by the Quaker Oats Company 's Aunt Jemima branch . The <unk> machine could produce pancakes " in less than three minutes . " It was a semi @-@ automatic machine that performed all of the cooking functions except for the pouring of the pancake batter . 
 In 1956 , four Racine , WI Engineers developed and fabricated two , 5 ' diameter gas burning pancake machines for the annual Pancake Day sponsored by the Kiwanis Club there in Racine . 
 = = Types and uses = = 
 Various types of pancake machines exist , such as those that run pancake batter through a heated conveyor inside of a box unit , and those that automatically drop pancake batter onto a flattop grill . Some pancake machines , such as one developed by Crepe @-@ <unk> , cook both sides of a pancake simultaneously . Semi @-@ automatic pancake machines also exist , which require some human interaction to function , such as the pouring of batter . Commercial pancake machines may be used in the foodservice industry , in cafeterias and by restaurants , and can serve to reduce the waste of stale pancake batter . Some hotels have pancake machines that guests are allowed to operate . They are also used in other environments in a self @-@ service manner , such as in upscale airport lounges and hotels . 
 = = Homemade pancake machines = = 
 Homemade versions of pancake machines have been constructed . An example of a homemade pancake machine is one constructed in 1977 by Ken Whitsett of the Ocala Kiwanis Club in Ocala , Florida , which was used for the organization 's annual pancake day . The Kiwanis machine utilized a hopper filled with pancake batter that was manually dropped onto a revolving griddle . The pancakes were manually flipped and plated when cooking was completed . It required four people for its operation , and could produce between 750 – 1000 pancakes per hour . 
 = = Companies and brands = = 
 Commercial and home @-@ consumer pancake machines are mass @-@ produced by some companies in contemporary times . 
 = = = Commercial products = = = 
 Commercial pancake machines are typically used in the commercial foodservice and hospitality industries . 
 <unk> is a pancake machine brand that can produce 200 pancakes per hour . Individual Pancakes are produced in seconds by this machine . The machine was designed for use in commercial establishments such as cafeterias and convenience stores . 
 Popcake is a U.S. company that produces Popcake @-@ brand pancake machines . The Popcake machine was invented by Marek Szymanski , and as of July 2014 approximately 7 @,@ 000 of them are used worldwide . This brand has features that allow users to adjust the size , quantity and doneness level of the pancakes produced . Plates of pancakes are produced in around two minutes time by the Popcake machine . 
 = = = Consumer products = = = 
 Consumer versions of pancake machines for home use are simpler in operation compared to commercial machines , typically involving a basic griddle and a feature to adjust cooking temperature . Consumer machines are typically <unk> @-@ sized small appliances . Brands include the Severin Crepe Maker , the <unk> <unk> and Grill , Swan 's Come Dine With Me Party Wok and Pancake Maker , the Roller Grill Single Plate Crepe Machine and the Andrew James Crepe Maker , among others . A review of various consumer machines published in The Daily Mail recommended various machines per situational uses . For example , the Roller Grill Single Plate Crepe Machine was recommended for use with large groups of people and the Severin Crepe Maker was recommended for " <unk> " who prefer a simple design The review recommended the Andrew James Crepe Maker as the overall best value . 
 In March 2015 in the U.S. , the <unk> pancake machine received over $ 141 @,@ 000 on Kickstarter . Its target donation request on the website was $ 50 @,@ 000 . <unk> can produce custom pancakes in various designs , which is performed by the use of pancake batter in a bottle that is moved by a programmable machine arm atop the griddle . The machine utilizes custom software to accomplish this . 
 = = Novelty machines = = 
 In commemoration of Pancake Day in the United Kingdom , a novelty pancake machine was built by The Happy Egg Company in February 2013 that involved a complex series of steps to automatically produce pancakes from scratch . The machine involves the use of a freshly laid egg from a hen that rolls onto a turntable , which then moves the egg to an area where it is automatically cracked and mixed with other ingredients . After this point , the mixture is poured into a griddle , flipped to cook the other side , and then flipped onto a plate . 
 = New York State Route 191 = 
 New York State Route 191 ( NY 191 ) was a 6 @.@ 24 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 04 km ) long state highway located north of Adirondack Park The route was maintained and co @-@ designated by the Clinton County highway department as County Route 23 ( CR 23 ) and headed from an intersection with NY 22 in the hamlet of Sciota within the town of Chazy to a junction with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in the hamlet of Chazy . The route met Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 , also known as the Adirondack Northway ) west of Chazy hamlet . 
 NY 191 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . The route initially extended from the community of Altona to a ferry landing on Lake Champlain in Chazy Landing , where it connected to Vermont Route F @-@ 2 . The ferry ceased to operate in 1937 , but NY 191 remained unchanged until 1980 when ownership and maintenance of NY 191 was transferred from the state to Clinton County . NY 191 was truncated to its current length following the maintenance swap . The route was decommissioned in July , 2014 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 191 began at an intersection with NY 22 and Miner Farm Road ( CR 23 ) in the Clinton County hamlet of Sciota , located within the town of Chazy . The route headed to the northeast as a two @-@ lane county @-@ maintained , state @-@ numbered highway , overlapping with CR 23 and taking on the Miner Farm Road name . East of Sciota , the highway traversed lightly developed areas , serving several residences separated by patches of woodlands . The route eventually began to turn to the southeast , connecting with <unk> Road ( unsigned CR 20 ) in the process . A long stretch of dense forests followed the turn , with little to no development along the highway . 
 After 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , the road bent back to the east , leaving the woodlands behind as it passed south of the Miner Institute . The research complex leaded to another stretch of isolated homes along NY 191 , centered on the route 's interchange with the Adirondack Northway ( I @-@ 87 ) . Not far from the junction , NY 191 entered the hamlet of Chazy , a small community located on the Little Chazy River . The route bypassed most of Chazy , skirting the northern edge of the hamlet as it headed northeast to a junction with US 9 . NY 191 ended here while CR 23 follows the state @-@ maintained US 9 south into downtown Chazy . 
 = = History = = 
 Modern NY 191 is one part of a mostly continuous east – west highway between the hamlets of Altona and Chazy Landing . On September 23 , 1908 , the state assumed maintenance of the part east of the hamlet of Chazy following the completion of a $ 38 @,@ 925 project ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 025 @,@ 169 in 2016 ) to improve a total of 4 @.@ 60 miles ( 7 @.@ 40 km ) of roads in Clinton County . The section west of the hamlet of Sciota cost $ 75 @,@ 711 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 19 million in 2016 ) to rebuild to state highway standards , and it became a state highway on December 12 , 1918 . From Sciota to Chazy , the road was locally maintained until the late 1920s . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , hundreds of state @-@ maintained highways without a posted route number were given a signed designation for the first time . The Altona – Chazy Landing state highway was designated as NY 191 . At its east end , the route connected to Vermont Route F @-@ 2 on Isle La Motte by way of a ferry across part of Lake Champlain . The ferry was discontinued in 1937 ; however , the endpoints of NY 191 remained unchanged . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of all of NY 191 was transferred from the state of New York to Clinton County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The entirety of the highway was designated as CR 23 by Clinton County and NY 191 was truncated to consist only of the portion of the route between Sciota and Chazy . The route was decommissioned in July 2014 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Chazy , Clinton County . 
 = A Dramatic Turn of Events = 
 A Dramatic Turn of Events is the eleventh studio album by American progressive metal band Dream Theater , released worldwide on September 12 , 2011 and in the United States on September 13 through Roadrunner Records . It is the band 's first recording to feature drummer Mike Mangini following the departure of founding member Mike Portnoy in September 2010 . The album was written , recorded , mixed , and mastered between January and June 2011 at Cove City Sound Studios in Long Island , New York . It was produced by John Petrucci and mixed by Andy Wallace . Two singles , " On the Backs of Angels " and " Build Me Up , Break Me Down " , were released in promotion of the album . 
 For A Dramatic Turn of Events , Dream Theater underwent a self @-@ proclaimed musical change , reevaluating and restructuring themselves . The album has drawn stylistic comparisons to two of the band 's past albums , Images and Words and Metropolis Pt . 2 : Scenes from a Memory . Many songs on the album were written with a specific purpose in mind as Petrucci , one of the album 's primary composers , felt a sense of responsibility to fans following Portnoy 's departure . The album 's title was derived from its recurring lyrical themes of dramatic changes in history that have affected people 's lives , including contemporary uprisings such as the Libyan Civil War . 
 A commercial success , A Dramatic Turn of Events moved 36 @,@ 000 units in the United States in its debut week , charting at number eight on the US Billboard 200 . The album received mixed reviews from critics , but nonetheless earned Dream Theater their first @-@ ever Grammy nomination ( for " On the Backs of Angels " ) . From July 2011 until September 2012 , the band supported the album on the A Dramatic Turn of Events Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Search for a new drummer = = = 
 On September 8 , 2010 , Mike Portnoy announced that he would be leaving Dream Theater , citing better relationships in other projects , burnout , and his desire for a break as reasons . Elaborating on the situation for MusicRadar , John Petrucci revealed that originally , Portnoy did not want to leave the band ; he only wanted to take a five @-@ year break . Only after the rest of the band rejected his proposal did Portnoy decide to quit . 
 Petrucci has called Portnoy 's departure one of the hardest things Dream Theater have had to face , and speaking of when he first heard the news , Jordan Rudess recounted , " You know , just to give you an idea of how deep this was to lose him , how difficult it was ... after we got off the phone with him ... I literally sat on the steps of my studio and cried . This is a guy who 's a friend of mine , who we all love and admire . We didn 't want to see it come crashing down . " 
 A little more than a month after Portnoy 's departure , Dream Theater began auditioning for a new drummer in New York City . The drummers invited to audition were Mike Mangini , Derek Roddy , Thomas Lang , Virgil Donati , Marco <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Peter <unk> . In April 2011 , the band announced that Mangini was the drummer selected via a three part YouTube documentary series called The Spirit Carries On . 
 Shortly after Mangini joined Dream Theater , Portnoy e @-@ mailed the band asking to rejoin , but his attempt was rebuffed . Reflecting on his arrival to the band , Mangini told Noisecreep , " As I see it , as I look back , I really think what happened was that this band kind of started over . They were in a new place as they looked for a drummer , and I when got the news , after the shock wore off , I knew what I wanted to do – which was just basically come in and try to support where they wanted to go . They had a vision , they had great ideas , and I just wanted to help them achieve those things . " 
 = = = Writing and recording = = = 
 On January 3 , 2011 , Dream Theater entered Cove City Sound Studios to begin working on a new album . Although John Petrucci brought in demos , riffs , and songs from home , the album was mostly written in the studio . Writing was completed on March 2 and done without Mike Mangini . The band made demos for all the songs with drums already programmed , then sent them to Mangini who learned the parts and " added his own stuff . " Reflecting on the writing process for Rock Your Life , Jordan Rudess explained that the band 's approach was more open to his keyboards than in the past , and that after Mike Portnoy 's departure , he and Petrucci " became , like , free . " James LaBrie and John Myung each contributed more to the writing than they had in recent years . 
 On April 14 , LaBrie began tracking vocals and the album 's mixing and mastering by Andy Wallace were finished by June 28 . LaBrie recorded all the album 's vocals in Canada with Richard Chycki . Originally , LaBrie planned to only record the album 's first two songs away from New York City , but after flying there to finish the remainder of the vocals , decided to go back to Canada because " it just didn 't feel right . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Jordan Rudess has said that , for A Dramatic Turn of Events , the band underwent a musical change , re @-@ evaluating and restructuring " who we are and what we do . " Speaking in an interview for Der Spiegel and Roadrunner Germany , John Petrucci mentioned that the album " tells a story ... not literally but emotionally " and likened the experience to a " roller coaster ride . " In that same interview , James LaBrie emphasized that the album was melodically driven . 
 In his review of A Dramatic Turn of Events , Rich Wilson – author of the official Dream Theater biography Lifting Shadows – described the album 's material as veering toward progressive rock and being " spiritually reminiscent " of past albums like Images and Words ( 1992 ) and Scenes from a Memory ( 1999 ) . In a post on his forum , Mike Portnoy took these comparisons a step further , suggesting that the new songs were " desperate attempts to re @-@ write the past " . 
 In composing A Dramatic Turn of Events , Petrucci admitted to feeling a sense of responsibility to fans following Portnoy 's departure . He also explained that the majority of the songs on the album were written to prove to people that everything was grounded and intact with the band . Opener " On the Backs of Angels " was designed to reflect Dream Theater 's signature sound , the heavy " Build Me Up , Break Me Down " was written far into the making of the album to serve as a contrast to its progressive elements , " <unk> " was intended to be the anthem of the album , and " Breaking All Illusions " was used as an epic piece that would not bind the band to conventional songwriting arrangements . The final song written for the album was the ballad " Beneath the Surface " , which is also the album 's closing track . Petrucci wrote the song himself , demoed and recorded it , and then presented it to the band , who were open to including it on the album . 
 Amidst speculation that A Dramatic Turn of Events ' title was a vague reference to Portnoy 's departure , Petrucci stressed that it is in no way a reference to anyone ; rather , the title references the album 's recurring themes of dramatic changes in history that have affected peoples ' lives . All of the album 's lyrics were written by Petrucci except for " Far from Heaven " , written by LaBrie , and " Breaking All Illusions " , co @-@ written with John Myung . 
 = = Release = = 
 A Dramatic Turn of Events ' title , track listing , and United States release date were revealed on June 8 , 2011 . Its cover art , designed by longtime collaborator Hugh Syme , was revealed several days later . On June 29 , " On the Backs of Angels " was released as the album 's first single . Leading up to the release of the album , Dream Theater teased various one @-@ minute long snippets of new songs , including " Breaking All Illusions " , " Beneath the Surface " , and " This Is the Life " . On September 14 , a music video for " On the Backs of Angels " was released . On January 26 , 2012 , the band premiered a lyric video for their upcoming single , " Build Me Up , Break Me Down " , on Loudwire . 
 A Dramatic Turn of Events was released worldwide on September 12 , 2011 and in the United States on September 13 , debuting at number one in some countries and attaining the eighth position on the US Billboard 200 , Dream Theater 's second top ten debut position on that chart after their previous album , 2009 's Black Clouds & Silver Linings , which debuted at No. 6 . Alongside the standard edition of the album , a special edition and deluxe collector 's edition were also made available for purchase . The special edition featured different packaging and a bonus DVD containing The Spirit Carries On documentary , while the deluxe collector 's edition featured , among other bonus items , instrumental versions of all songs . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 A Dramatic Turn of Events has received mixed reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album holds an average score of 55 , based on six reviews . Rich Wilson called it " fresh and frankly stunning " ; however , he warned that the album was not immediately gratifying and that it required several listens to fully appreciate . Critics were generally complimentary of Mike Mangini 's performance , with Drumhead elaborating , " [ he ] demonstrates the physical prowess and agility of a racehorse , stretching to play at the top of his talents and reining himself in to allow his bandmates to do the same . " 
 In a negative review for Popmatters , Chris Conaton expressed disappointment in the album 's predictability , noting , " At this point it ’ s pretty clear that the band is comfortably ensconced in their lifestyle and content to just keep doing things the way they have been for years . " In a lukewarm review for AllMusic , Thom Jurek observed , " there is something here for virtually every fan -- or detractor -- to grab hold of . " Sputnikmusic criticized Mangini 's drum parts , describing them as " bland " , as well as the decision to include three ballads , but ultimately gave the album a positive review . 
 A Dramatic Turn of Events has received several accolades . In their year @-@ end wrap up for 2011 , <unk> ! awarded the album with their Best Album , Best Front Cover , Best Guitarist , and Best Keyboardist honors . At the 2012 Grammy Awards , " On the Backs of Angels " was nominated for Best Hard Rock / Metal Performance , representing the Dream Theater 's first @-@ ever Grammy nomination . 
 = = = Supporting tour = = = 
 Dream Theater began their tour in support of A Dramatic Turn of Events on July 4 , 2011 in Rome , Italy . The second leg of the tour took place in North America , where the band headlined with Trivium . After a short break to conclude 2011 , the band returned to Europe with Periphery , then to North America with Crimson <unk> before heading to South America for the final leg of the tour . On August 19 and 20 , they filmed two shows at Luna Park in Buenos Aires , Argentina for a live Blu @-@ ray release . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All titles , writing credits , and song lengths taken from the A Dramatic Turn of Events liner notes . All lyrics written by John Petrucci except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits taken from the A Dramatic Turn of Events liner notes . 
 = Galaxy = 
 A galaxy is a gravitationally bound system of stars , stellar remnants , interstellar gas , dust , and dark matter . The word galaxy is derived from the Greek galaxias ( γαλαξίας ) , literally " milky " , a reference to the Milky Way . Galaxies range in size from dwarfs with just a few thousand ( 103 ) stars to giants with one hundred trillion ( 1014 ) stars , each orbiting its galaxy 's center of mass . Galaxies are categorized according to their visual morphology as elliptical , spiral and irregular . Many galaxies are thought to have black holes at their active centers . The Milky Way 's central black hole , known as Sagittarius A * , has a mass four million times greater than the Sun . As of March 2016 , GN @-@ z11 is the oldest and most distant observed galaxy with a comoving distance of 32 billion light @-@ years from Earth , and observed as it existed just 400 million years after the Big Bang . Previously , as of July 2015 , <unk> was the most distant known galaxy , estimated to have a light travel distance of 13 @.@ 2 billion light @-@ years away . 
 Approximately 170 billion ( 1 @.@ 7 × 1011 ) to 200 billion ( 2 @.@ 0 × 1011 ) galaxies exist in the observable universe . Most of the galaxies are 1 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 parsecs in diameter and usually separated by distances on the order of millions of parsecs ( or megaparsecs ) . The space between galaxies is filled with a tenuous gas having an average density of less than one atom per cubic meter . The majority of galaxies are gravitationally organized into associations known as galaxy groups , clusters , and superclusters . At the largest scale , these associations are generally arranged into sheets and filaments surrounded by immense voids . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the word galaxy derives from the Greek term for the Milky Way , galaxias ( γαλαξίας , " milky one " ) , or <unk> <unk> ( " milky circle " ) due to its appearance as a " milky " band of light in the sky . In Greek mythology , Zeus places his son born by a mortal woman , the infant Heracles , on Hera 's breast while she is asleep so that the baby will drink her divine milk and will thus become immortal . Hera wakes up while breastfeeding and then realizes she is nursing an unknown baby : she pushes the baby away , some of her milk spills and , produces the faint band of light known as the Milky Way . 
 In the astronomical literature , the capitalized word " Galaxy " is often used to refer to our galaxy , the Milky Way , to distinguish it from the other galaxies in our universe . The English term Milky Way can be traced back to a story by Chaucer c . 1380 : 
 " See yonder , lo , the <unk> 
 Which men <unk> the Milky Wey , 
 For hit is <unk> . " 
 Certain astronomical objects known as spiral nebula such as M31 would later be recognized as conglomerations of stars when the true distance to these objects began to be discovered , and they would be deemed island universes . However , the word Universe was later understood to mean the entirety of existence , so this expression fell into disuse and the objects instead became known as galaxies . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 Tens of thousands of galaxies have been catalogued , but only a few have well @-@ established names , such as the Andromeda Galaxy , the Magellanic Clouds , the Whirlpool Galaxy , and the Sombrero Galaxy . Astronomers work with numbers from certain catalogues , such as the Messier catalogue , the NGC ( New General Catalogue ) , the IC ( Index Catalogue ) , the CGCG ( Catalogue of Galaxies and of Clusters of Galaxies ) , the MCG ( Morphological Catalogue of Galaxies ) and UGC ( Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies ) . All of the well @-@ known galaxies appear in one or more of these catalogues but each time under a different number . For example , Messier 109 is a spiral galaxy having the number 109 in the catalogue of Messier , but also codes <unk> , <unk> , CGCG 269 @-@ 023 , MCG + 09 @-@ 20 @-@ 044 , and PGC <unk> . 
 Because it is customary in science to assign names to most of the studied objects , even to the smallest ones , the Belgian astrophysicist Gerard <unk> and the classicist Michel Berger started a new catalogue ( CNG @-@ Catalogue of Named Galaxies ) in which a thousand well @-@ known galaxies are given meaningful , descriptive names in Latin ( or Latinized Greek ) in accordance with the binomial nomenclature that one uses in other sciences such as biology , anatomy , paleontology and in other fields of astronomy such as the geography of Mars . One of the arguments to do so is that these impressive objects deserve better than uninspired codes . For instance , <unk> and Berger propose the informal , descriptive name <unk> Ursae Majoris for the well @-@ formed barred galaxy Messier 109 in Ursa Major . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 The realization that we live in a galaxy , and that ours is one among many , parallels major discoveries that were made about the Milky Way and other nebulae in the night sky . 
 = = = Milky Way = = = 
 The Greek philosopher Democritus ( 450 – 370 BCE ) proposed that the bright band on the night sky known as the Milky Way might consist of distant stars . Aristotle ( 384 – 322 BCE ) , however , believed the Milky Way to be caused by " the ignition of the fiery exhalation of some stars that were large , numerous and close together " and that the " ignition takes place in the upper part of the atmosphere , in the region of the World that is continuous with the heavenly motions . " The Neoplatonist philosopher Olympiodorus the Younger ( c . 495 – 570 CE ) was critical of this view , arguing that if the Milky Way is sublunary ( situated between Earth and the Moon ) it should appear different at different times and places on Earth , and that it should have parallax , which it does not . In his view , the Milky Way is celestial . 
 According to <unk> Mohamed , the Arabian astronomer Alhazen ( 965 – 1037 ) made the first attempt at observing and measuring the Milky Way 's parallax , and he thus " determined that because the Milky Way had no parallax , it must be remote from the Earth , not belonging to the atmosphere . " The Persian astronomer al @-@ Bīrūnī ( 973 – 1048 ) proposed the Milky Way galaxy to be " a collection of countless fragments of the nature of nebulous stars . " The Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah ( " <unk> " , d . 1138 ) proposed that the Milky Way is made up of many stars that almost touch one another and appear to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction from sublunary material , citing his observation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars as evidence of this occurring when two objects are near . In the 14th century , the Syrian @-@ born Ibn <unk> proposed the Milky Way galaxy to be " a myriad of tiny stars packed together in the sphere of the fixed stars . " 
 Actual proof of the Milky Way consisting of many stars came in 1610 when the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei used a telescope to study the Milky Way and discovered that it is composed of a huge number of faint stars . In 1750 the English astronomer Thomas Wright , in his An original theory or new hypothesis of the Universe , speculated ( correctly ) that the galaxy might be a rotating body of a huge number of stars held together by gravitational forces , akin to the Solar System but on a much larger scale . The resulting disk of stars can be seen as a band on the sky from our perspective inside the disk . In a treatise in 1755 , Immanuel Kant elaborated on Wright 's idea about the structure of the Milky Way . 
 The first project to describe the shape of the Milky Way and the position of the Sun was undertaken by William Herschel in 1785 by counting the number of stars in different regions of the sky . He produced a diagram of the shape of the galaxy with the Solar System close to the center . Using a refined approach , Kapteyn in 1920 arrived at the picture of a small ( diameter about 15 kiloparsecs ) ellipsoid galaxy with the Sun close to the center . A different method by Harlow Shapley based on the cataloguing of globular clusters led to a radically different picture : a flat disk with diameter approximately 70 kiloparsecs and the Sun far from the center . Both analyses failed to take into account the absorption of light by interstellar dust present in the galactic plane , but after Robert Julius Trumpler quantified this effect in 1930 by studying open clusters , the present picture of our host galaxy , the Milky Way , emerged . 
 = = = Distinction from other nebulae = = = 
 A few galaxies outside the Milky Way are visible in the night sky to the unaided eye . In the 10th century , the Persian astronomer Al @-@ Sufi made the earliest recorded identification of the Andromeda Galaxy , describing it as a " small cloud " . In 964 , Al @-@ Sufi identified the Large Magellanic Cloud in his Book of Fixed Stars ; it was not seen by Europeans until Magellan 's voyage in the 16th century . The Andromeda Galaxy was independently noted by Simon Marius in 1612 . 
 In 1750 , Thomas Wright speculated ( correctly ) that the Milky Way is a flattened disk of stars , and that some of the nebulae visible in the night sky might be separate Milky Ways . In 1755 , Immanuel Kant used the term " island Universe " to describe these distant nebulae . 
 Toward the end of the 18th century , Charles Messier compiled a catalog containing the 109 brightest celestial objects having nebulous appearance . Subsequently , William Herschel assembled a catalog of 5 @,@ 000 nebulae . In 1845 , Lord Rosse constructed a new telescope and was able to distinguish between elliptical and spiral nebulae . He also managed to make out individual point sources in some of these nebulae , lending credence to Kant 's earlier conjecture . 
 In 1912 , Vesto Slipher made spectrographic studies of the brightest spiral nebulae to determine their composition . Slipher discovered that the spiral nebulae have high Doppler shifts , indicating that they are moving at a rate exceeding the velocity of the stars he had measured . He found that the majority of these nebulae are moving away from us . 
 In 1917 , Heber Curtis observed nova S Andromedae within the " Great Andromeda Nebula " ( as the Andromeda Galaxy , Messier object M31 , was then known ) . Searching the photographic record , he found 11 more novae . Curtis noticed that these novae were , on average , 10 magnitudes fainter than those that occurred within our galaxy . As a result , he was able to come up with a distance estimate of 150 @,@ 000 parsecs . He became a proponent of the so @-@ called " island universes " hypothesis , which holds that spiral nebulae are actually independent galaxies . 
 In 1920 a debate took place between Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis ( the Great Debate ) , concerning the nature of the Milky Way , spiral nebulae , and the dimensions of the Universe . To support his claim that the Great Andromeda Nebula is an external galaxy , Curtis noted the appearance of dark lanes resembling the dust clouds in the Milky Way , as well as the significant Doppler shift . 
 In 1922 , the Estonian astronomer Ernst Öpik gave a distance determination that supported the theory that the Andromeda Nebula is indeed a distant extra @-@ galactic object . Using the new 100 inch Mt . Wilson telescope , Edwin Hubble was able to resolve the outer parts of some spiral nebulae as collections of individual stars and identified some Cepheid variables , thus allowing him to estimate the distance to the nebulae : they were far too distant to be part of the Milky Way . In 1936 Hubble produced a classification of galactic morphology that is used to this day . 
 = = = Modern research = = = 
 In 1944 , Hendrik van de Hulst predicted that microwave radiation with wavelength of 21 cm would be detectable from interstellar atomic hydrogen gas ; and in 1951 it was observed . This radiation is not affected by dust absorption , and so its Doppler shift can be used to map the motion of the gas in our galaxy . These observations led to the hypothesis of a rotating bar structure in the center of our galaxy . With improved radio telescopes , hydrogen gas could also be traced in other galaxies . In the 1970s , Vera Rubin uncovered a discrepancy between observed galactic rotation speed and that predicted by the visible mass of stars and gas . Today , the galaxy rotation problem is thought to be explained by the presence of large quantities of unseen dark matter . A concept known as the universal rotation curve of spirals , moreover , shows that the problem is ubiquitous in these objects . 
 Beginning in the 1990s , the Hubble Space Telescope yielded improved observations . Among other things , Hubble data helped establish that the missing dark matter in our galaxy cannot solely consist of inherently faint and small stars . The Hubble Deep Field , an extremely long exposure of a relatively empty part of the sky , provided evidence that there are about 125 billion ( 1 @.@ 25 × 1011 ) galaxies in the observable universe . Improved technology in detecting the spectra invisible to humans ( radio telescopes , infrared cameras , and x @-@ ray telescopes ) allow detection of other galaxies that are not detected by Hubble . Particularly , galaxy surveys in the Zone of Avoidance ( the region of the sky blocked by the Milky Way ) have revealed a number of new galaxies . 
 = = Types and morphology = = 
 Galaxies come in three main types : ellipticals , spirals , and irregulars . A slightly more extensive description of galaxy types based on their appearance is given by the Hubble sequence . Since the Hubble sequence is entirely based upon visual morphological type ( shape ) , it may miss certain important characteristics of galaxies such as star formation rate in starburst galaxies and activity in the cores of active galaxies . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Hubble classification system rates elliptical galaxies on the basis of their ellipticity , ranging from E0 , being nearly spherical , up to E7 , which is highly elongated . These galaxies have an ellipsoidal profile , giving them an elliptical appearance regardless of the viewing angle . Their appearance shows little structure and they typically have relatively little interstellar matter . Consequently , these galaxies also have a low portion of open clusters and a reduced rate of new star formation . Instead they are dominated by generally older , more evolved stars that are orbiting the common center of gravity in random directions . The stars contain low abundances of heavy elements because star formation ceases after the initial burst . In this sense they have some similarity to the much smaller globular clusters . 
 The largest galaxies are giant ellipticals . Many elliptical galaxies are believed to form due to the interaction of galaxies , resulting in a collision and merger . They can grow to enormous sizes ( compared to spiral galaxies , for example ) , and giant elliptical galaxies are often found near the core of large galaxy clusters . 
 Starburst galaxies are the result of a galactic collision that can result in the formation of an elliptical galaxy . 
 = = = = Shell galaxy = = = = 
 A shell galaxy is a type of elliptical galaxy where the stars in the galaxy 's halo are arranged in concentric shells . About one @-@ tenth of elliptical galaxies have a shell @-@ like structure , which has never been observed in spiral galaxies . The shell @-@ like structures are thought to develop when a larger galaxy absorbs a smaller companion galaxy . As the two galaxy centers approach , the centers start to oscillate around a center point , the oscillation creates gravitational ripples forming the shells of stars , similar to ripples spreading on water . For example , galaxy NGC <unk> has over twenty shells . 
 = = = Spirals = = = 
 Spiral galaxies resemble spiraling pinwheels . Though the stars and other visible material contained in such a galaxy lie mostly on a plane , the majority of mass in spiral galaxies exists in a roughly spherical halo of dark matter that extends beyond the visible component , as demonstrated by the universal rotation curve concept . 
 Spiral galaxies consist of a rotating disk of stars and interstellar medium , along with a central bulge of generally older stars . Extending outward from the bulge are relatively bright arms . In the Hubble classification scheme , spiral galaxies are listed as type S , followed by a letter ( a , b , or c ) that indicates the degree of tightness of the spiral arms and the size of the central bulge . An Sa galaxy has tightly wound , poorly defined arms and possesses a relatively large core region . At the other extreme , an Sc galaxy has open , well @-@ defined arms and a small core region . A galaxy with poorly defined arms is sometimes referred to as a flocculent spiral galaxy ; in contrast to the grand design spiral galaxy that has prominent and well @-@ defined spiral arms . 
 It appears the reason that some spiral galaxies are fat and bulging while some are flat discs is because of how fast they rotate . 
 In spiral galaxies , the spiral arms do have the shape of approximate logarithmic spirals , a pattern that can be theoretically shown to result from a disturbance in a uniformly rotating mass of stars . Like the stars , the spiral arms rotate around the center , but they do so with constant angular velocity . The spiral arms are thought to be areas of high @-@ density matter , or " density waves " . As stars move through an arm , the space velocity of each stellar system is modified by the gravitational force of the higher density . ( The velocity returns to normal after the stars depart on the other side of the arm . ) This effect is akin to a " wave " of slowdowns moving along a highway full of moving cars . The arms are visible because the high density facilitates star formation , and therefore they harbor many bright and young stars . 
 = = = = Barred Spiral Galaxy = = = = 
 A majority of spiral galaxies , including our own Milky Way galaxy , have a linear , bar @-@ shaped band of stars that extends outward to either side of the core , then merges into the spiral arm structure . In the Hubble classification scheme , these are designated by an SB , followed by a lower @-@ case letter ( a , b or c ) that indicates the form of the spiral arms ( in the same manner as the categorization of normal spiral galaxies ) . Bars are thought to be temporary structures that can occur as a result of a density wave radiating outward from the core , or else due to a tidal interaction with another galaxy . Many barred spiral galaxies are active , possibly as a result of gas being channeled into the core along the arms . 
 Our own galaxy , the Milky Way , is a large disk @-@ shaped barred @-@ spiral galaxy about 30 kiloparsecs in diameter and a kiloparsec thick . It contains about two hundred billion ( 2 × 1011 ) stars and has a total mass of about six hundred billion ( 6 × 1011 ) times the mass of the Sun . 
 = = = = Super Luminous Spiral = = = = 
 Can have a diameter of 437 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . The Milky Way is about 100 @,@ 000 light @-@ years in diameter . They can have a mass of 340 billion solar masses and generate large amount of ultraviolet and mid @-@ infrared light . They create new stars 30 times faster than the Milky Way . 
 = = = Other morphologies = = = 
 Peculiar galaxies are galactic formations that develop unusual properties due to tidal interactions with other galaxies . 
 A ring galaxy has a ring @-@ like structure of stars and interstellar medium surrounding a bare core . A ring galaxy is thought to occur when a smaller galaxy passes through the core of a spiral galaxy . Such an event may have affected the Andromeda Galaxy , as it displays a multi @-@ ring @-@ like structure when viewed in infrared radiation . 
 A lenticular galaxy is an intermediate form that has properties of both elliptical and spiral galaxies . These are categorized as Hubble type S0 , and they possess ill @-@ defined spiral arms with an elliptical halo of stars ( barred lenticular galaxies receive Hubble classification <unk> . ) 
 Irregular galaxies are galaxies that can not be readily classified into an elliptical or spiral morphology . 
 An <unk> @-@ I galaxy has some structure but does not align cleanly with the Hubble classification scheme . 
 <unk> @-@ II galaxies do not possess any structure that resembles a Hubble classification , and may have been disrupted . Nearby examples of ( dwarf ) irregular galaxies include the Magellanic Clouds . 
 An ultra diffuse galaxy ( <unk> ) is an extremely @-@ low @-@ density galaxy . The galaxy may be the same size as the Milky Way but has a visible star count of only 1 % of the Milky Way . The lack of luminosity is because there is a lack of star @-@ forming gas in the galaxy which results in old stellar populations . 
 = = = Dwarfs = = = 
 Despite the prominence of large elliptical and spiral galaxies , most galaxies in the Universe are dwarf galaxies . These galaxies are relatively small when compared with other galactic formations , being about one hundredth the size of the Milky Way , containing only a few billion stars . Ultra @-@ compact dwarf galaxies have recently been discovered that are only 100 parsecs across . 
 Many dwarf galaxies may orbit a single larger galaxy ; the Milky Way has at least a dozen such satellites , with an estimated 300 – 500 yet to be discovered . Dwarf galaxies may also be classified as elliptical , spiral , or irregular . Since small dwarf ellipticals bear little resemblance to large ellipticals , they are often called dwarf spheroidal galaxies instead . 
 A study of 27 Milky Way neighbors found that in all dwarf galaxies , the central mass is approximately 10 million solar masses , regardless of whether the galaxy has thousands or millions of stars . This has led to the suggestion that galaxies are largely formed by dark matter , and that the minimum size may indicate a form of warm dark matter incapable of gravitational coalescence on a smaller scale . 
 = = Other types of galaxies = = 
 = = = Interacting = = = 
 Interactions between galaxies are relatively frequent , and they can play an important role in galactic evolution . Near misses between galaxies result in warping distortions due to tidal interactions , and may cause some exchange of gas and dust . Collisions occur when two galaxies pass directly through each other and have sufficient relative momentum not to merge . The stars of interacting galaxies will usually not collide , but the gas and dust within the two forms will interact , sometimes triggering star formation . A collision can severely distort the shape of the galaxies , forming bars , rings or tail @-@ like structures . 
 At the extreme of interactions are galactic mergers . In this case the relative momentum of the two galaxies is insufficient to allow the galaxies to pass through each other . Instead , they gradually merge to form a single , larger galaxy . Mergers can result in significant changes to morphology , as compared to the original galaxies . If one of the merging galaxies is much more massive than the other merging galaxies then the result is known as cannibalism . The more massive larger galaxy will remain relatively undisturbed by the merger , while the smaller galaxy is torn apart . The Milky Way galaxy is currently in the process of cannibalizing the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy and the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy . 
 = = = Starburst = = = 
 Stars are created within galaxies from a reserve of cold gas that forms into giant molecular clouds . Some galaxies have been observed to form stars at an exceptional rate , which is known as a starburst . If they continue to do so , then they would consume their reserve of gas in a time span less than the lifespan of the galaxy . Hence starburst activity usually lasts for only about ten million years , a relatively brief period in the history of a galaxy . Starburst galaxies were more common during the early history of the Universe , and , at present , still contribute an estimated 15 % to the total star production rate . 
 Starburst galaxies are characterized by dusty concentrations of gas and the appearance of newly formed stars , including massive stars that ionize the surrounding clouds to create H II regions . These massive stars produce supernova explosions , resulting in expanding remnants that interact powerfully with the surrounding gas . These outbursts trigger a chain reaction of star building that spreads throughout the gaseous region . Only when the available gas is nearly consumed or dispersed does the starburst activity end . 
 <unk> are often associated with merging or interacting galaxies . The prototype example of such a starburst @-@ forming interaction is M82 , which experienced a close encounter with the larger <unk> . Irregular galaxies often exhibit spaced knots of starburst activity . 
 = = = Active galaxy = = = 
 A portion of the observable galaxies are classified as an active galaxy if the galaxy contains an active galactic nucleus . A significant portion of the total energy output from the galaxy is emitted by the active galactic nucleus , instead of the stars , dust and interstellar medium of the galaxy . 
 The standard model for an active galactic nucleus is based upon an accretion disc that forms around a supermassive black hole ( SMBH ) at the core region of the galaxy . The radiation from an active galactic nucleus results from the gravitational energy of matter as it falls toward the black hole from the disc . In about 10 % of these galaxies , a diametrically opposed pair of energetic jets ejects particles from the galaxy core at velocities close to the speed of light . The mechanism for producing these jets is not well understood . 
 Seyfert galaxies or quasars , are classified depending on the luminosity , are active galaxies that emit high @-@ energy radiation in the form of x @-@ rays . 
 = = = = Blazars = = = = 
 Blazars are believed to be an active galaxy with a relativistic jet that is pointed in the direction of Earth . A radio galaxy emits radio frequencies from relativistic jets . A unified model of these types of active galaxies explains their differences based on the viewing angle of the observer . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Possibly related to active galactic nuclei ( as well as starburst regions ) are low @-@ ionization nuclear emission @-@ line regions ( <unk> ) . The emission from LINER @-@ type galaxies is dominated by weakly ionized elements . Approximately one @-@ third of nearby galaxies are classified as containing LINER nuclei . 
 = = = = Seyfert Galaxy = = = = 
 Seyfert galaxies are one of the two largest groups of active galaxies , along with quasars . They have quasar @-@ like nuclei ( very luminous , distant and bright sources of electromagnetic radiation ) with very high surface brightnesses but unlike quasars , their host galaxies are clearly detectable . Seyfert galaxies account for about 10 % of all galaxies . Seen in visible light , most Seyfert galaxies look like normal spiral galaxies , but when studied under other wavelengths , the luminosity of their cores is equivalent to the luminosity of whole galaxies the size of the Milky Way . 
 = = = = Quasar = = = = 
 Quasars ( / <unk> / ) or quasi @-@ stellar radio sources are the most energetic and distant members of a class of objects called active galactic nuclei ( AGN ) . Quasars are extremely luminous and were first identified as being high redshift sources of electromagnetic energy , including radio waves and visible light , that appeared to be similar to stars , rather than extended sources similar to galaxies . Their luminosity can be 100 times greater than that of the Milky Way . 
 = = = Luminous infrared galaxy = = = 
 Luminous Infrared Galaxies or ( LIRG 's ) are galaxies with luminosities , the measurement of brightness , above 1011 L ☉ . LIRG 's are more abundant than starburst galaxies , Seyfert galaxies and quasi @-@ stellar objects at comparable luminosity . Infrared galaxies emit more energy in the infrared than at all other wavelengths combined . An LIRG 's luminosity is 100 billion times that of our Sun . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Galaxies have galactic magnetic fields . 
 = = Formation and evolution = = 
 Galactic formation and evolution is an active area of research in astrophysics . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Current cosmological models of the early Universe are based on the Big Bang theory . About 300 @,@ 000 years after this event , atoms of hydrogen and helium began to form , in an event called recombination . Nearly all the hydrogen was neutral ( non @-@ ionized ) and readily absorbed light , and no stars had yet formed . As a result , this period has been called the " dark ages " . It was from density fluctuations ( or anisotropic irregularities ) in this primordial matter that larger structures began to appear . As a result , masses of baryonic matter started to condense within cold dark matter halos . These primordial structures would eventually become the galaxies we see today . 
 = = = = Early galaxies = = = = 
 Evidence for the early appearance of galaxies was found in 2006 , when it was discovered that the galaxy <unk> @-@ 1 has an unusually high redshift of 6 @.@ 96 , corresponding to just 750 million years after the Big Bang and making it the most distant and primordial galaxy yet seen . While some scientists have claimed other objects ( such as Abell 1835 <unk> ) have higher redshifts ( and therefore are seen in an earlier stage of the Universe 's evolution ) , <unk> @-@ 1 's age and composition have been more reliably established . In December 2012 , astronomers reported that the <unk> @-@ <unk> is the most distant object known and has a redshift value of 11 @.@ 9 . The object , is estimated to have existed around " 380 million years " after the Big Bang ( which was about 13 @.@ 8 billion years ago ) , is about 13 @.@ 42 billion light travel distance years away . The existence of such early protogalaxies suggests that they must have grown in the so @-@ called " dark ages " . As of May 5 , 2015 , the galaxy EGS @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 is the most distant and earliest galaxy measured , forming 670 million years after the Big Bang . The light from EGS @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 has taken 13 billion years to reach Earth , and is now 30 billion light @-@ years away , because of the expansion of the universe during 13 billion years . 
 = = = = Early galaxy formation = = = = 
 The detailed process by which early galaxies formed is an open question in astrophysics . Theories can be divided into two categories : top @-@ down and bottom @-@ up . In top @-@ down theories ( such as the Eggen – Lynden @-@ Bell – Sandage [ ELS ] model ) , protogalaxies form in a large @-@ scale simultaneous collapse lasting about one hundred million years . In bottom @-@ up theories ( such as the Searle @-@ Zinn [ SZ ] model ) , small structures such as globular clusters form first , and then a number of such bodies accrete to form a larger galaxy . 
 Once protogalaxies began to form and contract , the first halo stars ( called Population III stars ) appeared within them . These were composed almost entirely of hydrogen and helium , and may have been massive . If so , these huge stars would have quickly consumed their supply of fuel and became supernovae , releasing heavy elements into the interstellar medium . This first generation of stars re @-@ ionized the surrounding neutral hydrogen , creating expanding bubbles of space through which light could readily travel . 
 In June 2015 , astronomers reported evidence for Population III stars in the Cosmos Redshift 7 galaxy at z = 6 @.@ 60 . Such stars are likely to have existed in the very early universe ( i.e. , at high redshift ) , and may have started the production of chemical elements heavier than hydrogen that are needed for the later formation of planets and life as we know it . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Within a billion years of a galaxy 's formation , key structures begin to appear . Globular clusters , the central supermassive black hole , and a galactic bulge of metal @-@ poor Population II stars form . The creation of a supermassive black hole appears to play a key role in actively regulating the growth of galaxies by limiting the total amount of additional matter added . During this early epoch , galaxies undergo a major burst of star formation . 
 During the following two billion years , the accumulated matter settles into a galactic disc . A galaxy will continue to absorb infalling material from high @-@ velocity clouds and dwarf galaxies throughout its life . This matter is mostly hydrogen and helium . The cycle of stellar birth and death slowly increases the abundance of heavy elements , eventually allowing the formation of planets . 
 The evolution of galaxies can be significantly affected by interactions and collisions . Mergers of galaxies were common during the early epoch , and the majority of galaxies were peculiar in morphology . Given the distances between the stars , the great majority of stellar systems in colliding galaxies will be unaffected . However , gravitational stripping of the interstellar gas and dust that makes up the spiral arms produces a long train of stars known as tidal tails . Examples of these formations can be seen in NGC <unk> or the Antennae Galaxies . 
 The Milky Way galaxy and the nearby Andromeda Galaxy are moving toward each other at about 130 km / s , and — depending upon the lateral movements — the two might collide in about five to six billion years . Although the Milky Way has never collided with a galaxy as large as Andromeda before , evidence of past collisions of the Milky Way with smaller dwarf galaxies is increasing . 
 Such large @-@ scale interactions are rare . As time passes , mergers of two systems of equal size become less common . Most bright galaxies have remained fundamentally unchanged for the last few billion years , and the net rate of star formation probably also peaked approximately ten billion years ago . 
 = = = Future trends = = = 
 Spiral galaxies , like the Milky Way , produce new generations of stars as long as they have dense molecular clouds of interstellar hydrogen in their spiral arms . Elliptical galaxies are largely devoid of this gas , and so form few new stars . The supply of star @-@ forming material is finite ; once stars have converted the available supply of hydrogen into heavier elements , new star formation will come to an end . 
 The current era of star formation is expected to continue for up to one hundred billion years , and then the " stellar age " will wind down after about ten trillion to one hundred trillion years ( 1013 – 1014 years ) , as the smallest , longest @-@ lived stars in our universe , tiny red dwarfs , begin to fade . At the end of the stellar age , galaxies will be composed of compact objects : brown dwarfs , white dwarfs that are cooling or cold ( " black dwarfs " ) , neutron stars , and black holes . Eventually , as a result of gravitational relaxation , all stars will either fall into central supermassive black holes or be flung into intergalactic space as a result of collisions . 
 = = Larger @-@ scale structures = = 
 Deep sky surveys show that galaxies are often found in groups and clusters . Solitary galaxies that have not significantly interacted with another galaxy of comparable mass during the past billion years are relatively scarce . Only about 5 % of the galaxies surveyed have been found to be truly isolated ; however , these isolated formations may have interacted and even merged with other galaxies in the past , and may still be orbited by smaller , satellite galaxies . Isolated galaxies can produce stars at a higher rate than normal , as their gas is not being stripped by other nearby galaxies . 
 On the largest scale , the Universe is continually expanding , resulting in an average increase in the separation between individual galaxies ( see Hubble 's law ) . Associations of galaxies can overcome this expansion on a local scale through their mutual gravitational attraction . These associations formed early in the Universe , as clumps of dark matter pulled their respective galaxies together . Nearby groups later merged to form larger @-@ scale clusters . This on @-@ going merger process ( as well as an influx of infalling gas ) heats the inter @-@ galactic gas within a cluster to very high temperatures , reaching 30 – 100 <unk> . About 70 – 80 % of the mass in a cluster is in the form of dark matter , with 10 – 30 % consisting of this heated gas and the remaining few percent of the matter in the form of galaxies . 
 Most galaxies in the Universe are gravitationally bound to a number of other galaxies . These form a fractal @-@ like hierarchical distribution of clustered structures , with the smallest such associations being termed groups . A group of galaxies is the most common type of galactic cluster , and these formations contain a majority of the galaxies ( as well as most of the baryonic mass ) in the Universe . To remain gravitationally bound to such a group , each member galaxy must have a sufficiently low velocity to prevent it from escaping ( see <unk> theorem ) . If there is insufficient kinetic energy , however , the group may evolve into a smaller number of galaxies through mergers . 
 Clusters of galaxies consist of hundreds to thousands of galaxies bound together by gravity . Clusters of galaxies are often dominated by a single giant elliptical galaxy , known as the brightest cluster galaxy , which , over time , tidally destroys its satellite galaxies and adds their mass to its own . 
 <unk> contain tens of thousands of galaxies , which are found in clusters , groups and sometimes individually . At the supercluster scale , galaxies are arranged into sheets and filaments surrounding vast empty voids . Above this scale , the Universe appears to be the same in all directions ( isotropic and homogeneous ) . 
 The Milky Way galaxy is a member of an association named the Local Group , a relatively small group of galaxies that has a diameter of approximately one <unk> . The Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are the two brightest galaxies within the group ; many of the other member galaxies are dwarf companions of these two galaxies . The Local Group itself is a part of a cloud @-@ like structure within the Virgo Supercluster , a large , extended structure of groups and clusters of galaxies centered on the Virgo Cluster . And the Virgo Supercluster itself is a part of the Pisces @-@ Cetus Supercluster Complex , a giant galaxy filament . 
 = = Multi @-@ wavelength observation = = 
 The peak radiation of most stars lies in the visible spectrum , so the observation of the stars that form galaxies has been a major component of optical astronomy . It is also a favorable portion of the spectrum for observing ionized H II regions , and for examining the distribution of dusty arms . 
 The dust present in the interstellar medium is opaque to visual light . It is more transparent to far @-@ infrared , which can be used to observe the interior regions of giant molecular clouds and galactic cores in great detail . Infrared is also used to observe distant , red @-@ shifted galaxies that were formed much earlier in the history of the Universe . Water vapor and carbon dioxide absorb a number of useful portions of the infrared spectrum , so high @-@ altitude or space @-@ based telescopes are used for infrared astronomy . 
 The first non @-@ visual study of galaxies , particularly active galaxies , was made using radio frequencies . The Earth 's atmosphere is nearly transparent to radio between 5 MHz and 30 GHz . ( The ionosphere blocks signals below this range . ) Large radio interferometers have been used to map the active jets emitted from active nuclei . Radio telescopes can also be used to observe neutral hydrogen ( via 21 cm radiation ) , including , potentially , the non @-@ ionized matter in the early Universe that later collapsed to form galaxies . 
 Ultraviolet and X @-@ ray telescopes can observe highly energetic galactic phenomena . Ultraviolet flares are sometimes observed when a star in a distant galaxy is torn apart from the tidal forces of a nearby black hole . The distribution of hot gas in galactic clusters can be mapped by X @-@ rays . The existence of supermassive black holes at the cores of galaxies was confirmed through X @-@ ray astronomy . 
 = = = Other references = = = 
 " Unveiling the Secret of a Virgo Dwarf Galaxy " . ESO . May 3 , 2000 . Archived from the original on 2009 @-@ 01 @-@ 09 . Retrieved January 3 , 2007 . 
 = Royal Rumble ( 1995 ) = 
 Royal Rumble ( 1995 ) was the eighth annual Royal Rumble professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on January 22 , 1995 , in the USF Sun Dome located in Tampa , Florida . 
 The event featured five matches based on scripted storylines and the results were predetermined by the WWF . The main event was the 1995 Royal Rumble match , which Shawn Michaels won after entering first and outlasting the 29 other wrestlers for the first time in WWF history . The event also featured a match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship , when Diesel defended the title against Bret Hart . The match was stopped when several other wrestlers interfered and the referee lost control of the match . Two other title matches took place ; Jeff Jarrett won the WWF Intercontinental Championship from Razor Ramon , and The 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Bob Holly won the final match in a tournament that determined the new WWF Tag Team Champions . 
 Several storylines from Royal Rumble 1995 were carried over to WrestleMania XI , the WWF 's next pay @-@ per @-@ view . Bam Bam Bigelow attacked National Football League Hall of Famer Lawrence Taylor , who was sitting in the crowd ; this set up a match between the two at WrestleMania . Pamela Anderson was at ringside and was supposed to accompany the winner of the Royal Rumble match to his WWF World Heavyweight Championship match at WrestleMania . Although Shawn Michaels won the match , Anderson came to the ring at WrestleMania with Diesel . The Undertaker 's feud with Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation also escalated , as DiBiase 's men stole the urn that was said to give The Undertaker his power . Jarrett and Ramon continued to feud for several months , and Bret Hart targeted Bob Backlund because of Backlund 's interference in the WWF World Heavyweight Championship match . 
 = = Background = = 
 The storyline behind the WWF World Heavyweight Championship match began in 1994 , when Bret Hart was feuding with his brother Owen . After Owen was unable to win the title , he helped Bob Backlund win the belt from Bret at Survivor Series 1994 . Three days after Survivor Series , Diesel faced Backlund and won the title belt . He agreed to grant a title shot to Bret Hart , who , like Diesel , was also a fan @-@ favorite . 
 Also at Survivor Series 1994 , Shawn Michaels and Diesel had an argument after Michaels accidentally kicked Diesel in the face . Although the pair held the WWF Tag Team Championship together , Diesel said that he did not want to team with Michaels any longer . The title was vacated , and the WWF held a tournament to determine the new champions . During the tournament , The Smoking Gunns were forced to withdraw when Bart Gunn was injured in a rodeo accident . As a result , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Bob Holly took their place . The Gunns requested that they get a title shot after the tournament when Bart had recovered . The 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Holly advanced to the finals , as did Ted DiBiase 's team of Bam Bam Bigelow and Tatanka . The match to determine the new champions was scheduled to take place at the Royal Rumble . 
 The Undertaker had been feuding with DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation since his return to the WWF from an injury in August 1994 . During the match between The Undertaker and Yokozuna at Survivor Series 1994 , Irwin R. Schyster , one of DiBiase 's wrestlers , interfered in the match by attacking The Undertaker . The feud between The Undertaker and Schyster escalated when Schyster performed a series of vignettes in which he repossessed such items as tombstones and burial plots from people he claimed had not paid their taxes before dying . During the feud , Schyster was escorted to the ring for his matches by a group of hooded druids . 
 The feud between Jeff Jarrett and Razor Ramon began in late 1994 when Jarrett challenged Ramon for Ramon 's WWF Intercontinental Championship . They faced each other several times , but Jarrett was unable to win the belt . Jarrett , who portrayed an aspiring country music star , was accompanied to the ring by The Roadie , who often interfered in matches on Jarrett 's behalf . 
 Although no major feuds were featured in the Royal Rumble match , Baywatch star Pamela Anderson was in attendance at ringside . It was announced that she would accompany the winner of the match during his WWF World Heavyweight Championship title shot at WrestleMania XI . 
 = = Event = = 
 Prior to the live pay @-@ per @-@ view broadcast , Buck Quartermaine defeated The Brooklyn Brawler in a dark match . In the first televised match , Razor Ramon defended his WWF Intercontinental Championship against Jeff Jarrett , who was accompanied by The Roadie . Ramon used his strength to dominate the opening of the match . Jarrett gained the momentum with a series of dropkicks and then choked Ramon with a sleeper hold . Ramon ran at Jarrett but was thrown over the top rope . He hit his knee when he landed , and The Roadie then hit Ramon from behind in the knee . Ramon was unable to return to the ring , so Jarrett was awarded the match via countout . Because the championship cannot change hands on a countout , Jarrett challenged Ramon to continue the match . Ramon agreed and nearly pinned Jarrett twice . Jarrett applied the figure four leglock to apply pressure to Ramon 's injured knee . Ramon escaped the hold and attempted to perform the Razor 's Edge . He collapsed under Jarrett 's weight , however , and Jarrett pinned him to win the title . 
 The Undertaker faced Irwin R. Schyster in the next match . The Undertaker gained the advantage at the beginning and held it until Ted DiBiase called his druids to the ring . When The Undertaker attempted to attack Schyster from the top rope , the druids shook the ropes and caused him to fall . Schyster performed a clothesline to knock The Undertaker out of the ring , where he and the druids attacked The Undertaker . When the match returned to the ring , Schyster was in control . Both men got knocked down , however , and a druid snuck into the ring and rolled Schyster on top of The Undertaker for a pinfall attempt . The Undertaker kicked out and attempted to perform the Tombstone Piledriver . A druid interfered to prevent the move , but The Undertaker performed a chokeslam on Schyster to gain the pinfall victory . After the match , Ted DiBiase called out Corporation member King Kong Bundy to help Schyster attack The Undertaker and steal the urn , which was said to be the source of The Undertaker 's power . 
 The WWF World Heavyweight Championship match was next , in which Diesel defended the title against Bret Hart . Diesel began the match by clotheslining Hart , but Hart gained the advantage by focusing on injuring Diesel 's knee . He performed the figure four leglock twice before attacking Diesel outside the ring . Diesel regained the advantage by using his size and strength to throw Hart and perform power moves to wear him down . Hart tied Diesel 's legs to the ring post with a piece of tape and kicked him repeatedly . Diesel recovered and performed the Jackknife power bomb on Hart . Before the referee could count the pinfall , Shawn Michaels ran to the ring and attacked Diesel . The referee ordered the match to continue , and the match went back and forth until Hart used the Sharpshooter submission hold to place pressure on Diesel 's injured leg . Owen Hart interfered by attacking Bret , but the match was ordered to continue . Bret Hart and Diesel brawled until Bret rolled Diesel up for a pinfall . The referee was knocked unconscious , and Michaels , Jarrett , and The Roadie came to the ring to attack Diesel . Meanwhile , Owen Hart and Bob Backlund attacked Bret Hart . Because the referee could not control the match , it was declared a draw and Diesel retained his championship . 
 Bob Holly and the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid faced Bam Bam Bigelow and Tatanka next in the final match of the WWF Tag Team Championship tournament . Tatanka began the match by using his strength against Holly , but Holly soon turned the match around by performing a hurricanrana throw . Bigelow used his strength against his opponents , but the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid performed a hurricanrana on him as well . Bigelow regained the advantage by kicking the Kid in the back of the head and controlled the match until the Kid threw him out of the ring . Bigelow and Tatanka turned the match around again , using power moves to wear down their opponents . At one point , Bigelow held the Kid for Tatanka to attack , but Tatanka accidentally hit Bigelow instead . The match ended in a similar manner , as Tatanka knocked Bigelow off the top rope when Bigelow attempted to perform a moonsault . The 1 – 2 – 3 Kid pinned Bigelow to win the match and the WWF Tag Team Championship . After the match , the crowd heckled Bigelow . He responded by pushing retired NFL player Lawrence Taylor , who was at ring side , laughing about Bigelow 's loss . 
 In the main event , Shawn Michaels was the first entrant in the Royal Rumble match , while Davey Boy Smith was the second participant . Every 60 seconds , another wrestler entered the match . As Owen Hart made his way to the ring , he was attacked by his brother Bret . As a result of the attack , Owen was quickly eliminated from the match when Smith , his brother @-@ in @-@ law , threw him out of the ring . King Kong Bundy and Mabel , the two biggest competitors in the match , fought until Mabel eliminated Bundy . Lex Luger then entered the match and eliminated Mabel . Bret Hart returned later and attacked Bob Backlund as Backlund was about to enter the match . This enabled Luger to eliminate Backlund quickly , after which Backlund and Bret continued to fight . The final four participants remaining in the ring were Michaels , Smith , Luger , and Crush . Luger attacked Crush but was eliminated by Michaels . Crush then convinced Michaels to work with him but then turned on Michaels by attacking him . Michaels scratched Crush 's eyes , which enabled Smith to eliminate Crush . Michaels and Smith , the first two entrants , were the last two wrestlers remaining . Smith threw Michaels over the top rope and began to celebrate . Michaels , who had only touched the floor with one foot , was not eliminated from the match , however . He attacked Smith from behind and threw him out of the ring to become the first wrestler to win the Royal Rumble after entering first . Michaels celebrated in the ring with Pamela Anderson . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after Royal Rumble , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Bob Holly faced The Smoking Gunns . The Gunns won the match and the WWF Tag Team Championship . By losing the belts after one day , the Kid and Holly tied what was at that time the record for the shortest tag team title reign in WWF history . 
 Razor Ramon faced Jeff Jarrett at WrestleMania XI in a rematch for the WWF Intercontinental Championship . To counteract The Roadie 's interference , Ramon was accompanied by his friend the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid . Ramon won the match by disqualification but did not win the title . On May 19 , 1995 , Ramon defeated Jarrett in a ladder match to regain the championship , but Jarrett won the belt back three days later . 
 The Undertaker faced King Kong Bundy at WrestleMania XI . Although The Undertaker won the match , Kama , another member of DiBiase 's Corporation , took possession of the urn and melted it down into a necklace . The Undertaker defeated Kama in dark matches at In Your House 1 and In Your House 2 . They faced each other in a casket match at SummerSlam 1995 , which The Undertaker won to end the feud . 
 Bret Hart wrestled an " I Quit " match against Bob Backlund at WrestleMania . Hart won the match after the referee determined that Backlund had conceded defeat . Bret 's feud with Owen was not featured again , but the two did not reunite until they formed The Hart Foundation in 1997 with brothers @-@ in law Davey Boy Smith and Jim Neidhart . 
 Despite Michaels winning the right to be escorted by Pamela Anderson to his WWF World Heavyweight Championship match against Diesel at WrestleMania , Anderson came to the ring with Diesel instead . Michaels 's bodyguard , Sycho Sid , attempted to interfere on Michaels 's behalf but ultimately helped Diesel retain the title . Diesel offered Michaels a rematch , and Michaels told Sid that he would not be needed in the upcoming match . Upset with Michaels , Sid attacked Michaels until Diesel came to Michaels 's rescue . Diesel and Michaels became allies once again and teamed up to win the WWF Tag Team Championship later that year . 
 Bam Bam Bigelow challenged Lawrence Taylor to a match , which Taylor accepted after initially refusing . Diesel trained Taylor , who beat Bigelow at WrestleMania XI . Embarrassed , Bigelow challenged Diesel to a match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . Tatanka was at ringside for the match ; he turned on Bigelow and caused him to lose . Bigelow attacked Tatanka after the match , which led to Sid , a new addition to the Corporation , to come to Tatanka 's defense . This led to a tag team match at King of the Ring 1995 , where Diesel and Bigelow defeated Tatanka and Sid . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event was attended by 10 @,@ 000 fans , which is approximately the maximum capacity of the USF Sun Dome . This attendance figure was down from the previous year 's attendance of 14 @,@ 500 , but higher than the following year , when 9 @,@ 600 people attended Royal Rumble 1996 . From the ticket sales , the WWF gained $ 140 @,@ 000 ; again , this was lower than in 1994 but higher than in 1996 . The pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate of 1 @.@ 0 , however , was higher than 1994 's 0 @.@ 9 figure but lower than 1996 's buyrate of 1 @.@ 1 . 
 Current WWE wrestler Cody Rhodes has stated that Michaels 's win , in which he was the first wrestler to enter the ring in the # 1 position and win the match , is his favorite ending to a Royal Rumble match . Reviewing the event for Online Onslaught , columnist Adam Gutschmidt evaluated the event as acceptable but not exceptional . He found the Royal Rumble match to be the best part of the show , although he claimed that the WWF 's switch to having wrestlers enter every 60 seconds hurt the match . He also found the inconclusive ending to the WWF World Heavyweight Championship match frustrating and rated the match between The Undertaker and Irwin R. Schyster as a " dud " . The event has also been rated by customers at Amazon.com , who have given the event four and a half out of five stars . 
 Royal Rumble 1995 was released on VHS in North America by Coliseum Video on March 8 , 1995 . It was released in the United Kingdom in VHS format on May 8 , 1995 . The event , packaged together with Royal Rumble 1996 , was also released on DVD in the United Kingdom as part of the WWE Tagged Classics line on April 17 , 2006 . On October 15 , 2007 , WWE released the event in the United Kingdom as part of the Royal Rumble Complete Anthology DVD set . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Tournament bracket = = = 
 The tournament was held between December 1994 and January 22 , 1995 . The tournament brackets were : 
 = = = Royal Rumble entrances and eliminations = = = 
 A new entrant came out approximately every minute . 
 Shawn Michaels was the first superstar to win the Royal Rumble from the # 1 entry . Also , it was the first time that the first two entries were the final two in the match . 
 = Subfossil lemur = 
 Subfossil lemurs are lemurs from Madagascar that are represented by recent ( subfossil ) remains dating from nearly 26 @,@ 000 years ago ( from the late Pleistocene until the Holocene ) to approximately 560 years ago . They include both living and extinct species , although the term more frequently refers to the extinct giant lemurs . The diversity of subfossil lemur communities was greater than that of present @-@ day lemur communities , ranging from as high as 20 or more species per location , compared with 10 to 12 species today . Extinct species are estimated to have ranged in size from slightly over 10 kg ( 22 lb ) to roughly 160 kg ( 350 lb ) . Even the subfossil remains of living species are larger and more robust than the skeletal remains of modern specimens . The subfossil sites found around most of the island demonstrate that most giant lemurs had wide distributions and that ranges of living species have contracted significantly since the arrival of humans . 
 Despite their size , the giant lemurs shared many features with living lemurs , including rapid development , poor day vision , relatively small brains , and lack of male dominance . They also had many distinct traits among lemurs , including a tendency to rely on terrestrial locomotion , slow climbing , and suspension instead of leaping , as well as a greater dependence on leaf @-@ eating and seed predation . The giant lemurs likely filled ecological niches now left vacant , particularly seed dispersal for plants with large seeds . There were three distinct families of giant lemur , including the Palaeopropithecidae ( sloth lemurs ) , Megaladapidae ( koala lemurs ) , and Archaeolemuridae ( monkey lemurs ) . Two other types were more closely related and similar in appearance to living lemurs : the giant aye @-@ aye and Pachylemur , a genus of " giant ruffed lemurs " . 
 Subfossil remains were first discovered on Madagascar in the 1860s , but giant lemur species were not formally described until the 1890s . The paleontological interest sparked by the initial discoveries resulted in an overabundance of new species names , the allocation of bones to the wrong species , and inaccurate reconstructions during the early 20th century . Discoveries waned during the mid @-@ 20th century , although paleontological work resumed in the 1980s and resulted in the discovery of new species and a new genus . Research has recently focused on diets , lifestyle , social behavior , and other aspects of biology . The remains of the subfossil lemurs are relatively recent , with all or most species dating within the last 2 @,@ 000 years . Humans first arrived on Madagascar around that time and likely played a role in the demise of the lemurs and the other megafauna that once existed on the large island . Although hunting and habitat change have been investigated as the primary cause of their extinction , a mosaic of complex interactions between multiple factors is now seen as the ultimate cause of their disappearance . Yet oral traditions and recent sightings by Malagasy villagers are still reported , suggesting either lingering populations or very recent extinctions . 
 = = Diversity = = 
 = = = Extinct giant lemurs = = = 
 Until recently , giant lemurs existed in Madagascar . Although they are only represented by subfossil remains , they were modern forms , having adaptations unlike those seen in lemurs today , and are counted as part of the rich lemur diversity that has evolved in isolation for up to 60 million years . All 17 extinct lemurs were larger than the extant forms , including the largest living lemurs , the indri ( Indri indri ) and diademed sifaka ( Propithecus diadema ) , which weigh up to 9 @.@ 5 kg ( 21 lb ) . The estimated weights for the subfossil lemurs have varied . Techniques used for these weight estimations include the comparison of skull lengths , tooth size , the head diameter of the femur , and more recently , the area of cortical bone ( hard bone ) in long bones ( such as the humerus ) . Despite the variations in the size estimates for some species , all subfossil lemurs were larger than living species , weighing 10 kg ( 22 lb ) or more , and one species may have weighed as much as 160 kg ( 350 lb ) . 
 All but one species , the giant aye @-@ aye , are thought to have been active during the day . Not only were they unlike the living lemurs in both size and appearance , they also filled ecological niches that no longer exist or are now left unoccupied . Their remains have been found in most parts of the island , except for the eastern rainforests and the Sambirano domain ( seasonal moist forests in the northwest of the island ) , where no subfossil sites are known . Radiocarbon dates for subfossil lemur remains range from approximately 26 @,@ 000 years BP ( for Megaladapis in northern Madagascar at the Ankarana Massif ) to around 500 years BP ( for Palaeopropithecus in the southwest ) . 
 = = = = Characteristics = = = = 
 All of the extinct subfossil lemurs , including the smallest species ( Pachylemur , Mesopropithecus , and the giant aye @-@ aye ) , were larger than the lemur species alive today . The largest species were among the largest primates ever to have evolved . Due to their larger size , the extinct subfossil lemurs have been compared to large @-@ bodied anthropoids ( monkeys and apes ) , yet they more closely resemble the small @-@ bodied lemurs . Like other lemurs , the subfossil lemurs did not exhibit appreciable differences in body or canine tooth size between males and females ( sexual dimorphism ) . This suggests that they , too , either exhibited female social dominance or lacked male dominance , possibly exhibiting the same levels of agonism ( aggressive competition ) seen in extant lemurs . Like other lemurs , they had smaller brains than comparably sized anthropoids . Most species also had a unique strepsirrhine dental trait , called a toothcomb , which is used for grooming . Even tooth development and weaning was rapid compared to similarly sized anthropoids , suggesting faster sexual maturity of their offspring . Most subfossil lemurs also had high retinal summation ( sensitivity to low light ) , resulting in poor day vision ( low visual acuity ) compared to anthropoids . This has been demonstrated by the ratio between their relatively small orbits ( eye sockets ) and the relative size of their optic canal , which is comparable to that of other lemurs , not diurnal anthropoids . 
 Although these traits are shared among both living and extinct lemurs , they are uncommon among primates in general . Two prevailing hypotheses to explain these unique adaptations are the energy frugality hypothesis by Patricia Wright ( 1999 ) and the evolutionary disequilibrium hypothesis by Carel van <unk> and Peter M. Kappeler ( 1996 ) . The energy frugality hypothesis expanded on Alison Jolly 's energy conservation hypotheses by claiming that most lemur traits not only help conserve energy , but also maximize the use of highly limited resources , enabling them to live in severely seasonal environments with low productivity . The evolutionary disequilibrium hypothesis postulated that living lemurs are in the process of evolving to fill open ecological niches left by the recently extinct subfossil lemurs . For example , small nocturnal prosimians are typically nocturnal and monogamous , while the larger living lemurs are generally active both day and night ( cathemeral ) and live in small groups ( gregarious ) . <unk> and increased gregariousness might indicate that the larger living lemurs are evolving to fill the role of the giant lemurs , which were thought to be diurnal ( day @-@ living ) and more monkey @-@ like in behavior . Since most giant subfossil lemurs have been shown to share many of the unique traits of their living counterparts , and not those of monkeys , Godfrey et al . ( 2003 ) argued that the energy frugality hypothesis seems to best explain both living and extinct lemur adaptations . 
 Despite the similarities , subfossil lemurs had several distinct differences from their lemur relatives . In addition to being larger , the subfossil lemurs were more dependent on leaves and seeds in their diet , rather than fruit . They utilized slow climbing , hanging , and terrestrial quadrupedalism for locomotion , rather than vertical clinging and leaping and arboreal quadrupedalism . Also , all but one of them — the giant aye @-@ aye — are assumed to have been diurnal ( due to their body size and small orbits ) , whereas many small lemurs are nocturnal and medium @-@ sized are cathemeral . 
 Their skeletons suggest that most subfossil lemurs were tree @-@ dwellers , adapted for living in forests and possibly limited to such habitats . Unlike some of the living species , the subfossil lemurs lacked adaptations for leaping . Instead , suspension , used by some indriids and ruffed lemurs , was extensively used in some lineages . Although living lemurs are known to visit the ground to varying extents , only the extinct <unk> exhibit adaptations for semiterrestrial locomotion . Due to the size of the extinct subfossil lemurs , all were likely to travel on the ground between trees . They had shorter , more robust limbs , heavily built axial skeletons ( trunks ) , and large heads and are thought to have shared the common lemur trait of low basal metabolic rates , making them slow @-@ moving . Studies of their semicircular canals confirm this assumption , showing that koala lemurs moved slower than orangutans , monkey lemurs were less agile than Old World monkeys , and sloth lemurs exhibited slow movements like those of lorises and sloths . 
 = = = = Types = = = = 
 Sloth lemurs 
 The sloth lemurs ( family Palaeopropithecidae ) were the most species @-@ rich group of the subfossil lemurs , with four genera and eight species . The common name is due to strong similarities in morphology with arboreal sloths , or in the case of Archaeoindris , with giant ground sloths . They ranged in size from some of the smallest of the subfossil lemurs , such as Mesopropithecus , weighing as little as 10 kg ( 22 lb ) , to the largest , Archaeoindris , weighing approximately 160 kg ( 350 lb ) . Their characteristic curved finger and toe bones ( phalanges ) suggest slow suspensory movement , similar to that of an orangutan or a loris , making them some of the most specialized mammals for suspension . Their day vision was very poor , and they had relatively small brains and short tails . Their diet consisted mostly of leaves , seeds , and fruit , although dental wear analysis suggests they were primarily folivorous seed @-@ predators . 
 Koala lemurs 
 The koala lemurs of the family Megaladapidae most closely resemble marsupial koalas from Australia . According to genetic evidence they were most closely related to the family Lemuridae , although for many years they were paired with the sportive lemurs of the family Lepilemuridae due to similarities in their skulls and molar teeth . They were slow climbers and had long forelimbs and powerful grasping feet , possibly using them for suspension . Koala lemurs ranged in size from an estimated 45 to 85 kg ( 99 to 187 lb ) , making them as large as a male orangutan or a female gorilla . They had poor day vision , short tails , lacked permanent upper incisors , and had a reduced toothcomb . Their diet generally consisted of leaves , with some species being specialized folivores and others having a broader diet , possibly including tough seeds . 
 Monkey lemurs 
 Monkey lemurs , or baboon lemurs , share similarities with macaques , although they have also been compared to baboons . Members of the family Archaeolemuridae , they were the most terrestrial of the lemurs , with short , robust forelimbs and relatively flat digits . Although they spent a lot of time on the ground , they were only semi @-@ terrestrial , spending time in trees to feed and sleep . They were heavy @-@ bodied and ranged in size from approximately 13 to 35 kg ( 29 to 77 lb ) . They had relatively good day vision and large brains compared with other lemurs . Their robust jaws and specialized teeth suggest a diet of hard objects , such as nuts and seeds , yet other evidence , including fecal pellets , suggests they may have had a more varied diet , including leaves , fruit , and animal matter ( omnivory ) . Dental wear analysis has shed some light on this dietary mystery , suggesting that monkey lemurs had a more eclectic diet , while using tough seeds as a fall @-@ back food item . Within the family , the genus Archaeolemur was the most widespread in distribution , resulting in hundreds of subfossil specimens , and may have been one of the last subfossil lemurs to die out . 
 Giant aye @-@ aye 
 An extinct , giant relative of the living aye @-@ aye , the giant aye @-@ aye shared at least two of the aye @-@ aye 's bizarre traits : ever @-@ growing central incisors and an elongated , skinny middle finger . These shared features suggest a similar lifestyle and diet , focused on percussive foraging ( tapping with the skinny digit and listening for reverberation from hollow spots ) of defended resources , such as hard nuts and invertebrate larvae concealed inside decaying wood . Weighing as much as 14 kg ( 31 lb ) , it was between two @-@ and @-@ half and five times the size of living aye @-@ aye . Alive when humans came to Madagascar , its teeth were collected and drilled to make necklaces . 
 Pachylemur 
 The only extinct member of the family Lemuridae , the genus Pachylemur contains two species that closely resembled living ruffed lemurs . Sometimes referred to as " giant ruffed lemurs " , they were approximately three times larger than ruffed lemurs , weighing between 10 and 13 kg ( 22 and 29 lb ) . Despite their size , they were arboreal quadrupeds , possibly utilizing more suspensory behavior and cautious climbing than their sister taxon . Their skull and teeth were similar to those of ruffed lemurs , suggesting a diet high in fruit and possibly some leaves . The rest of its skeleton ( postcrania ) was much more robust and their vertebrae had distinctly different features . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Determining the phylogeny of subfossil lemurs has been problematic because studies of morphology , developmental biology , and molecular phylogenetics have sometimes yielded conflicting results . All studies agree that the family Daubentoniidae ( including the giant aye @-@ aye ) diverged first from the other lemurs at least 60 million years ago . The relationship between the remaining families has been less clear . Morphological , developmental , and molecular studies have offered support for lumping the four sloth lemur genera of the family Palaeopropithecidae with the family Indriidae ( including the indri , sifakas , and woolly lemurs ) . The placement of family Megaladapidae has been more controversial , with similarities in teeth and skull features suggesting a close relationship with family Lepilemuridae ( sportive lemurs ) . Molecular data , instead , indicate a closer relationship to family Lemuridae . Likewise , a relationship between family Archaeolemuridae and family Lemuridae has been suggested , based on morphological and developmental traits , yet molar morphology , the number of teeth in the specialized toothcomb , and molecular analysis support a closer relationship with the indriid – sloth lemur clade . Other subfossil lemurs , including the giant aye @-@ aye and Pachylemur , are more easily placed due to strong similarities with existing lemurs ( the aye @-@ aye and ruffed lemurs , respectively ) . 
 = = = Living species = = = 
 Subfossil sites in Madagascar have yielded the remains of more than just extinct lemurs . Extant lemur remains have also been found , and radiocarbon dating has demonstrated that both types of lemur lived at the same time . Furthermore , in some cases living species are locally extinct for the area in which their subfossil remains were found . Because subfossil sites are found across most of the island , with the most notable exception being the eastern rainforest , both <unk> composition and <unk> can be determined . Geographic ranges have contracted for numerous species , including the indri , greater bamboo lemur , and ruffed lemurs . For instance , subfossil remains of the indri have been found in marsh deposits near Ampasambazimba in the Central Highlands and in other deposits in both central and northern Madagascar , demonstrating a much larger range than the small region on the east coast that it currently occupies . Even the greater bamboo lemur , a critically endangered species restricted to a small portion of the south @-@ central eastern rainforest , has undergone significant range contraction since the mid @-@ Holocene , with subfossil remains from Ankarana Massif in the far north of Madagascar dating to 2565 BCE ± 70 years . Combined with finds from other subfossil sites , data suggests that it used to range across the northern , northwestern , central , and eastern parts of the island . It is unclear whether these locations were wetter in the past or whether distinct subpopulations or subspecies occupied the drier forests , much like modern diversity of sifakas . 
 In addition to previously having expanded geographic ranges , extant subfossil lemurs exhibited significant variation in size . Researchers have noted that subfossil bones of living species are more robust and generally larger than their present @-@ day counterparts . The relative size of living species may be related to regional ecological factors , such as resource seasonality , a trend that is still observable today , where individuals from the spiny forests are , on average , smaller than individuals from the southwestern succulent woodlands or the dry deciduous forests . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 As a group , the lemurs of Madagascar are extremely diverse , having evolved in isolation and radiated over the past 40 to 60 million years to fill many ecological niches normally occupied by other primates . In the recent past , their diversity was significantly greater , with 17 extinct species sharing body proportions and specializations with lorises and various non @-@ primates , such as tree sloths , giant ground sloths , koalas , and striped possums ( genus <unk> ) . Although the diversity of lemur communities today can be as high as 10 to 12 species per region , communities of 20 or more lemur species existed as recently as 1 @,@ 000 years ago in areas that now have no lemurs at all . Just like living species , many of the extinct species shared overlapping ranges with closely related species ( sympatry ) through niche differentiation ( resource partitioning ) . Among all the late Quaternary assemblages of megafauna , only Madagascar was dominated by large primates . 
 Although anatomical evidence suggests that even the large , extinct species were adapted to tree @-@ climbing , some habitats , including gallery forests and the spiny forests of southern Madagascar , in which they occurred would not have allowed them to be strictly arboreal . Even today , most lemur species will visit the ground to cross open areas , suggesting that the extinct species did the same . Monkey lemurs ( family Archaeolemuridae ) , including Archaeolemur majori and Hadropithecus stenognathus , have been reconstructed as being primarily terrestrial . In contrast , the sloth lemurs ( family Palaeopropithecidae ) were highly arboreal despite the large size of some species . 
 Species of both extinct and living ( extant ) lemur vary in size based on habitat conditions , despite their differences in niche preference . Within related groups , larger species tend to inhabit wetter , more productive habitats , while smaller sister taxa are found in drier , less productive habitats . This pattern suggests that populations of both living and extinct lemur species had become geographically isolated by differences in habitat and evolved in isolation due to varying primary production within different ecosystems . Thermoregulation may also have played a role in the evolution of their increased body size . Yet despite this pressure to specialize and differentiate , some of the extinct subfossil lemurs , such as Archaeolemur , may have had island @-@ wide distributions during the Holocene , unlike the living lemurs . If this is the case , it may suggest that some larger lemurs might have been more tolerant to regional differences in ecology than living lemurs . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Research on subfossil lemur diets , particularly in southern and southwestern Madagascar , has indicated that ecological communities have been significantly affected by their recent extinction . Many extinct subfossil lemurs were large @-@ bodied leaf @-@ eaters ( folivores ) , seed predators , or both . Today , leaf @-@ eating along with seed predation is only seen in mid @-@ sized lemurs , and is far less common than it was in the past . Strict folivory is also less common , now found primarily in small lemurs . In certain cases , subfossil lemurs , such as the sloth lemurs and koala lemurs , may have used leaves as an important fallback food , whereas other species , such as the monkey lemurs and the giant aye @-@ aye , specialized on structurally defended resources , such as hard seeds and wood @-@ boring insect larvae . Last , Pachylemur was primarily a fruit eater ( frugivorous ) . Subfossil lemur diets have been reconstructed using analytical tools , including techniques to compare tooth anatomy , structure , and wear ; biogeochemistry ( analysis of isotope levels , like carbon @-@ 13 ) ; and the dissection of fecal pellets associated with subfossil remains . 
 The diets of most subfossil lemurs , most notably Palaeopropithecus and Megaladapis , consisted primarily of C3 plants , which use a form of photosynthesis that results in higher water loss through transpiration . Other subfossil lemurs , such as Hadropithecus and Mesopropithecus , fed on CAM and C4 plants , which use more water @-@ efficient forms of photosynthesis . Fruit and animal matter was more common in the diets of subfossil lemurs including Pachylemur , Archaeolemur , and the giant aye @-@ aye . In southern and southwestern Madagascar , the subfossil lemurs of the spiny forests generally favored the C3 plants over the more abundant CAM plants , although closely related sympatric species may have fed upon the two types of plants in different ratios , allowing each to divide resources and coexist . Since plants produce defenses against leaf @-@ eating animals , the extensive use of spines by plants in the spiny forests suggest that they evolved to cope with leaf @-@ eating lemurs , large and small . 
 = = = Seed dispersal = = = 
 Giant subfossil lemurs are thought to have also played a significant role in seed dispersal , possibly targeting species that did not attract the seed dispersal services of the extinct elephant birds . <unk> studies have shown that they may have been the primary seed dispersers for the endemic and native C3 trees in the spiny forests . Terrestrial species may even have dispersed seeds for small bushes in addition to tall trees . Seed dispersal can involve passing seeds through the gut ( <unk> ) or attaching the seeds to the animal 's body ( <unk> ) , and both processes probably occurred with subfossil lemurs . Seeds from Uncarina species embed themselves in lemur fur , and likely did the same with subfossil lemurs . Seed dispersal biology is known for very few species in the spiny forest , including genera of plants suspected of depending on giant lemurs , such as Adansonia , <unk> , Commiphora , Delonix , Diospyros , Grewia , Pachypodium , Salvadora , Strychnos , and Tamarindus . For example , Delonix has edible pods that are rich in protein , and Adansonia fruits have a nutritious pulp and large seeds that may have been dispersed by Archaeolemur majori or Pachylemur insignis . 
 Seed size may be a limiting factor for some plant species , since their seeds are too large for living ( extant ) lemurs . The common brown lemur ( Eulemur fulvus ) can swallow seeds 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) in diameter , while the black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur ( Varecia variegata ) is capable of swallowing seeds up to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter . A large lemur , such as Pachylemur , which was more than twice the size of today 's ruffed lemurs , could probably swallow even larger seeds . Seed dispersal limitations tied to megafaunal extinction are exhibited by Commiphora <unk> . At present , this tree species has a short dispersal distance , but its genetics indicate higher levels of regional gene flow in the past , based on comparisons with a closely related species in Africa that still has its seeds dispersed by large animals . 
 = = Discovery and research = = 
 The writings of French colonial governor Étienne de Flacourt in the mid @-@ 17th century introduced the existence of giant Malagasy mammals to Western science with recorded eye @-@ witness accounts from the local people of dangerous animals , hornless " water cows " , and a large lemur @-@ like creature referred to locally as the tretretretre or <unk> . Today , the latter is thought to have been a species of Palaeopropithecus or possibly Megaladapis . Flacourt described it as : 
 An animal as big as a two @-@ year @-@ old calf , with a round head and a human face : the front feet are <unk> , and the rear ones as well . It has frizzy hair , a short tail , and humanlike ears . ... One has been seen near Lake <unk> , around which it lives . It is a very solitary animal ; the local people fear it greatly and flee from it as it does from them . 
 Local tales of a song <unk> ( Malagasy for " cow that is not a cow " ) , or pygmy hippopotamus , led French naturalist Alfred Grandidier to follow a village headman to a marsh in southwestern Madagascar , a site called <unk> , which became the first known subfossil site in Madagascar . In 1868 , Grandidier uncovered the first subfossil remains of lemurs — a humerus from Palaeopropithecus and a tibia of a sifaka . The Palaeopropithecus remains were not described for several decades , and it took decades more for the remains to be correctly paired with other sloth lemur remains . It was not until 1893 that giant lemur species were formally described , when Charles Immanuel Forsyth Major discovered and described a long , narrow skull of Megaladapis madagascariensis in a marsh . His discoveries in various marshes of central and southwestern Madagascar sparked paleontological interest , resulting in an overabundance of taxonomic names and confused assemblages of bones from numerous species , including non @-@ primates . Specimens were distributed between European museums and Madagascar , often resulting in the loss of field data that went with the specimens , if the data had been recorded at all . 
 In 1905 , Alfred Grandidier 's son , Guillaume Grandidier , reviewed subfossil lemur taxonomy and determined that too many names had been created . His review established most of the presently known family and genera names for the extinct lemurs . Despite the taxonomic clarification , subfossil postcrania from different genera , particularly Megaladapis , Palaeopropithecus and Hadropithecus , continued to be incorrectly paired and sometimes assigned to non @-@ primates . Since subfossil remains were often dredged from marshes one by one , pairing skulls with other bones was often guesswork based on size @-@ matching , and was not very accurate as a consequence . Even as late as the 1950s , bones of non @-@ primates were attributed to subfossil lemurs . One reconstruction of the confounded subfossil remains by paleontologist Herbert F. Standing depicted Palaeopropithecus as an aquatic animal that swam near the surface , keeping its eyes , ears , and nostrils slightly above water . Postcranial remains of Palaeopropithecus had previously been paired with Megaladapis by Guillaume Grandidier , who viewed it as a giant tree sloth , which he named <unk> . Standing 's aquatic theory was supported by Italian paleontologist Giuseppe Sera , who reconstructed Palaeopropithecus as an " arboreal @-@ aquatic acrobat " that not only swam in water but climbed trees and dove from there into the water . Sera took the aquatic theory further in 1938 by including other extinct lemurs , including Megaladapis , which he viewed as a thin ray @-@ like swimmer that fed on mollusks and crustaceans while concealed underwater . It was primarily the paleontologist Charles Lamberton who correctly paired many of the confused subfossils , although others had also helped address problems of association and taxonomic synonyms . Lamberton also refuted Guillaume Grandidier 's sloth theory for Megaladapis , as well as the aquatic lemur theory of Standing and Sera . 
 Excavations during the early 20th century by researchers like Lamberton failed to unearth any new extinct lemur genera . Fourteen of the approximately seventeen known species had previously been identified from field work in southern , western , and central Madagascar . When paleontological field work resumed in the early 1980s , new finds provided associated skeletal remains , including rare bones such as carpal bones ( wrist bones ) , phalanges ( finger and toe bones ) , and bacula ( penile bone ) . In some cases , nearly complete hands and feet were found . Enough remains have been found for some groups to demonstrate the physical development of juveniles . Standard long @-@ bone indices have been calculated in order to determine the intermembral index ( a ratio that compares limb proportions ) , and body mass estimates have been made based on long @-@ bone circumference measurements . Even preserved fecal pellets from Archaeolemur have been found , allowing researchers to learn about its diet . More recently , electron microscopy has allowed researchers to study behavioral patterns , and DNA amplification has helped with genetic tests that determine the phylogenetic relationships between the extinct and living lemurs . 
 A new genus of sloth lemur , Babakotia , was discovered in 1986 by a team led by Elwyn L. Simons of Duke University in karst caves on the Ankarana Massif in northern Madagascar . Along with Babakotia , a new species of Mesopropithecus , M. dolichobrachion , was also discovered , but not formally described until 1995 . The same team has also helped promote new ideas about sloth lemur adaptations and the relationships among the four genera . They have also provided evidence that living species , such as the indri and the greater <unk> lemur , have lost much of their original range . In 2009 , a new species of large sloth lemur , called Palaeopropithecus <unk> , was described from northwestern Madagascar by a Franco @-@ Madagascan team . The new species was found to be smaller than the two previously known species from the genus , and its diet reportedly consisted of more hard @-@ textured food . The resurgence in subfossil lemur work has also sparked new interest in Madagascar 's small mammals , which have also been found at the subfossil sites . This has led to new ideas about the origins , diversity , and distribution of these animals . 
 The number of Malagasy subfossil sites containing subfossil lemurs has increased significantly since the mid @-@ 20th century . At that time , subfossil lemurs had only been found in the center , south , and southwest of the island . Since then , only the eastern rainforests have not been represented , and <unk> are now known for both extinct and living species around most of the island . Large quantities of subfossil lemur remains have been found in caves , marshes , and streambank sites in drier regions . The subfossil sites are clustered together geographically and are recent in age , mostly dating between 2 @,@ 500 and 1 @,@ 000 years old , with a few spanning back into the last glaciation , which ended approximately 10 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 At least 17 species of giant subfossil lemur vanished during the Holocene , with all or most extinctions happening after the colonization of Madagascar by humans around 2 @,@ 000 years ago . Madagascar 's megafauna included not only giant lemurs , but also elephant birds , giant tortoises , several species of Malagasy hippopotamuses , Cryptoprocta spelea ( a " giant Fossa " ) , large crocodiles ( <unk> robustus ) , and Plesiorycteropus , a unique digging mammal , all of which died out during the same period . Madagascar 's megafaunal extinctions were among the most severe for any continent or large island , with all endemic wildlife over 10 kg ( 22 lb ) disappearing , totaling approximately 25 species . The most severely impacted lemurs were generally large and diurnal , particularly the clade containing the living indriids and extinct sloth lemurs . Although only the indriids are alive today and represent only a small percentage of the living lemur species , this clade collectively contained the majority of the extinct giant lemur species . 
 By region , the Central Highlands lost the greatest number of lemur species . Although it has lost nearly all of its woodland habitat , some lemur species still survive in isolated forest patches . Lemur diversity is tightly linked with plant diversity , which in turn decreases with increased forest fragmentation . In extreme cases , treeless sites such as the town of Ampasambazimba from the central region no longer support any of the lemur species represented in their subfossil record . However , other locations no longer have giant subfossil lemurs , yet they still maintain forested habitat that could support them . Even though the giant lemurs have disappeared from these locations , while the smaller species survive in the forest patches that remain , the subfossil remains indicate that the living species used to be more widespread and coexisted with the extinct species . Although the Central Highlands saw the greatest species loss , it was not the only region or habitat type to witness extinctions . However , the least @-@ understood region is the eastern rainforests , which have not yielded subfossil lemur remains . Consequently , it is impossible to know what percentage of lemur taxa were recently lost there , although studies of Malagasy customs ( ethnohistory ) along with archaeological evidence suggests the eastern rainforests were more ecologically disturbed in the past than they are today . Hunting and trapping by humans may have severely impacted large lemurs in this region as well . 
 Comparisons of species counts from subfossil deposits and remnant populations in neighboring Special Reserves has further demonstrated decreased diversity in lemur communities and contracted geographic ranges . At Ampasambazimba in central Madagascar , 20 species of subfossil lemur have been found . At nearby Ambohitantely Reserve , only 20 % of those species still survive . Only six of 13 species found at Ankilitelo and <unk> Caves in the southwest still survive at Beza Mahafaly Reserve . In the extreme north , the caves of Ankarana have yielded 19 species , yet only nine remain in the surrounding forests . In the northwest , 10 or 11 subfossil species have been found at Anjohibe , whereas only six species remain at nearby Ankarafantsika National Park . 
 As with the extinctions that occurred on other land masses during the late Pleistocene and Holocene ( known as the Quaternary extinction event ) , the disappearance of Madagascar 's megafauna is tightly linked with the arrival of humans , with nearly all extinctions dating to around the same time of the earliest evidence of human activity on the island or significantly later . The exact date of human arrival is unknown , although a radius ( arm bone ) of a Palaeopropithecus ingens with distinct cut marks from the removal of flesh with sharp objects dates to approximately <unk> ± 43 BP ( <unk> – <unk> cal yr BP ) . Based on this evidence from Taolambiby in the southwest interior , as well as other dates for human @-@ modified dwarf hippo bones and introduced plant pollen from other parts of the island , the arrival of humans is conservatively estimated at approximately 350 cal yr BCE . Measurements of stratigraphic charcoal and the appearance of exotic plant pollen dated from Holocene core samples confirm these approximated dates for human arrival in the southwestern corner of the island and further suggest that the central and northern parts of the island did not experience significant human impact until 700 to 1 @,@ 500 years later . The humid forests of the lower interior of the island were the last to be settled ( as shown by the presence of charcoal particles ) , possibly due to the prevalence of human diseases , such as plague , malaria , and dysentery . The entire island was not fully colonized by humans until the beginning of the second millennium CE . 
 The extinction of Madagascar 's megafauna , including the giant lemurs , was one of the most recent in history , with large lemur species like Palaeopropithecus ingens surviving until approximately 500 years ago and one bone of the extinct Hippopotamus laloumena radiocarbon dated to about 100 years BP An even wider extinction window for the subfossil lemurs , ranging up until the 20th century , may be possible if reports of unidentified animals are true . As recently as the early 17th century , dwindling populations of subfossil lemurs may have persisted in coastal regions where tree @-@ cutting and uncontrolled fires had less of an impact . By that date , the Central Highlands ' forests were mostly gone , with the exception of scattered forest fragments and strips . Along the northwest coast , forms such as Archaeolemur may have survived for more than a millennium after the arrival of humans . This is supported by radiocarbon dates for Archaeolemur from the Ankarana Massif dating to 975 ± 50 CE as well as archaeological data that show there was little human activity in the area until a few centuries ago , with low human population density along the northwest coast until nearly 1500 CE . 
 = = = Hypotheses = = = 
 In the 20th century , six hypotheses for explaining the extinction of the giant subfossil lemurs have been proposed and tested . They are known as the " Great Fire " , " Great Drought " , " Blitzkrieg " , " Biological Invasion " , " <unk> Disease " , and " Synergy " hypotheses . The first was proposed in 1927 when Henri Humbert and other botanists working in Madagascar suspected that human @-@ introduced fire and uncontrolled burning intended to create pasture and fields for crops transformed the habits quickly across the island . In 1972 , Mahé and <unk> proposed that the arid south had become progressively drier , slowly killing off lemur fauna as the climate changed . Paul S. Martin applied his overkill hypothesis or " blitzkrieg " model to explain the loss of the Malagasy megafauna in 1984 , predicting a rapid die @-@ off as humans spread in a wave across the island , hunting the large species to extinction . That same year , Robert Dewar speculated that introduced livestock outcompeted the endemic wildlife in a moderately fast series of multiple waves across the island . In 1997 , MacPhee and Marx speculated that a rapid spread of <unk> disease might explain the die @-@ offs that occurred after the appearance of humans worldwide , including Madagascar . Finally , in 1999 , David Burney proposed that the complete set of human impacts worked together , in some cases along with natural climate change , and very slowly brought about the demise of the giant subfossil lemurs and other recently extinct endemic wildlife . 
 Since all extinct lemurs were larger than the ones that currently survive , and the remaining large forests still support large populations of smaller lemurs , large size appears to have conveyed some distinct disadvantages . Large @-@ bodied animals require larger habitats in order to maintain viable populations , and are most strongly impacted by habitat loss and fragmentation . Large folivores typically have slower reproductive rates , live in smaller groups , and have low dispersal rates ( <unk> ) , making them especially vulnerable to habitat loss , hunting pressure , and possibly disease . Large , slow @-@ moving animals are often easier to hunt and provide a larger amount of food than smaller prey . Furthermore , leaf @-@ eating , large @-@ bodied slow climbers , and semiterrestrial seed predators and omnivores disappeared completely , suggesting an extinction pattern based on habitat use . 
 Since the subfossil bones of extinct lemurs have been found alongside the remains of highly arboreal living lemur species , we know that much of Madagascar had been covered in forest prior to the arrival of humans ; however , the forest coverage of the high plateau region has been debated . Humbert and other botanists suggested that the central plateau had once been blanketed in forest , later to be destroyed by fire for use by humans . However , recent <unk> studies by Burney have shown that the grasslands of that region have fluctuated over the course of millennia and were not entirely created by humans . Similarly , the role humans played in the aridification of the south and southwest has been questioned , since natural drying of the climate started before human arrival . The marshes of the region ( in which subfossil remains have been found ) have dried up , subfossil sites have yielded a host of arboreal lemurs , and site names , such as Ankilitelo ( " place of three <unk> or tamarind trees " ) suggest a recent wetter past . Pollen studies have shown that the aridification process began nearly 3 @,@ 000 years ago , and peaked 1 @,@ 000 years prior to the time of the extinctions . However , no extinctions occurred prior to the arrival of humans , and the recent climatic changes have not been as severe as those prior to human arrival , suggesting that humans and their effect on the vegetation did play a role in the extinctions . The central plateau lost more species than the dry south and southwest , suggesting that degraded habitats were more affected than arid habitats . 
 Over @-@ hunting by humans has been one of the most widely accepted hypotheses for the ultimate demise of the subfossil lemurs . The extinctions and human hunting pressure are associated due to the synchronicity of human arrival and species decline , as well as the suspected naïveté of the Malagasy wildlife during the early encounters with human hunters . Despite the assumptions , evidence of butchery has been minimal until recently , although folk memories of rituals associated with the killing of megafauna have been reported . Archeological evidence for butchery of giant subfossil lemurs , including Palaeopropithecus ingens and Pachylemur insignis , was found on specimens from two sites in southwestern Madagascar , Taolambiby and Tsirave . Although the bones had been collected in the early 20th century and lacked stratigraphic records , one of the bones with tool marks had been dated to the time of the first arrival of humans . Tool @-@ induced bone alterations , in the form of cuts and chop marks near joints and other characteristic cuts and fractures , indicated the early human settlers skinned , disarticulated , and filleted giant lemurs . Prior to these finds , only modified bones of dwarf hippos and elephant birds , as well as giant aye @-@ aye teeth , had been found . 
 Although there is evidence that habitat loss , hunting , and other factors played a role in the demise of the subfossil lemurs , prior to the synergy hypothesis , each had its own discrepancies . Humans may have hunted the giant lemurs for food , but no signs of game @-@ dependent butchery have been found . In fact , Madagascar was colonized by Iron @-@ age pastoralists , horticulturalists , and fishermen , not big @-@ game hunters . Additionally , the blitzkrieg hypothesis predicts extinction within 100 and 1 @,@ 000 years as humans sweep across the island , yet humans lived alongside the giant lemurs for more than 1 @,@ 500 years . Alternatively , habitat loss and deforestation have been argued against because many giant lemurs were thought to be terrestrial , they are missing from undisturbed forested habitats , and their environment was not fully forested prior to the arrival of humans . Anthropologist Laurie Godfrey defended the effects of habitat loss by pointing out that most of the extinct lemurs have been shown to have been at least partly arboreal and dependent upon leaves and seeds for food , and also that these large @-@ bodied specialists would be most vulnerable to habitat disturbance and fragmentation due to their low reproductive resilience and their need for large , undisturbed habitats . Still , much of the island remained covered in forest , even into the 20th century . 
 Linking human colonization to a specific cause for extinction has been difficult since human activities have varied from region to region . Although no single human activity can account for the extinction of the giant subfossil lemurs , the humans are still regarded as being primarily responsible . Each of the contributing human @-@ caused factors played a role ( having a synergistic effect ) in varying degrees . Even the most widespread and adaptable species , such as Archaeolemur , were able to survive despite hunting pressure and human @-@ caused habitat change until human population growth and other factors reached a tipping point , cumulatively resulting in their extinction . 
 = = = Extinction timeline and the primary trigger = = = 
 While it is generally agreed that both human and natural factors contributed to the subfossil lemur extinction , studies of sediment cores have helped to clarify the general timeline and initial sequence of events . Spores of the coprophilous fungus , <unk> , found in sediment cores experienced a dramatic decline shortly after the arrival of humans . Since this fungus cannot complete its life cycle without dung from large animals , its decline also indicates a sharp decline in giant subfossil lemur populations , as well as other large herbivores , starting around 230 – 410 cal yr CE . Following the decline of megafauna , the presence of charcoal particles increased significantly , starting in the southwest corner of the island , gradually spreading to the other coasts and the island 's interior over the next 1 @,@ 000 years . The first evidence for the introduction of cattle to the island dates to 1 @,@ 000 years after the initial decline of coprophilous fungal spores . 
 The loss of grazers and browsers might have resulted in the accumulation of excessive plant material and litter , promoting more frequent and destructive wildfires , which would explain the rise in charcoal particles following the decline in coprophilous fungus spores . This in turn resulted in ecological restructuring through the elimination of the wooded savannas and preferred arboreal habits on which the giant subfossil lemurs depended . This left their populations at unsustainably low levels , and factors such as their slow reproduction , continued habitat degradation , increased competition with introduced species , and continued hunting ( although at lower levels , depending on the region ) prevented them from recovering and gradually resulted in their extinction . 
 Hunting is thought to have caused the initial rapid decline , referred to as the primary trigger , although other explanations may be plausible . In theory , habitat loss should affect frugivores more than folivores , since leaves are more widely available . However , both large @-@ bodied frugivores and large @-@ bodied folivores disappeared simultaneously , while smaller species remained . Furthermore , other large non @-@ primate grazers also disappeared around the same time . Consequently , large body size has been shown to have the strongest link to the extinctions — more so than activity patterns or diet . Since large animals are more attractive as prey , fungal spores associated with their dung declined rapidly with the arrival of humans , and butchery marks have been found on giant subfossil lemur remains , hunting appears to be a plausible explanation for the initial decline of the megafauna . 
 By region , studies have revealed specific details that have helped outline the series of events that led to the extinction of the local megafauna . In the Central Highlands , dense forests existed until 1600 CE , with lingering patches persisting until the 19th and 20th centuries . Today , small fragments stand isolated among vast expanses of human @-@ created savanna , despite an average annual rainfall that is sufficient to sustain the evergreen forests once found there . Deliberately set fires were the cause of the deforestation , and forest regrowth is restricted by soil erosion and the presence of fire @-@ resistant , exotic grasses . In the southeast , an extended drought dating to 950 cal yr BP led to fires and transition of open grasslands . The drought may also have pushed humans populations to rely more heavily on bushmeat . Had humans not been present , the subfossil lemur populations might have adjusted to the new conditions and recovered . Had the drought not reduced the population of the subfossil lemurs , the pressure from the small number of people living in the region at the time might not have been enough to cause the extinctions . As in the past , all of the factors that have played a role in past extinctions are still present and active today . As a result , the extinction event that claimed Madagascar 's giant subfossil lemurs has not fully concluded . 
 = = = Lingering populations and oral tradition = = = 
 Recent radiocarbon dates from accelerator mass spectrometry 14C dating , such as 630 ± 50 BP for Megaladapis remains and 510 ± 80 BP for Palaeopropithecus remains , indicate that the giant lemurs survived into modern times . Moreover , it is likely that memories of these creatures persist in the oral traditions of some Malagasy cultural groups . Some recent stories from around Belo sur Mer in southwestern Madagascar might even suggest that some of the giant subfossil lemurs still survive in remote forests . 
 Flacourt 's 1658 description of the tretretretre or <unk> was the first mention of the now extinct giant lemurs in Western culture , but it is unclear if he saw it . The creature Flacourt described has traditionally been interpreted as a species of Megaladapis . However , the size may have been exaggerated , and the " round head and a human face " would not match Megaladapis , which had an enlarged snout and eyes that did not face entirely forward . Megaladapis had the least forward @-@ facing eyes of all primates . The facial description , and the mention of a short tail , solitary habits , and other traits better match the most recent interpretation — Palaeopropithecus . Likewise , Malagasy tales recorded by the 19th @-@ century folklorist Gabriel Ferrand describing a large animal with a flat human @-@ like face that was unable to negotiate smooth rock outcrops best match Palaeopropithecus , which would also have had difficulty on flat smooth surfaces . 
 In 1995 , a research team led by David Burney and <unk> performed interviews in and around Belo sur Mer , including <unk> and <unk> , to find subfossil megafaunal sites used early in the century by other paleontologists . During carefully controlled interviews , the team recorded stories of recent sightings of dwarf hippos ( called kilopilopitsofy ) and of a large lemur @-@ like creature known as kidoky ; a report of the interviews was published in 1998 with encouragement from primatologist Alison Jolly and anthropologist Laurie Godfrey . In one interview , an 85 @-@ year @-@ old man named Jean <unk> Pascou recounted seeing the rare kidoky up close in 1952 . Pascou said that the animal looks similar to a sifaka , but had a human @-@ like face , and was " the size of a seven @-@ year @-@ old girl " . It had dark fur and a discernible white spot both on the forehead and below the mouth . According to Pascou , it was a shy animal that fled on the ground instead of in the trees . Burney interpreted the old man as saying that it moved in " a series of leaps " , but Godfrey later claimed that " a series of bounds " was a better translation — a description that would closely match the foot anatomy of monkey lemurs , such as Hadropithecus and Archaeolemur . Pascou could also imitate its call , a long single " whoop " , and said that kidoky would come closer and continue calling if he imitated the call correctly . The call Pascou imitated was comparable to that of a short call for an indri , which lives on the other side of Madagascar . When shown a picture of an indri , Pascou said kidoky did not look like that , and that it had a rounder face , more similar to a sifaka . Pascou also speculated that kidoky could stand on two legs and that it was a solitary animal . 
 Another interviewee , François , a middle @-@ aged woodcutter who spent time in the forests inland ( east ) from the main road between Morondava and Belo sur Mer , and five of his friends , reported seeing kidoky recently . Their description of the animal and François 's imitation of its long call were virtually identical to Pascou 's . One of the young men insisted that its fur had a lot of white in it , but the other men could not confirm that . François and his friends reported that it had never climbed a tree in their presence , and that it flees on the ground in short leaps or bounds . When Burney imitated the sideways leaping of a sifaka moving on the ground , one of the men corrected him , pointing out that he was imitating a sifaka . The man 's imitation of the gallop kidoky used was very baboon @-@ like . The men also reported that imitating its call can draw the animal closer and cause it to continue calling . 
 Burney and <unk> admitted that the most parsimonious explanation for the sightings was that kidoky was a misidentified sifaka or other larger living lemur species . However , the authors did not feel comfortable with such a dismissal because of their careful quizzing and use of <unk> color plates during the interviews and because of the competence demonstrated by the interviewees in regards to local wildlife and lemur habits . The possibility of a wild introduced baboon surviving in the forests could not be dismissed . However , the descriptions of kidoky , with its terrestrial baboon @-@ like gait , make Hadropithecus and Archaeolemur the most plausible candidates among the giant subfossil lemurs . At the very least , the stories support a wider extinction window for the giant subfossil lemurs , suggesting that their extinction was recent enough for such vivid stories to still survive in the oral traditions of the Malagasy people . 
 = Nepenthes rajah = 
 Nepenthes rajah / <unk> <unk> / is an insectivorous pitcher plant species of the Nepenthaceae family . It is endemic to Mount Kinabalu and neighbouring Mount Tambuyukon in Sabah , Malaysian Borneo . Nepenthes rajah grows exclusively on serpentine substrates , particularly in areas of seeping ground water where the soil is loose and permanently moist . The species has an altitudinal range of 1500 to 2650 m a.s.l. and is thus considered a highland or sub @-@ alpine plant . Due to its localised distribution , N. rajah is classified as an endangered species by the IUCN and listed on CITES Appendix I. 
 The species was collected by Hugh Low on Mount Kinabalu in 1858 , and described the following year by Joseph Dalton Hooker , who named it after James Brooke , the first White Rajah of Sarawak . Hooker called it " one of the most striking vegetable productions hither @-@ to discovered " . Since being introduced into cultivation in 1881 , Nepenthes rajah has always been a much sought @-@ after species . For a long time , the plant was seldom seen in private collections due to its rarity , price , and specialised growing requirements . However , recent advances in tissue culture technology have resulted in prices falling dramatically , and N. rajah is now relatively widespread in cultivation . 
 Nepenthes rajah is most famous for the giant urn @-@ shaped traps it produces , which can grow up to 41 cm high and 20 cm wide . These are capable of holding 3 @.@ 5 litres of water and in excess of 2 @.@ 5 litres of digestive fluid , making them probably the largest in the genus by volume . Another morphological feature of N. rajah is the peltate leaf attachment of the lamina and tendril , which is present in only a few other species . 
 The plant is known to occasionally trap vertebrates and even small mammals , with drowned rats having been observed in the pitcher @-@ shaped traps . It is one of only two Nepenthes species documented as having caught mammalian prey in the wild , the other being N. rafflesiana . N. rajah is also known to occasionally trap small vertebrates such as frogs , lizards and even birds , although these cases probably involve sick animals and certainly do not represent the norm . Insects , and particularly ants , comprise the staple prey in both aerial and terrestrial pitchers . 
 Although Nepenthes rajah is most famous for trapping and digesting animals , its pitchers are also host to a large number of other organisms , which are thought to form a mutually beneficial ( symbiotic ) association with the plant . Many of these animals are so specialised that they cannot survive anywhere else , and are referred to as <unk> . N. rajah has two such mosquito taxa named after it : Culex rajah and Toxorhynchites rajah . 
 Another key feature of N. rajah is the relative ease with which it is able to hybridise in the wild . Hybrids between it and all other Nepenthes species on Mount Kinabalu have been recorded . However , due to the slow @-@ growing nature of N. rajah , few hybrids involving the species have been artificially produced yet . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Joseph Dalton Hooker described Nepenthes rajah in 1859 , naming it in honour of Sir James Brooke , the first White Rajah of Sarawak . In the past , the Latin name was written as Nepenthes Rajah , since it derives from a proper noun . However , this capitalisation is considered incorrect today . ' Rajah Brooke 's Pitcher Plant ' is an accurate , but seldom @-@ used common name . N. rajah is also sometimes called the ' Giant Malaysian Pitcher Plant ' or simply ' Giant Pitcher Plant ' , although the binomial name remains by far the most popular way of referring to this species . The specific epithet rajah means " King " in Malay and this , coupled with the impressive size of its pitchers , has meant that N. rajah is often referred to as the " King of Nepenthes " . 
 = = Plant characteristics = = 
 Nepenthes rajah , like virtually all species in the genus , is a scrambling vine . The stem usually grows along the ground , but will attempt to climb whenever it comes into contact with an object that can support it . The stem is relatively thick ( ≤ 30 mm ) and may reach up to 6 m in length , although it rarely exceeds 3 m . N. rajah does not produce runners as some other species in the genus , but older plants are known to form basal offshoots . This is especially common in plants from tissue culture , where numerous offshoots may form at a young age . 
 = = = Leaves = = = 
 Leaves are produced at regular intervals along the stem . They are connected to the stem by sheathed structures known as petioles . A long , narrow tendril emanates from the end of each leaf . At the tip of the tendril is a small bud which , when physiologically activated , develops into a functioning trap . Hence , the pitchers are modified leaves and not specialised flowers as is often believed . The green structure most similar to a normal leaf is specifically known as the lamina or leaf blade . 
