 The accompanying music video for " Diva " was shot downtown Los Angeles on November 22 , 2008 , and was directed by Melina Matsoukas , who worked with Beyoncé for several music videos . The music video is conceptually similar to that for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " in the sense that it was filmed in black and white , shows Beyoncé as alter ego Sasha Fierce , who dons her metal glove and performs choreography with two back @-@ up dancers with more formal leotards . Beyoncé wears a Gareth Pugh design in the video , a custom Brian Lichtenberg bodysuit , as well as a couple of vintage Thierry Mugler Haute Couture pieces , including a leather bodice and a <unk> inspired gown . Diana <unk> of Daily Mail wrote that the gown gave Beyoncé a distinct appearance of a mermaid ; it was noted by another writer of the same publication that the same dress was worn by Jennifer Lopez in the past . 
 In her 2003 music video for " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) , Beyoncé 's husband ( then boyfriend ) Jay @-@ Z throws a lighter on the ground , which ignites a trail of petrol to a car . According to a Daily Mail 's reporter , that particular scene bears resemblance to the climax of " Diva " ' ' s video , where Beyoncé lights a cigar and throws the still lit lighter at a car , prompting it to explode into flames . The same location under a bridge in downtown Los Angeles was chosen for the shoot . The video for " Diva " premiered on the iTunes Store on December 23 , simultaneously with the one for " Halo " . It was included on Beyoncé 's remix album with videography , Above and Beyoncé ( 2009 ) . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the filming of the music also appeared online and it features the scene where Beyoncé throws her cigar in the car . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with a dictionary definition of the word " diva " , before cutting to a parking lot outside of a warehouse . Beyoncé , wearing a pair of " dangle shades " , walks past a car full of mannequin parts into the warehouse . From here , she is accompanied by her two dancers and a variety of high fashion outfits . When she states " Diva 's gettin ' money ... " she waves a fan made of $ 100 bills . During the bridge to the climax , Beyoncé dances on a single light and then during the climax , she is seen very glossy in another wardrobe choice dancing in robotic movements to the beat with gold punctuating the black and white scene . In one scene , Beyoncé is seen dancing robotically in front of a set of gold @-@ tinted mannequins ; while in another , she dances against a wall with two large chains hanging from the ceiling . During the last chorus , Beyoncé is in her last wardrobe change in front of window which is where the paparazzi had taken photos of her . At the end of the song , Beyoncé walks back out to the parking lot . She lights up a cigar and throws the lighter into the car , letting it explode . As she walks away , the intro to " Video Phone " ( a track from I Am ... Sasha Fierce ) plays . The explosion retains its original fiery colors in contrast with the black and white . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 A writer of Rolling Stone described the video as " quite a hot mess " , further comparing the dancers with the ones from the video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . The writer finished the review calling it " a four @-@ minute art @-@ school film unworthy of her Sasha <unk> " . Jennifer Cady of E ! Online commented that the video was " all about being gritty and edgy , like strutting around a downtown L.A. warehouse in crazy designer fashion and chewing bubblegum . Hard @-@ core style " . Cady further described the dance in the video for " Diva " as " way easier to learn than [ the one ] in ' Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) ' " . However , she chose the C @-@ 3PO @-@ inspired mannequins , the lack of Beyoncé 's robot hand and the " obnoxious camera work or car explosion " as the worst parts of the video . Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Slezak commented : " The video has the production values of the clearance bin at Family Dollar , and yet somehow it works . " Slezak further described the set as a " trunk full of mannequins , Cylon @-@ y fringed sunglasses , and angry @-@ lady dancing on display in the accompanying video " . The video was ranked at number 13 on Black Entertainment Television 's ( BET 's ) Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Although Beyoncé did not perform " Diva " on televised appearances , the song was a part of her set list on the I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 @-@ 2010 ) . Eventually , it was included on her 2010 live album , I Am ... World Tour as the twelfth song . The performance of " Diva " during her I Am ... World Tour features Beyoncé performing the song while being backed up by six dancers ( four of which are golden mannequins ) . She sports a leopard print glow @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dark leotard , black trenchcoat , leopard print stockings , high heels and leopard @-@ print sunglasses . She would remove the trenchcoat during the performance . Alice Jones of The Independent felt that " she sings her heart out " during the electro hook of " Diva " . In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed " Diva " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice noted that the song was one of the " dancefloor @-@ fillers " performed during the revue . Rebecca Thomas writing for MTV News , noted that Beyoncé transformed in Sasha Fierce for the performance of the song . On October 7 , 2012 , Beyoncé appeared at Jay @-@ Z 's concert at the Barclays Center and performed " Diva " , " Crazy in Love " and " Young Forever " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In 2008 , Ciara recorded a remix of " Diva " for a mixtape of her album Fantasy Ride ( 2009 ) . Alex Newell , Heather Morris , Jenna Ushkowitz and Darren Criss covered the song in the eponymous episode of the fourth season of the American television series Glee which aired on February 7 , 2013 . In a review of the episode , Daniel Sperling of the website Digital Spy , described the performance of the song as one of the " plenty of fierce moments " adding that it was " posy , [ and ] pouty " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Demographic history of Scotland = 
 The demographic history of Scotland includes all aspects of population history in what is now Scotland . Scotland may have been first occupied in the last interglacial period ( 130 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 BCE ) , but the earliest surviving archaeological evidence of human settlement is of Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherer encampments . These suggest a highly mobile boat @-@ using people , probably with a very low density of population . Neolithic farming brought permanent settlements dating from 3500 BCE , and greater concentrations of population . Evidence of hillforts and other buildings suggest a growing settled population . Changes in the scale of woodland indicates that the Roman invasions from the first century CE had a negative impact on the native population . 
 There are almost no written sources from which to reconstruct the demography of early medieval Scotland . This was probably a high fertility , high mortality society , similar to developing countries in the modern world . The population may have grown from half a million to a million by the mid @-@ fourteenth century when the Black Death reached the country . It may then have fallen to as low as half a million by the end of the fifteenth century . Roughly half lived north of the River Tay and perhaps 10 per cent in the burghs that grew up in the later medieval period . Inflation in prices , indicating greater demand , suggests that the population continued to grow until the late sixteenth century , when it probably levelled off . It began to grow again in the relative stability of the late seventeenth century . The earliest reliable evidence suggests a population of 1 @.@ 2 million in 1681 . This was probably reduced by the " seven ill years " of the 1690s , which caused severe famine and depopulation , particularly in the north . The first national census was conducted in 1755 , and showed the population of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 . By then four towns had populations of over 10 @,@ 000 , with the capital , Edinburgh , the largest with 57 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 The Highland and Lowland Clearances led to the depopulation of rural areas , but overall the population of Scotland grew rapidly in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . By 1801 it had reached 1 @,@ 608 @,@ 420 and it grew to 2 @,@ 889 @,@ 000 in 1851 and 4 @,@ 472 @,@ 000 in 1901 . By the beginning of the twentieth century , one in three lived in the four cities of Glasgow , Edinburgh , Dundee and Aberdeen . Glasgow emerged as the largest city , with a population of 762 @,@ 000 by 1901 , making it " the Second City of the Empire " . Despite industrial expansion there were insufficient jobs and between the mid @-@ nineteenth century and the Great Depression about two million Scots emigrated to North America and Australia , and another 750 @,@ 000 to England . The Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population but they provided 15 per cent of the national armed forces , and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead in World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) . With the end of mass migration , the population reached a peak of 5 @,@ 240 @,@ 800 in 1974 . Thereafter it began to fall slowly , moving down to 5 @,@ 062 @,@ 940 in 2000 . There was also a decrease in some urban populations as a result of policies of slum clearance , overspill and relocation to new towns , with the population of Glasgow falling from over a million in 1951 to 629 @,@ 000 in 2001 . Rural areas also saw a loss of population , particularly in the Highlands and Hebrides . 
 = = Prehistoric and Roman eras = = 
 At times during the last interglacial period ( 130 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 BCE ) Europe had a climate warmer than today 's , and early humans may have made their way to what is now Scotland , though archaeologists have found no traces of this . Glaciers then scoured their way across most of Britain , and only after the ice retreated did Scotland again become habitable , around 9600 BCE . Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherer encampments formed the first known settlements , and archaeologists have dated a site near Biggar to around 8500 BCE . Numerous other sites found around Scotland build up a picture of highly mobile boat @-@ using people making tools from bone , stone and antlers , probably with a very low density of population . 
 Neolithic farming brought permanent settlements , such as the stone house at Knap of Howar on Papa Westray dating from 3500 BCE , and greater concentrations of population . Although the Roman geographer Ptolemy indicated that there were 19 " towns " in Caledonia , north of the Roman province of Britannia , no clear evidence of urban settlements has been found and these were probably hillforts . There is evidence of over 1 @,@ 000 such forts , most south of the Clyde @-@ Forth line , but the majority seem to have been abandoned in the Roman period . There is also evidence of distinctive stone wheelhouses ( a type of roundhouse , with a circle of stone piers resembling the spokes of a wheel ) and over 400 small underground souterrains ( underground galleries that may have been used to store food ) . Extensive analyses of Black Loch in Fife indicate that arable land spread at the expense of forest from about 2000 BCE until the time of the Roman advance into lowland Scotland in the first century CE , suggesting an expanding settled population . Thereafter , there was regrowth of birch , oak and hazel for some 500 years , suggesting that the Roman invasions had a negative impact on the native population . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 There are almost no written sources from which to reconstruct the demography of early medieval Scotland . Estimates have been made of a population of 10 @,@ 000 in Dál Riata and 80 – 100 @,@ 000 for Pictland , which was probably the largest region . It is likely that the fifth and sixth centuries saw higher mortality rates due to the appearance of bubonic plague , which may have reduced the population . The examination of burial sites for this period , such as that at Hallowhill , St Andrews , indicates a life expectancy of only 26 to 29 . The known conditions have been taken to suggest it was a high fertility , high mortality society , similar to developing countries in the modern world , with a relatively young demographic profile , and perhaps early childbearing , and large numbers of children born to each woman ( although with high child mortality ) . This would have meant a relatively low ratio of available workers to the number of mouths to feed , which in turn would have made it difficult to produce a surplus that would allow demographic growth and the development of more complex societies . 
 From the formation of the Kingdom of Alba in the tenth century , to before the Black Death reached the country in 1349 , estimates based on the amount of farmable land suggest that the population may have grown from half a million to a million . Growth was probably punctuated by occasional crises , like the famines recorded in chronicles for 1154 and 1256 . More significant was a series of poor harvests that affected Scotland and most of Europe in the early fourteenth century and widespread famines in 1315 – 16 and in the later 1330s . 
 Although there is no reliable documentation of the <unk> impact of the Black Death in Scotland , there are some indications of the immediate effects of the plague . Walter Bower recorded that 24 , about a third , of the canons of St. Andrews died during the outbreak . There are also anecdotal references to abandoned land in the following decades . If the pattern followed that in England , then the population may have fallen to as low as half a million by the end of the fifteenth century . Compared with the distribution of population after the later Clearances and the Industrial Revolution , these numbers would have been relatively evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the River Tay . 
 = = Early modern era = = 
 Price inflation , which generally reflects growing demand for food , suggests that the population was probably still expanding in the first half of the sixteenth century . Almost half the years in the second half of the sixteenth century saw local or national scarcity , necessitating the shipping of large quantities of grain from the Baltic . Distress was exacerbated by outbreaks of plague , with major epidemics in the periods 1584 @-@ 8 , 1595 and 1597 – 1609 . The population expansion probably levelled off after the famine of the 1590s , as prices were relatively stable in the early seventeenth century . Famine was common , with four periods of famine prices between 1620 and 1625 . The invasions of the 1640s had a profound impact on the Scottish economy , with the destruction of crops and the disruption of markets resulting in some of the most rapid price rises of the century , but population probably expanded in the Lowlands in the period of stability that followed the Restoration in 1660 . There is evidence that there was a different demographic regime operating in the Highlands , where growth probably continued from the early seventeenth century to the late eighteenth century . 
 Estimates based on hearth tax returns for 1691 indicate a population of around 1 @.@ 2 million . The population may have been seriously affected by the failed harvests ( 1695 , 1696 and 1698 @-@ 9 ) known as the " seven ill years " . The result was severe famine and depopulation , particularly in the north . Starvation probably killed 5 to 15 per cent of the Scottish population , but in areas like Aberdeenshire death rates reached 25 per cent . The famines of the 1690s were seen as particularly severe , partly because famine had become relatively rare in the second half of the seventeenth century , with only one year of dearth ( in 1674 ) , and the shortages of the 1690s were the last of their kind . Between 1650 and 1700 approximately 7 @,@ 000 Scots migrated to America , 10 – 20 @,@ 000 to Europe and England and 60 – 100 @,@ 000 to Ireland . The first reliable figure for the national population is from the census conducted by the Reverend Alexander Webster in 1755 , which showed the inhabitants of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 persons . 
 Unlike in England , where the nucleated village existed relatively early , most of the early modern population of Scotland , in both the Lowlands and Highlands , was housed in small clachans or townships and isolated dwellings . These were unstructured groups of houses , often belonging to between four and six tenants , who were often engaged in common agriculture . As the population expanded , some of these settlements were subdivided to create new clachans and more marginal land was settled , with sheilings ( clusters of huts occupied while summer pasture was being used for grazing ) becoming permanent settlements . 
 Perhaps 10 per cent of the population lived in the burghs that had grown up in the later medieval period , mainly in the east and south of the country . They perhaps had an average population of 2 @,@ 000 , but many were much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 , and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the period . Edinburgh doubled in size in the century after 1540 , particularly after the plague of 1580 , with most of its population probably coming from a growing reservoir in the surrounding countryside . It also expanded beyond the city walls in suburbs at Cowgate , Bristo and Westport and by 1750 , with its suburbs , it had reached a population of 57 @,@ 000 . The only other towns above 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the period were Glasgow with 32 @,@ 000 , Aberdeen with around 16 @,@ 000 and Dundee with 12 @,@ 000 . By 1600 Scotland had a higher proportion of its population living in larger towns than contemporaneous Scandinavia , Switzerland and most of Eastern Europe : by 1750 in Europe , only Italy , the Low Countries and England were more urbanised than Scotland . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 The agricultural revolution changed the traditional system of agriculture which had existed in Lowland Scotland . Thousands of cottars and tenant farmers migrated from farms and smallholdings to the new industrial centres of Glasgow , Edinburgh and northern England . Particularly after the end of the boom created by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars ( 1790 – 1815 ) , Highland landlords needed cash to maintain their position in London society . Whereas rents had often been paid in kind , the landlords turned to money rents . They displaced farmers to raise sheep and downplayed the traditional patriarchal relationship that had historically sustained the clans . This was exacerbated after the repeal of the Corn Laws in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , when Britain adopted a free trade policy , and grain imports from America undermined the profitability of crop production . One result of these changes was the Highland Clearances , by which much of the population of the Highlands suffered forced displacement as lands were enclosed , principally so that they could be used for sheep farming . The clearances followed patterns of agricultural change throughout the United Kingdom , but were particularly notorious as a result of the late timing , the lack of legal protection for year @-@ by @-@ year tenants under Scots law , the abruptness of the change from the traditional clan system , and the brutality of many evictions . The result was a continuous exodus from the land — to the cities , and further afield to England , Canada , America and Australia . The potato famine of the 1840s , caused by potato blight , which devastated the population of Ireland , reached the Highlands in 1846 . Although 150 @,@ 000 people faced disaster , because their food supply was largely potatoes ( with a little herring , oatmeal and milk ) , they were rescued by an effective emergency relief system that stands in dramatic contrast to the failures of relief in Ireland and prevented a major demographic crisis . 
 By the time of the first decadal census in 1801 , the population was 1 @,@ 608 @,@ 420 . It grew steadily in the nineteenth century , to 2 @,@ 889 @,@ 000 in 1851 and 4 @,@ 472 @,@ 000 in 1901 . While population fell in some rural areas , it rose rapidly in the towns . Aberdeen , Dundee and Glasgow grew by a third or more between 1755 and 1775 and the textile town of Paisley more than doubled its population . Because of the industrial revolution , Scotland was already one of the most urbanised societies in Europe by 1800 . In 1800 , 17 per cent of people in Scotland lived in towns of more than 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants . By 1850 it was 32 per cent and by 1900 it was 50 per cent . By 1900 one in three of the entire population were in the four cities of Glasgow , Edinburgh , Dundee and Aberdeen . Glasgow emerged as the largest city . Its population in 1780 was 43 @,@ 000 , reaching 147 @,@ 000 by 1820 ; by 1901 it had grown to 762 @,@ 000 . This was due to a high birth rate and immigration from the countryside and particularly from Ireland ; but from the 1870s there was a fall in the birth rate and lower rates of migration and much of the growth was due to longer life expectancy . Glasgow was now one of the largest cities in the world , and it became known as " the Second City of the Empire " after London . 
 Mortality rates were high compared with England and other European nations . Evidence suggests a national death rate of 30 per 1 @,@ 000 in 1755 , 24 in the 1790s and 22 in the early 1860s . Mortality tended to be much higher in urban than rural settlements . The first time these were measured , 1861 – 82 , in the four major cities these were 28 @.@ 1 per 1 @,@ 000 and 17 @.@ 9 in rural areas . Mortality probably peaked in Glasgow in the 1840s , when large inflows of population from the Highlands and Ireland combined population outgrowing sanitary provision and combining with outbreaks of epidemic disease . National rates began to fall in the 1870s , particularly in the cities , as environmental conditions improved . By 1930 – 32 the national rate was 13 @.@ 4 per 1 @,@ 000 , with a rate of 14 @.@ 1 and in rural areas 12 @.@ 8 . 
 Even with the growth of industry there were not enough good jobs : as a result , from 1841 to 1931 , about two million Scots emigrated to North America and Australia , and another 750 @,@ 000 Scots relocated to England . With a population of 4 @.@ 8 million in 1911 , Scotland sent 690 @,@ 000 men to the First World War , of whom 74 @,@ 000 died in combat or from disease , and 150 @,@ 000 were seriously wounded . Thus , although Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population , they made up 15 per cent of the national armed forces and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead . While emigration began to tail off in England and Wales after the First World War , it continued apace in Scotland , with 400 @,@ 000 Scots , 10 per cent of the population , estimated to have left the country between 1921 and 1931 . When the Great Depression hit in the 1930s there were no easily available jobs in the US and Canada , and emigration fell to less than 50 @,@ 000 a year , bringing to an end the period of mass migrations that had opened in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . This contributed to the growth of the population , which reached a peak of 5 @,@ 240 @,@ 800 in 1974 . Thereafter it began to fall slowly , moving down to 5 @,@ 062 @,@ 940 in 2000 . There was also a decrease in some urban populations as a result of slum clearance , overspill and relocation to new towns , with the population of Glasgow falling from over a million in 1951 to 629 @,@ 000 in 2001 . Rural areas also saw a loss of population , particularly the Highlands and Hebrides . In the early part of the twenty @-@ first century Scotland saw a rise in its population to 5 @,@ 313 @,@ 600 ( its highest ever recorded ) at the 2011 census . 
 = South American dreadnought race = 
 A naval arms race among Argentina , Brazil and Chile — the most powerful and wealthy countries in South America — began in the early twentieth century when the Brazilian government ordered three " dreadnoughts " , formidable battleships whose capabilities far outstripped older vessels in the world 's navies . 
 In 1904 , the Brazilian Navy found itself well behind the Argentine and Chilean navies in quality and total tonnage ; few ships had been ordered since the fall of the Brazilian emperor Pedro II in 1889 and subsequent naval rebellions in 1891 and 1893 – 94 , while its continental rivals Argentina and Chile had just concluded a fifteen @-@ year naval arms race which filled their navies with modern warships . Rising demand for coffee and rubber brought the Brazilian government a large increase in revenue , and they voted to devote some of the proceeds to address this naval imbalance . They believed that building a strong navy would play an essential role in their goal of making the country an international power . 
 The Brazilian government ordered three small battleships from the British company Armstrong Whitworth in late 1905 , but the appearance of the revolutionary British warship HMS Dreadnought in 1906 quickly scrapped these plans . Instead , the Brazilians ordered three Minas Geraes @-@ class dreadnoughts — a warship type which quickly became a measure of international prestige , similar to nuclear weapons today . This action focused the world 's attention on the newly ascendant country : newspapers and politicians in the great powers fretted that Brazil would sell the ships to a belligerent nation , while the Argentine and Chilean governments immediately canceled their naval @-@ limiting pact and ordered two dreadnoughts each ( the Rivadavia and Almirante Latorre classes , respectively ) . 
 Meanwhile , Brazil 's third dreadnought faced a good deal of political opposition due to an economic downturn and the Revolt of the Lash , in which the crews of both of their brand @-@ new battleships mutinied and threatened to fire on Rio de Janeiro if their demands were not met . Despite these pressures , Armstrong successfully held the Brazilians to their contractual obligations . Construction on the new ship , preliminarily named Rio de Janeiro , was halted several times due to repeated design changes . Brazil 's coffee and rubber booms collapsed soon after . Concerned that their ship would be outclassed by larger super @-@ dreadnoughts , they sold the incomplete vessel to the Ottoman Empire in December 1913 . 
 The First World War marked the end of the naval arms race , as the South American countries found themselves unable to purchase additional warships . The Brazilian government ordered a new battleship , Riachuelo , in May 1914 , but the conflict effectively canceled the ship . The British purchased the two Chilean battleships before they were completed ; one was sold back to Chile in 1920 . Argentina 's two dreadnoughts , having been built in the neutral United States , escaped this fate and were commissioned in 1914 – 15 . Although several South American post @-@ war naval expansion plans called for dreadnoughts , no additional units were constructed . 
 = = Background : naval rivalry , revolts , and export crops = = 
 = = = Argentine – Chilean arms race = = = 
 Conflicting Argentine and Chilean claims to Patagonia , the southernmost region in South America , had been causing tension between the two countries since the 1840s . This tension was heightened in 1872 and 1878 , when Chilean warships seized merchant ships which had been licensed to operate in the disputed area by the Argentine government . An Argentine warship did the same to a Chilean @-@ licensed American ship in 1877 . This action nearly led to war in November 1878 , when the Argentines dispatched a squadron of warships to the Santa Cruz River . The Chilean Navy responded in kind , and war was only avoided by a hastily signed treaty . Each government was distracted in the next few years , Argentina 's with intensified military operations against the indigenous population ( 1870 – 84 ) , and Chile 's with the War of the Pacific ( Guerra del Pacífico , 1879 – 83 ) against Bolivia and Peru . Still , several warships were ordered by both nations : the Chileans ordered a protected cruiser , Esmeralda , while the Argentines contracted for two warships , the central battery ironclad Almirante Brown and protected cruiser Patagonia . 
 In 1887 , the Chilean government added £ 3 @,@ 129 @,@ 500 to the budget for its fleet , at the time still centered on two aging central battery ironclads , Almirante Cochrane and Blanco Encalada , from the 1870s . They ordered the battleship Capitán Prat , two protected cruisers , and two torpedo boats ; their keels were laid in 1890 . The Argentine government quickly responded with an order for two battleships , Independencia and Libertad , beginning a naval arms race between the two countries . It continued through the 1890s , even after the expensive Chilean Civil War ( 1891 ) . The two countries alternated cruiser orders between 1890 and 1895 , each marking a small increase in capabilities from the ship previous . Argentina escalated the race in July 1895 by buying an armored cruiser , Garibaldi , from Italy . Chile responded by ordering its own armored cruiser , O 'Higgins , and six torpedo boats ; the Argentine government quickly ordered another armored cruiser from the Italian engineering company Ansaldo , and later ordered two more . 
 The race slowed for a few years after a boundary dispute in the Puna de Atacama region was successfully mediated in 1899 by the American ambassador to Argentina , William Paine Lord , but more ships were ordered by both countries in 1901 . The Argentine Navy bought two more armored cruisers from Italy , and the Chilean Navy replied with orders for two Constitución @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships from British shipyards . The Argentines replied by signing letters of intent with Ansaldo in May 1901 to buy two larger battleships . 
 The growing dispute disturbed members of the British government , as war looked like a very real possibility , and an armed conflict would disrupt the extensive British commercial interests in the area . Argentina and Chile both imported British @-@ made goods , while the United Kingdom imported large amounts of Argentine grain , most shipped through the River Plate , and Chilean nitrates . The British government mediated negotiations between the two countries through their envoy in Chile . These were successfully concluded on 28 May 1902 with three pacts . The third limited the naval armaments of both countries ; both were barred from acquiring any further warships for five years without giving the other eighteen months ' advance notice . The warships under construction were sold to the United Kingdom and Japan : Chile 's battleships became the former 's Swiftsure class , and Argentina 's armored cruisers the latter 's Kasuga class . It is not clear if the two planned Argentine battleships were ordered , but in any case the plans were quickly scuttled . Capitán Prat , Garibaldi , and Pueyrredón were disarmed with the exception of their main batteries , as there was no crane capable of removing the cruisers ' gun turrets . 
 = = = Brazilian decline and re @-@ emergence = = = 
 Brazil 's navy fell into disrepair and obsolescence after an 1889 revolution , which deposed Emperor Dom Pedro II , two naval revolts ( 1891 and 1893 – 94 ) , the Federalist Revolution ( 1893 – 95 ) , and the War of Canudos ( 1896 – 97 ) . The navy had just forty @-@ five percent of its authorized personnel in 1896 , and the only modern armored ships were two small coast @-@ defense vessels launched in 1898 . With such dilapidated defenses , José Paranhos Jr . , the Baron of Rio Branco and Foreign Minister of Brazil , stated " In such conditions , you ... understand how upset I am and all the worries I have . All that still protects [ Brazil ] is the moral force and old prestige still left from [ the Imperial era ] when there was still foresight in this land ... " 
 Meanwhile , although the Argentine – Chilean agreement had limited their naval expansion , they still retained the numerous vessels built in the interim , so by the turn of the 20th century the Brazilian Navy lagged far behind its Argentine and Chilean counterparts in quality and total tonnage . Brazil 's huge advantage in population — it had almost three times the population of Argentina , close to five times that of Chile , and nearly double of the two combined — led the Brazilian government to believe that it should assume a leading role in naval affairs on the continent . 
 The late nineteenth and early twentieth century demand for coffee and rubber led to Brazil 's so @-@ called " coffee economy " and " rubber boom . " At the time , it was estimated that seventy @-@ five to eighty percent of the world 's coffee supply was grown in Brazil , particularly in São Paulo , Minas Geraes , and Rio de Janeiro . The resulting profits meant that the Brazilian government collected much more revenue than in previous years . Simultaneously , there was an effort on the part of prominent Brazilian politicians , most notably Pinheiro Machado and Rio Branco , to have the country recognized as an international power . A strong navy was seen as crucial to this goal . 
 The National Congress of Brazil passed a large naval acquisition program on 14 December 1904 , but it was two years before any ships were ordered or purchased , and while Rio Branco suggested purchasing used warships to fill the gap , nothing came of it . By 1906 , two factions had developed over which types of ships should be ordered . One , supported by the British armament company Armstrong Whitworth ( which eventually received the order ) , favored a navy centered on a small number of large warships . The other , supported by Rio Branco , preferred a larger navy composed of smaller warships . Rio Branco , in support of this measure , stated that " with six small battleships we would be much better . If we lost one or two in combat , there would be still four or five left to fight with . But with three [ larger battleships ] ? With two damaged or destroyed , we would be left with one only . " 
 At first , the smaller warships faction prevailed . After Law no . 1452 was passed on 30 December 1905 , which authorized £ 4 @,@ 214 @,@ 550 for new warship construction ( £ 1 @,@ 685 @,@ 820 in 1906 ) , three small battleships , three armored cruisers , six destroyers , twelve torpedo boats , three submarines , a collier , and a training ship were ordered . Though the Brazilian government later eliminated the armored cruisers for monetary reasons , the Minister of the Navy , Admiral Júlio César de Noronha , signed a contract with Armstrong Whitworth for the planned battleships on 23 July 1906 . 
 The British ambassador to Brazil was opposed to the planned naval expansion , even though the orders went to a British company , for its large cost and its negative effects on relations between Brazil and Argentina . He saw it as " an embodiment of national vanity , combined with personal motives of a pecuniary character . " The American ambassador to Brazil was alarmed , and sent a cablegram to his Department of State in September 1906 , warning them of the destabilization that would occur if the situation devolved into a full naval arms race . At the same time , the American government under Theodore Roosevelt tried using diplomatic means to coerce the Brazilians into canceling their ships , but the attempts were dismissed , with the Baron of Rio Branco remarking that caving to the American demands would render Brazil as powerless as Cuba , whose new constitution allowed the American government to intervene in Cuban affairs . The new President of Brazil , Afonso Pena , supported the naval acquisitions in an address to the National Congress of Brazil in November 1906 , as in his opinion the ships were necessary to replace <unk> , which unexpectedly blew up that year , and the antiquated vessels composing the current navy . 
 = = Catalyst : Brazil 's opening salvo = = 
 After construction began on Brazil 's three new small battleships , the Brazilian government reconsidered their order and chosen battleship design ( something that would happen several more times during the construction of Rio de Janeiro in 1913 ) . This was wrought by the impact of the Battle of Tsushima , which led navies to believe that larger guns were necessary , and the debut of the United Kingdom 's new dreadnought concept , represented by the surprisingly fast construction and commissioning of the eponymous ship in 1906 , rendered the Brazilian ships obsolete before they were completed . 
 The money authorized for naval expansion in 1905 was redirected to building three dreadnoughts ( with the third to be laid down after the first was launched ) , three scout cruisers ( later reduced to two , which became the Bahia class ) , fifteen destroyers ( later reduced to ten , the Pará class ) , three submarines ( the F 1 class ) , and two submarine tenders ( later reduced to one , Ceará ) . This move was made with the large @-@ scale support of Brazilian politicians , including Pinheiro Machado and a nearly unanimous vote in the Senate ; the navy , now with a large @-@ ship advocate , Rear Admiral Alexandrino Faria de Alencar , in the influential post of minister of the navy ; and the Brazilian press . Still , these changes were made with the stipulation that the total price of the new naval program not exceed the original limit , so the increase in battleship tonnage was bought with the previous elimination of armored cruisers and decreasing the number of destroyer @-@ type warships . The three battleships on which construction had begun were scrapped beginning on 7 January 1907 , and the design for the new dreadnoughts was approved on 20 February . Newspapers began covering the Brazilian warship order in March , and Armstrong laid down the first dreadnought on 17 April . The full order — including all three dreadnoughts and the two cruisers — was reported by the New York Herald , Daily Chronicle , and the Times later that year . 
 The Brazilian order for what contemporary commentators called " the most powerful battleship [ s ] in the world " came at a time when few countries in the world had contracted for such armament . Brazil was the third country to have a dreadnought under construction , behind the United Kingdom , with Dreadnought and the Bellerophon class , and the United States , with the South Carolina class . This meant that Brazil was in line to have a dreadnought before many of the world 's perceived powers , like France , the German Empire , the Russian Empire , and the Empire of Japan . As dreadnoughts were quickly equated with international status , somewhat similar to nuclear weapons today — that is , regardless of a state 's need for such equipment , simply ordering and possessing a dreadnought increased the owner 's prestige — the order caused a major stir in international relations . 
 Newspapers and journals around the world speculated that Brazil was acting as a proxy for a stronger country which would take possession of the two dreadnoughts soon after completion , as they did not believe that a previously insignificant geopolitical power would contract for such armament . Many American , British , and German sources variously accused the Americans , British , German , or Japanese governments of secretly plotting to purchase the vessels . The World 's Work remarked : 
 The question that is puzzling diplomats the world over is why Brazil should want ferocious leviathans of such size and armament and speed as to place them ten to fifteen years in advance of any other nation besides Great Britain . [ ... ] Although Brazil has denied that these are meant for England or Japan , naval men of all nations suspect that they are meant for some government other than Brazil 's . In the event of war , the government which would first be able to secure these vessels … would immediately place the odds of naval supremacy in its favor . England , no matter how many Dreadnoughts she has , would be compelled to buy them to keep them from some lesser power . They bring a new question into international politics . They may be leaders of a great fleet which minor government are said to be preparing to build ; or , to put it more accurately , to stand sponsors for . Some Machiavellian hand may be at work in this new game of international politics and the British Admiralty is suspected . But every statesmen and naval student may make his own guess . 
 On the other side of the Atlantic , in the midst of the Anglo – German naval arms race , members of the British House of Commons fretted over the battleships ' possible destinations , though the Admiralty consistently stated that they did not believe any sale would occur . In mid @-@ July and September 1908 , the Commons discussed purchasing the ships to bolster the Royal Navy and ensure they would not be sold to a foreign rival , which would disrupt the British naval plan set in place by the " two @-@ power standard , " though in March and late July 1908 , the Brazilian government officially denied any sale was planned . In March 1909 , the British press and House of Commons began pushing for more dreadnoughts after the First Lord of the Admiralty , Reginald McKenna , asserted that Germany had stepped up its building schedule and would complete thirteen dreadnoughts in 1911 — four more than previously estimated . Naturally , the subject of purchasing the Brazilian dreadnoughts already being built was brought up , and McKenna had to officially deny that the government was planning to tender an offer for the warships . He also stated that a sale to a foreign nation would be inconsequential , as " our present superiority in strength in 1909 – 10 is so great that no alarm would be created in the mind of the Board of Admiralty . " 
 Despite the plethora of rumors , the Brazilian government was not planning to sell their ships . Dreadnoughts formed an important role in Rio Branco 's goal of raising Brazil 's international status : 
 Brazil begins to feel the importance of her great position , the part she may play in the world , and is taking measures in a beginner 's degree commensurate with that realization . Her battle @-@ ship @-@ building is one with her attitude at The Hague , and these together are but part and parcel , not of a vainglorious striving after position , but of a just conception of her future . Dr. Ruy Barboza did not oppose the details of representation on the international arbitral tribunal out of antipathy to the United States , but because he believed that the sovereignty of Brazil was at least equal to that of any other sovereign nation , and because he was convinced that unequal representation on that tribunal would result in the establishment of ' categories of sovereignty ' — a thing utterly opposed to the philosophy of equal sovereign rights . And as in international law and discourse , so in her navy , Brazil seeks to demonstrate her sovereign rank . 
 = = Counter : Argentina and Chile respond = = 
 Argentina was highly alarmed by the Brazilian move , and they quickly moved to nullify the remaining months of the naval @-@ limiting restrictions in the 1902 pact with Chile . In November 1906 , Argentina 's Minister of Foreign Affairs , Manuel Augusto Montes de Oca , remarked that any one of the new Brazilian vessels could destroy the entire Argentine and Chilean fleets . Despite the seeming hyperbole , his statement — made before the Brazilian government reordered the ships as dreadnoughts — ended up being close to the truth : in 1910 , at least , the new Brazilian warships were seemingly stronger than any other vessel in the world , let alone any one ship in the Argentine or Chilean fleets . With this in mind , the Journal of the American Society of Naval Engineers opined that maintaining the older Libertad class or Capitán Prat ( respectively ) was now a waste of money . 
 The Argentine government 's alarm continued under de Oca 's successor , Estanislao Zeballos . In June 1908 , Zeballos presented a plan to the Argentine Congress where they would offer the Brazilian government a chance to give one of their two unfinished dreadnoughts to Argentina . This would allow the two countries a chance to enjoy relative naval parity . Should the Brazilians refuse , Zeballos planned to issue an ultimatum : if they did not comply in eight days , the mobilized Argentine Army would invade what the army and navy ministers claimed was a defenseless Rio de Janeiro . Unfortunately for Zeballos , his plan was leaked to the media , and the resulting public outcry — Argentine citizens happened to not be in favor of their government borrowing large sums of money to mobilize the army and go to war — ensured his resignation . 
 The Argentine government was also deeply concerned with the possible effect on the country 's large export trade , as a Brazilian blockade of the entrance to the River Plate would cripple the Argentine economy . The acquisition of dreadnoughts to maintain an equal footing with Brazil would , in the words of the Argentine admiral overseeing his countries ' dreadnoughts while they were being constructed , avoid a " preponderance of power on the other side , where a sudden gust of popular feeling or injured pride might make [ a blockade ] a dangerous weapon against us . " 
 Both countries faced difficulty in financing their own dreadnoughts . Although in Argentina the ruling National Autonomist Party supported the purchases , they initially faced public resistance for such expensive acquisitions . An influx of inflammatory newspaper editorials supporting new dreadnoughts , especially from La Prensa , and renewed border disputes , particularly Brazilian assertions that the Argentines were attempting to restore the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , swayed the public to support the purchases . The Argentine President , José Figueroa <unk> , attempted to ease the tensions with a message warning the Brazilians of a naval arms race should they continue on their present course . The Brazilian government replied with reasoning similar to Pena 's speech in 1906 , in that they believed the ships were necessary to replace the antiquated equipment left by the long @-@ term neglect of the Brazilian Navy , and they repeatedly insisted that the ships were not meant for use against Argentina . 
 In August , a bill authorizing the Argentine Navy to acquire three dreadnoughts was passed by the Chamber of Deputies seventy @-@ two to thirteen . Three months later , it was defeated in the Senate after they approved an arbitration treaty and the government made a last @-@ ditch offer to purchase one of the two Brazilian dreadnoughts currently being constructed . The Brazilian government declined , so the bill was reintroduced and passed by the Senate on 17 December 1908 with forty @-@ nine in support to thirteen opposed , over socialist objections that the country needed to be populated and the large sum of money ( £ 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) could be better spent in other areas of the government . 
 After the Argentine government sent a naval delegation to Europe to solicit and evaluate armament companies ' offers , they received tenders from fifteen shipyards in five countries ( the United States , Great Britain , Germany , France , and Italy ) , and conducted a drawn @-@ out bidding process . The Argentine delegation rejected all of the bids twice , each time recycling the best technical aspects of the tendered designs when crafting new bidding requirements . The reason given for the first rejection was the appearance of the first super @-@ dreadnought , HMS Orion . Still , the shipbuilders were furious , as the process of designing a major warship took large amounts of time and money , and they believed the Argentine tactic revealed their individual trade secrets . A British naval architect published a scathing condemnation of the Argentine tactics , albeit only after the contracts were not awarded to a British company : 
 We may assume that the British battleships embody good ideas and good practice — in all probability the very best . These cannot fail , in a greater or less degree , to become part of the design which the British shipbuilder first submits to the Argentine Government . In the second inquiry it may be presumed that everything that was good in the first proposals had been seized upon by the Argentine authorities and asked for in the new design . This second request went not only to British builders but to all the builders of the world , and in this way it is exceedingly probable that a serious leakage of ideas and practice of our ships was disseminated through the world by the Argentine government . ... The third inquiry that was issued showed to all the builders of the world what has been eliminated or modified in the second inquiry ; and so the process of leakage went merrily on , and with it that of the education of foreign builders and the Argentine government . 
 The United States ' Fore River Ship and Engine Company tendered the lowest bid — in part owing to the availability of cheap steel , though they were accused of quoting an unprofitable price so the ships could act as loss leaders — and was awarded the contract . This aroused further suspicion in the European bidders , who had previously believed that the United States was a non @-@ contender , though Argentina did order twelve destroyers from British , French , and German shipyards to soften the blow . These bidders , along with newspapers like the Times ( London ) , turned their anger on the American government under President William Howard Taft , whose so @-@ called " Dollar Diplomacy " policy had led his State Department to go to great lengths to obtain the contracts . Their reactions may have been justified : Taft boasted in the high @-@ profile 1910 State of the Union address that the Argentine dreadnought order was awarded to American manufacturers " largely through the good offices of the Department of State . " 
 The Argentine contract included an option for a third dreadnought in case the Brazilian government adhered to its contractual obligations to order a third dreadnought . Two newspapers , La Prensa and La Argentina , heavily advocated for a third ship ; the latter even started a petition to raise money for a new battleship . The American minister to Argentina , Charles H. Sherrill , cabled back to the United States that " this newspaper rivalry promises the early conclusion of a movement which means a third battleship whether by public subscription or by Government funds . " On 31 December 1910 , the Argentine government decided against constructing the ship , after Roque Sáenz Peña , who had been making entreaties to Brazil to end the expensive naval race , was elected to the Presidency . In addition , the intended target of the third Argentine dreadnought , the third Brazilian dreadnought , had already been canceled multiple times . 
 The Chilean government delayed their naval plans after a financial depression brought on by the 1906 Valparaíso earthquake and a drastic fall in the nitrate market in 1907 , but these economic problems were not enough to stop them from countering the dreadnoughts purchased by their traditional rival Argentina . While Argentina 's principal concern was with Brazil , Chile also wished to respond to Peruvian military acquisitions . 
 Money for a naval building program was allocated in 1910 . Although the Chilean government solicited bids from several armament companies , nearly all believed that a British company would win the contract ; the American naval attaché opined that without anything short of a revolution the contracts were destined for the United Kingdom . The Chilean Navy had cultivated extensive ties with the United Kingdom 's Royal Navy since the 1830s , when Chilean naval officers were given places on British ships to receive training and experience they could bring back to their country . This relationship had recently been cemented when a British naval mission was requested by Chile and sent in 1911 . Still , the American and German governments attempted to swing sentiment to their side by dispatching modern naval vessels ( Delaware and Von der Tann , respectively ) to Chilean ports . Their efforts were futile , and the design tendered by Armstrong Whitworth was chosen on 25 July 1911 . 
 = = = Other navies = = = 
 Other South American navies , having limited resources and little expertise in operating large warships , were in no state to respond . The Peruvian Navy , fourth largest on the continent , had been decimated during the naval campaign of the War of the Pacific against Chile ( 1879 – 83 ) . It took the Peruvian government more than twenty years to order new warships — the Almirante Grau class ( Almirante Grau and Coronel Bolognesi ) , scout cruisers delivered in 1906 and 1907 . They were augmented by two submarines and a destroyer ordered from France . Almirante Grau was only intended to be the fleet 's flagship until a more powerful warship was purchased ; along with Coronel Bolognesi , they would be the " pioneers " of a modern navy . Proceedings reported in 1905 that this new navy would be composed of three Swiftsure @-@ like pre @-@ dreadnoughts , three armored cruisers , six destroyers , and numerous smaller warships , all acquired as part of a nine @-@ year , $ 7 million outlay . 
 None of these plans came to fruition . The closest major expansion came in 1912 , when the Peruvian Navy had an agreement to acquire an obsolete French armored cruiser in 1912 ( Dupuy de Lôme ) for three million francs . The Peruvian government paid one of a planned three planned installments , but the purchase came under criticism at home for not being able to change any balance of power with Chile . When a potential cruiser purchase by Ecuador fell through , the Peruvians quit paying for the ship , which was later converted to a merchant ship and scrapped in 1923 . 
 Other South American navies also added smaller vessels to their naval forces in the same time period . The Uruguayan Navy acquired a 1 @,@ 400 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 1 @,@ 422 t ) gunboat in 1910 , while the Venezuelan Navy bought an ex @-@ Spanish 1 @,@ 125 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 1 @,@ 143 t ) protected cruiser , Mariscal Sucre , from the United States in 1912 . The Ecuadorian Navy added a Chilean torpedo boat to its fleet in 1907 , complementing its fleet of two avisos , both around 800 long tons ( 810 t ) , two small steamers , and one minor coast guard ship . 
 = = Results : construction and trials of the new warships = = 
 Brazil 's Minas Geraes , the lead ship , was laid down by Armstrong on 17 April 1907 , while its sister São Paulo followed thirteen days later at Vickers . Completion of the partial hull needed to launch Minas Geraes was delayed by a five @-@ month strike to 10 September 1908 . São Paulo followed on 19 April 1909 . Both were christened in front of large crowds by the wife of Francisco Régis de Oliveira , the Brazilian ambassador to the United Kingdom . After fitting @-@ out , the period after a warship 's launch where it is completed , Minas Geraes was put through multiple trials of the speed , endurance , efficiency , and weaponry of the ship in September , including what was at that time the heaviest broadside ever fired off a warship , Minas Geraes was completed and handed over to Brazil on 5 January 1910 . The trials proved that the blast from the class ' superfiring upper turrets would not injure crewmen in the lower turrets . The ship itself managed to reach 21 @.@ 432 knots ( 24 @.@ 664 mph ; 39 @.@ 692 km / h ) on an indicated horsepower ( ihp ) of 27 @,@ 212 . São Paulo followed its classmate in July , after its own trials at the end of May , where the ship reached 21 @.@ 623 knots ( 24 @.@ 883 mph ; 40 @.@ 046 km / h ) at 28 @,@ 645 ihp . 
 Argentina 's Rivadavia was built by the Fore River Ship and Engine Company at its shipyard in Massachusetts . As called for in the final contract , Moreno was subcontracted out to the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of New Jersey . The steel for the ships was largely supplied by the Bethlehem Steel Company of Pennsylvania . Rivadavia was laid down on 25 May 1910 — one hundred years after the establishment of the first independent Argentine government , the Primera Junta — and launched on 26 August 1911 . Moreno was laid down on 10 July 1910 and launched on 23 September 1911 . Construction on both ships took longer than usual , and there were further delays during their sea trials when one of Rivadavia 's turbines was damaged and one of Moreno 's turbines failed . The two were only officially completed in December 1914 and February 1915 . Even the departure of Moreno was marked by mishaps , as the ship sank a barge and ran aground twice . 
 Chile 's Almirante Latorre was launched on 27 November 1913 . After the First World War broke out in Europe , work on Almirante Latorre was halted in August 1914 , and it was formally purchased on 9 September after the British Cabinet recommended it four days earlier . Almirante Latorre was not forcibly seized like the Ottoman Reşadiye and Sultân Osmân @-@ ı Evvel ( ex @-@ Rio de Janeiro ) , two other ships being built for a foreign navy , as a result of Chile 's " friendly neutral " status with the United Kingdom . The British needed to maintain this relationship owing to their dependence on Chilean nitrate imports , which were vital to the British armament industry . The former Chilean ship — the largest vessel built by Armstrong up to that time — was completed on 30 September 1915 , commissioned into the Royal Navy on 15 October , and served in that navy in the First World War . Work on the other battleship , Almirante Cochrane , was halted after the outbreak of war . The British purchased the incomplete hulk on 28 February 1918 for conversion to an aircraft carrier , as Almirante <unk> was the only large and fast hull which was immediately available and capable of being modified into a carrier without major reconstruction . Low priority and quarrels with shipyard workers slowed completion of the ship ; it was commissioned into the Royal Navy as Eagle in 1924 . 
 = = <unk> : Brazil orders again = = 
 = = = Rio de Janeiro = = = 
 After the first Brazilian dreadnought , Minas Geraes , was launched , the Brazilian government began an extended campaign to remove the third dreadnought from the contract because of political — backlash from the Revolt of the Lash coupled with warming relations with Argentina — and economic reasons . After much negotiating and attempts from Armstrong to hold the Brazilian government to the contract , the Brazilians relented , due in part to lower bond rates that made it possible for the government to borrow the necessary money . Rio de Janeiro was laid down for the first time in March 1910 . 
 By May , the Brazilian government asked Armstrong to stop work on the new warship and to submit new designs which took in the most recent advance in naval technology , super @-@ dreadnoughts . Eustace Tennyson @-@ d 'Eyncourt served as Armstrong 's liaison to Brazil . The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica specifies this design as a 655 @-@ foot ( 200 m ) long overall , 32 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 33 @,@ 000 t ) ship mounting twelve 14 @-@ inch guns and costing near £ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The many requests made by the Brazilian Navy for minor changes delayed the contract signing until 10 October 1910 , and the battleship 's keel laying was delayed further by a labor dispute with the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights , which led to a lockout . During these delays , a new Minister of the Navy , Admiral Marques Leão , was appointed to replace de Alencar — an important development , as the contract stipulated that the design could only proceed with the approval of the new Minister . Again , however , the Brazilian Navy found itself torn between two schools of thought : Leão and others in the navy favored a reversion to the 12 @-@ inch gun , but others , led by the outgoing Minister of the Navy ( de Alencar ) and the head of the Brazilian naval commission in the United Kingdom ( Rear Admiral Duarte Huet de <unk> Pinto Guedes ) , were strongly in favor of obtaining the ship with the largest armament — in this case , a design drawn up by <unk> , carrying eight 16 @-@ inch guns , six 9 @.@ 4 @-@ inch guns , and fourteen 6 @-@ inch guns . 
 D 'Eyncourt , who had departed Brazil in October immediately after the contract was signed , returned in March 1911 to display the various design options available to the Brazilian Navy . Armstrong evidently thought the second faction would prevail , so he also took with him everything needed to close a deal on <unk> 's design . By mid @-@ March , Armstrong 's contacts in Brazil reported that Leão had convinced the recently elected President Hermes Rodrigues da Fonseca to cancel the design with twelve 14 @-@ inch guns in favor of a smaller ship . The credit may not have laid with Leão alone , though ; da Fonseca was already dealing with multiple issues . Most importantly , he had to deal with the fallout from a large naval revolt in November 1910 ( the Revolt of the Lash ) , which had seen three of the new vessels just purchased by the navy , along with one older coast @-@ defense ship , mutiny against the use of corporal punishment in the navy . 
 To make matters worse , the dreadnoughts ' expense combined with loan payments and a worsening economy led to growing government debt compounded by budget deficits . By one measure of Brazil 's GDP per capita , income in the country rose from $ 718 in 1905 to a high of $ 836 in 1911 before declining over the next three years to a low of $ 780 in 1914 ( both measured in 1990 international dollars ) . It did not fully recover until after the First World War . At the same time , Brazil 's external and internal debt reached $ 500 and $ 335 million ( respectively , in contemporaneous dollar amounts ) by 1913 , partly through rising deficits , which were $ 22 million in 1908 and $ 47 million by 1912 . In May , the president commented negatively on the new ship : 
 When I assumed office , I found that my predecessor had signed a contract for the building of the battleship Rio de Janeiro , a vessel of 32 @,@ 000 tons , with an armament of 14 @-@ inch guns . Considerations of every kind pointed to the inconvenience of acquiring such a vessel and to the revision of the contract in the sense of reducing the tonnage . This was done , and we shall possess a powerful unit which will not be built on exaggerated lines such as have not as yet stood the time of experience . 
 D 'Eyncourt probably avoided proposing any design with 16 @-@ inch guns when he saw the political situation . In meetings with Leão , designs of only ten 12 @-@ inch guns mounted on the centerline were quickly rejected , even though their broadside was as strong as that of the Minas Geraes class , but a design with no less than fourteen 12 @-@ inch guns emerged as the frontrunner . Author David Topliss attributes this to political necessity , as he believed the Minister of the Navy could not validate purchasing a seemingly less @-@ powerful dreadnought than the Minas Geraes class : with larger guns ruled out , the only remaining choice was a larger number of guns . 
 After numerous requests for design alterations from the Brazilian Navy were accommodated or rejected , a contract was signed for a ship with fourteen 12 @-@ inch guns on 3 June 1911 for £ 2 @,@ 675 @,@ 000 , and Rio de Janeiro 's keel was laid for the fourth time on 14 September . It did not take long for the Brazilian government to reconsider their decision again ; by mid @-@ 1912 , battleships with 14 @-@ inch guns were under construction , and suddenly it seemed that Rio de Janeiro would be outclassed upon completion . Making matters worse , a European depression after the end of the Second Balkan War in August 1913 reduced Brazil 's ability to obtain foreign loans . This coincided with a collapse in Brazil 's coffee and rubber exports , the latter due to the loss of the Brazilian rubber monopoly to British plantations in the Far East . The price of coffee declined by 20 percent and Brazilian exports of it dropped 12 @.@ 5 percent between 1912 and 1913 ; rubber saw a similar decline of 25 and 36 @.@ 6 percent , respectively . The Brazilian Navy later claimed that selling Rio de Janeiro was a tactical decision , so they could have two divisions of battleships : two with 12 @-@ inch guns ( the Minas Geraes class ) , and two with 15 @-@ inch guns . 
 Armstrong studied whether replacing the 12 @-@ inch guns with seven 15 @-@ inch guns would be feasible , but Brazil was probably already attempting to sell the ship . In the tension building up to the First World War , many countries , including Russia , Italy , Greece , and the Ottoman Empire , were interested in purchasing the ship . While Russia quickly dropped out , Italy and the rival Greeks and Ottomans were all highly interested . The Italians seemed close to purchasing the ship until the French government decided to back the Greeks — rather than allow the Italians , who were the principal naval rivals of the French , to obtain the ship . The Grecian government made an offer for the original purchase price plus an additional £ 50 @,@ 000 , but as the Greeks worked to obtain an initial installment , the Ottoman government was also making offers . 
 The Brazilian government rejected an Ottoman proposal to swap ships , with Brazil 's Rio de Janeiro going to the Ottomans and Reşadiye going to Brazil , presumably with some amount of money . The Brazilian government would only accept a monetary offer . Lacking this , the Ottomans were forced to find a loan . Fortunately for them , they were able to obtain one from French banker acting independent of his government , and the Ottoman Navy secured the Rio de Janeiro on 29 December 1913 for £ 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 as @-@ is . As part of the purchase contract , the remainder of the ship was constructed with £ 2 @,@ 340 @,@ 000 in Ottoman money . Renamed Sultân Osmân @-@ ı Evvel , it was eventually taken over by the British shortly after the beginning of the First World War , serving with the Royal Navy as HMS Agincourt . 
 The Argentine government authorized a third dreadnought in October 1912 in case Rio de Janeiro was completed and delivered , but the ship was never named or built . 
 = = = Riachuelo = = = 
 After selling Rio de Janeiro , the Brazilian government asked Armstrong and Vickers to prepare designs for a new battleship , something strongly supported by the Navy League of Brazil ( Liga Maritima ) . Armstrong agreed to construct the ship without any further payments from Brazil . They replied with at least fourteen designs , six from Vickers ( December 1913 through March 1914 ) and eight from Armstrong ( February 1914 ) . Vickers ' designs varied between eight and ten 15 @-@ inch and eight 16 @-@ inch guns , with speeds between 22 and 25 knots ( the lower @-@ end ships having mixed firing , the higher using oil ) , and displacements between 26 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 long tons ) and 30 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 30 @,@ 000 long tons ) . Armstrong took two basic designs , one with eight and the other with ten 15 @-@ inch guns , and varied their speed and firing . 
 While most secondary sources do not mention that Brazil ordered a battleship , with the ship 's entry in the warship encyclopedia Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships even remarking that " Brazil had not selected from the four design variations , " the Brazilian government chose what was labeled as Design 781 , the first of the eight 15 @-@ inch designs tendered by Armstrong , which also shared characteristics with the Queen Elizabeth and Revenge classes then being built for the United Kingdom . They placed an order for one ship of this design , to be named Riachuelo , at the Armstrong Whitworth shipyard in Elswick on 12 May 1914 . Some preliminary gathering of materials was completed for a planned keel laying date of 10 September , but the beginning of the First World War in August 1914 delayed plans . Riachuelo was officially suspended on 14 January 1915 and canceled on 13 May 1915 . 
 = = Decline : instability and public unrest = = 
 = = = Brazilian naval revolt = = = 
 In late November 1910 , a large naval revolt , later named the Revolt of the Lash , or Revolta da Chibata , broke out in Rio de Janeiro . The tension was kindled by the racial makeup of the navy 's regular crewmembers , who were heavily black or mulatto , whereas their officers were mostly white . The Baron of Rio Branco commented : " For the recruitment of marines and enlisted men , we bring aboard the dregs of our urban centers , the most worthless lumpen , without preparation of any sort . Ex @-@ slaves and the sons of slaves make up our ships ' crews , most of them dark @-@ skinned or dark @-@ skinned mulattos . " 
 This kind of impressment , combined with the heavy use of corporal punishment for even minor offenses , meant that relations between the black crews and white officers was tepid at best . Crewmen aboard Minas Geraes began planning for a revolt in 1910 . They chose João Cândido Felisberto , an experienced sailor , as their leader . The mutiny was delayed several times by disagreements among the participants . In a major meeting on 13 November , some of the revolutionaries expressed a desire to revolt when the president would be inaugurated ( 15 November ) , but another leader , Francisco Dias Martins , talked them out of the idea , insisting that their demands would be overshadowed by a perceived rebellion against the political system as a whole . The immediate catalyst for their revolt came on 21 November 1910 , when an Afro @-@ Brazilian sailor , Marcelino Rodrigues Menezes , was brutally flogged 250 times for insubordination . A Brazilian government observer , former navy captain José Carlos de Carvalho , stated that the sailor 's back looked like " a mullet sliced open for salting . " 
 The revolt began aboard Minas Geraes at around 10 pm on 22 November ; the ship 's commander and several loyal crewmen were murdered in the process . Soon after , São Paulo , the new cruiser Bahia , the coast @-@ defense ship Deodoro , the minelayer República , the training ship Benjamin Constant , and the torpedo boats <unk> and <unk> all revolted with relatively little violence . The first four ships represented the newest and strongest ships in the navy ; Minas Geraes , São Paulo , and Bahia had been completed and commissioned only months before . Deodoro was twelve years old and had recently undergone a refit . The crews of the smaller warships made up only two percent of the mutineers , and some moved to the largest ships after the revolt began . 
 Key warships that remained in government hands included the old cruiser Almirante Barroso , Bahia 's sister Rio Grande do Sul , the eight new destroyers of the Pará class . Their crews were in a state of flux at the time : with nearly half of the navy 's enlisted men in Rio at that time in open revolt , naval officers were suspicious of even those who remained loyal to the government . These suspicions were perhaps well @-@ placed , given that radio operators on loyal ships passed on operational plans to the mutineers . Enlisted men on ships that remained in government hands were reduced wherever possible , and officers took over all of the positions that would be involved in direct combat . Further complicating matters were weapon supplies , such as the destroyer 's torpedoes . These could not be fired without firing caps , yet the caps were not where they were supposed to be . When they were located and delivered , they did not fit the newer torpedoes on board the destroyers . The correct caps were fitted only 48 hours after the rebellion began . 
 Felisberto and his fellow sailors demanded an end to the ' slavery ' being practiced by the navy , most notably the continued use of whipping despite its ban in every other Western nation . Though navy officers and the president were staunchly opposed to any sort of amnesty and made plans to attack the rebel @-@ held ships , many legislators were supportive . Over the next three days , both houses of the Brazilian National Congress , led by the influential senator Ruy Barbosa , passed a general bill granting amnesty to all involved and ending the use of corporal punishment . 
 In the aftermath of the revolt , the two Brazilian dreadnoughts were disarmed by the removal of their guns ' <unk> . The revolt and consequent state of the navy , which was essentially unable to operate for fear of another rebellion , caused many leading Brazilians , including the president , prominent politicians like Barbosa and the Baron of Rio Branco , and the editor of the most respected newspaper in Brazil , Jornal do Commercio , to question the use of the new ships and support their sale to a foreign country . The British ambassador to Brazil , <unk> Haggard , was ecstatic at Rio Branco 's about @-@ face , saying " This is indeed a wonderful surrender on the part of the man who was answerable for the purchase and who looked upon them as the most cherished offspring of his policy . " Shortly before the vote on the amnesty bill , Ruy Barbosa emphatically outlined his opposition to the ships : 
 Let me , in conclusion , point out two profound lessons of the bitter situation in which we find ourselves . The first is that a military government is not one whit more able to save the country from the vicissitudes of war nor any braver or resourceful in meeting them than a civil government . The second is that the policy of great armaments has no place on the American continent . At least on our part and the part of the nations which surround us , the policy which we ought to follow with joy and hope is that of drawing closer international ties through the development of commercial relations , the peace and friendship of all the peoples who inhabit the countries of America . 
 The experience of Brazil in this respect is decisive . All of the forces employed for twenty years in the perfecting of the means of our national defense have served , after all , to turn upon our own breasts these successive attempts at revolt . International war has not yet come to the doors of our republic . Civil war has come many times , armed by these very weapons which we have so vainly prepared for our defense against a foreign enemy . Let us do away with these ridiculous and perilous great armaments , securing international peace by means rather of just and equitable relations with our neighbors . On the American continent , at least , it is not necessary to maintain a ' peace armada ' ; that hideous cancer which is devouring continuously the vitals of the nations of Europe . 
 In the end , the president and cabinet decided against selling the ships because they feared it would hurt them politically . This came despite a consensus agreeing that the ships should be disposed of , possibly to fund smaller warships capable of traversing Brazil 's many rivers . The executive 's apprehension was heightened by Barbosa 's speech given before the revolt 's end , as he also used the occasion to attack the government , or what he called the " brutal militaristic regime . " Still , the Brazilians ordered Armstrong to cease working towards laying down their third dreadnought , which induced the Argentine government to not pick up their contractual option for a third dreadnought , and the United States ' ambassador to Brazil cabled home to state that the Brazilian desire for naval preeminence in Latin America was quelled , though this proved to be short @-@ lived . 
 Although the Minas Geraes class remained in Brazilian hands , the mutiny had a clear detrimental effect on the navy 's readiness : by 1912 , an Armstrong agent stated that the ships were in terrible condition , with rust already forming on turrets and boilers . The agent believed it would cost the Brazilian Navy around £ 700 @,@ 000 to address these issues . Haggard tersely commented , " These ships are absolutely useless to Brazil , " a sentiment echoed by Proceedings . Despite the government 's refusal to sell the two Minas Geraes @-@ class ships and subsequent support for acquiring Rio de Janeiro , some historians credit the rebellion , combined with the Baron of Rio Branco 's death in 1912 , as major factors in the Brazilian government 's decision ( which was possibly made by January 1913 , but certainly by September ) to sell the ship to the Ottomans . 
 = = = Attempted sales = = = 
 After Rio de Janeiro was purchased by the Ottoman Empire , the Argentine government bowed to popular demand and began to seek a buyer for their two dreadnoughts . The money received in return would have been devoted to internal improvements . Three bills directing that the battleships be sold were introduced into the Argentine National Congress in mid @-@ 1914 , but all were defeated . Still , the British and Germans expressed worries that the ships could be sold to a belligerent nation , while the Russian , Austrian , Ottoman , Italian , and Greek governments were all reportedly interested in buying both ships , the latter as a counter to the Ottoman purchase of Rio de Janeiro . 
 The New @-@ York Tribune reported in late April that the Argentine government rejected a $ 17 @.@ 5 million offer for Moreno alone , which would have netted them a large profit over the original construction cost of the ships ( $ 12 million ) . The United States , worried that its neutrality would not be respected and its technology would be released for study to a foreign country , put diplomatic pressure on the Argentine government to keep the ships , which it eventually did . Similarly , news outlets reported in late 1913 and early 1914 that Greece had reached an accord to purchase Chile 's first battleship as a counterbalance to the Ottoman acquisition of Rio de Janeiro , but despite a developing sentiment within Chile to sell one or both of the dreadnoughts , no deal was made . 
 In each of the countries involved in the South American dreadnought arms race , movements arose that advocated the sale of the dreadnoughts to redirect the substantial amounts of money involved toward what they viewed as more worthy pursuits . These costs were rightfully viewed as enormous . After the Minas Geraes class was ordered , a Brazilian newspaper equated the initial purchase cost for the original three ships as equaling 3 @,@ 125 miles of railroad tracks or 30 @,@ 300 homesteads . Naval historian Robert Scheina put the price at £ 6 @,@ 110 @,@ 100 without accounting for ammunition , which was £ 605 @,@ 520 , or necessary upgrades to docks , which was £ 832 @,@ 000 . Costs for maintenance and related issues , which in the first five years of Minas Geraes 's and São Paulo 's commissioned lives was about 60 percent of the initial cost , only added to the already staggering sum of money . The two <unk> were purchased for nearly a fifth of the Argentine government 's yearly income , a figure which did not include the later in @-@ service costs . Historian Robert K. Massie rounded the figure to a full quarter of each government 's annual income . 
 In addition , the nationalistic sentiments that exacerbated the naval arms race gave way to slowing economies and negative public opinions which came to support investing inside the country instead . Commenting on this , the United States ' Minister to Chile , Henry Prather Fletcher , wrote to Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan : " Since the naval rivalry began in 1910 , financial conditions , which were none too good then , have grown worse ; and as time approaches for the final payment , feeling has been growing in these countries that perhaps they are much more in need of money than of battleships . " 
 = = Aftermath : post @-@ war expansions = = 
 The First World War effectively ended the dreadnought race , as all three countries suddenly found themselves unable to acquire additional warships . After the conflict , the race never resumed , but many plans for post @-@ war naval expansions and improvements were postulated by the Argentine , Brazilian , and Chilean governments . 
 The Brazilians modernized Minas Geraes , São Paulo , and the two cruisers acquired under the 1904 plan , Bahia and Rio Grande do Sul , between 1918 and 1926 . This was sorely needed , as all four ships were not ready to fight a modern war . Although the Brazilian government intended to send São Paulo overseas for service in the Grand Fleet , both it and Minas Geraes had not been modernized since entering service , meaning they were without essential equipment like modern fire control . Maintenance on the two ships had also been neglected , which was most clearly illustrated when São Paulo was sent to New York for modernization : fourteen of its eighteen boilers broke down , and the ship required the assistance of the American battleship Nebraska and cruiser Raleigh to continue the voyage . The two cruisers were in " deplorable " condition , as they were able to steam at a top speed of only 18 knots ( 21 mph ; 33 km / h ) thanks to a desperate need for new condensers and boiler tubes . With repairs , though , both participated in the war as part of Brazil 's main naval contribution to the conflict . 
 The Brazilian Navy also made plans to acquire additional ships in the 1920s and 30s , but both were sharply reduced from the original proposals . In 1924 , they contemplated constructing a relatively modest number of warships , including a heavy cruiser , five destroyers , and five submarines . In the same year , the newly arrived American naval mission , led by Rear Admiral Carl Theodore <unk> , tendered a naval expansion plan of 151 @,@ 000 tons , divided between battleships ( 70 @,@ 000 ) , cruisers ( 60 @,@ 000 ) , destroyers ( 15 @,@ 000 ) , and submarines ( 6 @,@ 000 ) . The United States ' State Department , led by Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes and fresh from negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty , was not keen on seeing another dreadnought race , so Hughes quickly moved to thwart the efforts of the mission . Only one Italian @-@ built submarine , <unk> , was acquired during this time . 
 By the 1930s , the international community believed that the bulk of the Brazilian Navy was " obsolete " and were old enough to no longer be " considered effective . " Still , Minas Geraes was modernized a second time at the Rio de Janeiro Naval Yard from June 1931 to April 1938 . Plans to give similar treatment to São Paulo were dropped due to the ship 's poor material condition . During the same period , the Brazilian government looked into purchasing cruisers from the United States Navy but ran into the restrictions of the Washington and London Naval Treaties , which placed restrictions on the sale of used warships to foreign countries . The Brazilians eventually contracted for six destroyers from the United Kingdom . In the interim , a plan to lease six destroyers from the United States was abandoned after it was met with strong opposition from both international and American institutions . Three <unk> Dias @-@ class destroyers , based on the American Mahan class , were laid down in Brazil with six minelayers , all of which were launched between 1939 and 1941 . Though both programs required foreign assistance and were consequently delayed by the war , all nine ships were completed by 1944 . 
 In the 1920s , nearly all of the major warships of the Argentine Navy were obsolete ; aside from Rivadavia and Moreno , the newest major warship had been constructed at the end of the nineteenth century . The Argentine government recognized this , and as part of holding on to their naval superiority in the region , they sent Rivadavia and Moreno to the United States in 1924 and 1926 to be modernized . In addition , in 1926 the Argentine Congress allotted 75 million gold pesos for a naval building program . This resulted in the acquisition of three cruisers ( the Italian @-@ built Veinticinco de Mayo class and the British @-@ built La Argentina , twelve destroyers ( the Spanish @-@ built <unk> class and the British @-@ built Mendoza / Buenos Aires classes ) , and three submarines ( the Italian @-@ built Santa Fe class ) . 
 Chile began to seek additional ships to bolster its fleet in 1919 , and the United Kingdom eagerly offered many of its surplus warships . This action worried nearby nations , who feared that a Chilean attempt to become the region 's most powerful navy would destabilize the area and start another naval arms race . Chile asked for Canada and Eagle , the two battleships they ordered before the war , but the cost of converting the latter back to a battleship was too high . Planned replacements included the two remaining Invincible @-@ class battlecruisers , but a leak to the press of the secret negotiations to acquire them caused an uproar within Chile itself over the value of such ships . In the end , Chile only bought Canada and four destroyers in April 1920 — all ships that had been ordered from British yards by the Chilean government before 1914 but were purchased by the Royal Navy after the British entered the First World War — for relatively low prices . Canada , for instance , was sold for just £ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , less than half of what had been required to construct the ship . 
 Over the next several years , the Chileans continued to acquire more ships from the British , like six destroyers ( the Serrano class ) and three submarines ( the Capitan O 'Brien class ) . Almirante Latorre was modernized in the United Kingdom from 1929 to 1931 at the Devonport Dockyard . A recession and a major naval revolt then led to the battleship 's de facto inactivation in the early 1930s . In the late 1930s , the Chilean government inquired into the possibility of constructing an 8 @,@ 600 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 8 @,@ 700 t ) cruiser in the United Kingdom , Italy , Germany , or Sweden , but this did not lead to an order . A second plan to acquire two small cruisers was dropped with the beginning of the Second World War . Soon after the attack on Pearl Harbor , the United States attempted to purchase Almirante Latorre , two destroyers , and a submarine tender , probably because the Chilean Navy had a reputation for keeping its ships in top @-@ quality condition , but the offer was rejected . 
 During the Second World War , the three major South American navies found themselves unable to acquire major warships ; they were only able to do so again after the conflict , when the United States and United Kingdom had many unnecessary or surplus warships . The war had proved the obsolete status of battleships , so the South American navies were seeking cruisers , destroyers , and submarines , yet they ran into political difficulties in acquiring anything larger than Flower @-@ class corvettes and River @-@ class frigates . They were only able to acquire them when the Red Scare began to strongly affect American and international politics . One of the deals reached under the Mutual Defense Assistance Act ( 1949 ) sold six American light cruisers to Argentina , Brazil , and Chile in January 1951 . While this bolstered the navies of important South American allies of the United States , which would be treaty @-@ bound to assist the United States in any war , naval historian Robert Scheina argues that the American government also used the opportunity to significantly affect the traditional naval rivalry among the three countries . The warships sold unilaterally changed the naval outlook of all three nations , leading them to accept parity ( as opposed to the Argentine pre @-@ war stipulation that its fleet be equal to Brazil 's and Chile 's combined ) . 
 The venerable dreadnoughts of South America soldiered on for a short time after the war . The US Navy 's All Hands magazine reported in a series of 1948 articles that all save São Paulo and Almirante Latorre were still in active service ; the former had been decommissioned and the latter undergoing repairs . With the influx of the modern cruisers , frigates , and corvettes , the battleships were quickly sold for scrap . The Brazilian Navy was the first to dispose of its dreadnoughts , the oldest in the world by that time . São Paulo was sold for scrap in 1951 but sank in a storm north of the Azores while under tow . Minas Geraes followed two years later and was broken up in Genoa beginning in 1954 . Of the Argentine dreadnoughts , Moreno was towed to Japan for scrapping in 1957 , and Rivadavia was broken up in Italy beginning in 1959 . Almirante Latorre , inactive and unrepaired after a 1951 explosion in its engine room , was decommissioned in October 1958 and followed Moreno to Japan in 1959 . 
 = = Ships involved = = 
 = = Images = = 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = 1949 Florida hurricane = 
 The 1949 Florida hurricane was the second recorded storm and the strongest and most intense tropical cyclone of the 1949 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the most intense tropical cyclone to affect the United States during the season , with a minimum central pressure of 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 18 inHg ) at landfall . The cyclone originated from an easterly wave near the Leeward Islands , and it rapidly intensified to a hurricane near the Bahamas . It strengthened to a major hurricane northwest of Nassau , Bahamas , and it struck West Palm Beach , Florida as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds near 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) and peak gusts near 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) above the surface . It turned north over the Florida peninsula , and it transitioned to an extratropical low pressure area over New England . The tropical cyclone inflicted $ 52 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( 1949 USD ) in damage , most of which was incurred in the state of Florida . It was the costliest storm of the season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 23 , a moderate tropical storm developed 200 miles ( 323 km ) east of Sint Maarten . Operationally , the system was treated as an easterly wave until it moved through the Bahamas . It is believed that the system originated near the Cape Verde islands . On August 24 , the tropical storm passed north of the Leeward Islands and San Juan , Puerto Rico , and then strengthened to a minimal hurricane with 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds on August 25 . Subsequently , it strengthened rapidly , and the cyclone was noted as " well developed " when it passed near Nassau with 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) winds on the morning of August 26 . At the time , it was the equivalent of a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm strengthened further over the Gulf Stream , and it moved ashore over the city of West Palm Beach as a strong Category 4 hurricane around 7 : 20 p.m. EDT . The city 's airport reported calm conditions from 7 : 20 – 7 : 40 p.m. , and the minimum central pressure of 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 18 inHg ) was measured at the site . Peak gusts were recorded at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) before the anemometer blew away . A maximum sustained wind of 153 mph ( 246 km / h ) was reported from the Jupiter Inlet Light station prior to the loss of the anemometer ; although conditions were slightly more severe after the reading , reliable estimates are unavailable . The Atlantic hurricane database lists the cyclone as a strong Category 4 hurricane at landfall . The wind reading is the basis for the Category 4 designation in the Atlantic hurricane database , although a reduction from the anemometer 's elevated location lends credence to the concept of a weaker system . Originally , the system was designated as a Category 3 hurricane in the state of Florida , based on the minimum central pressure reading of 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 18 inHg ) ; this pressure corresponds to the original classification of a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . However , modern analysis applies Saffir @-@ Simpson rankings based on maximum sustained wind speeds . The 1949 Florida hurricane will be eventually reanalyzed by the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project , which may find a weaker hurricane in Florida . The central pressure of 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 18 inHg ) is unusually high for a strong Category 4 hurricane ; the reanalysis project has discovered that hurricanes erroneously featured stronger winds than the typical pressure / wind relationship in the 1940s – 1960s , unlike subsequent hurricanes in the 1970s – 1980s . The evidence suggests wind speeds may have been overestimated for hurricanes in the 1940s – 1960s . 
 Inland , the hurricane moved over the northern portion of Lake Okeechobee , following a similar path as the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane . On August 27 , the hurricane recurved over the Florida peninsula , and then weakened to a Category 1 hurricane northeast of Tampa . The system diminished to a tropical storm near Cedar Key , and it entered southern Georgia during the morning of August 28 . The system passed over the Carolinas as a weak tropical storm , and it was operationally noted as a " weak disturbance " at the time . The cyclone passed through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and New England on August 29 ; it became extratropical over New Hampshire . On August 31 , the extratropical low was last detected over the western North Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On August 25 , the northern Bahamas were advised to initiate hurricane precautions , and a hurricane warning was issued for the islands . South Floridians were encouraged to closely monitor the progress of the storm . On August 26 , hurricane warnings were released from Miami to Vero Beach ; officials decided to cancel proposed evacuations of the Lake Okeechobee region , as the presence of the Herbert Hoover Dike was expected to prevent flooding . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In the Bahamas , the cyclone produced 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) wind gusts on Bimini . Damages in the Bahamas are unknown . 
 In Florida , the hurricane produced hurricane @-@ force gusts from Miami Beach to Saint Augustine . The majority of the state experienced sustained winds of at least 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The strongest winds of 100 @-@ 126 mph ( 161 @-@ 203 km / h ) were observed in the Lake Okeechobee region , while unofficial wind gusts reached 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) at Stuart . Additionally , Vero Beach reported sustained winds of 97 mph ( 156 km / h ) and peak gusts of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) . The minimum central pressure near Lake Okeechobee was 956 mbar ( 28 @.@ 24 inHg ) at Canal Point . Palm Beach , Jupiter , and Stuart experienced the most severe damage from the storm in south Florida ; hundreds of homes , apartment buildings , stores , and warehouse buildings lost roofs and windows . Interior furnishings were blown through broken glass into the streets . Overall , the storm caused two deaths and $ 52 million in damage , mostly in Florida . 
 Trees and power lines were knocked down in Miami . Five homes were destroyed in Delray Beach . The " negro section " of Boynton Beach suffered $ 10 @,@ 000 in damage . Tides lashed the coast , with the worst impact between Lake Worth and Palm Beach . Much of the island of Palm Beach was covered with power lines , trees , broken glass , sand , and other debris . Between Joseph E. Widener 's mansion in Palm Beach and the Lake Worth casino , several washouts were reported . Along State Road 704 ( Royal Palm Way ) , many royal palm trees were toppled . At the Society of the Four Arts , several trees were uprooted and the library garden was ruined . The radio antenna at the town hall collapsed , damaging the roof , police and firefighters barracks , the door to the fire station , and a car . Palm Beach suffered approximately $ 2 @.@ 6 million in damage . In Lake Worth , a total of about 400 people stayed at six shelters in the area during the storm . Between 300 and 400 homes were impacted by the storm , with most of the effects limited to broken roofs , shattered windows , and water damage . One home was completely demolished . This does not include the number of homes deroofed in the " negro quarters " . Additionally , a trailer was overturned and " rolled over and over like a rubber ball " . Many plate @-@ glass windows broke in the business district , while a filling station on State Road 802 was destroyed . 
 In West Palm Beach , cars were overturned in the interior of a dealership as winds shattered windows . 
 Tides reached 12 feet ( 144 in ) above normal at Belle Glade and Clewiston , but the Herbert Hoover Dike remained intact , protecting the area from severe flooding . Minimal erosion occurred in some locales . 
 Water entered many homes in Palm Beach and Martin counties . Snakes and mosquitoes infested many residences . Precipitation totals of 8 @.@ 18 , 7 @.@ 10 , and 9 @.@ 51 inches ( 242 mm ) were measured at Belle Glade , Okeechobee , and St. Lucie Lock , respectively . Radio towers were toppled in Lake Worth and Belle Glade . 
 Severe damage was received by 40 percent of Stuart 's residences and commercial structures , and 90 percent required repairs . A church , baseball park , and ice company was destroyed in the area 's black neighborhoods . Many flimsy buildings were destroyed in the neighborhoods . Three portions of the Jensen causeway near Sewall 's Point were ripped away . A hangar and beacon was destroyed at the local airport in Martin County . 500 people were homeless in Stuart . A water mark of 8 @.@ 5 feet ( 102 in ) was recorded on the St. Lucie River near Stuart . 
 The cyclone inflicted heavy citrus losses , and one @-@ third of the trees were uprooted in many groves . Agricultural losses reached $ 20 million ( 1949 USD ) , including 14 million boxes of fruit . Wind gusts of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) affected Clermont , and numerous central Florida communities reported severe damage from the winds . The observation station at Archbold Biological Station reported peak wind gusts of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) ; the town of Sebring reported 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) gusts , which caused damage to trees and severe structural damage to buildings . Estimations of property damage reached $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1949 USD ) in the town , and local citrus groves estimated losses near $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( 1949 USD ) . Buildings received considerable damage in the Lake Placid area , and telegraph , telephone , rail , and bus services were disrupted . Flooding affected Georgia and the Carolinas , although the rains alleviated drought conditions in Maryland , Pennsylvania , New York , and New England . Charleston , South Carolina reported a wind gust of 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) , and power lines were damaged . In Maryland , damage was minimal , although trees were prostrated and electrical services were down . Two people were killed in Florida , but advance warnings prevented a higher death toll . 
 = Wave 1 = 
 Wave 1 is the third extended play released under <unk> musician Seth Haley 's pseudonym Com Truise . Haley described his releases as Com Truise as parts of a story about the world 's first " Synthetic Astronaut " on his adventure to a planet , and Wave 1 is where he lands on a kind @-@ of replica of Earth . Musically , Haley had to get inspiration from several artists as this part of the story is also where the music starts to change . 
 The EP is a combination of styles including synth soul , drum and bass , synth funk and electro , and retains the bright and danceable vibe from Com Truise 's debut album Galactic Melt ( 2011 ) . Promoted with two pre @-@ EP track releases , a music video for the track " Subsonic " and a February – March 2014 tour , the EP was issued on the Ghostly International label in February 2014 to generally positive reviews , with critics praising the record 's creativity . Commercially , it also landed in the top ten of the American Billboard Dance / Electronic and Heatseekers album charts . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In a June 2013 Twitter post , Seth Haley said he wrote Wave 1 without knowing it was a reflection of how he was living in the few months of his life before . He started taking care of his health , suffered through an ended relationship , and relocated to Brooklyn . He said that despite not usually revealing his personal life publicly , he said in an interview that when he makes his music , : " it 's always just there , and it happens , but I don 't focus on it . My music 's all based on this story about an android that travels to this other planet . So I 'm not really writing about myself , but then I realized I have been all along . It 's all been about me . " 
 Maintaining the bright and danceable feel from Com Truise 's 2011 debut studio album Galactic Melt and garnering more of a melodic approach than previous releases of the project , Wave 1 is a combination of synth soul , drum and bass , synth funk , electro , and , in the words of a Pitchfork Media reviewer , " fussy 80s computer @-@ pop " . Seth Haley has described the character of Com Truise as the first ever " Synthetic Astronaut " , and each release under the name shows the next part in this voyage to a planet . Wave 1 is a part of the story where he lands on a sort @-@ of replica of Earth , and Haley thought there was " something eerie about it , something familiar but something peculiar as well . " Because this was also meant to be a part of the story where the music starts changing , he had taken inspiration from several acts including New Order and Prince to have a much broader range of tempos and styles in each track . 
 = = Tracks = = 
 The opener " Wasat " sets the scene of the story , starting with a short , atmospheric prelude before it moves into " an uptempo , <unk> groove " . The " VHS @-@ quality dubstep " track " Mind " is where the record gets suspenseful , as the drums " threaten " to become , but doesn 't entirely become , a fully developed hard @-@ hitting four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor beat . These two tracks were described by a Spectrum Culture critic as " a practice in coalescence ; taking a moment to take shape and then defying one another ’ s difference until they too find their peaceful plane of existence . " The most melodic track on the EP , " Declination " , as well as probably the " most straightforwardly melodic " cut in Com Truise 's discography as of the release of the EP , " glides into your headphones like a starship slipping down out of hyperspace " , featuring vocals of Joel Ford from the projects Ford & Lopatin , <unk> and Young Ejecta . As a reviewer analyzed , the track opens as " spine @-@ tingling sci @-@ fi dissonance " before turning into a 1980s @-@ esque new wave song . 
 Wave 1 decreases its tensions on " Subsonic " , which goes through several " movements " of slow @-@ building , evocative sounds , including a " hell of a squelchy bass " , that the press release analogized to be " <unk> " the creation of new stars . This evocative vibe continues into " Valis Called ( Control ) " , its title referencing the works of one of the considered " gods of this retro synth phenomenon " Phillip K. Dick , followed by the " futuristic R & B " song " <unk> Mei " , a track consisting of broken drum beats and spiky synth sounds . The Jamie xx @-@ style title track of Wave 1 calmly ends the EP as the lead melody drifts far away into several " zipping " sci @-@ fi textures and " clustered percussion . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The lead single for Wave 1 was " Declination " , released on December 3 , 2013 . On January 23 , 2014 , " Subsonic " premiered on the website of Spin magazine , which announced the EP 's track list and a North American tour promoting the record that lasted from February 11 to March 15 . The EP was officially distributed on the Ghostly International label on February 18 . On April 14 , Vice magazine 's electronic music channel Thump premiered the video for " Subsonic " . Directed by Hans Lo , Thump summarized that the video " jacks us into a William Gibson novel , leading us through the gridded passages of the Information Superhighway . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Wave 1 received generally positive reviews upon its release ; the EP holds a weighted mean of an aggregate 69 out of 100 from Metacritic based on six reviews , indicating that , according to the site , the album 's critical reception was favorable in general . Daniel Sylvester of Exclaim ! called the EP " looser , more focused and much more imaginative " that Com Truise 's past work , writing that while the artist has yet to make " a truly transcendent piece of art , Wave 1 shows the young <unk> in transition , fearlessly searching for his definitive sound . " Similarly , Sputnikmusic reviewer <unk> praised Wave 1 for making a unique new sound with the chillwave palette instead of having limits from the genre , assuming that it could 've been the peak of the microgenre if the record 's other songs were as good as " Valis ( Called Control ) " and " Subsonic " . Mark Jenkins reviewed it for The Washington Post , and mainly highlighted its unpredictable melodic and rhythmic moments , while Pat Levy , reviewing for Consequence of Sound , honored Haley for getting out of his comfort zone while still having the same sounds and style of his past records . Pitchfork Media 's Paul Thompson liked the EP as " a mostly welcome return , " but criticized its focus of having perfectly @-@ detailed sound instead of new musical ideas . 
 In more mixed reviews , Derek Staples , writing for the site Spectrum Culture , wrote that with Wave 1 , the artist was starting to lose his " inventive edge " in trying to recreate the same sound of his past releases for nostalgic purposes . A NME critic praised the sounds on the EP , but called it more " disjointed " and " disorienting " than his past albums due to its " abrasive " and glitchy sound and lack of a " steady groove . " A reviewer for the magazine XLR8R wrote that Wave 1 may interest listeners , but also was a indication Com Truise 's creativity may decline with releases in his later career . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Seth Haley . 
 = = Credits and Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 Songwriting , production , artwork – Com Truise 
 Vocals on " Declination " – Joel Ford 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = ( I Can 't Make It ) Another Day = 
 " ( I Can 't Make It ) Another Day " is a song by American recording artist Michael Jackson featuring Lenny Kravitz , released on the posthumous album Michael which has sold 6 @.@ 5 million globally . Initially leaked as a 90 @-@ second snippet , it was referred to as " Another Day " . Shortly after the leak , singer @-@ songwriter Lenny Kravitz confirmed that he had produced and composed " Another Day " ; he stated that although he did not leak the song , he would like to have the full version of the song — in which he also features — officially released . Kravitz later referred to the song as " ( I Can 't Make It ) Another Day " on Facebook prior to the release of the Michael album . The song was recorded for the album Invincible , but dropped from the final track list . It was later re @-@ written and re @-@ titled " Storm " , a collaboration between Kravitz and rapper Jay @-@ Z which is featured on the former 's 2004 album Baptism . 
 Shortly after the leak , both Jackson 's estate and record label , Sony Music Entertainment , revealed that they were in the process of removing " Another Day " from the Internet for copyright reasons . Despite successful attempts , the song has continued to be re @-@ uploaded to the Internet and listened to thousands of times . " Another Day " is the second Jackson track to be posthumously leaked , as it follows " A Place with No Name " , which was unofficially released on July 16 , 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 2009 , singer Michael Jackson died at the age of 50 following cardiac arrest . Three weeks after Jackson 's death , celebrity news website TMZ.com ( who were the first media outlet to report his death ) obtained a 24 @-@ second snippet of a song entitled " A Place with No Name " , and released it on the Internet . At the time of the leak there were news reports that there was a " vast vault " and " dozens and dozens " of unreleased Jackson songs that could be issued for several years to come . The curator of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , Jim Henke , commented that any future Jackson releases would receive a significant amount of attention , stating , " What we have seen happen in the last three weeks is that the albums that are out here right now are selling in amazing numbers . I think we are going to see amazing interest in any released Michael Jackson material that will come out in the future or a year from now on . " 
 After Jackson 's death , rock musician Lenny Kravitz wrote a letter about the late singer that was published by AOL Music 's website <unk> In it he spoke of collaborating with Jackson on an unspecified song : " I got to work with Michael on a track that has not been released and it was the most amazing experience I 've had in the studio . He was funny . Very funny and we laughed the whole time . " Kravitz added , " He was a beautiful human being . " 
 On December 10 , 2010 , the song was officially released on the posthumous album Michael . It features more vocals and instrumentation . 
 = = Leak and music = = 
 A 90 @-@ second snippet of a song called " Another Day " was leaked onto the Internet on January 2 , 2010 . It features the vocals of Michael Jackson and Winnipeg Free Press stated the song originated from <unk> At the beginning of the leaked snippet , two DJs , one calling himself <unk> , are name @-@ checked . The full song is said to feature both Jackson and Kravitz , with the Huffington Post insisting that while the latter does not appear on the snippet of " Another Day " , the song is a duet between the two musicians . 
 Gil Kaufman of MTV spoke of the snippet 's composition , proclaiming that it had a " thumping R & B beat and soaring strings " . She stated that " the tune rides a grinding R & B beat " as Jackson sings in a " plaintive falsetto " : " My life has taken me beyond the planets and the stars / And you 're the only one that could take me this far / I 'll be forever searching for your love . " Kaufman noted that Jackson became more forceful during the chorus , when he sang , " You 're the one that makes me strong / I can 't make it another day / You 're the fire that keeps me warm / I can 't make it another day . " The journalist also noted the lyrical and <unk> similarities between " Another Day " and " Storm " , which features Kravitz singing , " I walked away but I was wrong / You 're the one that keeps me strong / You 're the fire that keeps me warm / How will I get through this storm ? " 
 = = Response = = 
 The song had not been intended for release and Jackson 's record label Sony Music Entertainment gained the support of the late entertainer 's estate and its lawyers in their endeavor to have the track removed from the Internet on the basis of copyright infringement . Some of their attempts at removal were successful , though individuals continued to upload the audio , one clip garnering 20 @,@ 000 views within hours . 
 Following the leak , Kravitz discussed the song in a video he uploaded to the social networking site Twitter . He confirmed that he had written , produced and played instruments on the song , as well as record it with Jackson . Kravitz stated that he was not responsible for the unofficial release , as his copy " has been locked up in a vault " . He noted that the two DJs on the snippet were not involved in the recording process , stating , " I don 't know what their purpose is , but that person has nothing to do with the track . " Kravitz reflected that working with Jackson had been " one of the most amazing musical experiences " that he had ever had . " It was done by two people who had respect for each other and who love music — that was it . " The singer @-@ songwriter concluded that " Another Day " had not been mixed or completed but added that he hoped the full song would be released and heard " the way me and Michael intended it to be " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said the song " <unk> him further " , yielding the album ( Michael ) ' s " most genuinely fierce moment " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe review the song as " a faint echo of vintage rock @-@ oriented Jackson tracks such as Dirty Diana and Beat It " . , " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone also draw a <unk> with this song and Dirty Diana . Jason Lipshutz with Gail Mitchell and Gary Graff from Billboard said the song developed an industrial rock groove that was a bit reminiscent of Nine Inch Nails , " Jackson bellows on the chorus , as guitars envelop his voice and Kravitz repeats the song title like a lullaby , " . " 
 Negative reviews came from Alexis Petridis of The Guardian , he said " of exactly the standard you might expect from a track that failed to make the cut for his worst solo album . " Huw Jones of Slant Magazine thought the song " a gutless rock track with dull guest spots from Lenny Kravitz . " 
 = = = David Grohl controversy = = = 
 Although Dave Grohl is credited as having played drums on the track " ( I Can 't Make It ) Another Day " , Grohl himself claimed in the November 2011 issue of The Red Bulletin that he does not perform on the track . According to Grohl , Lenny Kravitz asked him to play on the song but neither Kravitz nor Michael Jackson contacted him after he had recorded his drums and the version of the song that appears on Michael does not feature his playing . Grohl called the fact that he was credited in the album notes despite not playing on the record " not cool " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Written and produced : Lenny Kravitz 
 Co @-@ produced : Michael Jackson 
 Lead and Background vocals : Michael Jackson 
 Background vocals : Lenny Kravitz 
 12 @-@ String Electric Guitar : Craig Ross 
 Electric Guitar , Bass , Mini Moog , String and Horn Samples , Timpani , Gong : Lenny Kravitz 
 Drum Programming and Noise : David Barron and Lenny Kravitz 
 Synthesizer Programming : David Baron 
 Programming : Craig Ross 
 Mixed : Lenny Kravitz 
 Arranged : Lenny Kravitz 
 Studio Technician and Additional Synthesizer Programming : Alex Alvarez 
 = Carrington Moss = 
 Carrington Moss is a large area of peat bog near Carrington in Greater Manchester , England . It lies south of the River Mersey , approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) south @-@ west of Manchester , and occupies an area of about 1 @,@ 100 acres ( 450 ha ) . The depth of peat varies between 17 and 20 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 and 6 @.@ 1 m ) . 
 Originally an unused area of grouse moorland , the moss was reclaimed in the latter half of the 19th century for farming and the disposal of Manchester 's waste . A system of tramways was built to connect it with the Manchester Ship Canal and a nearby railway line . During the Second World War the land was used as a Starfish site and in the latter half of the 20th century , a large industrial complex was built along its northern edge . More recently , several sporting facilities have been built on Carrington Moss . 
 Today , the land is still used for farming and several nature reserves have been established within its bounds . Parts of Carrington Moss are accessible to the public over several rights of way . 
 = = History = = 
 A History of Flixton , Urmston , and Davyhulme ( 1898 ) claims that the name Carrington might be derived from the Goidelic Celtic root <unk> , a fortress , but a more recent theory is that it derives from an Anglicised form of a Scandinavian personal name . A Carrington Hall , seat of the Carrington family ( descended from William de <unk> ) once existed to the north of Carrington Moss , at the junction formed by the modern @-@ day A6144 and <unk> roads . The word moss , first used during the 15th century , forms part of the local name for a lowland peat bog , " <unk> " . Today the term is also used to describe former bogs that have been converted to farmland . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Manchester 's population increased by more than 150 % between 1831 and 1851 . This placed considerable pressure on the city 's ability to dispose of refuse , exacerbated during the 1870s by a gradual switch from the older cesspit methods of sewage disposal to pail closets . These needed to be emptied regularly and by the 1880s , night soil accounted for about 75 % of Manchester 's 200 @,@ 000 long tons ( 200 @,@ 000 t ; 220 @,@ 000 short tons ) of refuse . 
 Along with parts of Moss Side and Withington , in 1885 Bradford , Harpurhey and Rusholme became part of the City of Manchester . To cope with the extra demands placed on the area 's refuse disposal systems , Manchester Corporation began to look for disposal sites . A number of locations were considered , including one on Deeside and another in Nottinghamshire , but Carrington Moss was chosen due to the nature of its land and its accessibility . Therefore , in 1886 , the corporation bought the Carrington Moss Estate — an area of grouse moorland — from Harry Grey , 8th Earl of Stamford . 
 The purchase was part of the corporation 's ultimately unsuccessful plan to retain the pail closet system ( now superseded by the water closet ) , and followed a public scandal created by the daily dumping of 30 – 60 tons of human faeces into the Medlock and Irwell rivers , at Holt Town sewage works . It paid about £ 38 @,@ 000 ( £ 4 million as of 2016 ) , for the site , but the bog 's depth , between 17 and 20 feet or 5 @.@ 2 and 6 @.@ 1 metres deep pushed the total development cost to almost £ 94 @,@ 000 ( £ 9 million as of 2016 ) . The 1 @,@ 101 @-@ acre ( 446 ha ) estate included 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) of wild mossland , 209 acres ( 0 @.@ 85 km2 ) of partly cultivated mossland , 282 acres ( 1 @.@ 14 km2 ) of mossland under cultivation and 10 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 m2 ) of incomplete roads . A number of brick buildings were included , along with Asphodel Farm and Ash Farm , both with wooden farmhouses . The corporation rented 700 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 km2 ) of land in small holdings to local farmers and kept 400 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 km2 ) for itself . 
 The bog 's virgin moss was cultivated and drainage channels cut through at regular intervals , the first step in the area 's reclamation . This drainage caused the characteristically convex Moss to sag noticeably ; some residents of Dunham Town commented that they could see parts of Carrington previously obscured by the moss . A network of tramways and roads was constructed using clinker and other materials brought from the city . Drains were laid and the land cleared of scrub . A water supply was also installed . Some of the more dangerous buildings were demolished , while others were either repaired or replaced . 
 Refuse was loaded from a number of locations and was first transported along the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , until that waterway was closed on 11 November 1888 . For several years until the completion of its replacement , the Manchester Ship Canal , the corporation was reliant on Manchester 's local railway network . Refuse was loaded at the corporation 's Water Street Depot on to Cornbrook sidings and in waggons to Carrington on a junction from the Cheshire Lines Committee 's ( CLC ) Glazebrook to Stockport <unk> Dale line . The canal company installed a temporary dock on the new canal , although this was considered impractical and was rarely used . A more permanent arrangement was made several years later . New railway sidings were also built ; once complete , refuse was loaded from near Oldham Road railway station and the corporation 's Water Street Depot . It was then transported along the Ship Canal to a newly built wharf , and thereafter , by tramway across the moss . 
 Once delivered , refuse was normally placed in heaps and allowed to dry before being put into the ground . The naturally acidic water was a perfect receptacle for the contents of pail closets , rich in urea and nitrogen . Bacteria quickly broke the refuse down into ammonium compounds and free ammonia , which neutralised the soil 's acidity and created ammonium nitrate — an essential fertiliser for arable land . 
 By the 1890s , over 70 @,@ 000 long tons of excrement annually were being disposed of on the moss . The land was a useful source of income for Manchester ; for the year ending 31 March 1900 the estate made a profit of £ 777 5s 2d ( by comparison , the larger Chat Moss made £ 2 @,@ 591 13s 4d ) . Its success helped persuade Manchester Corporation to purchase 2 @,@ 583 acres of nearby Chat Moss in 1895 . By 1897 , 37 @,@ 082 long tons of <unk> , 587 long tons of sweepings and litter and 11 @,@ 673 long tons of cinders were being sent to Carrington . Various crops were grown on the land , including wheat , oats , potatoes and carrots . A variety of ornamental shrubs , including rhododendrons , were grown in a nursery and used in the parks and gardens of Manchester . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 By the 1930s , extensive use of the water closet meant that the amount of night soil being delivered to Carrington Moss had dropped significantly . During this period , the majority of refuse placed on the Moss came from ash bins , although some was from slaughterhouses and <unk> facilities . In 1923 , manure of only moderate value was being delivered , supplemented by sulphate of potash , sulphate of ammonia , and super @-@ phosphates . Altrincham Sewage Farm ( visible on the above map ) was used to flood the surrounding fields with sewage water . To the west , a series of disused marl @-@ pits formed Timperley Sewage Beds , a further source of manure . 
 Carrington Wharf had fallen out of use by 1934 and with the advent of the Second World War , five miles ( 8 km ) of railway were lifted and all the waggons scrapped . At the Ministry of Supply 's request , much of the infrastructure supporting both Carrington Moss and Chat Moss was sold . The sidings at Carrington continued to be used by the CLC for waggon storage , but Carrington Wharf was subsumed in 1946 by the construction of Carrington Power Station . During the war , the moss became one of four sites in Manchester used as a Starfish site — decoy targets for enemy aircraft . Operational control was the responsibility of RAF Balloon Command . The site contained an air raid shelter for the operational crew and several combustible devices used to simulate fires and lights . The site was activated in December 1940 but closed several years later , following a reduction in enemy aircraft attacks and lack of manpower . 
 In 1948 , the estate was valued at £ 82 @,@ 615 . In the year ending March 1971 , it produced an income of £ 20 @,@ 268 . By that time the entire Moss had been fully reclaimed ; 872 @.@ 785 acres ( 3 @.@ <unk> km2 ) of cultivated land , 39 @.@ 012 acres ( 157 @,@ 880 m2 ) of roads and plantations , and 30 @.@ 140 acres ( 121 @,@ 970 m2 ) of ' industrial area ' were available for use . The principal land uses were dairy , arable farming , and glasshouse culture . No refuse was delivered for the year ending March 1971 , and the Moss had by that time taken a total of 1 @,@ 305 @,@ 822 tons of refuse . 
 The estate was leased on 1 October 1968 to Shell Chemicals , who in 1957 had purchased a propylene oxide plant along the moss 's northern edge . Shell had built an ethylene oxide plant in 1958 and began to produce <unk> polyols the following year . Council housing was built nearby , at Carrington and Partington , for workers and their families . By 1985 the Shell plant had a turnover of about £ 200M and employed 1 @,@ 150 people , but a major restructuring of the business reduced the workforce to less than 500 by 1986 . By 1994 , four distinct plants operated on the 3 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 14 km2 ) site , producing a range of chemicals , and materials including polystyrene , polyethylene and polypropylene . In 2005 it was reported that Shell would close their polyols and <unk> units , a decision which came into effect in 2007 . The estate is currently managed by chartered surveyors Bell Ingram . 
 Manchester United opened their Trafford Training Centre training ground and Academy in 2000 , on land formerly owned by Shell . Bury F.C. ' s Carrington Training Centre , formerly occupied by Manchester City F.C. , is located nearby . Because of the Moss 's history as a dumping ground for waste , bottle diggers often frequent the area . Several rights of way cross the land , and a horse @-@ riding school operates in the area . 
 = = Geography and ecology = = 
 At 53 ° 25 ′ 14 ″ N 2 ° 23 ′ 16 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> , 2 @.@ <unk> ) , 65 @.@ 6 feet ( 20 @.@ 0 m ) above sea level , Carrington Moss lies along the southern edge of the Lancashire Plain , an area of Bunter sandstones overlaid with marls laid down during the Late Triassic period . These rocks are themselves overlaid by a layer of boulder clay deposited during the last ice age , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The combination of the flat topography and the underlying clay resulted in extensive peat bogs developing along the Mersey Valley , and overflowing beyond the valley . Along with large parts of Chat Moss and Holcroft Moss , Carrington Moss began to form during the Flandrian period from 7100 to 5000 BP . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Carrington Moss is a lowland raised bog . The area drains slowly , which slows the decomposition of plant life and leads to the accumulation of peat . Over thousands of years this raises the level of peat and forms a gently sloping dome ( hence , raised ) . Such areas support a wide range of flora and fauna ; Sphagnum <unk> , a medium @-@ sized bog moss , was recorded on Carrington Moss in the 1880s , although locally it is now presumed to be extinct . <unk> or bog asphodel ( <unk> <unk> ) , white beak @-@ sedge ( <unk> alba ) , cranberries , bog @-@ rosemary ( Andromeda <unk> ) , and the cotton sedge have also been recorded . In 1923 species of trees recorded by E. Price Evans for the Journal of Ecology included English oak ( Quercus robur ) , and common ash ( Fraxinus excelsior ) . Undergrowth included common hazel ( Corylus <unk> ) , blackberry ( Rubus <unk> ) , and European holly ( Ilex aquifolium ) . Several species of ground vegetation included creeping soft grass ( Holcus mollis ) , common bluebell ( Hyacinthoides non @-@ scripta ) , common foxglove ( Digitalis purpurea ) , dog 's mercury ( Mercurialis perennis ) , iris ( Iris pseudacorus ) , mad @-@ dog weed ( <unk> <unk> @-@ aquatica ) , and cat @-@ o ' <unk> @-@ tails ( Typha latifolia ) . 
 Birch Moss Covert is a small woodland containing birch , alder and willow trees , as well as various species of flora and fauna . The small mammal population includes the wood mouse ( Apodemus sylvaticus ) , which attract both kestrel ( Falco tinnunculus ) and sparrowhawk ( Accipiter nisus ) . Foxes , stoats , weasels , and badgers , are often seen . The area is part of Shell 's estate , covering about 15 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land managed by the Cheshire Wildlife Trust . The trust also manages a small nature reserve located within Manchester United 's training ground . This provides a habitat for a number of species including the red admiral butterfly ( Vanessa atalanta ) , meadow pipit ( Anthus pratensis ) , and grey partridge ( Perdix <unk> ) . Carrington Moss is home to the only recorded pairs of breeding grey partridge in Trafford . Six pairs of Eurasian bullfinch ( <unk> <unk> ) were recorded in 2003 . The reduction in the population of these and similar birds is attributed to modern farming methods , the loss of broad hedgerows , and the lack of winter stubble . Action for Nature in Trafford has therefore included the site in its Biodiversity Action Plan . The group intends to develop Carrington Moss as a home for other species , such as reed bunting ( Emberiza schoeniclus ) . <unk> <unk> ( a species of moth occurring in southern and north @-@ west England ) has been observed in the area . 
 = Canons of page construction = 
 The canons of page construction are a set of principles in the field of book design used to describe the ways that page proportions , margins and type areas ( print spaces ) of books are constructed . 
 The notion of canons , or laws of form , of book page construction was popularized by Jan Tschichold in the mid to late twentieth century , based on the work of J. A. van de Graaf , Raúl M. Rosarivo , Hans Kayser , and others . Tschichold wrote , “ Though largely forgotten today , methods and rules upon which it is impossible to improve have been developed for centuries . To produce perfect books these rules have to be brought to life and applied . ” Kayser 's 1946 Ein <unk> <unk> had earlier used the term canon in this context . 
 <unk> and book designers apply these principles to this day , with variations related to the availability of standardized paper sizes , and the diverse types of commercially printed books . 
 = = Van de Graaf canon = = 
 The Van de Graaf canon is a historical reconstruction of a method that may have been used in book design to divide a page in pleasing proportions . This canon is also known as the " secret canon " used in many medieval manuscripts and incunabula . 
 The geometrical solution of the construction of Van de Graaf 's canon , which works for any page width : height ratio , enables the book designer to position the text body in a specific area of the page . Using the canon , the proportions are maintained while creating pleasing and functional margins of size 1 / 9 and 2 / 9 of the page size . The resulting inside margin is one @-@ half of the outside margin , and of proportions 2 : 3 : 4 : 6 ( inner : top : outer : bottom ) when the page proportion is 2 : 3 ( more generally 1 : R : 2 : 2R for page proportion 1 : R ) . This method was discovered by Van de Graaf , and used by Tschichold and other contemporary designers ; they speculate that it may be older . 
 The page proportions vary , but most commonly used is the 2 : 3 proportion . Tschichold writes " For purposes of better comparison I have based his figure on a page proportion of 2 : 3 , which Van de Graaf does not use . " In this canon the text area and page size are of same proportions , and the height of the text area equals the page width . This canon was popularized by Jan Tschichold in his book The Form of the Book . 
 Robert Bringhurst , in his The Elements of Typographic Style , asserts that the proportions that are useful for the shapes of pages are equally useful in shaping and positioning the textblock . This was often the case in medieval books , although later on in the Renaissance , typographers preferred to apply a more polyphonic page in which the proportions of page and textblock would differ . 
 = = Golden canon = = 
 Tschichold 's " golden canon of page construction " is based on simple integer ratios , equivalent to Rosarivo 's " typographical divine proportion . " 
 = = = Interpretation of Rosarivo = = = 
 Raúl Rosarivo analyzed Renaissance books with the help of a drafting compass and a ruler , and concluded in his Divina <unk> <unk> ( " Typographical Divine Proportion " , first published in 1947 ) that Gutenberg , Peter <unk> , Nicolaus Jenson and others had applied the golden canon of page construction in their works . According to Rosarivo , his work and assertion that Gutenberg used the " golden number " 2 : 3 , or " secret number " as he called it , to establish the harmonic relationships between the diverse parts of a work , was analyzed by experts at the Gutenberg Museum and re @-@ published in the Gutenberg @-@ Jahrbuch , its official magazine . Ros Vicente points out that Rosarivo " demonstrates that Gutenberg had a module different from the well @-@ known one of Luca Pacioli " ( the golden ratio ) . 
 Tschichold also interprets Rosarivo 's golden number as 2 : 3 , saying : 
 In figure 5 the height of the type area equals the width of the page : using a page proportion of 2 : 3 , a condition for this canon , we get one @-@ ninth of the paper width for the inner margin , two @-@ ninths for the outer or fore @-@ edge margin , one @-@ ninth of the paper height for the top , and two @-@ ninths for the bottom margin . Type area and paper size are of equal proportions . ... What I uncovered as the canon of the manuscript writers , Raul Rosarivo proved to have been Gutenberg 's canon as well . He finds the size and position of the type area by dividing the page diagonal into ninths . 
 The figures he refers to are reproduced in combination here . 
 = = = John Man 's interpretation of Gutenberg = = = 
 Historian John Man suggests that Gutenberg 's Bible page was based on the golden ratio ( commonly approximated as the decimal 0 @.@ 618 or the ratio 5 : 8 ) , and that the printed area also had that shape . He quotes the dimensions of Gutenberg 's half @-@ folio Bible page as 30 @.@ 7 x 44 @.@ 5 cm , a ratio of 1 : 1 @.@ 45 , close to Rosarivo 's golden 2 : 3 ( 1 @.@ 5 ) but not to the golden ratio 1 @.@ 618 . 
 = = = Tschichold and the golden section = = = 
 Building on Rosarivo 's work , contemporary experts in book design such as Jan Tschichold and Richard Hendel assert as well that the page proportion of the golden section ( 21 : 34 ) has been used in book design , in manuscripts , and incunabula , mostly in those produced between 1550 and 1770 . Hendel writes that since Gutenberg 's time , books have been most often printed in an upright position , that conform loosely , if not precisely , to the golden ratio . 
 These page proportions based on the golden section or golden ratio , are usually described through its <unk> such as 2 : 3 , 5 : 8 , and 21 : 34 . 
 Tschichold says that common ratios for page proportion used in book design include as 2 : 3 , 1 : √ 3 , and the golden section . The image with circular arcs depicts the proportions in a medieval manuscript , that according to Tschichold feature a " Page proportion 2 : 3 . Margin proportions 1 : 1 : 2 : 3 . Text area in accord with the Golden Section . The lower outer corner of the text area is fixed by a diagonal as well . " By accord with the golden section , he does not mean exactly equal to , which would conflict with the stated proportions . 
 Tschichold refers to a construction equivalent to van de Graaf 's or Rosarivo 's with a 2 : 3 page ratio as " the Golden Canon of book page construction as it was used during late Gothic times by the finest of scribes . " For the canon with the arc construction , which yields a text area ratio closer to the golden ratio , he says " I abstracted from manuscripts that are older yet . While beautiful , it would hardly be useful today . " 
 Of the different page proportions that such a canon can be applied to , he says " Book pages come in many proportions , i.e. , relationships between width and height . Everybody knows , at least from hearsay , the proportion of the Golden Section , exactly 1 : 1 @.@ 618 . A ratio of 5 : 8 is no more than an approximation of the Golden Section . It would be difficult to maintain the same opinion about a ratio of 2 : 3 . " 
 Tschichold also expresses a preference for certain ratios over others : " The geometrically definable irrational page proportions like 1 : 1 @.@ 618 ( Golden Section ) , 1 : √ 2 , 1 : √ 3 , 1 : √ 5 , 1 : 1 @.@ 538 , and the simple rational proportions of 1 : 2 , 2 : 3 , 5 : 8 and 5 : 9 I call clear , intentional and definite . All others are unclear and accidental ratios . The difference between a clear and an unclear ratio , though frequently slight , is noticeable . ... Many books show none of the clear proportions , but accidental ones . " 
 John Man 's quoted Gutenberg page sizes are in a proportion not very close to the golden ratio , but Rosarivo 's or van de Graaf 's construction is applied by Tschichold to make a pleasing text area on pages of arbitrary proportions , even such accidental ones . 
 = = Current applications = = 
 Richard Hendel , associate director of the University of North Carolina Press , describes book design as a craft with its own traditions and a relatively small body of accepted rules . The dust cover of his book , On Book Design , features the Van de Graaf canon . 
 Christopher Burke , in his book on German typographer Paul Renner , creator of the Futura typeface , described his views about page proportions : 
 Renner still championed the traditional proportions of margins , with the largest at the bottom of a page , ' because we hold the book by the lower margin when we take it in the hand and read it ' . This indicates that he envisioned a small book , perhaps a novel , as his imagined model . Yet he struck a pragmatic note by adding that the traditional rule for margin proportions cannot be followed as a doctrine : for example , wide margins for pocket books would be counter @-@ productive . Similarly , he refuted the notion that the type area must have the same proportions as the page : he preferred to trust visual judgment in assessing the placement of the type area on the page , instead of following a pre @-@ determined doctrine . 
 Bringhurst describes a book page as a tangible proportion , which together with the textblock produce an antiphonal geometry , which has the capability to bind the reader to the book , or conversely put the reader 's nerve on edge or drive the reader away . 
 = Michael Johnson ( fighter ) = 
 Michael Julian Johnson ( born June 4 , 1986 ) is an American mixed martial artist who competes in the lightweight division of the Ultimate Fighting Championship . A professional MMA competitor since 2008 , Johnson mostly competed in his regional circuit , before signing onto the Ultimate Fighting Championship to appear on The Ultimate Fighter : Team GSP vs. Team Koscheck . As of July 18 , 2016 , he is # 10 in the official UFC lightweight rankings . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in St. Louis , Missouri , Johnson was raised as the youngest of three siblings . Johnson began fighting at the age of 10 , after his father 's fatal heart attack . The incident made Johnson want to exert his anger physically . Johnson later said , " I lost something , a huge part of me .... Fighting was my way of not dealing with my dad 's passing . Now that I think of it , of course , it was the wrong thing to do , especially putting all that burden on my mom having to deal with it . " Athletic , Johnson was a three @-@ sport varsity athlete at Marquette High School in Chesterfield , Missouri . Johnson later received a full scholarship to play football at Central Methodist University , but transferred after one year to Meramec Community College where he was one of the top NJCAA wrestlers in the country . 
 = = Mixed martial arts career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Johnson is a former Midwest Fight League and Xtreme Cage Fighting Champion who won those titles in July 2008 and October 2009 respectively . 
 = = = The Ultimate Fighter = = = 
 Johnson then signed onto the Ultimate Fighting Championship circuit to appear on The Ultimate Fighter : Team GSP vs. Team Koscheck . 
 Johnson 's entry onto the show was , in part , due to his persistence in attending tryouts for the show . After making the final interview round of The Ultimate Fighter : Team Nogueira vs. Team Mir , Johnson was told that he wasn 't the right fit for the show . Johnson then tried out for the ninth season of the show , before finally becoming accepted onto the twelfth season after telling the producers , " I 've been getting tired of chasing you [ expletive ] around the country . I 'm here ; I 'm not going to go anywhere . If you guys don 't pick me , I 'm going to try out again . " Finally , Johnson was signed . 
 Johnson 's first fight took place on the debut episode of the season , where he faced unbeaten Pablo Garza . Johnson scored a unanimous decision victory , which moved him into the house . 
 In the second episode , both St @-@ Pierre and Koscheck had Johnson at the top of their lists when it came time to select fighters . During the team selection process however , St @-@ Pierre created a fake list which did not have Johnson among his top selections , and subtly showed it to Koscheck to fool him into believing it . This seemed to manipulate Koscheck into picking Marc Stevens , as he may have believed he could take Johnson later . This allowed St @-@ Pierre to choose Johnson with the second overall pick . 
 Johnson competed in his preliminary round matchup against Aaron Wilkinson in the third episode . After some early striking exchanges in the first round , Wilkinson was able to take Johnson down and utilise ground @-@ and @-@ pound punches and elbows . In the second round , Johnson landed an early superman punch , as well as a takedown . After takedowns were achieved by both men , Johnson stuffed a final attempt and took the second round on the judges scorecards . In the sudden victory round , Johnson attacked quickly , which allowed him to end the fight via a rear naked choke . 
 In episode 8 , Team GSP had to pick which team members would fight each other ( considering they had 5 members in the quarter @-@ finals ) . St. Pierre asked each member to pick the fighter they wanted to fight . Johnson and Alex Caceres picked each other and a fight was scheduled . Johnson won by unanimous decision after two rounds , earning himself a spot in the semi @-@ finals . 
 In the final round , Johnson faced the one remaining Team Koscheck member , Nam Phan . In a back @-@ and @-@ forth fight , Johnson scored takedowns . The consensus after the fight was that Johnson won the opening round , and Phan the second . The third was in dispute however , with each fighter 's coach convinced they had won the round . Johnson was declared the winner via split decision . 
 = = = Ultimate Fighting Championship = = = 
 Johnson made his UFC debut in the The Ultimate Fighter : Team GSP vs. Team Koscheck Finale against Jonathan Brookins . That fight determined the winner of The Ultimate Fighter 12 . After an impressive first round , Johnson lost rounds two and three — and subsequently the fight — via unanimous decision , leaving him the runner @-@ up . 
 Johnson was looking to take a fight outside of the UFC before returning to the promotion . The fight was to headline the North American Fighting Championship card against Jim <unk> . However , after obtaining a UFC fight , Johnson pulled out of the <unk> bout to focus his training on the UFC bout . Johnson faced Edward <unk> on June 26 , 2011 at UFC on Versus 4 and won the fight via TKO in the first round . 
 Johnson faced Paul Sass on October 1 , 2011 at UFC on Versus 6 . He lost the fight via submission in the first round . 
 Johnson was expected to face Cody McKenzie on January 28 , 2012 at UFC on Fox 2 . However , McKenzie was forced out of the bout with an injury and replaced by Shane Roller . Johnson defeated Roller by unanimous decision , with all three judges scoring the bout 29 @-@ 28 . 
 Johnson faced Tony Ferguson on May 5 , 2012 at UFC on Fox 3 , replacing an injured Thiago Tavares . He won the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Johnson was expected to face Danny Castillo on September 1 , 2012 at UFC 151 . However , after UFC 151 was cancelled , Johnson / Castillo was rescheduled and took place on October 5 , 2012 at UFC on FX 5 . After almost being finished in the first round , Johnson survived and came back to win via KO at 1 : 06 into the second round . Johnson was awarded Knockout of the Night honors for his performance . 
 Johnson fought Myles Jury on December 29 , 2012 at UFC 155 . He lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Johnson faced Reza Madadi on April 6 , 2013 at UFC on Fuel TV 9 . Despite almost finishing Madadi with a head kick in the first round , he eventually succumbed to the wrestling of Madadi and lost the fight via submission in the third round . 
 Johnson faced Joe Lauzon on August 17 , 2013 at UFC Fight Night 26 . He won the fight via unanimous decision after <unk> Lauzon for all three rounds . 
 Johnson faced Gleison Tibau on December 28 , 2013 at UFC 168 . He won the fight in impressive fashion ; winning via knockout in the second round . 
 Due to an injury to Ross Pearson , Johnson stepped in to face Melvin Guillard at UFC Fight Night 37 . Johnson won the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Johnson was expected to face Josh Thomson on July 26 , 2014 at UFC on Fox 12 . However , on July 11 , the UFC announced he had been pulled from the bout . It was later revealed that Johnson was pulled from the bout and would not compete during the remainder of 2014 following his arrest regarding a domestic dispute in Palm Beach County , Florida in April 2014 . 
 Johnson faced Edson Barboza on February 22 , 2015 at UFC Fight Night 61 . He won the bout by unanimous decision . 
 A bout with Benson Henderson was initially linked as the event headliner for The Ultimate Fighter 21 Finale on July 12 , 2015 . Although never officially announced by the UFC , the bout between Henderson and Johnson will not take place at this event . 
 Johnson faced <unk> Dariush on August 8 , 2015 at UFC Fight Night 73 . He lost the fight by split decision . Every mainstream MMA media outlet polled by MMA Decisions scored the fight as decision victory for Johnson . 
 Johnson faced Nate Diaz on December 19 , 2015 at UFC on Fox 17 . He lost the fight by unanimous decision . Both participants were awarded Fight of the Night honors . 
 A rematch with Tony Ferguson was expected to take place on March 5 , 2016 at UFC 196 . However , on January 27 , it was announced that Johnson withdrew from the bout due to injury . 
 Johnson is expected to face Dustin Poirier on September 17 , 2016 at UFC Fight Night 94 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnson trained at Springfield Fight Club , which is an affiliate of Gracie Barra based in Springfield , Missouri . Johnson also worked there as the assistant mixed martial arts coach . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Ultimate Fighting Championship 
 Fight of the Night ( One time ) 
 Knockout of the Night ( One time ) 
 Xtreme Cage Fighting 
 <unk> Lightweight Championship ( One time ) 
 Midwest Fight League 
 <unk> Lightweight Championship ( One time ) 
 = = Mixed martial arts record = = 
 = = = Mixed martial arts exhibition record = = = 
 = Netherlands Antilles at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 A delegation from the Netherlands Antilles competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . It was the fifteenth and final appearance of the Netherlands Antilles at the Olympic Games , as the territory was to be dissolved before the 2012 Summer Olympic games in London , during which the IOC decided that Dutch Antillean athletes would participate independently under the Olympic flag . 
 The Netherlands Antilles ' delegation was composed of three athletes participating in three different sports : Rodion Davelaar in swimming , Philip Elhage in shooting , and Churandy Martina in track and field . Neither Davelaar or Elhage continued past the qualification rounds , but Martina reached the finals for the 100m and 200m dashes . Martina scored fourth place in the 100m dash and second place in the 200m dash ( the latter behind Usain Bolt ) , but was disqualified after a controversial American @-@ led protest . 
 = = Background = = 
 The appearance of the Netherlands Antilles at the Beijing Olympics marked its thirteenth and final appearance . The Netherlands Antilles had consistently appeared at the Summer Olympics since the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki , Finland , excluding two Olympic games that had been boycotted due to Soviet incursions in other countries . Churandy Martina was the flagbearer for the Netherlands Antilles at the closing and opening ceremonies for the 2008 Olympics . 
 Issues regarding debt and revenue @-@ sharing within the Netherlands Antilles eventually led to the dissolution of the territory and its division as constituent islands Curaçao and Sint Maarten claimed a status of autonomy similar to that of Aruba , while the islands Bonaire , Saba , and Sint Eustatius were absorbed directly into the Netherlands . Thus , the 2008 Summer Olympics served as the final Olympics games in which the Netherlands Antilles participated as a territory . The future of the Dutch Antillean athletes to participate in the 2012 Summer Olympics in London were cast into doubt as a result . As residents of the Netherlands Antilles hold Dutch passports , IAAF General Secretary Pierre Weiss remarked all former Dutch Antillean athletes should immediately become eligible to represent the Netherlands in the Netherlands Antilles ' stead . Ultimately , however , the IOC decided in its 123rd session upon three items : that former Dutch Antillean athletes would compete independently under the Olympic flag ; that recognition for the Netherlands Antilles ' Olympic Committee was to be withdrawn ; and that a temporary administrative structure would serve in the Dutch Antillean NOC 's place until after the 2012 London games , directly supervised and supported by the IOC . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Churandy Martina was the only Dutch Antillean to participate in track and field in the 2008 Beijing Olympics . He participated in two events : The 100m dash and the 200m dash . 
 = = = 100 m dash = = = 
 On 14 August , Martina completed round one of qualifications for the 100m dash at 10 @.@ 35 seconds . This placed Martina at first in his heat ( Heat 10 ) . He ranked twenty @-@ seventh in the round , tying with Walter Dix from the United States and Andrew Hinds from Barbados . In round two on 14 August , Martina ran the 100m dash in 9 @.@ 99 seconds , tying for second with Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago , and falling behind Usain Bolt of Jamaica by 0 @.@ 07 seconds . Martina advanced because of his score , and was first in his heat on 15 August , running 9 @.@ 99 seconds . Churandy Martina advanced to semifinals and ran the 100m dash in 9 @.@ 94 seconds , scoring third in his heat ( behind Thompson and Jamaica 's Asafa Powell ) and fourth overall ( also behind Bolt ) . He also ranked fourth in the finals , falling 0 @.@ 02 seconds short of bronze medalist Walter Dix 's time . Consequently , he did not medal in the event . 
 = = = 200 m dash = = = 
 Martina ranked third in his heat in the 17 August qualifications for the 200m dash , finishing the event in 20 @.@ 78 seconds and falling behind Azerbaijan 's Ramil <unk> and Nigeria 's Obinna <unk> . Overall , Martina ranked in twenty @-@ fourth place , but advanced . During round two of qualifications on 17 August , Martina ran the 200m dash in 20 @.@ 42 seconds , second place in the heat before Antigua and Barbuda 's Brendan Christian . In round two , Martina ranked tenth place , tying with the United States ' Shawn Crawford . Martina ran the 200m in 20 @.@ 11 seconds during semifinals , ranking first in his heat and second overall behind Usain Bolt . He then advanced to the finals round . 
 Martina 's participation in the 200m finals round was controversial . Martina came in second place to Usain Bolt , completing the event in 19 @.@ 82 seconds over Usain Bolt 's world @-@ record breaking performance of 19 @.@ 30 seconds . However , when American would @-@ be bronze medalist Wallace Spearmon was disqualified for running outside of his lane , the American coaches reviewed video records of the race and found that Martina had done the same . The United States filed a protest against the Netherlands Antilles . The Dutch Antillean Olympic committee argued that the challenge was invalid , having been filed after the 30 @-@ minute post @-@ race deadline , but Martina was disqualified from receiving the silver medal anyway . Shawn Crawford of the United States , who originally finished the race in fourth place , was given the silver medal , and Walter Dix was given the bronze medal in place of Spearmon . 
 Shortly after the 2008 Olympics , Crawford competed against Martina again in a meet in Zurich , Switzerland . At a hotel during the course of the meet , Crawford left the silver medal for Martina , believing that Martina deserved the medal more than he . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 = = Shooting = = 
 Philip Elhage was the only Dutch Antillean to participate in shooting events at the 2008 Summer Olympics . He participated in the 10m air pistol . During 9 August , the 10m air pistol event was held in Beijing , with forty @-@ nine competitors . Elhage scored 566 @.@ 0 , ranking forty @-@ fifth . Elhage scored the same as Yusuf <unk> from Turkey . Overall , Elhage 's score fell 122 @.@ 2 short of Pang Wei of China , who won the gold medal in the event . 
 Men 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Rodion Davelaar was the only Dutch Antillean athlete to participate in swimming in the 2008 Summer Olympics . He participated in the 50m freestyle . He was the recipient of a 2008 IOC Olympic Scholarship , which provided Davelaar with training facilities , a specialized coach and insurance . Additionally , the Scholarship covered costs for lodging , checkups , and Davelaar 's entry for and participation in qualification competitions for the 2008 Olympics . 
 During the 14 August preliminaries , Davelaar swam the 50m freestyle in 24 @.@ 21 seconds . He ranked second in Heat 6 , falling behind Yellow Yei Yah of Nigeria by 0 @.@ 21 seconds . Overall , Davelaar ranked fifty @-@ seventh out of ninety @-@ seven swimmers . Davelaar 's time was 2 @.@ 75 seconds slower than French swimmer Amaury <unk> during his performance in the 14 August preliminaries , who ranked first and set an Olympic record in the preliminary session . Davelaar did not advance past the 14 August preliminaries . 
 Men 
 = Loin Like a Hunting Flame = 
 " ' Loin Like a Hunting Flame " is the twelfth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on January 31 , 1997 . The episode was written by Ted Mann , and directed by David Nutter . " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " featured guest appearances by William Lucking , Hrothgar Mathews and Harriet Sansom Harris . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , joins a fellow Group member to track a killer driven by sexual neuroses and who uses mood @-@ altering drugs to gain control of his victims . 
 " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " has received mostly negative reviews from critics , with its treatment of female characters being seen as particularly poor . The episode — Nutter 's last contribution to the series — contains several literary references , alluding to both Dylan Thomas and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Boulder , Colorado , a rave is underway in a nightclub . Pharmacist Art Nesbitt ( Hrothgar Matthews ) approaches a young couple , offering them drugs . Later , all three of them are in a room elsewhere , with Nesbitt recording the couple having sex . When they finish , he poisons them by injection . Their naked bodies are found the following day in a botanic garden , posed to resemble the story of Adam and Eve . The Millennium Group , a private investigative firm , despatches offender profilers Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Maureen Murphy ( Harriet Sansom Harris ) to aid the police investigation . Detective Thomas ( William Lucking ) feels uncomfortable working with Murphy , believing that women do not understand male sex offenders . 
 Elsewhere , Nesbitt is spying on a swingers ' party , and follows two women as they leave to buy more alcohol for the party . He impersonates a police officer and pulls their car over . The next day the women are reported missing by their husbands , and their bodies are found posed in a park . Nesbitt is next seen working in his pharmacy , when another young couple come in to purchase medication in preparation for an exotic honeymoon . Nesbitt instead surreptitiously gives them an MDMA @-@ like drug , suggesting they take it immediately . 
 Meanwhile , the investigation has found traces of this drug in the other victims , with Black believing that the killer not only has access to it through his occupation but is likely consuming it himself while committing his crimes in order to readily act on his sexual fantasies . Black follows up on this , and investigates Nesbitt 's pharmacy . Nesbitt is not working at the time , but Black realizes he must be the killer . He interviews Nesbitt 's wife ( Barbara Howard ) , finding that they have not had sex in eighteen years of marriage — however , Nesbitt has recently become interested in trying again . 
 Later , Detective Thomas tells Black that he really has no problem with Murphy — his true issue with the case is his own past . Having investigated sexual offences in the past , Thomas had found the cases affecting him personally , leaving him unable to have sex with his wife and leading to their divorce . 
 Black realizes that the killer is trying to experience the sexual encounters he missed out on before his marriage , and that he believes his victims are living the happiest moments of their lives because of his actions . He returns to the Nesbitt home , finding the honeymooning couple locked in a bomb shelter below the house . Black runs upstairs , thinking that Nesbitt will murder his wife , but arrives in time to see him commit suicide by injection instead . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " is the second of four episodes of Millennium to have been written by Ted Mann , who had previously written " The Judge " , and would go on to write " " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " and the first season finale " Paper Dove " . The episode was directed by David Nutter , and was his last directing credit for the series , having helmed " Pilot " , " Gehenna " and " 522666 " earlier in the season . 
 A member of Fox 's Standards and Practices department was flown out to the episode 's Vancouver , British Columbia filming location . She was asked to watch the episode being produced to ensure that it did not breach any of the network 's censorship rules . Several of the scenes that were being produced required quite small spaces during filming , requiring Nutter to record additional coverage on a handheld camera , which he later played back to the Standards and Practices liaison for approval . 
 The episode 's title is taken from a line in the Dylan Thomas poem Ballad of the Long @-@ legged Bait , which was first published in 1946 's Deaths and Entrances ; while the quotation displayed at the beginning — " Two souls , alas , are housed within my breast " — is taken from Goethe 's Faust , a two @-@ part 19th century play by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . Both literary allusions serve to highlight the secret life of the character of Nesbitt — the first in its subject matter , the second thematically echoing the character 's two lives . Several of the cast had previously worked with series creator Chris Carter on his previous series The X @-@ Files — Harriet Sansom Harris had appeared in the first season episode " Eve " ; Hrothgar Matthews had played roles in four episodes ; and Tyler Labine , who briefly appeared handing out leaflets in the episode 's cold open , had made appearances in two episodes of that series . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 31 , 1997 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 8 , meaning that roughly 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . 
 " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " received mostly negative reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding Mann 's writing to lack tension and imagination . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode " has good moments , and is at least efficient and watchable " , but believed that it " doesn 't really deliver anything special , doesn 't try to be anything other than average " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " 4 out of 5 , describing it as being " handled in a subtle , somber manner " . Gibron felt that " the events unfold in this episode evenly and eerily " , and it serves as an example of " what could have been done had the show 's focus , both literally and metaphysically , remained on crime " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an F , calling it " quite possibly one of the worst episodes of television I 've ever seen " . VanDerWerff felt that the episode 's wariness of the 1990s rave subculture was particularly dated . He also felt that " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " served as a prominent example of Millennium 's " social conservatism " , noting that it seems " fairly closed @-@ off from other points @-@ of @-@ view " than that of the character Frank Black . 
 = Mississippi Highway 572 = 
 Mississippi Highway 572 ( MS 572 ) is a former state highway in southwestern Mississippi . The route 's western terminus was in Centreville of Wilkinson county . MS 572 traveled east and intersected MS 24 and MS 33 , just east of the town . It ended at MS 569 south of Beechwood . MS 572 was designated in 1957 , from MS 24 and MS 33 to MS 569 . The route was extended west to Centreville , and was removed from the state highway system in 1967 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 As of 1965 , the route was located in eastern Wilkinson and western Amite counties . All of the route was a two @-@ laned paved road . MS 572 began at the center of Centreville , near a railroad track . The route then traveled down Park Road until it exited Wilkinson County and entered Amite County . After crossing the county line , MS 572 intersected MS 24 and MS 33 , and MS 572 was also branded Lower Centreville Road . Continuing eastward , the route exited Centreville and crossed over Beaver Creek and emerged into the village of Olio . MS 572 left Olio , and ended few miles later at MS 569 at a T @-@ intersection . Lower Centreville Road continued east , concurrent with MS 569 . MS 572 was maintained by the Mississippi State Highway Commission and Amite County , as part of the state highway system . 
 = = History = = 
 MS 572 was designated in 1957 , connecting from MS 24 / 33 to MS 569 . The route was fully paved when it was created . The next year , it was extended slightly to Centreville . By 1960 , a section of the route in Amite County was transferred to county maintenance . MS 572 was removed from the state highway system by 1967 . Today , the road is known as Park Road ( unsigned Mississippi Highway 946 ) west of MS 24 and MS 33 , and Lower Centreville Road east of it . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The route is documented as it existed in 1965 . 
 = Nothing Was the Same = 
 Nothing Was the Same is the third studio album by Canadian recording artist Drake . It was released on September 24 , 2013 , by OVO Sound , Young Money Entertainment , Cash Money Records and Republic Records . Work on the record began in 2012 and continued through 2013 . As its executive producer , Drake enlisted collaborators including 2 Chainz , Big Sean , Jay Z , Jhené Aiko and Sampha to appear as guest appearances on the album . The album 's production was primarily handled by Noah " 40 " Shebib and other OVO Sound producers ; Boi @-@ 1da , Mike Zombie , Majid Jordan and Nineteen85 , among others such as , Detail , Key Wane , Hudson Mohawke and Jake One . 
 Nothing Was the Same was supported by the seven successful singles ; " Started from the Bottom " , " Hold On , We 're Going Home " featuring Majid Jordan , " All Me " featuring 2 Chainz and Big Sean , " Pound Cake " featuring Jay Z , " The Language " , " Too Much " featuring Sampha and " Worst Behavior " . " Wu @-@ Tang Forever " was released , prior to the album as a promotional single . Drake also toured with Future , Miguel and PartyNextDoor from October through December 2013 , on the Would You Like a Tour ? concert tour . 
 Nothing Was the Same received generally positive reviews from critics , including a score of 79 at Metacritic based on 33 reviews . The album was also a commercial success , debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 , selling 658 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . It became the seventh best @-@ selling album of 2013 in the United States . It also debuted within the top two positions in Canada , Denmark , Australia and the United Kingdom . As of August 2015 , the album has sold 1 @,@ 720 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 While touring the United Kingdom in support of Take Care during March 2012 , Drake announced in an interview that he had begun work on his third studio album . In April 2012 Drake had stated that the album will have a different style and tempo than that of Take Care . This is due to his different mindset and his recent move to the Hidden Hills @-@ Calabasas area , where he is Kanye West 's neighbor . He told GQ , " This is my fucking moment to say if I wanted to rap all the time , really rap , I would , but I also love to make music . I 'll do this for you right now . But it 's for me , too . It 's my story … I 'm trying to get back to that kid in the basement . To say what he has to say . And I 'm trying to make it last . " 
 On February 10 , 2013 , the same night Drake won a Grammy for Best Rap Album at the 55th Grammy Awards , he announced the title of his third album would be Nothing Was the Same . During an interview with Ryan Seacrest on the red carpet , Drake told E ! , " I think music , it 's a process we all go through , " he said . " It 's an evolution . You 're constantly figuring out what works for you . " He explained the difference between Nothing Was the Same and Take Care to XXL saying , 
 " Take Care was about connecting with my city and connecting with my past and sort of still feeling guilty that I 'm not in love with one of these girls that cared about me from back in the day . Now , I 'm 26 , I 'm with my friends , I 'm making jobs for people , I 'm making memories for people that will last a lifetime . I don 't need to be in love right now . I don 't need these things that I maybe once thought that I needed to feel normal and feel righteous about myself . I think for the first time in an album I 'm content — not satisfied — but proud of where I 'm at as a person . " 
 Drake also stated that Marvin Gaye 's 1978 double album Here , My Dear had been a big influence on his current musical direction and he had been doing recording in Gaye 's old studio " Marvin 's Room " . He later told MTV , " This album is not some straight rap album , I 'll never do a straight rap album . That 's not how I came into this and that ’ s never what I 'll do . I make songs for the people . " He also spoke of Marvin Gaye again saying , " I have aspirations to be Marvin Gaye in the back of my head . So I just want to sing the world 's triumphs and problems on one record . " In the same interview he explained more about the differences between Nothing Was the Same and Take Care saying ; " The music I 'm making is more concise , more clear , I 've been able to get my thoughts across a lot better on this album . Take Care is a great album but I listened to it and realized where I could do better and I think I 've done better on this album . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In March 2012 , Drake was reportedly in the studio with American rapper 2 Chainz and record producer Noah " 40 " Shebib . He has been stating that he was hoping that he could work with Jamie xx , while in the United Kingdom , saying that he wants him to " have a bigger presence on my third record " . Jake One produced a song for Drake , originally expected to be released ahead of the third annual OVO Fest . The video , which features Drake previewing the untitled song , while smoking a hookah , was released on June 26 , 2012 through Vimeo . In December 2012 , Young Chop confirmed that he was working on a song with Drake . He also then released two free songs , which is a collaboration with a singer @-@ songwriter James Fauntleroy . 
 In 2013 , Drake was also seen in the studio with a fellow rapper Jay Z , working on what has yet to be a song , titled " Pound Cake " . On June 3 , 2013 , Drake revealed the first guest appearance on the album , which is American singer Jhené Aiko and then he also said that he had recently been in the studio with fellow rapper Anthony Hamilton . On June 15 , 2013 , Drake confirmed with Hot 107 @.@ 9 , that he had made the final recording process for the album . On September 3 , 2013 , Drake confirmed on Twitter , that the album has been mixed and mastered . 
 In July 2013 , Complex reported that he was in the studio with artists , such as Future , Rick Ross , Justin Timberlake , Sade , Migos , <unk> , TLC and Miguel , while working on the album . Complex also reported that he had worked with producers , during the recording process , including Hit @-@ Boy , Just Blaze , Chilly Gonzales , Mike Will Made It , Zaytoven , Bink , Detail , James Blake , Swizz Beatz and Timbaland . On July 27 , 2013 , Drake posted a picture of him and frequent collaborator The Weeknd in the studio . 
 In August 2013 , Drake told Rolling Stone during the interview , he has spoke that the album would contain features by Jay Z and Lil Wayne , with production from Hudson Mohawke . In a story in the September issue of Rolling Stone , he confirmed that the album was primarily produced by Noah " 40 " Shebib , with production also coming from Hit @-@ Boy , Boi @-@ 1da , Detail and Hudson Mohawke . He also confirmed working with OVO Fest performer , singer and post @-@ dubstep producer James Blake . The final track listing contained guest appearances by Jhené Aiko , Majid Jordan , Detail , Sampha , Jay Z , Big Sean and 2 Chainz . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 On August 21 , 2013 , Drake revealed the album 's cover artwork was an oil painting by Southern California 's Kadir Nelson , the designer behind Michael Jackson 's posthumous album , Michael . The two versions of the cover feature illustrations of profiles of Drake as a child , while the other shows the rapper as an adult . His younger self is adorned only with an afro comb in his hair , and his older self has a gold chain . Both covers are set against a blissful blue sky . The cover artwork was compared to iconic hip hop albums Nas ' Illmatic , The Notorious B.I.G. ' s Ready to Die and Lil Wayne 's Tha Carter III . " What that album art is to me , is the fact that this is my most clear , concise thoughts from now , and my best recollection of then " , Drake explained . Both covers will be available side by side in stores , so consumers may choose which one they want . 
 The artist , Kadir Nelson told MTV , " Drake wanted a signature painting , he didn 't want something that looked like a hip @-@ hop album cover . He wanted something that was a little bit more artsy and had more weight to it , so I did a number of sketches , and when we picked out what he liked , I sculpted it together . " He said he listened to Drake 's music in the studio to gain inspiration and he also gave Drake a full sized painting of the album cover . The album artwork would end up being named the fourth @-@ best album cover of 2013 by Complex . XXL also listed it among the best album covers of 2013 . 
 = = Release = = 
 On June 22 , 2013 , Drake announced a release date of September 17 , 2013 via Twitter . On the following day , he has released the first trailer for the album , featuring him and his friends drinking alcohol out of his 2012 's Grammy Award for Best Rap Album for his previous album Take Care . On August 21 , 2013 , the album was pushed back one week from its initial release date for September 17 , 2013 , until September 24 , 2013 . On September 10 , 2013 , Drake released the second trailer for the album , featuring " Trophies " , which was produced by Hit @-@ Boy . In the video Drake and his entourage drive various luxury cars such as Bentley , Lamborghini and Bugatti 's , all sporting small Canadian flags while driving down an empty street . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In March 2013 , Drake premiered a song , titled " <unk> in Toronto " , which is a sequel to the Thank Me Later track " 9AM in Dallas " . In the same month , he filmed a music video for the song and it was released on April 1 , 2013 . On April 15 , 2013 , Drake released two more songs , " No New Friends " ( which ended up being a track for DJ Khaled 's album Suffering from Success ) and " Girls Love Beyoncé " , which contains a samples from Destiny 's Child 's song " Say My Name " , and the song features guest vocals from James Fauntleroy . On June 17 , 2013 , an unreleased track , titled " On My Way " , which was recorded back in 2010 , that had been leaked . This song also features guest appearances from Fauntleroy . On June 22 , 2013 , Drake released four songs for streaming via his official website . This included collaborations with J. Cole , PartyNextDoor , Migos and a song titled " The Motion " . It was confirmed that these songs were only released , in promotion for the album , that did not make the album . However , " The Motion " appeared as a Best Buy bonus track on the album . 
 On June 18 , 2013 , Drake announced that he would be going on tour , in support of Nothing Was the Same , starting September 25 , 2013 , in Portland , Oregon . The tour , titled Would You Like a Tour ? , featured supporting acts by singers Future , Miguel and OVO Sound 's PartyNextDoor . In the months leading up to the album 's release , Drake was featured on the covers of various magazines , such as Billboard , GQ and the 150th issue special of XXL . On September 20 , 2013 , Drake revealed that he had rescheduled the " Would You Like A Tour ? " due to " an intense rehearsal schedule and technical production requirements that will be part of the show . " The tour was rescheduled to begin on October 19 , and the first leg ran until December 16 , 2013 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 In January 2013 , Drake was seen filming a music video for a new song , titled " Started from the Bottom " , which was directed by Director X. Drake later announced that he would release the song as the first single for his third album , which happened on the night of the 55th Annual Grammy Awards . The single premiered instead on February 1 , 2013 , and was released on iTunes , five days later . On February 10 , 2013 , the music video for " Started from the Bottom " was released . The song charted in many countries , reaching a peak of number 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and has been certified double platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 On August 4 , 2013 , it was revealed that Drake would soon be releasing the second single , titled " Hold On , We 're Going Home " . The song featuring Majid Jordan , with production by Noah " 40 " Shebib and Nineteen85 , and was released via iTunes on August 7 , 2013 . On August 12 , 2013 , the song was serviced to rhythmic contemporary and contemporary hit radio . On September 24 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Hold On , We 're Going Home " . The song peaked at number 4 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 8 on the Canadian Hot 100 , respectively . 
 Drake premiered a song from Nothing Was the Same , titled " All Me " , via SoundCloud on August 1 , 2013 . The song features guest vocals from fellow rappers 2 Chainz and Big Sean , and was produced by Key Wane . On the album 's US release date of September 24 , 2013 , Drake sent " All Me " to urban contemporary radio , as the album 's third single . The song peaked at number 20 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , on the week of the album 's release . 
 On September 12 , 2013 , Drake released the previously announced track , titled " Wu @-@ Tang Forever " , as the album 's second promotional single , along with the pre @-@ order of Nothing Was the Same on iTunes . The song is a reference to the Wu @-@ Tang Clan and their critically acclaimed double album Wu @-@ Tang Forever ( 1997 ) . The track also samples their song " It 's <unk> " . After the song 's release , Wu @-@ Tang Clan member U @-@ God told Vibe , that Wu @-@ Tang Clan members , including himself and Method Man among others , has recorded a remix to the track . 
 " Pound Cake / Paris Morton Music 2 " serves as the album 's outro and consists of two songs , " Pound Cake " featuring a guest appearance from Jay Z , and " Paris Morton Music 2 " is a sequel to " Paris Morton Music " . " Pound Cake " features a significant sample of " C.R.E.A.M. " performed by Wu @-@ Tang Clan , and was produced by frequent collaborator Boi @-@ 1da . " Pound Cake " was serviced to radio in the United Kingdom on September 26 , 2013 , as the album 's fourth single , and was subsequently added to the BBC Radio 1Xtra playlist . The track peaked at number 65 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number 111 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 " The Language " was serviced to mainstream urban radio , as the album 's fifth single on October 29 , 2013 . It received many positive reviews , one coming from Nick <unk> of Entertainment Weekly , which named the song , along with " Hold On , We 're Going Home " as one of the album 's best songs . Erika Ramirez of Billboard also credited Drake with " arrogantly " reinstating his spot in the rap game with the song . Upon its release , the song was said to be " addressed " and " acting passively " towards American rapper Kendrick Lamar 's recent diss record , but it was later denied by Birdman , whom appeared to be seen on MTV , prior to the album 's release and said that it was not directed towards Lamar . The song peaked at number 51 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and number 13 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Too Much " impacted urban contemporary radio as the album 's sixth overall single on October 31 , 2013 . On November 11 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Worst Behavior " . " Worst Behavior " was then serviced to urban contemporary radio in the United Kingdom as the album 's seventh single on June 9 , 2014 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Nothing Was the Same debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 658 @,@ 000 . The album has the second highest first week sales of any album in 2013 , at the time of its release . It would also be the highest first week sales for a hip hop album since Lil Wayne 's Tha Carter IV ( 2011 ) . In its second week , the album sold 148 @,@ 000 more copies . In its third week , the album sold 83 @,@ 000 more copies . In its fourth week , the album continued to remain in the top five on the Billboard 200 , selling 58 @,@ 000 more copies . The album sold 1 @,@ 344 @,@ 000 copies in 2013 in the United States , making it the seventh best @-@ selling album of the year . As of August 2015 , the album has sold 1 @,@ 720 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 The album debuted at number 2 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 61 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It would be Drake 's highest debut on the chart and was the fastest selling hip hop album of 2013 in the United Kingdom , at the time of its release . The album also debuted at number one on the main album charts in Canada and Denmark , along with peaking in the top five of the main album charts in Australia , New Zealand and Ireland . The album has sold 108 @,@ 000 copies in Canada in 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nothing Was the Same received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 79 , based on 33 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said , " Drake 's increasing mastery of not just rhyme , but tone and inflection is readily apparent . " Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A , saying " Nothing Was the Same bristles with epiphanies , absurdities , and plenty of bluster , but it 's all fodder for a hyperrealistic portrait of Aubrey Drake Graham , not some coronation ceremony . " Jayson Greene of Pitchfork said , " Nothing Was the Same is Drake and 40 's most audacious experiment yet in how far inward they can push their sound ; a lot of the album sounds like a black hole of all 40 's previous productions being sucked into the center . Song @-@ to @-@ song transitions , which have always been <unk> and blurry , are more notional than ever . " Eric Diep of XXL gave the album an XL rating , saying " It 's apparent throughout the record that Drake thinks Nothing Was The Same is so good that none of his contemporaries can best him . Drake wants to hold the spot as an innovator , and his signature style is grasping onto newer territories every day , influencing artists in the rap world and beyond . " Bryant Kitching of Consequence of Sound gave the album a A – , saying " Nothing Was the Same wrestles Drake 's successes with his ever @-@ lingering insecurities , and like some of the best music , we can see ourselves in these songs . It 's an exhilarating change of pace for the genre . " 
 Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Rolling Stone said , " After a while , his confessions start to sound like sneaky boasts about all the beautiful hearts he 's broken . And maybe he wants you to see that contradiction . After all , hiding his flaws has never been Drake 's style – they 're the whole point . " Bonsu Thompson of Vibe gave the album a positive review , saying " As a major label artist , Drake has yet to conceive a classic album . While Nothing Was The Same doesn 't end that drought , its accomplishments may end up more pivotal . Hip @-@ hop music hasn 't been blurred and stretched this wide since Kanye ’ s 808s & Heartbreak . " David Amidon of PopMatters , gave the album a seven out of ten , saying " Nothing Was the Same could very easily grow up to be one of those albums deemed “ pretty good ” at the time only to be recognized as Drake 's most likable album years from now . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today stated , " On his latest album Canada 's leading hip @-@ hop export continues to juggle bravado with brooding , though he sounds more empowered in the latter . " Tim Sendra of AllMusic said , " Nothing Was the Same doesn 't show large amounts of growth , but the small changes to the sound and the slightly wider net his lyrics cast make it worthwhile . " Aaron Matthews of Exclaim ! stated , " Nothing Was The Same is a challenging , uncompromised major label rap album with a handful of impeccable songs , weighed down slightly by the rapper 's increasingly solipsistic viewpoint . " 
 Julia LeConte of Now stated , " To say “ nothing was the same ” might be a stretch , but certainly the record mines enough new sonic territory to make it Kanye @-@ like in its evolution . " Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times said , " By the end , " Nothing Was the Same " overwhelms even by Drake 's selfie standards , and confirms that just because they 're well @-@ marketed and Midwest @-@ palatable doesn 't make internal diaries wholly compelling . " Jesse Cataldo of Slant Magazine gave the album four out of five stars , saying " The album isn 't perfect , but it draws energy from that imperfection , further establishing a persona driven by Drake 's still @-@ developing conflict between assurance and hesitation . " Evan Rytlewski of The A.V. Club gave the album a B + , saying " If Nothing Was The Same doesn 't resonate quite as consistently as Take Care , it 's because Drake and his in @-@ house collaborator Noah " 40 " Shebib sometimes seem content to revisit that album 's sonic landscapes instead of carving out new ones . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Closing out the year , Nothing Was the Same was named to multiple " Best Albums of the Year " lists . XXL named it the best album of 2013 . They commented saying , " The OVO general is at his highest point of his career , perfecting his formula of singing and rapping that truly carries the album from start to finish . With 40 in his corner , the pair executed tighter levels of their dark , lush sound that became easily identifiable . The compelling cuts — " From Time " , " Too Much " , " Hold On , We 're Going Home " — as well as obvious anthems like " Started From The Bottom " and " Worst Behaviour " display leaps of growth . " Complex named it the second best album of 2013 stating , " it was one of the most anticipated albums of the year , and one that actually lived up to the hype . Nothing Was The Same might not have had a legendary producer on hand to " <unk> " its sound , but it has minimized the discussion of who is the most popular rap star in the world right now . " Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly also named it the second best album of 2013 saying , " When he gets to <unk> ' — as on " Worst Behavior , " with its Rube Goldberg underpinnings ; the MC smackdown " The Language " ; and the hypnotic " Started From the Bottom " — he 's flawlessly confident . But his restless thoughts keep the elegant music here taut . " It was ranked at number 14 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 50 best albums of 2013 . They commented saying , " Drake is the people 's rapper , a smart kid conflicted about his fame , heart , family , everything except his mic potency . But what makes his lonely fantastic voyage matter is its emotional weight , which gets crucial amplification from Noah " 40 " Shebib 's whirlpool beats . " 
 The Guardian placed it at number 31 on their list of the forty best albums of 2013 . Exclaim ! named it the third best hip hop album of 2013 . It was named the ninth best album of 2013 by Slant Magazine . They commented saying , " Drake , the Canadian master of confession @-@ rap , cuts the usual sharp lines , and his lamentations have never felt so knowing , nor more tuneful . He doesn 't need a handful of guest MCs , and he doesn 't want our sympathy either — just the chance to give us mellow ear @-@ <unk> , which he does on nearly every track . " It was ranked at number 19 on Consequence of Sound 's list of the top 50 albums of 2013 . Stereogum ranked it at number 28 on their list of the 50 best albums of the year . " Spin positioned it at number 50 on their list . The album is a shortlisted nominee for the 2014 Polaris Music Prize . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] signifies an additional producer 
 " Tuscan Leather " features background vocals by <unk> . 
 " Furthest Thing " features background vocals by Brian Hamilton , Omar Richards , Owen Lee , Deborah Vernal , Jennifer Tulloch , Patricia Shirley and Rachel Craig . 
 " Own It " features background vocals by PartyNextDoor . 
 " From Time " features background vocals by Travis Savoury Baka AKA “ Not Nice " 
 " Hold On , We 're Going Home " features background vocals by Brian Hamilton , Omar Richards , Deborah Vernal , Grace Gayle , Dionne Wilson , Patricia Shirley and Rachel Craig . 
 " Connect " features background vocals by Shawn Lawrence and <unk> tha Truth . 
 " Come Thru " features background vocals from PartyNextDoor . 
 Sample credits 
 " Tuscan Leather " contains interpolations of " Serious " , written by Warren McGlone and Lawrence Parker ; samples of " I Have Nothing " , written by David Foster and Linda Thompson , as performed by Whitney Houston ; and samples from " When Seasons Change " ( live ) by Curtis Mayfield . 
 " Started from the Bottom " contains samples from the composition <unk> Piano & Drones , written and performed by Bruno <unk> . 
 " Wu @-@ Tang Forever " contains samples of " It 's <unk> " , written by Dennis Coles , Robert Diggs , Lamont Hawkins , Jason Hunter , Corey Woods , Thor <unk> , Mats <unk> and <unk> <unk> , as performed by Wu @-@ Tang Clan ; and samples of " Loss <unk> " , as performed by Zodiac Beats . 
 " Too Much " contains samples of " Too Much " , written by Sampha and Emile Haynie , as performed by Sampha . 
 " Pound Cake / Paris Morton Music 2 " contains interpolations of " C.R.E.A.M. " , written by Dennis Coles , Robert Diggs , Gary Grice , Lamont Hawkins , Isaac Hayes , Jason Hunter , Russell Jones , David Porter , Clifford Smith and Corey Woods , as performed by Wu @-@ Tang Clan ; samples of " Don 't Say a Word " , written by Jim Eliot and Ellie Goulding , as performed by Ellie Goulding ; and samples of " Jimmy Smith Rap " , as performed by Jimmy Smith . 
 " All Me " contains samples of " My Man " , written by Albert Lucien <unk> , Jacques Charles and Maurice Yvain , as performed by Abbey Lincoln . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Nothing Was the Same adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Macrotarsomys petteri = 
 Macrotarsomys petteri , also known as Petter 's big @-@ footed mouse , is a Malagasy rodent in the genus Macrotarsomys . With a head and body length of 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and body mass of 105 g ( 3 @.@ 7 oz ) , Macrotarsomys petteri is the largest species of its genus . The upperparts are brown , darkest in the middle of the back , and the underparts are white to yellowish . The animal has long whiskers , short forelimbs , and long hindfeet . The tail ends in a prominent tuft of long , light hairs . The skull is robust and the molars are low @-@ crowned and cuspidate . 
 Macrotarsomys petteri is now found only in the Mikea Forest of southwestern Madagascar , but subfossil records indicate that it used to be more widely distributed in southern Madagascar . Climatic changes and competition with introduced species may have led to the shift in its distribution . The Mikea Forest , the only place where it is still known to occur , is threatened by human development . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 During a 2003 biological inventory of the Mikea Forest , a forest region of southwestern Madagascar , a single specimen of the rodent genus Macrotarsomys was collected . This animal turned out to be distinct from both previously known species of the genus — Macrotarsomys bastardi , which is widespread in western Madagascar , and the larger Macrotarsomys ingens , known only from the Ankarafantsika National Park . Accordingly , Steven Goodman and Voahangy <unk> named it in 2005 as a new species , Macrotarsomys petteri . The specific name , petteri , honors French zoologist François Petter for his contributions to the study of Malagasy rodents . M. petteri , the largest species in the genus , is most similar to M. ingens , which may be its closest relative . 
 = = Description = = 
 Macrotarsomys petteri is a terrestrial rodent with short forelimbs and long hindfeet . With a head and body length of 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and body mass of 105 g ( 3 @.@ 7 oz ) in the only known complete specimen , it is much larger than M. bastardi , and its measurements fall at or above the upper end of the known range of variation in M. ingens . The upperparts are covered with soft and short , brown fur . Most cover hairs ( the main part of the fur ) are dark brown for the two @-@ thirds closest to the base , then light brown , with a short dark brown tip . The middle of the back appears darker , because the cover hairs there are entirely dark brown . The hairs are 6 to 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 3 in ) long on the shoulders and 7 to 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) on the back . The guard hairs are gray . Because the flanks lack entirely dark cover hairs , they are slightly lighter than the rest of the upperparts . They are sharply separated in color from the underparts , which are entirely white to buffish . The mystacial vibrissae ( whiskers above the mouth ) are long , up to 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) , and white or black in color . The pinnae ( external ears ) are dark brown and covered with fine gray hairs , and ear length is 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 <unk> length is 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) . The upper sides of the feet are covered with grayish white fur , which extends around the claws to form ungual tufts . On the hindfeet , the fifth digit is relatively short at 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) ; the hallux ( first digit ) is 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) long , and the other digits 11 to 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 5 in ) . The tail is 238 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) long and naked in part . At the base , it is dark brown both above and below , but slightly lighter below . The upper side remains dark brown for much of its length , though the color does become lighter towards the tip . The lower side becomes mottled at about 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) from the tip and then whitish at about 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) . Macrotarsomys petteri has a well @-@ developed tuft at its tail tip , consisting of whitish and occasional light brown hairs . This tuft commences at about 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) from the base with fairly short hairs and becomes more pronounced at 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) . In contrast , M. ingens has a weaker , dark brown tuft . 
 Macrotarsomys petteri has a large and robust skull with well @-@ developed zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) . The interorbital region of the skull ( between the eyes ) is smooth , as in M. ingens , and lacks the shelves characteristic of M. bastardi . The palate is broad and the incisive foramina ( openings in the front portion of the palate ) are long and broad . In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the root of the lower incisor is housed in a distinct capsular process , a protuberance at the back of the jawbone . The lower masseteric ridge ( a crest on the outer side of the mandible ) is prominent . As is typical of Macrotarsomys , the molars are cuspidate and low @-@ crowned . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 The single known living specimen , a young adult male , was collected at 80 m ( 260 ft ) altitude in the <unk> forest ( part of the Mikea Forest ) . The <unk> forest is different in vegetation from the rest of the Mikea Forest , and is similar to forests further to the north on Madagascar . The animal was found in an isolated fragment of dry deciduous forest amid land cleared for maize cultivation . The trap was set at the foot of a tree surrounded by bushes and succulent plants . Other small mammals known from the Mikea Forest include Macrotarsomys bastardi , the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) , several species of tenrecs , and the shrew <unk> madagascariensis . Although only a single individual of M. petteri was caught during Goodman and <unk> 's survey , which accrued 3100 trap @-@ nights , they argue that this does not necessarily mean the species is rare , since trapping rates for rodents in the dry forests of Madagascar are often variable depending on year and season . Nothing is known of its behavior , but the animal 's morphology suggests it lives on the ground . 
 Subsequent to its discovery at the Mikea Forest , Macrotarsomys petteri was also found as a subfossil in cave deposits at Andrahomana in far southeastern Madagascar , a find reported in 2006 . There , it was found together with more abundant remains of the introduced black rat and house mouse ( Mus musculus ) , as well as indigenous rodents such as Macrotarsomys bastardi . Two M. petteri bones were radiocarbon dated to 790 – 410 BCE and 150 – 390 CE , respectively , a period when the local climate became drier and humans first appeared . Macrotarsomys species are thought to burrow in sandy ground and would not be expected to enter caves ; therefore , the subfossils are probably remains of animals eaten by birds of prey . Although M. petteri could conceivably persist in remnant pockets of wet habitat in southeastern Madagascar , searches at two sites near Andrahomana failed to confirm its presence . It may have become locally extinct in the area because of the drying climate and competition with the black rat . 
 In 2009 , Macrotarsomys petteri was also recorded from the cave of Ankilitelo in southwestern Madagascar . Remains of a large Macrotarsomys had previously been reported from other southern Madagascar sites , and at least some of these may be M. petteri . A karstic deposit near Lake <unk> ( dated to the Late Pliocene or Early Pleistocene on unclear grounds ) contained three species of Macrotarsomys , including a very large one that may well be M. petteri . Remains identified as Macrotarsomys ingens have been reported from a cave at Ankazoabo in southern Madagascar ; these may also be M. petteri . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN Red List assesses Macrotarsomys petteri as " Data Deficient " , but notes that the species will very probably qualify as threatened if its current distribution turns out to be restricted to primary forest in the Mikea Forest . The Mikea Forest is one of the largest remaining forests of southwestern Madagascar , but it is not protected and is threatened by logging , pasture , and conversion to agricultural land . 
 = SM UB @-@ 4 = 
 <unk> <unk> UB @-@ 4 was a German Type UB I submarine ( U @-@ boat ) in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. She was sunk by a British Q @-@ ship disguised as a fishing smack in August 1915 . 
 UB @-@ 4 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in November . UB @-@ 4 was a little more than 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 142 tonnes ( 125 and 140 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 4 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 4 in March 1915 . 
 UB @-@ 4 conducted the first sortie of the Flanders Flotilla in April , during which she sank the Belgian Relief ship Harpalyce , the first ship credited to the flotilla . She sank three more ships from mid @-@ April to mid @-@ August . On 15 August , UB @-@ 4 surfaced near the British Q @-@ ship Inverlyon and was sunk by gunfire from the sailing vessel . None of UB @-@ 4 's 14 crewmen survived the attack . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow environment off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . UB @-@ 4 was part of the initial allotment of eight submarines — numbered UB @-@ 1 to UB @-@ 8 — ordered on 15 October from Germaniawerft of Kiel , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . 
 UB @-@ 4 was laid down by Germaniawerft in Kiel on 3 November . As built , UB @-@ 4 was 28 @.@ 10 metres ( 92 ft 2 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 10 ft ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Daimler 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 6 @.@ 47 knots ( 11 @.@ 98 km / h ; 7 @.@ 45 mph ) , surfaced , and 5 @.@ 51 knots ( 10 @.@ 20 km / h ; 6 @.@ 34 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 650 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 060 km ; 1 @,@ 900 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 4 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 4 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 4 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 After work on UB @-@ 4 was complete at the Germaniwerft yard , UB @-@ 4 was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In early 1915 , the sections of UB @-@ 4 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three @-@ week process . After UB @-@ 4 was assembled and launched sometime in March , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials . 
 = = Service career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 4 on 23 March under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Karl Gross , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . UB @-@ 4 soon joined the other UB I boats then comprising the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote des Marinekorps U @-@ Flotille Flandern ) , which had been organized on 29 March . When UB @-@ 4 joined the flotilla , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom ( including the English Channel ) , were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . 
 UB @-@ 4 kicked off operations for the new flotilla when she departed on her first patrol on 9 April . The following day , she sank the first ship credited to the Flanders Flotilla . The 5 @,@ 940 @-@ ton British @-@ flagged Harpalyce , which had been chartered by the American Commission for Relief in Belgium , was headed for Norfolk , Virginia , United States , in ballast after delivering relief supplies to Rotterdam . UB @-@ 4 came upon the steamer between Harwich and the Hook of Holland and pulled to within about 100 yards ( 91 m ) . Despite the fact that the ship had a pass of safe @-@ conduct from Germany , was marked with the words " Belgian Relief " on her side , and was flying a white flag with the same wording , Gross torpedoed the vessel without warning . Harpalyce sank in about five minutes , which allowed no time to launch any of the lifeboats . The Dutch steamers Elisabeth and Constance , and the American steamer Ruby picked up survivors . Herbert Hoover , head of the relief committee , reported that his organization 's charter of the ship ended after delivery of the cargo in Rotterdam , but expressed disbelief that the ship could have been the victim of a torpedo attack , given the " distinct assurance " that ships engaged in the relief effort " would not be molested " . Harpalyce 's master and 14 others from the 44 @-@ man crew died in the attack . Harpalyce was the largest ship sunk by UB @-@ 4 during her career . 
 UB @-@ 4 's followed up the sinking of Harpalyce by sinking the Greek ship <unk> , a steamer of 2 @,@ 989 gross register tons ( GRT ) . <unk> was en route to Montevideo from Amsterdam when sunk by Gross and UB @-@ 4 on 17 April . Although German U @-@ boats sank over 100 @,@ 000 tons of shipping in each of May and June , UB @-@ 4 did not contribute to those totals . She did add one ship to the 98 @,@ 000 @-@ ton tally for July when she sank the Belgian ship Princesse Marie Jose and her load of coal on 29 July . The 1 @,@ 954 @-@ ton steamer had sailed from Dunston and was headed to Bordeaux when sunk 1 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 2 @.@ 8 km ; 1 @.@ 7 mi ) from the Shipwash Lightship off Harwich . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 On 14 August , the 59 @-@ ton British fishing smack Bona Fide was stopped by a U @-@ boat , boarded , and sunk with explosives 35 nautical miles ( 65 km ; 40 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Lowestoft . According to the website Uboat.net , this attack was likely by UB @-@ 4 , because she was operating in the area on her fourteenth patrol . Regardless of the identity of Bona Fide 's attacker , UB @-@ 4 did approach a group of smacks in the vicinity the next day , but unbeknownst to UB @-@ 4 's commander , Gross , one of the fishing vessels was actually a British decoy ship . 
 The decoy or Q @-@ ship was His Majesty 's Armed Smack Inverlyon , a smack that had been outfitted with a concealed 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ) gun . Around 20 : 20 , UB @-@ 4 drew within 30 yards ( 27 m ) of Inverlyon and Gross , on the conning tower of UB @-@ 4 , shouted out commands to Inverlyon 's crew in German . After waiting until the right moment , Ernest Jehan , a Royal Navy gunner in command of Inverlyon , ordered the White Ensign raised and gave the command to open fire . A burst of three rounds from the 3 @-@ pounder scored hits on the conning tower , the second destroying part of the bridge and sending Gross into the water . UB @-@ 4 , with no one at the helm , drifted behind Inverlyon , and when clear , the 3 @-@ pounder fired another six shots into the hull of UB @-@ 4 at point blank range . All the while small arms fire from Inverlyon 's crew peppered the submarine . The U @-@ boat began going down by the bow , becoming nearly vertical before disappearing below the surface . A member of Inverlyon 's crew attempted the rescue of one crewman from UB @-@ 4 , but was unable to reach him before he went under , meeting the same fate as the other thirteen crewmen . 
 As UB @-@ 4 went down , her hulk fouled the Inverlyon 's nets — which had been deployed to keep up the appearance of a real fishing boat — essentially anchoring Inverlyon in place . The Q @-@ ship 's crew , not having a wireless set on board , sent word of the encounter with another smack , and followed up by releasing messenger pigeons the following morning , requesting instructions on what to do with UB @-@ 4 . The thought of salvaging the snagged U @-@ boat was rejected , so the nets were cut , freeing UB @-@ 4 to sink to the bottom . UB @-@ 4 's wreck lies at position 52 ° 43 ′ N 2 ° 18 ′ E. Jehan was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for the sinking of UB @-@ 4 , and the crewmen of Inverlyon split the submarine bounty paid by the Admiralty . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Sam & Max : Freelance Police = 
 Sam & Max : Freelance Police was a graphic adventure computer game developed by LucasArts from 2002 until its cancellation in 2004 , and the final game in the company 's adventure game era . Freelance Police was originally intended for release for Windows in early 2004 as a sequel to the 1993 title Sam & Max Hit the Road . The game was based on the characters Sam and Max : an anthropomorphic dog and " hyperkinetic rabbity thing " who debuted in a 1987 comic book series created by Steve Purcell . Freelance Police was announced in August 2002 , and showcased at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) in 2003 . Like its predecessor , Freelance Police was designed as a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game , but used a 3D game engine in place of the SCUMM and GrimE engines used in older LucasArts adventure games . The project 's development was led by Michael Stemmle , one of the original designers for Sam & Max Hit the Road , while Steve Purcell assisted in developing the game 's plot and providing artistic direction . 
 Although the game 's development appeared to be proceeding towards completion without difficulty , LucasArts abruptly canceled production of Freelance Police in March 2004 , citing economic and market conditions . The game 's cancellation was received poorly by fans of the series , Steve Purcell , and the video game industry media . Many journalists viewed this move as a culmination in the decline of the adventure game genre . LucasArts later terminated its adventure game development , and many of the Freelance Police design team left to create Telltale Games and continue development of such adventure games . Steve Purcell moved the Sam & Max franchise to Telltale Games in 2005 , prompting a revival of Sam & Max video games . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Sam & Max : Freelance Police was designed by LucasArts as a graphic adventure game and sequel to the 1993 title Sam & Max Hit the Road . The game was to feature 3D computer graphics rendered in real @-@ time . The game engine contained elements from other LucasArts games , including those from <unk> , RTX Red Rock , Full Throttle : Hell on Wheels and Star Wars : Obi @-@ Wan . Graphical features such as shaders , bump maps and lightmaps were used to give a 3D effect to 2D textures in the game . Little was revealed of the gameplay , other than that Freelance Police would not follow the same control scheme used in 3D LucasArts adventures Grim Fandango and Escape from Monkey Island , but would return to point @-@ and @-@ click mechanics used in the 2D LucasArts games . As in Sam & Max Hit the Road , Freelance Police would contain a mixture of optional and compulsory minigames , 19 in total . The game was designed so that the player character could not die or reach a dead end . 
 Few details were revealed about the game 's plot . In a January 2004 interview , lead designer Michael Stemmle provided a rough outline : the game 's story was " really six stories , loosely held together by a thrilling über @-@ plot " . Each individual story contained a separate case for the Freelance Police , taking place in a variety of environments , including a space station and a neopagan bacchanal , and featuring " freakish bad guys " . Stemmle stated that the intention was to keep the " über @-@ plot " concealed for a while , but noted that it contained " all the barely plausible grandeur that fans have come to expect from Sam and Max " . Steve Purcell , the creator of Sam & Max , assisted in the development of both the plot and the artistic direction , producing concept art of various characters and locales . Besides the return of the title characters , only one other character , Flint Paper , was confirmed for the game . Described by Stemmle as " the Freelance Police 's rough ' n ' tumble private detective neighbour " , Paper is briefly featured in Sam & Max comics and makes an offstage appearance in Sam & Max Hit the Road . Stemmle had Paper planned for a " critical role " in the game 's plot . 
 Due to the nature of the story , LucasArts considered releasing the game in episodic fashion and using digital distribution , an option favored by the development team but opposed by the management division , who preferred the more traditional methods of retail distribution . Post @-@ release bonus content was also considered ; Stemmle remarked that such content would include new power @-@ ups , minigames and " maybe even entirely new interactive Sam & Max cases [ the player ] can download " . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development of a sequel to Sam & Max Hit the Road was announced by LucasArts on August 27 , 2002 . In their press release , LucasArts president Simon Jeffery stated that " the Sam & Max sequel , much like the recently announced Full Throttle II , perfectly complements LucasArts ' renowned adventure game legacy and lends further support to the company 's commitment to investing in and developing more of our original properties " . LucasArts revealed no additional details at the time beyond a projected release in the first quarter of 2004 . The game was officially announced for Windows at the Electronic Entertainment Expo convention on May 12 , 2003 , where the full title Sam & Max : Freelance Police was revealed . LucasArts reaffirmed the projected early 2004 release date at the convention . The game 's trailer was also presented at E3 , reintroducing the characters and confirming that the original voice actors for Sam and Max , Bill Farmer and Nick Jameson respectively , were set to reprise their roles . Over the following months , several minor media releases were made , revealing new information regarding the game 's developmental direction and graphical style . The game 's release was highly anticipated by journalists in the video game industry , who published various previews and interviews with the development team , particularly with lead designer Michael Stemmle , one of the original designers of Sam & Max Hit the Road . 
 In August 2003 , LucasArts halted production on the Full Throttle adventure game sequel Hell on Wheels , leading the magazine Hyper to speculate that Freelance Police might suffer a similar fate . LucasArts reassured the media that Freelance Police was still in production and was nearing completion , reiterating that the game would be released in 2004 . Media coverage continued ; for example , PC Gamer US ran an interview with Stemmle as a cover story in February 2004 . However , on March 3 , 2004 , LucasArts abruptly announced the cancellation of Freelance Police . In a short press release , LucasArts ' Acting General Manager , Mike Nelson , stated that " after careful evaluation of current market place realities and underlying economic considerations , we 've decided that this was not the appropriate time to launch a graphic adventure on the PC " . 
 The reaction to the game 's cancellation was overwhelmingly negative . Commentators in the industry media felt that the decision was representative of the diminishing relevance of adventure games , with many concluding that LucasArts was moving to maintain its position with low risk Star Wars @-@ themed titles instead of the adventure games that had brought them success in earlier years . Freelance Police 's cancellation is often cited as the culmination of the adventure genre 's decline . The decision came so suddenly that some magazines accidentally published favorable previews of the game after LucasArts ' announcement . A fan web site named " Save Sam and Max " presented a petition of 32 @,@ 000 signatures to LucasArts conveying the fans ' disappointment . Steve Purcell , the creator of the Sam & Max franchise , stated that he was disappointed by LucasArts ' decision : 
 According to Stemmle , the cancellation decision was prompted by the report of an external marketing analysis group hired by LucasArts , which claimed that the European market for adventure games " had simply disappeared . Not shrunk , not cratered , just ... disappeared " . A newly established German company , Bad Brain Entertainment , claimed to have entered negotiations with LucasArts to acquire the game , although nothing resulted from these talks . LucasArts subsequently dismissed many of the designers involved with developing their adventure games , and in 2006 stated that they did not intend to return to the adventure genre until the next decade . Some of the former Freelance Police development team formed Telltale Games in June 2004 to continue developing the sort of adventure games that LucasArts no longer wished to produce . Telltale Games later unsuccessfully attempted to buy the rights to Freelance Police from LucasArts , which would have enabled the team to finish developing the game . When the LucasArts license expired in mid @-@ 2005 , Purcell took the franchise to Telltale Games , where it was developed into an episodic series of games . However , very little of the work done on Freelance Police was carried over by the developers to Telltale Games ; LucasArts still held onto the game 's assets and Telltale was wary about using similar design patterns . The new series debuted in October 2006 with Sam & Max Save the World . 
 = 6955 kHz = 
 " 6955 kHz " is the sixth episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . It first aired on November 11 , 2010 in the United States . The third season spent much of its time alternating between the prime and parallel universes , and " 6955 kHz " was set in the former . The storyline followed the Fringe team 's investigation into a numbers station that mysteriously gave its listeners amnesia , a case that ultimately ties to a doomsday device . 
 The episode was written by story editors Robert Chiappetta and Glen Whitman , and was directed by Joe Chappelle . Its broadcast took place on the Fox network , and according to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 4 @.@ 8 million viewers tuned in . Reviews of the episode ranged from positive to mixed , as some reviewers disagreed about the introduction of a " First People " mythology . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fauxlivia , Olivia Dunham 's doppelgänger from the parallel universe , continues to pose as Olivia as part of the Fringe division . The Fringe team is brought in on a case where several people , part of an online group attempting to decode the information sent by a numbers station , have been stricken with amnesia . They discover the station broadcasting the signal , finding its workers killed and a strange box connected to the broadcast equipment . They identify fingerprints on the box of a Joseph Feller , but his current location is unknown . Walter attempts to decipher the workings of the box , while giving hope to some of the affected people that they will get their memories back in time . 
 Peter discovers that the rare book shopkeeper , Edward Markham ( Clark Middleton ) , was part of the online group but did not listen that night . Edward provides his theory of the numbers stations to Peter and Fauxlivia : that it is a signal left by the " First People " , an advanced civilization that existed before a mass extinction event . He provides them with a book about the First People . As they return the book to Walter , Peter notices numbers in the astrological charts in the book are the same as the broadcast numbers . They give the book to Astrid , a skilled decoder , along with copious volumes of data from biotechnology corporation Massive Dynamic about the numbers stations . 
 Later , the crash of a small commuter aircraft is attributed to a similar signal from a numbers station , and when Fringe division identifies the source , they find a second box . Taking the box to Walter , Peter identifies one of the electronic components as rare , and engages his contacts to find Feller 's address from its purchase . Fauxlivia feigns returning to headquarters to instead travel to Feller 's apartment , warning him that Fringe is onto him , but he insists on continuing his job . She throws him out the window as the Fringe team arrives , killing him and revealing him to be a shapeshifter . Fauxlivia claims she killed the man in self @-@ defense . 
 Meanwhile , Astrid has decoded the numbers as a series of geographical coordinates . The closest one is in Milton , Massachusetts , the site of where a mysterious box was found ( " The Box " ) . Teams are quickly sent to the other sites given across the globe , and they discover many more parts of what Walter and Peter believe to be the same doomsday machine that Walternate , Walter 's doppelgänger , has already constructed in the parallel universe , and which the First People book claims can destroy or create universes . Fauxlivia later communicates this finding to the parallel universe through the typewriter shop , and is ordered to initiate " phase two " . 
 The episode ends in the parallel universe where Olivia , having broken Walternate 's conditioning making her believe herself to be Fauxlivia , is told that no further tests are needed . A vision of Peter warns Olivia that her usefulness to Walternate has ended and her life is in danger . 
 = = Production = = 
 " 6955 kHz " was written by story editors Robert Chiappetta and Glen Whitman , while frequent Fringe collaborator Joe Chappelle served as the director . Leading up to the episode 's broadcast , actress Anna Torv revealed in an official Fox interview that " [ The next ] episode is all about these co @-@ ordinates that keep getting broadcast on the radio . This is all ... a ploy to get Walter and Peter working on Walternate 's machine . " Chappelle also added that Fauxlivia would be working " to protect Walternate 's plan ... These pirate broadcasts are created on the other side ... by Walternate , to help him in his plans with our universe . " 
 The episode featured performances by guest actors Kevin Weisman , Mark Acheson , Minh Ly , Paula Lindberg , Tyler McClendon , and Vincent Tong ; previous guest stars Ryan McDonald and Clark Middleton returned as scientist Brandon Fayette and rare bookseller Edward Markham , respectively . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " 6955 kHz " , with the intention of having " students learn about information encoding , which is [ the ] process of converting a piece of information into another form or representation . " 
 Torv later remarked in a DVD special featurette that " this episode is actually a nice one because I think she 's kind of starting to look at these people as more than just a project . I think she ’ s starting to think about who they are " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its first American broadcast on November 11 , 2010 , " 6955 kHz " was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 8 million viewers , earning a 2 @.@ 9 / 5 rating for all households and 1 @.@ 7 / 5 for adults 18 to 49 . Fringe and its lead @-@ in show Bones helped Fox place third for the night in a tie with NBC . Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's ratings by 53 percent among adults , resulting in a rise from 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 6 . This number tied with the NBC series The Event as the largest increase of the week in time @-@ shifting viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received positive to mixed reviews . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , critic Ken Tucker noted and appreciated that " many key details were provided by characters who don ’ t often serve that function " , such as with Broyles and the numbers stations . He called it " a terrific , almost Astrid @-@ centric episode . " Los Angeles Times writer Andrew Hanson enjoyed the episode 's many puzzles and expressed appreciation for the " First People " revelation as well as Walternate 's " long con " concerning the doomsday device . Hanson was skeptical that Peter had not yet figured out Fauxlivia 's true identity , but praised Anna Torv 's performance ( " Anyone who doubted [ her ] acting chops in the first couple of seasons should be eating their words " ) . 
 Like Andrew Hanson , A.V. Club 's Noel Murray called the introduction of the First People " a masterstroke on the part of the Fringe writers " . Murray graded the episode with a B + , explaining it " was a strange Fringe for me . The dialogue was often painfully expository , with liberal doses of ADR to make sure that we viewers didn ’ t miss any of the massive amounts of significant information we need to understand as the story moves forward ... And yet the episode was also funky and philosophical in the way I like my Fringe to be , using the plot and even the setting to put across more than just pieces of the series ’ mythology . " 
 Fearnet critic Alyse Wax wrote " This episode made my brain hurt . And I mean that in the nicest way possible . They were throwing a lot of weird shit at us . It was great because I feel like we are finally getting answers , like we will finally get some closure , and just maybe get rid of the Red universe <unk> . This episode was so ridiculously dense I am sure I missed some of the deeper scientific facts . I got the gist of it , though , and frankly , I much prefer these jam @-@ packed episodes . I like when the puzzle pieces start falling into place . It 's calming . " SFScope 's Sarah Stegall believed the episode " start [ ed ] out interestingly enough " , but unlike other reviewers , she was very critical of the First People mythology , stating " This is where my disbelief not only stopped being suspended , it got up and walked out of the room ... I still don 't like the premise of the evolution of an entire hominid species that left not one single solitary fossil behind . It 's more like fantasy than science fiction . " Stegall praised Torv 's acting as she plays " two people very subtly , very convincingly " , and concluded her review by commenting she will continue to watch the series because she trusts the writers will " supply us with plausible answers from time to time " , but is " losing some respect for it " . 
 = U2 3D = 
 U2 3D is a 2007 American @-@ produced 3D concert film featuring rock band U2 performing during the Vertigo Tour in 2006 . The film contains performances of 14 songs , including tracks from How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb ( 2004 ) , the album supported by the tour . The concert footage includes political and social statements made during the shows . It is the band 's second feature film , following their 1988 rockumentary Rattle and Hum . Among several cinematic firsts , U2 3D was the first live @-@ action digital 3D film . 
 The project was created to experiment with a new type of 3D film technology pioneered by producer Steve Schklair . After considering shooting American football games in 3D , Schklair 's company 3ality Digital decided to create a concert film with U2 . The band were hesitant to participate , but agreed to the project mainly as a technological experiment rather than a profit @-@ making venture . Although set in Buenos Aires , U2 3D was shot at seven concerts across Latin America , and two in Australia . The film 's complex setup involved shooting with up to 18 3D cameras simultaneously and capturing the footage digitally . 
 After a premiering out of competition at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival , U2 3D showed at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival and had its limited theatrical release in late January 2008 , followed by its wide release the following month . The film was distributed by National Geographic Entertainment and was only released in IMAX 3D and digital 3D theaters . It peaked at number 19 at the United States box office , and earned over $ 22 million internationally , ranking as one of the highest @-@ grossing concert films . It received widely positive reviews , with critics praising the 3D technology and innovation . U2 3D won several awards , and its reception convinced some of the creators that the project marked a paradigm shift in filmmaking . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 U2 3D depicts a U2 concert in Buenos Aires during the band 's Vertigo Tour . In the beginning of the film , a voice is heard chanting " everyone " in a crowd @-@ filled stadium , followed by fans running through the venue . U2 begin the concert with " Vertigo " , followed by ten more songs in the main set . Images are shown throughout the concert on the stage 's LED display . Political and social statements are made during some songs , including " Sunday Bloody Sunday " — during which the word " <unk> " is spelled out on @-@ screen through various religious symbols — and " Miss Sarajevo " , during which an excerpt from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is read aloud by a narrator . The main set ends with " One " , after which the group leave the stage . They return for an encore and perform " The Fly " , during which a succession of words and phrases appear on the stage 's LED display and are superimposed into the film . U2 end the show with " With or Without You " and leave the stage for the final time . As the closing credits begin , a live performance of " Yahweh " is heard as animations from the stage 's LED display are shown . U2 reappear on stage in a post @-@ credits scene performing the end of the song . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 2001 , producers Jon and Peter Shapiro created a 2D IMAX concert film titled All Access , which featured live performances of several musicians . Due to the difficulty of using conventional IMAX film stock that had to be replaced every three minutes of shooting , the Shapiros wanted to use digital technology for their next project , which could easily be upscaled to the IMAX format without loss of quality . Noting how 3D films out @-@ performed 2D films , they also wanted their next project to be in the IMAX 3D format . While looking for a new digital 3D technology medium , the Shapiros met producer Steve Schklair , founder of Cobalt Entertainment in 2000 . Schklair had recently developed a digital 3D filming technique known as " active depth cut " , which allowed for smooth cuts between shots that would normally not line up when filmed in 3D . This was done using motion control photography and real @-@ time image processing to create a realistic 3D experience without subjecting the viewer to excessive motion sickness or eye strain . It was intended to be an inexpensive and effective way to shoot live events such as concerts or sports . With the help of John and David Modell , former owners of the Baltimore Ravens American football team , the digital 3D technology was tested at several National Football League ( NFL ) games in the 2003 season , including Super Bowl XXXVIII . Cobalt showed the footage to the NFL , hoping to create an NFL @-@ based 3D IMAX film . While waiting for a response , the Shapiros proposed the idea of creating a 3D concert film for IMAX theaters . Although All Access had showcased several artists , the Shapiros now wanted to focus on a single act , and being U2 fans , suggested the band as a potential subject . Schklair felt U2 would be a good choice for the film due to their large concert setups and their constant movement while performing , both of which would provide good depth of field for 3D effects . 
 The <unk> ' collaboration with U2 for the film was facilitated by their involvement with the band in researching LED display technology in 1997 for use at Ravens Stadium at Camden Yards . At the time , the only giant LED display in existence was being used by U2 on their PopMart Tour . To learn about the technology , David Modell toured with U2 on @-@ and @-@ off for a period of six months . During that time , he befriended Catherine Owens , who served as the group 's art director since their 1992 Zoo TV Tour . 
 Unable to contact U2 manager Paul McGuinness , Peter Shapiro instead proposed the idea to Owens . The latter was researching art content for the upcoming Vertigo Tour and thought the concept could be used to show 3D video as part of U2 's concerts . Shapiro explained that the technology was not that developed and simply wanted to document the tour itself in 3D , but Owens was not interested in making a film of the band , fearing it would interfere with the tour , so she declined the offer . After Shapiro showed Owens the 3D footage of the NFL games , Owens expressed interest in directing the proposed film , despite having no previous experience . According to bassist Adam Clayton , U2 were not interested in making another concert film , but Owens " pushed it down [ their ] throats " . Once the band viewed the test shots , frontman Bono expressed interest in the project and convinced his band @-@ mates to commit . Since U2 had already experimented with video technology in the past , they were interested in the project as a technological experiment rather than a means to make profit , and as a means to share the live experience with fans who could not afford concert tickets . 
 Pre @-@ production for U2 3D officially started in early 2004 , and the production was handled by 3ality Digital , a company formed from Schklair 's <unk> Entertainment and his partnership with the <unk> and the Shapiros . Midway through the year , Bono agreed to let the 3ality Digital crew record test footage , which was accomplished using a single 3D camera at one of U2 's Vertigo Tour concerts in Anaheim , California in March 2005 . U2 were dissatisfied with their 1988 rockumentary feature film , Rattle and Hum , which mixed backstage footage and interviews with concert performances . The filmmakers decided that U2 3D would only have concert footage . The producers originally wanted to shoot in Los Angeles where all the filming equipment was located , but Owens and the band decided they needed a more enthusiastic audience . U2 ultimately chose to film in five cities in Latin America from February to March 2006 , believing their absence from the region for eight years would foster an energetic atmosphere . The only one of the eight Latin American shows that was not shot was the first in Monterrey , Mexico . The project enabled U2 to share the outdoor stadium concerts with audiences in the US , where the band only performed at indoor arenas on the Vertigo Tour . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 U2 3D 's production featured the first 3D multiple @-@ camera setup and was shot using every digital 3D camera and recording deck in existence . The crew had two days to set up the filming equipment before each concert , which required running optical fiber cables and hooking up an electrical generator to supply power at each venue . The filming equipment consisted of nine custom @-@ built 3D rigs . The project 's large scale prompted 3ality Digital to work with director James Cameron — their chief competitor at the time . 3ality used their own <unk> <unk> camera rigs for filming , in addition to five Fusion 3D rigs , designed by Cameron and camera operator Vincent Pace . A total of 18 Sony CineAlta <unk> @-@ F950 cameras were used for filming , with two cameras on each rig . The cameras were fitted with Zeiss digital zoom lenses , making U2 3D the first 3D film shot using a zoom lens . One of the Fusion 3D camera rigs was used as a <unk> and became the first 3D aerial camera . The cameras on each rig were spaced eye @-@ distance apart to create a 3D effect in post @-@ production . Using a beam splitter mounted to the camera rig , one camera shot through a 50 / 50 mirror , while the other shot the image reflected from that mirror . Each rig weighed an average of 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) . All of the concert footage was shot with twin @-@ camera setups , except for the two Melbourne shoots , where a single CineAlta camera with a Steadicam was also used to capture close @-@ ups . The cameras captured high @-@ definition video onto HDCAM SR recording decks , which enabled the crew to capture an entire concert . 
 Five crew members were required to work on each rig simultaneously to ensure that the focus on both cameras were synchronized . After one camera was destroyed when a concert security guard tossed buckets of water onto the audience , the crew waterproofed the remaining cameras . Due to Owens ' limited directing experience prior to production , some of the filming in South America was directed by Mark Pellington , who previously worked with U2 on the " One " music video . Pellington was not involved in post @-@ production , leaving Owens responsible for the remaining aspects of the project , including creative direction and editing . 
 The concerts were filmed in a style which Owens described as " very unorthodox " ; no storyboards or shooting scripts were used to ensure footage of U2 's performances was improvised . Instead of being directed , U2 performed each of their concerts as usual , with the filming crew capturing footage in real time for the full 2 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ hour concerts . The shoots were planned such that the band 's performance and the audience 's view was uninterrupted . To avoid capturing other camera rigs in the footage , the crew would either film from the back of the stage , or alternate each night between shooting left @-@ to @-@ right and right @-@ to @-@ left . Several shows were edited together to create one performance ; therefore , U2 were required to wear the same clothes every night to maintain continuity . Additional spotlights were focused on the audience during filming , and the lighting was dimmed on the stage 's LED display . 110 microphones were used to record the concert audio , which included microphones placed on the main stage and around the two B @-@ stages to record the band , and microphones placed throughout the venue to record the audience . 
 Principal photography began in February 2006 , under the supervision of the 3D cinematographer Peter Anderson ; two shows were filmed in Mexico City to capture medium shots during a practice run for the crew to learn the choreography of U2 's performances . The crew captured additional medium shots using two camera setups at the two São Paulo concerts , and captured overhead footage of drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. using a single camera setup at the show in Santiago . During preparations for the Buenos Aires concerts , U2 performed a 10 @-@ song set without an audience , so that the crew could capture close @-@ up footage using a wide @-@ angle lens ; doing so in @-@ concert would have interfered with the show . Owens dubbed the session the " phantom shoot " . During the Buenos Aires shows , all nine camera setups were used , capturing shots of U2 from the B @-@ stages . The Buenos Aires shoot was the largest of the project , requiring a crew of 140 people . 
 In March 2006 , the remaining Vertigo Tour concerts were postponed when the daughter of guitarist The Edge fell ill . During the interim , footage from the seven filmed shows was edited together , prompting the crew to request additional wide shots from the back of the stadium and close @-@ ups of the band members . When the tour was on its fifth leg in November 2006 , an additional two shows were filmed in Melbourne to capture the extra footage . At the time , the songs appearing in the final cut of the film had already been selected and therefore only specific songs from the concerts were filmed . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Post @-@ production began in February 2006 and occurred concurrently with ongoing principal photography . Editor Olivier Wicki led post @-@ production , working closely with Owens ; the two had previously collaborated on the " Original of the Species " music video . Over 100 hours of footage were filmed , featuring performances of 26 different songs . To appeal to a mainstream audience , 14 tracks were chosen for the final cut , including 12 of U2 's singles and two non @-@ singles from How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb , the album that the Vertigo Tour supported . When selecting songs for the project , the crew had to ensure that the performances of each track fit with one another . U2 wanted to include " Mysterious Ways " and " Until the End of the World " , but they were left out since Owens felt that those songs were out of place with the rest of the film . She stated that the main focus of the film was based upon U2 's relationship with one another and with their audience , and the challenge of selecting the songs was to create a narrative within the band 's performance . Although " City of Blinding Lights " opened most shows on the tour , " Vertigo " was selected as the opening song of U2 3D . Other tracks that were performed at most of the filmed concerts that did not make the final cut include " Bullet the Blue Sky " , " Elevation " , " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " , " Original of the Species " , and " Zoo Station " . " With or Without You " was chosen as the last song before the closing credits , although it closed only one concert on the tour . 
 After the songs were selected , the footage was edited in 2D for eight months in New York City . Video post @-@ production continued in Burbank , California at 3ality Digital 's 3D production facility , which opened prior to the completion of shooting . Wicki worked with 3ality Digital to create the 3D and computer @-@ generated effects . Footage from the nine filmed concerts , mostly from the Buenos Aires shows , was edited together with the footage from the " phantom shoot " . Although the Mexico City shows were practice runs , footage from those concerts was used , including a scene where Bono reaches out to the camera during " Sunday Bloody Sunday " . Because the crew felt the Melbourne audience lacked the energy of the Latin America crowds , most of the footage from the Melbourne concerts was not used except for some close @-@ ups of Mullen . 
 Creating the 3D effect involved taking the edited 2D footage for the right eye and matching it up with footage for the left eye . Editing the Melbourne footage that used only a single camera involved a separate process to create 3D effects , known as " virtual second eye perspective " . Several software programs were used to convert footage from 2D to 3D . The primary editing software , <unk> , was developed at 3ality Digital during principal photography . It allowed the post @-@ production team to change convergence points in each shot , and to create multiple convergence points . Left @-@ eye and right @-@ eye footage was assembled on separate layers , then edited together with color grading added , and eventually output in a 3D stereoscopic format for review . 
 U2 developed a style of editing in their previous concert films that involved fast cutting between shots , which Owens wanted to retain in U2 3D . Because fast cutting in 3D would lead to motion sickness or eye strain , the film was edited to incorporate dissolves of at least four frames between shots . Many of the transitions were created by layering several frames of footage on top of one another into composite images . Each of the layered frames featured a different depth of field to enhance the 3D effects , and up to five images were layered together in a single shot . This made U2 3D the first 3D film to feature composite images with more than two layers , and the first to be edited specifically to prevent the viewer from experiencing motion sickness or eye strain . Software did not exist at the time to layer the 3D images , so new software had to be developed . Because the project was captured in high @-@ definition video , each frame used nearly 20 megabytes of data on 3ality Digital 's servers , and the entire film used almost a <unk> ( 1015 bytes ) . The 3D editing process took longer than Owens expected , and consequently , the project went over budget , costing $ 15 million to produce . Video editing took 17 months , and the final film was cut to a length of 85 minutes — seven shorter than originally announced . 
 Audio editor Carl Glanville worked on the soundtrack , mixing the audio into a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix with audio engineer Robbie Adams in New York City . Video footage was compiled into files by Wicki , which were given to Glanville for compiling the soundtrack . Glanville and Adams said the audio editing was difficult mainly because the selection of video footage was limited , as only one to two cameras angles were captured at most of the shows . Further , the lyrics and music from the song performances differed slightly each night . To avoid lip sync and instrumental sync issues , the editors had to use the exact audio that was recorded during each shot . Mixing the vocals required that Glanville layer the audio recorded from the stage microphones with that from the audience microphones and to add a short delay between the two to compensate for any echos or delay that occurred in the venue . The sound from the subwoofer channel was mixed inside two IMAX theaters in Los Angeles to ensure the volume of low @-@ end frequencies was consistent with the rest of the soundtrack . The edited video footage featured 10- to 20 @-@ second @-@ long shots , in contrast to the shorter shots usually found in concert films . Extended gaps were added between songs to slightly slow down the pace of the film . All audio and video footage used was recorded live in concert , with no added overdubs . Following post @-@ production , U2 3D became the first live @-@ action film to be shot , posted , and exhibited entirely in 3D , the first live @-@ action digital 3D film , and the first 3D concert film . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The trailer for the film was released and first screened at the ShoWest trade show in March 2007 , along with footage of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " . Clips from the " Vertigo " and " The Fly " performances were featured in the trailer , which was edited by creative director John <unk> , who also designed the wordmark logo and title sequence for U2 3D . The film poster , which featured a collage of images from the film , won <unk> an award for best poster art at the Giant Screen Cinema Association 's annual international conference in 2008 . The trailer was shown in 3D theaters before Meet the Robinsons , the only 3D film released in theaters in early 2007 . 
 Originally scheduled for the third quarter of 2007 , the film 's release was delayed when a distributor could not be found . In October 2007 , National Geographic Cinema Ventures ( <unk> ) , the entertainment division of the National Geographic Society , announced that U2 3D would be the division 's first major international release . Two days after the announcement , <unk> was combined into the newly created National Geographic Entertainment , a new unit within the society featuring various entertainment divisions . National Geographic CEO John M. Fahey , Jr. stated that U2 3D was chosen as the new unit 's first release because they felt that U2 is " a band of the world " and " world music is something the Geographic as an institution is really interested in " . National Geographic chose Best Buy as the film 's American sponsor , and offered passes to select members of the retailer 's loyalty program to view U2 3D before its wide release . U2 3D was promoted through the internet , print , radio , television , on a JumboTron in Times Square , and as a sponsor on NASCAR 's # 19 Best Buy Dodge stock car driven by Elliott Sadler . 
 = = = Initial screenings = = = 
 U2 were committed to preserving the film 's 3D format and decided to only release it in digital 3D . To help promote this film format , U2 3D was first screened at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival on May 19 , 2007 . It was one of nine films to be screened out @-@ of @-@ competition at the 2007 festival , and was the first live @-@ action 3D film shown at Cannes . Following a brief song performance by U2 at the festival , the film was screened at midnight inside the Palais des Festivals et des Congrès . At the time , the 3D post @-@ production process was incomplete ; therefore , a shortened , 56 @-@ minute version of the title was screened , featuring nine of the completed version 's 14 songs . The completed version premiered at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival on January 19 , 2008 at the Ellen Eccles Theatre . The theater incorporated a customized sound system designed especially for the premiere with new Dolby 3D technology , which John Modell referred to as " the most high tech film screening that 's ever been done in history . " 
 = = = Releases and box office = = = 
 U2 3D was slated to be screened only in IMAX theaters , but the large increase in the number of digital 3D theaters following post @-@ production prompted the filmmakers to expand the release to include those cinemas . Two different types of polarized 3D glasses were used for the IMAX 3D and digital 3D showings . The IMAX 3D version of the film used glasses with one lens polarized horizontally and one polarized vertically , while the digital 3D version used glasses with two circularly polarized lenses . John Modell described the IMAX version as a " more immersive experience " , and stated that the digital 3D version features more vivid colors . 
 On January 23 , 2008 , U2 3D was released into IMAX theaters in the United States and Canada for its initial limited release . It grossed over $ 960 @,@ 000 in the US during its opening weekend after playing in 61 theaters , and ranked at number 20 at the box office . The IMAX release took place much earlier than the film 's wide release , as many IMAX theaters had booked The <unk> Chronicles , which was released on February 15 . U2 3D was U2 's second feature film , following 1988 's Rattle and Hum , and the third concert film from the Vertigo Tour , following the direct @-@ to @-@ video concert films Vertigo 2005 : Live from Chicago and Vertigo 2005 : Live from Milan . 
 The wide release was originally scheduled for February 15 , 2008 , but the date was pushed back one week when Walt Disney Pictures decided to extend its release of the 3D concert film Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert , which was initially scheduled to be in theaters for only one week . Instead , on February 15 , U2 3D had a second limited release in select theaters in the US with RealD 3D technology . The film 's European premiere took place on February 20 at the Jameson Dublin International Film Festival , followed by its international wide release on February 22 . The first week of the wide release was the highest @-@ grossing week of its theatrical run , grossing over $ 1 million at 686 theaters in the US and ranking at number 19 at the box office . Comparing the box office performance of Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus , The Spokesman @-@ Review 's online magazine <unk> said U2 3D was " failing miserably " . Three weeks into its wide release , U2 3D was playing in less than 100 theaters throughout the US . At the time , it had grossed less than $ 6 @.@ 6 million , while Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus — still playing in many theaters since its February 1 release — had brought in over $ 60 million . 
 Prior to its Japan premiere in February 2009 , U2 3D grossed $ 20 million in box office revenue . A re @-@ release in the US took place in 2009 to coincide with the release of U2 's studio album , No Line on the Horizon , followed by re @-@ releases in Brazil and Spain in 2011 and 2015 , respectively , prior to U2 's concert tours in those countries . In addition to re @-@ releases , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame celebrated the opening of its new theater in October 2009 by featuring screenings of U2 3D at its museum . The film 's box office run in the US ended August 26 , 2010 , bringing its total domestic gross to $ 10 @,@ 363 @,@ 341 , after showing for 947 days . The film 's distributors stated there was no predetermined limit to the length of the title 's run , and the overall length would be determined by box office sales . Due to an open @-@ ended theatrical run , total worldwide box office gross sources vary ; website Box Office Mojo reported a worldwide gross of $ 22 @.@ 7 in December 2010 , while magazine BoxOffice and website The Numbers list grosses of $ 23 @.@ 4 million and $ 26 @.@ 2 million , respectively . 
 For its genre , U2 3D was successful and set several box office records . The film became the highest grossing documentary to be eligible for an Oscar nomination at the 81st Academy Awards . U2 3D set a record in Ireland for the highest screen average of any film playing during its opening weekend , and it took in almost € 90 @,@ 000 at eight theaters during its first three days . In February 2011 , Forbes ranked U2 3D as the fifth highest grossing concert film , earning $ 14 million more than Rattle and Hum , which ranked at number seven . 
 U2 control the ancillary rights to U2 3D along with their record label Universal Music Group , and they have stated that additional rights such as those for a home video release will not be optioned until home video technology can meet the same digital 3D standards as cinema . Owens said in a 2007 interview that there were plans to release the film to a 3D home video format , however , the press release for the 2015 Spain re @-@ release stated that U2 3D has been licensed exclusively for theatrical release , and will not be distributed in television , internet , or other home video formats . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Based on 87 reviews by critics , Rotten Tomatoes gave U2 3D a 93 % approval rating , and ranked it the fourth @-@ best reviewed film in wide release from 2008 . The website assigned it an average score of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , with a consensus that U2 3D was " an exhilarating musical experience at the price of a movie ticket " . At Metacritic — which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics — the film received an average score of 83 , based on 19 reviews , which translates to " universal acclaim " on the website 's rating scale . The film received positive reviews from Toronto Star and Variety following its 56 @-@ minute premiere at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival when the final 85 @-@ minute cut was months away from completion . Critics from publications such as the Irish Independent , The New Zealand Herald , Reno News & Review , Toronto Star , and USA Today said that the film 's 3D experience was " even better than the real thing " — a reference to U2 's song of the same name . Reviews by Rolling Stone and Total Film stated the film seemed to appeal to fans and non @-@ fans of U2 alike , just as the filmmakers had intended . 
 U2 3D was praised by Variety for its straightforward concert footage , compared to the interviews and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage included in Rattle and Hum . In an episode of the TV series At the Movies with Ebert & Roeper , Michael Phillips called the film " a genuine eye @-@ fill " and Richard Roeper described it as " spectacular " . The New York Times designated U2 3D as a " Critics ' Pick " and stated in the review that the film was " the first IMAX movie that deserves to be called a work of art " . U2 3D appeared on many critics ' lists of the top ten films released in 2008 including The Austin Chronicle , <unk> International , Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , The Sydney Morning Herald , and River Cities ' Reader . The film was also ranked by Complex and Empire as one of the best 3D films . Bono was satisfied with the outcome of the film and said his favorite sequence was the performance of " Miss Sarajevo " . When interviewed about the PopMart Tour in 2009 , Bono said that the PopMart : Live from Mexico City video was the best project U2 had done from an audio and visual perspective , and was " [ e ] <unk> only by U2 3D " . The Edge was pleased that the footage did not show any of the distress he felt from his daughter 's illness during filming . 
 However , the film received more critical reviews . The A.V. Club graded it a B − and stated that U2 's performance was less thrilling than the 3D effects . Online magazine <unk> criticized The New York Times ' statement about U2 3D being the first IMAX art film , stating that some of the first IMAX titles were " experimental works of art " . Music critic Joel Selvin wrote in the San Francisco Chronicle that seeing U2 on the big screen was " more distracting than illuminating " , and Time Out London criticized Bono 's political statements , stating he " should refrain from ramming his preachy political meanderings down our throats and let the music do the talking " . The Daily Telegraph favored Rattle and Hum over U2 3D and called U2 's performance " unexciting " , criticizing how " the cameras , not the band , are doing all the work " . The Guardian , which gave a rating of one out of five stars , claimed that U2 appeared to be " four conceited billionaires who are further up themselves than ever " . 
 = = = Recognition and legacy = = = 
 U2 3D was recognized favorably after its release , earning several awards . In 2008 , it earned three awards , including " Best Film Produced Non @-@ <unk> for the Giant Screen " at the Giant Screen Cinema Association 's 2008 Achievement Awards , " Best Musical Film " at Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica 2008 , and the Pioneer Award for Film & Television at the 2008 3D Film and Interactive Film Festival . In February 2009 , the film received the award for " Outstanding Visual Effects in a Special Venue Project " from the Visual Effects Society ( VES ) at the 7th Annual VES Awards . 
 The extensive use of technology during production was featured as the cover story in the December 2007 issue of the high @-@ definition video magazine <unk> , a month before the premiere of U2 3D . Its usage of evolutionary technology led to Catherine Owens being selected as a featured guest speaker at the SIGGRAPH 2008 conference , which took place several months after the film 's release . After U2 3D received praise from fans , critics , and the film industry , several of the filmmakers stated that they felt it helped create a paradigm shift in cinema history , due to the technological advancements used in the production . The film 's use of new technology inspired English rock band Muse to increase the production values for their 2013 release Live at Rome Olympic Stadium , which became the first concert film shot in 4K resolution . 
 Following the success of U2 3D , 3ality Digital continued to pioneer 3D projects . After previously experimenting with filming American football games in 3D , 3ality Digital successfully broadcast the first live 3D NFL game in December 2008 . In 2009 , 3ality Digital aired the first live 3D sports broadcast available to consumers , the first 3D television advertisement , and the first 3D episode of a scripted television program . U2 show director Willie Williams recruited U2 3D director of photography Tom Krueger to design the photography and video coverage for the band 's 2009 – 2011 U2 360 ° Tour . Krueger directed their subsequent concert film , U2 360 ° at the Rose Bowl , which was released in 2010 . 
 = = Setlist = = 
 All titles written by U2 , except " Miss Sarajevo " ( co @-@ written with Brian Eno ) . 
 " Vertigo " 
 " Beautiful Day " 
 " New Year 's Day " 
 " Sometimes You Can 't Make It on Your Own " 
 " Love and Peace or Else " 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " 
 " Bullet the Blue Sky " 
 " Miss Sarajevo " / U.N. Declaration of Human Rights 
 " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " 
 " Where the Streets Have No Name " 
 " One " 
 Encore 
 " The Fly " 
 " With or Without You " 
 Closing credits 
 " Yahweh " 
 = Hedwig Potthast = 
 Hedwig Potthast ( 5 February 1912 – 1997 ) was the private secretary and mistress of Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler with whom she had two children . 
 Born in 1912 , Potthast began as Himmler 's secretary in 1936 and by 1938 she was his lover . She resigned from her duties in 1941 , and subsequently had two children with Himmler , a boy and a girl . After the war , Potthast married and lived out the rest of her life outside the public eye . In post @-@ war interviews , she refrained from answering questions about Himmler 's involvement in war crimes committed by the Nazis and her own knowledge of them . She died in 1997 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hedwig Potthast was born on 5 February 1912 in Cologne , North Rhine @-@ Westphalia as the daughter of a local businessman . After her final Abitur exams at secondary school , she trained as a secretary qualified in foreign languages . At the end of her training in 1928 , Potthast worked in Koblenz . 
 = = = Relationship with Himmler = = = 
 Through Kurt Baron von Schröder , one of the founders of the <unk> der <unk> ( " Circle of Friends of the Economy " ) , she met Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler . In 1934 , she was employed at Gestapo headquarters at Prinz @-@ Albrecht @-@ Straße in Berlin . Then from early 1936 to early 1941 , Potthast was Himmler 's private secretary , and in this function was particularly responsible for Himmler 's sponsorship and giving of awards . 
 Himmler and Potthast confessed their love for each other at Christmastime in 1938 . At first they tried to keep it platonic , but they fell into an adulterous relationship . Himmler 's wife since 1928 and mother of their daughter , Margarete Himmler , found out about Himmler 's relationship with Potthast at some time in February 1941 . She felt humiliated and bitter , and Potthast 's parents rejected the extramarital relationship . Potthast first took up residence in Grunewald and from 1943 she lived in <unk> , near the estate of Oswald Pohl , because she was a friend of his wife , Eleonore . Lina Heydrich , wife of Himmler 's right @-@ hand man Reinhard Heydrich , and Gerda Bormann , spouse of Martin Bormann , were also counted among her friends . Later she lived in Berchtesgaden , Bavaria . 
 Potthast had two children with Himmler . Helge , a son born 15 February 1942 in the <unk> Sanatorium , and Nanette @-@ Dorothea , a daughter born 20 July 1944 in Berchtesgaden . That same year , Himmler borrowed 80 @,@ 000 Reichmarks from the Nazi Party Chancellery and had a house built for Potthast near Berchtesgaden . 
 Little is known about the overall relationship between Himmler and Potthast . The couple most likely saw each other only rarely due to Himmler 's activity in his numerous offices . Presumably , neither Potthast nor Himmler 's wife were informed of his " secret work " . Potthast 's relationship with Himmler ended during the spring of 1945 , — they met for the last time in mid @-@ March 1945 , after which they shared daily telephone calls up until 19 April 1945 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 When World War II in Europe ended , Potthast was in <unk> , Austria and , after learning of the death of Himmler on the radio on 23 May 1945 , went into hiding , living temporarily with Eleonore Pohl in Rosenheim , Upper Bavaria . In June / July 1945 , she was arrested there by members of the U.S. Army and interrogated for several days in Munich . Margarete and Himmler 's daughter , Gudrun <unk> , did not learn of her half @-@ siblings until after the war . When she tried to make contact with them , Potthast refused . She lived in <unk> and kept in contact with the family of Himmler 's older brother , Gebhard , as well as Himmler 's former close confidant , Karl Wolff , until the 1950s . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Potthast later remarried and took on her new husband 's name . Her son struggled with ailments throughout his life and stayed with her ; her daughter became a physician . In a 1987 interview with former Der Spiegel editor Peter @-@ Ferdinand Koch , Potthast remained silent about Himmler 's responsibility for Nazi war crimes . She died in 1997 , aged 85 , in Baden @-@ Baden , Baden @-@ Württemberg . 
 = = = Printed = = = 
 Himmler , Katrin ( 2007 ) . The Himmler Brothers . London : Pan Macmillan . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 330 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Longerich , Peter ( 2012 ) . Heinrich Himmler : A Life . New York : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " Himmler , Heinrich Luitpold " . World War II <unk> . Retrieved 1 June 2015 . 
 " The Nazi Party : Women of the Third Reich " . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 1 June 2015 . 
 = Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector = 
 The Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector , also known as the Atlantic City Expressway Connector or simply the Brigantine Connector , is a highway connector in Atlantic City , New Jersey . It connects the Atlantic City Expressway with Route 87 , which leads into Brigantine , a beach resort along the Atlantic Ocean . The connector is 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) long and is maintained by the South Jersey Transportation Authority . It is considered to be a state highway and is assigned the route number Route 446X ; however , the route number is unsigned . The connector consists of lettered exits from A to I in south to north order and features 10 bridges and 15 ramps throughout its length . 
 The Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector was initially planned in 1995 to provide a direct connection between the Atlantic City Expressway and the Brigantine area . Construction of the road was completed in 2001 at a total cost of $ 330 million ( equivalent to $ 441 million in 2016 ) . Before the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector was planned , Mirage Resorts president Steve Wynn acquired a piece of land near the northern end of the proposed connector and planned for a direct exit ramp to a proposed casino called Le Jardin . Donald Trump , the chief executive officer of Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts , who owned the nearby Trump Marina ( now Golden Nugget ) , took legal action against the state for the proposed ramp to Wynn 's casino . Despite the legal concerns , construction on the connector began in 1998 . Wynn 's proposed casino , Le Jardin , was canceled following the acquisition of Mirage Resorts by MGM Grand Inc . , which , as the MGM Mirage company , proposed the Borgata casino . Meanwhile , Trump 's casino received a direct ramp from the connector . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector begins near the eastern terminus of the Atlantic City Expressway on the western edge of the Atlantic City coast . The speed limit is 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) for its entire length . The entire route of the Connector is located within the city of Atlantic City , New Jersey , and features 10 bridges and 15 ramps throughout its duration . Exits are lettered based on their ramp letter designation , which range from Ramps A – I , skipping Ramp C. Ramp D east and west are two entrance @-@ only ramps , and Ramp I is north of the Connector 's terminus on Route 87 . Despite its sequential lettering , Ramp H merges from the Connector prior to Ramp G. The Connector is 2 @.@ 3 mi ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) long , from the Atlantic City Expressway interchange to the northbound Connector 's merge with Route 87 towards Brigantine , New Jersey . The Atlantic City Expressway is unsigned as Route 446 , and the Connector has the route number 446X . According to the New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) , Route 446X is 1 @.@ 98 mi ( 3 @.@ 19 km ) long , measured from the Atlantic City Expressway interchange to the at @-@ grade intersection with U.S. Route 30 via Ramp E. The remainder of the Connector past Ramp E toward Route 87 is not included by NJDOT as part of the route nor calculated in its total mileage . 
 The Connector begins from Exit 1 on the Atlantic City Expressway , and heads north along the edge of the coast . In the southbound direction , Ramp A leads towards the <unk> and Midtown sections of the city via Mississippi Avenue , prior to merging onto the Expressway westbound . The Connector has an at @-@ grade intersection with the Atlantic City Line , adjacent to the city 's Rail Terminal . Following the railroad , Ramp B west and B south provide access to Bacharach Boulevard and the Atlantic City Convention Center in both directions on the Connector , prior to a 1 @,@ 957 ft ( 596 m ) long tunnel , which runs parallel to the Penrose Canal . Upon emerging from the tunnel , Ramp D west feeds traffic southbound on the Connector from Route 87 south , and Ramp D east feeds traffic northbound on the Connector from US 30 east . The southbound direction of the Connector begins at the Route 87 crossing , which is followed by Ramp E , a two @-@ way ramp towards US 30 with an intersection at Route 187 . The Connector continues northbound with Ramp F , which leads back to Ramp E westbound , acting as a U @-@ turn to the Connector southbound for traffic that entered from Ramp D east . The northbound Connector then branches off with Ramp H towards Renaissance Pointe , Borgata , and The Water Club , followed by Ramp G towards Farley Marina and Golden Nugget ( formerly Trump Marina ) via Huron Avenue . The Connector merges onto Route 87 northbound toward Brigantine near milepost 2 @.@ 3 , at which Ramp I provides access to Harrah 's from Route 87 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The connector road between the Atlantic City Expressway and the marina district was first proposed in 1964 by the Atlantic City Planning Board . The project was called the " Route 30 Connector " and was to connect the end of the Expressway with U.S. Route 30 . The main purpose of the road was to lessen congestion in Midtown Atlantic City , and provide easier access to the uptown and marina districts , as well as the neighboring city of Brigantine , New Jersey . Due to a lack of funds and environmental concerns about construction near the adjacent wetlands , the connector project remained dormant until 1990 when plans for the road were included report by the city 's Transportation Executive Council . Following the release of the report , engineering and planning for the road began , as well as environmental study by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection , to determine the project 's feasibility . A transportation official , at the time , stated that if the project was approved , construction would not begin for at least four to five years . 
 The following year , a new report was released stating that the Route 30 Connector project was feasible . The proposed Connector was to be one mile ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) long , and would be constructed as an elevated highway above the wetlands . Construction cost was estimated at $ 80 million , half of which could be paid for by making the Connector a toll road . The new report also identified US 30 as an important roadway for reducing city traffic , as it carried the least amount of traffic and had the greatest capacity out of the city 's three major entering highways , the other two being the Expressway and the Black Horse Pike ( US 40 / US 322 ) . 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 In 1995 , a tunnel was proposed as part of the Connector , traveling underneath Horace J. Bryant Drive ; however , the idea was rejected by Mayor James Whelan and the City Council as it would have displaced many homes in the area . The same year , Mirage Resorts president Steve Wynn proposed a new casino resort in the marina district , and stated that resort would not be built unless there was better access to the site . Additional plans were later researched , and six different plans were proposed . The plans included the tunnel underneath Horace J. Bryant Drive , a tunnel underneath the adjacent Penrose Canal , two alternative tunnel locations , the elevated highway above the wetlands , and the improvement of existing streets to direct traffic through the city . Transportation officials determined all of the plans , except for the first two tunnel proposals , to have significant drawbacks . 
 After the tunnel proposal was rejected , it was once again proposed in February 1996 after Wynn officially announced plans for the new resort . The City of Atlantic City requested bids for the sale of the property in the northern section of the city near the marina , which at one time served as the city 's landfill . Wynn won the bid against Donald Trump , chief executive officer of the Trump Organization . As disputes over the tunnel construction continued , Mirage Resorts announced they were given the options of purchasing the properties required for building the tunnel . Mirage Resorts deemed building the proposed " off @-@ island connector " as " virtually impossible " , stating how permits would be difficult to obtain with a land @-@ based alternative available , and the tunnel was determined to be the best option for construction of the Connector . The tunnel was designed to have as little impact on the surrounding environment as possible , with both portals on opposite ends of the community . The design included both portals on opposite ends of the community , with landscaping added between the construction site and adjacent homes . Deliveries of raw materials would take place by barge and construction vehicles would not be traveling via any local streets . Mirage subsidiary president Richard " Skip " Bronson referred to the project as " the nicest tunnel you 've never seen . " Some opponents described the project as an effort to destroy a stable , middle @-@ class African @-@ American community , while others supported the project as a means of lessening traffic and creating jobs at the new Mirage casino . 
 Wynn had intentions of constructing a new casino project on the property , known as Le Jardin , with an exit ramp from the connector leading directly to his new property . The exit to Le Jardin was referred to as a " driveway " to the casino , which caused Trump to take legal action against the state , as he felt that the easy access to Wynn 's new property would create an unfair business advantage against Trump Marina , a Trump @-@ owned property in the same area . The proposal for the grade crossing of New Jersey Transit 's Atlantic City Line initially drew criticism from both the Delaware Valley Association of Rail Passengers and the Federal Railroad Administration because of the high amount of road and railroad traffic that would pass through the crossing . However , it was built because it was $ 24 million cheaper than building a grade @-@ separated crossing and would allow for an interchange with Bacharach Boulevard . 
 In 1997 , Governor Christine Todd Whitman approved the project , and construction began on November 4 , 1998 . After construction on the freeway began , Wynn 's interests were purchased by MGM Grand Inc . , thus creating the MGM Mirage company , and plans for Le Jardin were canceled . Despite the fact that Le Jardin was canceled and MGM Mirage 's new casino , Borgata , was not scheduled to open until 2003 , Trump still fought against the project 's plans to build the exit directly to the new casino . Eventually , in January 2000 , Trump dropped his case after an exit ramp leading to the Trump Marina was added to the project . 
 Very little land and property was displaced by the project . Following the construction , the land formerly housing nine residential properties displaced during construction were leveled and turned into a park . A warehouse was reduced in size to make way for the project , as well as the relocation of Atlantic City Electric power lines leading to a substation . A promenade as part of Trump Marina was leveled to make way for new ramps , in which 37 ornamental lampposts which were dismantled were later shipped to the Tuckerton Seaport in nearby Tuckerton , which opened in 2000 . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 On July 27 , 2001 , the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector was completed after a 32 @-@ month construction period . The grand opening ceremony was open to the public , which featured various festivities , including a pedestrian tunnel walk . However , the connector was not opened to traffic until four days later due to a last @-@ minute failure of the tunnel communications system . Although the connector itself was open to traffic , the exit ramps leading to the Borgata were still under construction along with the resort itself , and the ramps did not open up until October 2003 . The total cost of the project was $ 330 million ( equivalent to $ 441 million in 2016 ) and was funded by various state @-@ operated agencies , while one @-@ third of the cost was privately funded by MGM Mirage . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Atlantic City , Atlantic County . 
 = Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) = 
 " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " is the debut song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her debut studio album , Saxobeats ( 2011 ) . The track was written by Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi , and produced by Prodan . It was first released in Romania in 2009 . Following the international success of Stan 's 2010 single " Mr. Saxobeat " , " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was re @-@ released in Canada , Germany , and the United States in 2011 . The music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " features Stan and other female dancers dancing to the song in front of a purple backdrop ; interspersed scenes portray Stan licking a lollipop . She herself described the song as " club @-@ friendly " and as featuring " funny lyrics " , while music critics praised it for being a " catchy pop song " and a " club sensation " . Commercially , the single peaked at number 18 on her native Romanian Top 100 . 
 = = Background , composition and reception = = 
 Before being signed to a record label , Stan participated in various music @-@ related contests , including the Mamaia Music Festival . In 2009 , she was discovered by Romanian producers and songwriters Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi at a karaoke bar . They offered her a record deal with their own label , Maan Records , through which she also released a promotional single called " Show Me The Way " . During one of Stan 's televised performances on Romanian TV show <unk> Direct , she explained that " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was produced " just for fun " after she arrived from a club one night . When interviewed by Urban.ro while premiering Saxobeats , Stan confessed that she expected positive and negative reception for the song , also saying that it emphasised more her image than her vocal abilities . 
 While Stan said that the track was " club @-@ friendly " and features " funny lyrics " , German magazine <unk> Tratsch named it a " catchy pop song " . Celeste Rhoads , writing for AllMusic , praised " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " during his review for Saxobeats , calling it a " club sensation " along with 2011 singles " Mr. Saxobeat " and " Get Back ( ASAP ) " . Mike Schiller from PopMatters described the production of the track " generic " and its lyrics " crude " , while wishing " that it had been conveniently forgotten about [ on the album ] " . 
 = = Impact and promotion = = 
 The song reached number 18 on Stan 's native Romanian Top 100 , being extensively broadcast by domestic radio stations there . It also impacted mainstream radio stations from the United States in early 2010 . Meanwhile , the music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " garnered 25 million views on YouTube a short time . Following this , various labels from the United Kingdom , Ireland , Canada , Czech Republic , Russia , Italy , France , Israel and the United States asked for license to release the song through their means . In order to promote the single , Stan was invited to perform the recording on various native TV shows , with her as well embarking on a tour in her native Romania . She also provided a live performance of the single during the 2012 Après Ski Hits event in Germany , and sang the song during the concert tours that promoted Saxobeats . 
 A low @-@ budget accompanying music video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was posted onto Maan Studio 's YouTube channel on 22 December 2009 and filmed by Andrei Nemirschi in a restaurant . The whole clip portrays Stan and two fellow female dancers performing in front of a purple backdrop . It commences with Stan asking herself which sweets she likes the most , with the words " candy " , " chocolate " and " ice cream " appearing on the screen . Following this , the other females are presented wearing white underwear until one of them is shown with a saxophone . Next , Stan is shown blowing a bubble with bubble gum and , after she further dances to the song , the clip ends with the screen displaying the phrase " <unk> pam pam " and finally becoming dark . Scenes interspersed through the main video portrayed Stan seductively licking a lollipop . The clip was not received well by the audience . Spanish @-@ language music station Los 40 Principales named the video for " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " as one of Stan 's best clips ever . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) [ Radio Edit ] − 3 : 55 
 Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) [ Club Edit ] − 4 : 12 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Saxobeats and The Collection . 
 Maan Studio – recording studio 
 Marcel Prodan – songwriter , producer 
 Andrei Nemirschi – songwriter , photography , director 
 Alexandra Stan – lead vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " Lollipop ( Param Pam Pam ) " was released as Stan 's debut recording in her native Romania in late 2009 , charting early in the following year . After the international success of her breakthrough single " Mr. Saxobeat " ( 2011 ) , it was also made available for digital download on iTunes Store through Ultra Records on 31 May 2011 in Canada and the United States . In Germany , the single was launched digitally on 9 September 2011 through Prime Music , within the period of the release of its parent record , Saxobeats ( 2011 ) . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = California State Route 149 = 
 State Route 149 ( SR 149 ) is a short state highway that helps to connect Oroville and Chico through rural Butte County . Connecting State Route 70 at Wicks Corner with State Route 99 east of Durham , it forms part of the primary north – south highway through the eastern Sacramento Valley , a Focus Route of the Interregional Road System . SR 149 was formerly part of the Oroville @-@ Chico Highway ; the majority of the latter was merged into other routes . In the mid @-@ 1970s , the highway was reallocated onto a newer two @-@ lane alignment . The route is also part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , and a project to widen the two @-@ lane road to a four @-@ lane expressway was completed in late 2008 , removing the bottleneck from the Oroville @-@ Chico highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 149 begins at Wicks Corner as a divided highway , at an interchange with SR 70 several miles north of Oroville . This is the north end of the State Route 70 freeway , which passes through a gap between the Campbell Hills and South Table Mountain on its way from Oroville . SR 149 heads northwest across gently rolling terrain before descending into the valley of the Dry Creek . As it begins to climb out of the valley , SR 149 ends at an interchange with SR 99 . The latter highway continues the corridor northwest to Chico , quickly dropping back into the Butte Creek valley . The route is a divided highway with four lanes . 
 = = History = = 
 By the late 1910s , a " natural prairie road " linked Oroville to State Highway Route 3 southeast of Chico , following the present Table Mountain Boulevard , Openshaw Road , and Oroville @-@ Chico Highway to Midway ( Route 3 ) . The primary route between these two cities was the all @-@ state highway route , following Route 21 ( now SR 162 ) west from Oroville to Route 3 near Richvale . Butte County dedicated a newly improved Oroville @-@ Chico Highway on July 4 , 1926 ; it became part of the state highway system in 1933 as the northern portion of the Woodland @-@ Chico Route 87 . ( The rest of Route 87 became part of Sign Route 24 , which turned east at Oroville along present State Route 70 , in 1934 . ) 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , about three @-@ quarters of the Oroville @-@ Chico Highway was absorbed by other routes . A new two @-@ lane alignment of U.S. Route 99E ( Legislative Route 3 , now SR 99 ) between east of Richvale and Chico opened in the mid @-@ 1950s , using part of the Oroville @-@ Chico Highway south of Durham Dayton Highway and bypassing the remainder to the junction south of Chico . In the early 1960s , U.S. Route 40 Alternate ( Legislative Route 21 , now SR 70 ) was relocated due to the damming of Lake Oroville across its old alignment . The bridge over the West Branch Feather River northwest of the dam opened in August 1962 , resulting in US 40 Alt. using the Oroville @-@ Chico Highway ( which was relocated to a new four @-@ lane freeway alignment ) south of Wicks Corner . The remainder , which was never part of a sign route , became Route 149 in the 1964 renumbering . 
 SR 149 was relocated onto a new two @-@ lane alignment in the mid @-@ 1970s , leaving behind Openshaw Road . Caltrans began studies for interchanges at each end in September 1992 . The California Transportation Commission approved funding for four @-@ laning SR 149 in April 1994 and the two interchanges in May 1996 , with construction to begin in 1998 and cost $ 47 million . Due to state budget problems and the need to study environmental impacts , the project was repeatedly pushed back ; these impacts and inflation had more than doubled the cost to $ 120 million in 2004 . In particular , an endangered species of meadowfoam was discovered on the south <unk> , forcing a redesign . Construction began in September 2005 on a new freshwater marsh near the State Route 70 intersection to replace beaver ponds in the path of the highway , and it was completed in March 2006 . 
 Ground was broken for the highway project in April 2006 , with major construction beginning in May . Caltrans estimated completion in late 2009 for the completion of the four @-@ lane expressway , including a new directional interchange at each end , at which State Route 70 and State Route 99 will exit and enter to the right of the main Oroville @-@ Chico movement . Most access was closed , with <unk> Road providing the sole at @-@ grade crossing of the expressway , and an overcrossing near State Route 70 giving access to local property . <unk> Road was relocated to the southeast , allowing for the future construction of an interchange . In addition , State Route 70 was relocated to the west between SR 149 and State Route 191 , and local access on State Route 99 between SR 149 and the Durham Dayton Highway interchange was replaced by frontage roads . The entire project was completed in November 2008 , at a cost of $ 125 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in Butte County . 
 = Al Gore = 
 Albert Arnold " Al " Gore Jr . ( born March 31 , 1948 ) is an American politician and environmentalist who served as the 45th Vice President of the United States from 1993 to 2001 under President Bill Clinton . Chosen as Clinton 's running mate in their successful 1992 campaign , he was reelected in 1996 . At the end of Clinton 's second term , Gore was the Democratic Party 's nominee for President in 2000 . After leaving office , Gore remained prominent as an author and environmental activist , whose work in climate change activism earned him ( jointly with the IPCC ) the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007 . 
 Gore was an elected official for 24 years . He was a Congressman from Tennessee ( 1977 – 85 ) and from 1985 to 1993 served as one of the state 's Senators . He served as Vice President during the Clinton administration from 1993 to 2001 . In the 2000 presidential election , in what was one of the closest presidential races in history , Gore won the popular vote but lost in the Electoral College to Republican George W. Bush . A controversial election dispute over a vote recount in Florida was settled by the U.S. Supreme Court , which ruled 5 – 4 in favor of Bush . 
 Gore is the founder and current chair of the Alliance for Climate Protection , the co @-@ founder and chair of Generation Investment Management and the now @-@ defunct Current TV network , a member of the Board of Directors of Apple Inc . , and a senior adviser to Google . Gore is also a partner in the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers , heading its climate change solutions group . He has served as a visiting professor at Middle Tennessee State University , Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism , Fisk University , and the University of California , Los Angeles . He served on the Board of Directors of World Resources Institute . 
 Gore has received a number of awards including the Nobel Peace Prize ( joint award with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , 2007 ) , a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album ( 2009 ) for his book An Inconvenient Truth , a Primetime Emmy Award for Current TV ( 2007 ) , and a Webby Award ( 2005 ) . Gore was also the subject of the Academy Award @-@ winning ( 2007 ) documentary An Inconvenient Truth in 2006 . In 2007 he was named a runner @-@ up for Time 's 2007 Person of the Year . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Gore was born in Washington , D.C. , the second of two children of Albert Gore Sr. , a U.S. Representative who later served as a U.S. Senator from Tennessee , and Pauline ( LaFon ) Gore , one of the first women to graduate from Vanderbilt University Law School . Gore is partly descended from Scots @-@ Irish immigrants who first settled in Virginia in the mid @-@ 17th @-@ century , and moved to Tennessee after the Revolutionary War . His older sister Nancy LaFon Gore , who was born in 1938 , died of lung cancer in 1984 . 
 During the school year he lived with his family in The Fairfax Hotel in the Embassy Row section in Washington D.C. During the summer months , he worked on the family farm in Carthage , Tennessee , where the Gores grew tobacco and hay and raised cattle . 
 Gore attended St. Albans School , an independent college preparatory day and boarding school for boys in Washington , D.C. , from 1956 to 1965 , a prestigious feeder school for the Ivy League . He was the captain of the football team , threw discus for the track and field team , and participated in basketball , art , and government . He graduated 25th in his class of 51 , applied to only one college , Harvard , and was accepted . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gore met Mary Elizabeth " Tipper " <unk> from the nearby St. Agnes School at his St. Albans senior prom in 1965 . Tipper followed Gore to Boston to attend college ; and on May 19 , 1970 , shortly after Tipper graduated from Boston University , they married at the Washington National Cathedral . 
 They have four children — Karenna Gore ( b . 1973 ) , Kristin Carlson Gore ( b . 1977 ) , Sarah LaFon Gore ( b . 1979 ) , and Albert Arnold Gore III ( b . 1982 ) . 
 In early June 2010 , shortly after purchasing a new home , the Gores announced in an e @-@ mail to friends that after " long and careful consideration " , they had made a mutual decision to separate . In May 2012 , it was reported that Gore started dating Elizabeth Keadle of California . 
 = = Harvard , the Vietnam War , journalism , and Vanderbilt ( 1965 – 76 ) = = 
