 = = = Harvard = = = 
 Gore enrolled in Harvard College in 1965 , initially planning to major in English and write novels but later deciding to major in government . On his second day on campus , he began campaigning for the freshman student government council and was elected its president . 
 Although he was an avid reader who fell in love with scientific and mathematical theories , he did not do well in science classes in college and avoided taking math . His grades during his first two years put him in the lower one @-@ fifth of the class . During his sophomore year , he reportedly spent much of his time watching television , shooting pool , and occasionally smoking marijuana . In his junior and senior years , he became more involved with his studies , earning As and Bs . In his senior year , he took a class with oceanographer and global warming theorist Roger Revelle , who sparked Gore 's interest in global warming and other environmental issues . Gore earned an A on his thesis , " The Impact of Television on the Conduct of the Presidency , 1947 @-@ 1969 " , and graduated with an A.B. cum laude in June 1969 . 
 Gore attended college during the era of anti @-@ Vietnam War protests . Though he was against that war , he disagreed with the tactics of the student protest movement , thinking it silly and juvenile to take anger at the war out on a private university . He and his friends did not participate in Harvard demonstrations . John Tyson , a former roommate , recalled that " We distrusted these movements a lot .... We were a pretty traditional bunch of guys , positive for civil rights and women 's rights but formal , transformed by the social revolution to some extent but not buying into something we considered detrimental to our country . " Gore helped his father write an anti @-@ war address to the Democratic National Convention of 1968 but stayed with his parents in their hotel room during the violent protests . 
 = = = Military service = = = 
 When Gore graduated in 1969 , his student deferment ended and he immediately became eligible for the military draft . His father , a vocal anti @-@ Vietnam War critic , was facing a reelection in 1970 . Gore eventually decided that the best way he could contribute to the anti @-@ war effort was to enlist in the Army , which would improve his father 's reelection prospects . Although nearly all of his Harvard classmates avoided the draft and service in Vietnam , Gore believed if he found a way around military service , he would be handing an issue to his father 's Republican opponent . According to Gore 's Senate biography , " He appeared in uniform in his father 's campaign commercials , one of which ended with his father advising : ' Son , always love your country . ' Despite this , Gore Sr. lost the election . 
 Gore has said that his other reason for enlisting was that he did not want someone with fewer options than he to go in his place . Actor Tommy Lee Jones , a former college housemate , recalled Gore saying that " if he found a fancy way of not going , someone else would have to go in his place . " His Harvard advisor , Richard Neustadt , also stated that Gore decided , " that he would have to go as an enlisted man because , he said , ' In Tennessee , that 's what most people have to do . ' " In addition , Michael Roche , Gore 's editor for The Castle Courier , stated that " anybody who knew Al Gore in Vietnam knows he could have sat on his butt and he didn 't . " 
 After enlisting in August 1969 , Gore returned to the anti @-@ war Harvard campus in his military uniform to say goodbye to his adviser and was " jeered " at by students . He later said he was astonished by the " emotional field of negativity and disapproval and piercing glances that ... certainly felt like real hatred " . 
 Gore had basic training at Fort Dix from August to October , and then was assigned to be a journalist at Fort Rucker , Alabama . In April 1970 , he was " Soldier of the Month " . 
 His orders to be sent to Vietnam were " held up " for some time and he suspected that this was due to a fear by the Nixon administration that if something happened to him , his father would gain sympathy votes . He was finally shipped to Vietnam on January 2 , 1971 , after his father had lost his seat in the Senate during the 1970 Senate election , becoming one " of only about a dozen of the 1 @,@ 115 Harvard graduates in the Class of ' 69 who went to Vietnam . " Gore was stationed with the 20th Engineer Brigade in Bien Hoa and was a journalist with The Castle Courier . He received an honorable discharge from the Army in May 1971 . 
 Of his time in the Army , Gore later stated , " I didn 't do the most , or run the gravest danger . But I was proud to wear my country 's uniform . " He also later stated that his experience in Vietnam " didn 't change my conclusions about the war being a terrible mistake , but it struck me that opponents to the war , including myself , really did not take into account the fact that there were an awful lot of South Vietnamese who desperately wanted to hang on to what they called freedom . Coming face to face with those sentiments expressed by people who did the laundry and ran the restaurants and worked in the fields was something I was naively unprepared for . " 
 = = = Vanderbilt and journalism = = = 
 Gore was " dispirited " after his return from Vietnam . <unk> noted that , " his father 's defeat made service in a conflict he deeply opposed even more abhorrent to Gore . His experiences in the war zone don 't seem to have been deeply traumatic in themselves ; although the engineers were sometimes fired upon , Gore has said he didn 't see full @-@ scale combat . Still , he felt that his participation in the war was wrong . " 
 Although his parents wanted him to go to law school , Gore first attended Vanderbilt University Divinity School ( 1971 – 72 ) on a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship for people planning secular careers . He later said he went there in order to explore " spiritual issues " , and that " he had hoped to make sense of the social injustices that seemed to challenge his religious beliefs . " 
 In 1971 , Gore also began to work the night shift for The Tennessean as an investigative reporter . His investigations of corruption among members of Nashville 's Metro Council resulted in the arrest and prosecution of two councilmen for separate offenses . 
 In 1974 , he took a leave of absence from The Tennessean to attend Vanderbilt University Law School . His decision to become an attorney was a partial result of his time as a journalist , as he realized that , while he could expose corruption , he could not change it . Gore did not complete law school , deciding abruptly , in 1976 , to run for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives when he found out that his father 's former seat in the House was about to be vacated . 
 = = Congress and first presidential run ( 1976 – 93 ) = = 
 Gore began serving in the U.S. Congress at the age of 28 and stayed there for the next 16 years , serving in both the House ( 1977 – 85 ) and the Senate ( 1985 – 93 ) . Gore spent many weekends in Tennessee , working with his constituents . 
 = = = House and Senate = = = 
 At the end of February 1976 , U.S. Representative Joe L. Evins unexpectedly announced his retirement from Congress , making the Tennessee 's 4th congressional district seat , to which he had succeeded Albert Gore Sr. in 1953 open . Within hours after The Tennessean publisher John Seigenthaler Sr. called him to tell him the announcement was forthcoming , Gore decided to quit law school and run for the House of Representatives : 
 Gore 's abrupt decision to run for the open seat surprised even himself ; he later said that ' I didn 't realize myself I had been pulled back so much to it . ' The news came as a ' bombshell ' to his wife . Tipper Gore held a job in The Tennessean 's photo lab and was working on a master 's degree in psychology , but she joined in her husband 's campaign ( with assurance that she could get her job at the Tennessean back if he lost ) . By contrast , Gore asked his father to stay out of his campaign : " I must become my own man , ' he explained . ' I must not be your candidate . " 
 Gore won the 1976 Democratic primary for the district with " 32 percent of the vote , three percentage points more than his nearest rival " , and was opposed only by an independent candidate in the election , recording 94 percent of the overall vote . He went on to win the next three elections , in 1978 , 1980 , and 1982 , where " he was unopposed twice and won 79 percent of the vote the other time . " In 1984 , Gore successfully ran for a seat in the U.S. Senate , which had been vacated by Republican Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker . He was " unopposed in the Democratic Senatorial primary and won the general election going away " , despite the fact that Republican President Ronald Reagan swept Tennessee in his reelection campaign the same year . Gore defeated Republican senatorial nominee Victor Ashe , subsequently the mayor of Knoxville , and the Republican @-@ turned @-@ Independent , Ed McAteer , founder of the Christian right Religious Roundtable organization that had worked to elect Reagan as president in 1980 . 
 During his time in Congress , Gore was considered a " moderate " ( he once referred to himself as a " raging moderate " ) opposing federal funding of abortion , voting in favor of a bill which supported a moment in silence in schools , and voting against a ban on interstate sales of guns . In 1981 , Gore was quoted as saying with regard to homosexuality , " I think it is wrong " , and " I don 't pretend to understand it , but it is not just another normal optional life style . " In his 1984 Senate race , Gore said when discussing homosexuality , " I do not believe it is simply an acceptable alternative that society should affirm . " He also said that he would not take campaign funds from gay rights groups . Although he maintained a position against homosexuality and gay marriage in the 1980s , Gore said in 2008 that he thinks " gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual men and women ... to join together in marriage . " His position as a moderate ( and on policies related to that label ) shifted later in life after he became Vice President and ran for president in 2000 . 
 During his time in the House , Gore sat on the Energy and Commerce and the Science and Technology committees , chairing the Science Committee 's Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations for four years . He also sat on the House Intelligence Committee and , in 1982 , introduced the Gore Plan for arms control , to " reduce chances of a nuclear first strike by cutting multiple warheads and deploying single @-@ warhead mobile launchers . " While in the Senate , he sat on the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , the Rules and Administration , and the Armed Services Committees . In 1991 , Gore was one of ten Democrats who supported the Gulf War . 
 Gore was one of the Atari Democrats who were given this name due to their " passion for technological issues , from biomedical research and genetic engineering to the environmental impact of the " greenhouse effect . " On March 19 , 1979 , he became the first member of Congress to appear on C @-@ SPAN . During this time , Gore co @-@ chaired the Congressional <unk> on the Future with Newt Gingrich . In addition , he has been described as having been a " genuine nerd , with a geek reputation running back to his days as a futurist Atari Democrat in the House . Before computers were comprehensible , let alone sexy , the poker @-@ faced Gore struggled to explain artificial intelligence and fiber @-@ optic networks to sleepy colleagues . " Internet pioneers Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn noted that , 
 as far back as the 1970s , Congressman Gore promoted the idea of high @-@ speed telecommunications as an engine for both economic growth and the improvement of our educational system . He was the first elected official to grasp the potential of computer communications to have a broader impact than just improving the conduct of science and scholarship [ ... ] the Internet , as we know it today , was not deployed until 1983 . When the Internet was still in the early stages of its deployment , Congressman Gore provided intellectual leadership by helping create the vision of the potential benefits of high speed computing and communication . 
 Gore introduced the Supercomputer Network Study Act of 1986 . He also sponsored hearings on how advanced technologies might be put to use in areas like coordinating the response of government agencies to natural disasters and other crises . " 
 As a Senator , Gore began to craft the High Performance Computing Act of 1991 ( commonly referred to as " The Gore Bill " ) after hearing the 1988 report Toward a National Research Network submitted to Congress by a group chaired by UCLA professor of computer science , Leonard Kleinrock , one of the central creators of the ARPANET ( the ARPANET , first deployed by Kleinrock and others in 1969 , is the predecessor of the Internet ) . The bill was passed on December 9 , 1991 , and led to the National Information Infrastructure ( NII ) which Gore referred to as the " information superhighway . " 
 After joining the U.S. House of Representatives , Gore held the " first congressional hearings on the climate change , and co @-@ sponsor [ ed ] hearings on toxic waste and global warming . " He continued to speak on the topic throughout the 1980s . In 1990 , Senator Gore presided over a three @-@ day conference with legislators from over 42 countries which sought to create a Global Marshall Plan , " under which industrial nations would help less developed countries grow economically while still protecting the environment . " 
 = = = First presidential run ( 1988 ) = = = 
 Gore campaigned for the Democratic Party nomination for President of the United States against Joe Biden , Gary Hart , Dick Gephardt , Paul Simon , Jesse Jackson , and Michael Dukakis ( who eventually won the Democratic nomination ) . Gore carried seven states in the primaries , finishing third overall . 
 Although Gore initially denied that he intended to run , his candidacy was the subject of speculation : " National analysts make Sen. Gore a long @-@ shot for the Presidential nomination , but many believe he could provide a natural complement for any of the other candidates : a young , attractive , moderate Vice Presidential nominee from the South . He currently denies any interest , but he carefully does not reject the idea out of hand . " At the time , he was 39 years old , making him the " youngest serious Presidential candidate since John F. Kennedy . " 
 CNN noted that , " in 1988 , for the first time , 12 Southern states would hold their primaries on the same day , dubbed " Super Tuesday " . Gore thought he would be the only serious Southern contender ; he had not counted on Jesse Jackson . " Jackson defeated Gore in the South Carolina Primary , winning , " more than half the total vote , three times that of his closest rival here , Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee . " Gore next placed great hope on Super Tuesday where they split the Southern vote : Jackson winning Alabama , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi and Virginia ; Gore winning Arkansas , North Carolina , Kentucky , Nevada , Tennessee , and Oklahoma . Gore was later endorsed by New York City Mayor Ed Koch who made statements in favor of Israel and against Jackson . These statements cast Gore in a negative light , leading voters away from Gore who received only 10 % of the vote in the New York Primary . Gore then dropped out of the race . The New York Times said that Gore also lost support due to his attacks against Jackson , Dukakis , and others . 
 Gore was eventually able to mend fences with Jackson who supported the Clinton @-@ Gore ticket in 1992 and 1996 , and campaigned for the Gore @-@ Lieberman ticket during the 2000 presidential election . Gore 's policies changed substantially in 2000 , reflecting his eight years as Vice President . 
 = = = Son 's 1989 accident and first book = = = 
 On April 3 , 1989 , as the Gores and their six @-@ year @-@ old son Albert were leaving a baseball game , Albert ran across the street to see his friend and was hit by a car . He was thrown 30 feet ( 9 m ) , and then traveled along the pavement for another 20 feet ( 6 m ) . Gore later recalled : " I ran to his side and held him and called his name , but he was motionless , limp and still , without breath or pulse [ ... ] His eyes were open with the nothingness stare of death , and we prayed , the two of us , there in the gutter , with only my voice . " Albert was tended to by two nurses who happened to be present during the accident . The Gores spent the next month in the hospital with Albert . Gore also commented : " Our lives were consumed with the struggle to restore his body and spirit . " This event was " a trauma so shattering that [ Gore ] views it as a moment of personal rebirth " , a " key moment in his life " which " changed everything . " 
 In August 1991 , Gore announced that his son 's accident was a factor in his decision not to run for president during the 1992 presidential election . Gore stated : " I would like to be President [ ... ] But I am also a father , and I feel deeply about my responsibility to my children [ ... ] I didn 't feel right about tearing myself away from my family to the extent that is necessary in a Presidential campaign . " During this time , Gore wrote Earth in the Balance , a text which became the first book written by a sitting U.S. Senator to make the New York Times bestseller list since John F. Kennedy 's Profiles in Courage . 
 = = = 1992 presidential election = = = 
 Gore was initially hesitant to accept a position as Bill Clinton 's running mate for the 1992 United States presidential election , but after clashing with the George H. W. Bush administration over global warming issues , he decided to accept the offer . Clinton stated that he chose Gore due to his foreign policy experience , work with the environment , and commitment to his family . 
 Clinton 's choice was criticized as unconventional because rather than picking a running mate who would diversify the ticket , Clinton chose a fellow Southerner who shared his political ideologies and who was nearly the same age as Clinton . The Washington Bureau Chief for The Baltimore Sun , Paul West , later suggested that , " Al Gore revolutionized the way Vice Presidents are made . When he joined Bill Clinton 's ticket , it violated the old rules . Regional diversity ? Not with two Southerners from neighboring states . Ideological balance ? A couple of left @-@ of @-@ center moderates . [ ... ] And yet , Gore has come to be regarded by strategists in both parties as the best vice presidential pick in at least 20 years . " 
 Clinton and Gore accepted the nomination at the Democratic National Convention on July 17 , 1992 . Known as the Baby Boomer Ticket and the <unk> Team , The New York Times noted that if elected , Clinton and Gore , at ages 45 and 44 respectively , would be the " youngest team to make it to the White House in the country 's history . " Theirs was the first ticket since 1972 to try to capture the youth vote . Gore called the ticket " a new generation of leadership " . 
 The ticket increased in popularity after the candidates traveled with their wives , Hillary and Tipper , on a " six @-@ day , 1 @,@ 000 @-@ mile bus ride , from New York to St. Louis . " Gore also debated the other vice presidential candidates , Dan Quayle , and James Stockdale . The Clinton @-@ Gore ticket beat the Bush @-@ Quayle ticket , 43 % -38 % . 
 = = Vice Presidency and second presidential run ( 1993 – 2001 ) = = 
 = = = Vice Presidency = = = 
 Al Gore served as Vice President during the Clinton Administration . Clinton and Gore were inaugurated on January 20 , 1993 . At the beginning of the first term , Clinton and Gore developed a " two @-@ page agreement outlining their relationship . " Clinton committed himself to regular lunch meetings , recognized Gore as a principal adviser on nominations , and appointed some of Gore 's chief advisers to key White House staff positions [ ... ] Clinton involved Gore in decision @-@ making to an unprecedented degree for a Vice President . Through their weekly lunches and daily conversations , Gore became the president 's " indisputable chief adviser . " 
 Gore had a particular interest in reducing " waste , fraud , and abuse in the federal government and advocated trimming the size of the bureaucracy and the number of regulations . " During the Clinton Administration , the U.S. economy expanded , according to David Greenberg ( professor of history and media studies at Rutgers University ) who said that " by the end of the Clinton presidency , the numbers were uniformly impressive . Besides the record @-@ high surpluses and the record @-@ low poverty rates , the economy could boast the longest economic expansion in history ; the lowest unemployment since the early 1970s ; and the lowest poverty rates for single mothers , black Americans , and the aged . " 
 According to Leslie Budd , author of E @-@ economy : Rhetoric or Business Reality , this economic success was due , in part , to Gore 's continued role as an Atari Democrat , promoting the development of information technology , which led to the dot @-@ com boom ( c . 1995 @-@ 2001 ) . Clinton and Gore entered office planning to finance research that would " flood the economy with innovative goods and services , lifting the general level of prosperity and strengthening American industry . " Their overall aim was to fund the development of , " robotics , smart roads , biotechnology , machine tools , magnetic @-@ levitation trains , fiber @-@ optic communications and national computer networks . Also earmarked [ were ] a raft of basic technologies like digital imaging and data storage . " Critics claimed that the initiatives would " backfire , bloating Congressional pork and creating whole new categories of Federal waste . " 
 During the election and his term as Vice President , Gore popularized the term Information Superhighway , which became synonymous with the Internet , and he was involved in the creation of the National Information Infrastructure . Gore first discussed his plans to emphasize information technology at UCLA on January 11 , 1994 , in a speech at The Superhighway Summit . He was involved in a number of projects including <unk> ' 96 and 24 Hours in Cyberspace . The Clinton – Gore administration also launched the first official White House website in 1994 and subsequent versions through 2000 . The Clipper Chip , which " Clinton inherited from a multi @-@ year National Security Agency effort " , was a method of hardware encryption with a government backdoor . It met with strong opposition from civil liberty groups and was abandoned by 1996 . 
 Gore was also involved in environmental initiatives . He launched the GLOBE program on Earth Day ' 94 , an education and science activity that , according to Forbes magazine , " made extensive use of the Internet to increase student awareness of their environment " . In 1998 , Gore began promoting a NASA satellite ( Deep Space Climate Observatory ) that would provide a constant view of the Earth , marking the first time such an image would have been made since The Blue Marble photo from the 1972 Apollo 17 mission . During this time , he also became associated with Digital Earth . 
 Gore negotiated and strongly supported the Kyoto Protocol to reduce greenhouse gasses , but said upon his return that the administration would not submit the treaty to the Senate for ratification until it was amended to include " meaningful participation by key developing nations " , The Senate had previously passed unanimously ( 95 – 0 ) the Byrd – Hagel Resolution ( S. Res. 98 ) , which declared opposition to any greenhouse gas treaty which would limit US emissions without similar limits on third @-@ world countries such as China . The Clinton administration left office three years later without having submitted the treaty for ratification . 
 In 1996 , Gore became involved in a finance controversy over his attendance at an event at the Buddhist Hsi Lai Temple in Hacienda Heights , California . In an interview on NBC 's Today the following year , Gore said , " I did not know that it was a fund @-@ raiser . I knew it was a political event , and I knew there were finance people that were going to be present , and so that alone should have told me , ' This is inappropriate and this is a mistake ; don 't do this . ' And I take responsibility for that . It was a mistake . " In March 1997 , Gore had to explain phone calls which he made to solicit funds for the Democratic Party for the 1996 election . In a news conference , Gore stated that , " all calls that I made were charged to the Democratic National Committee . I was advised there was nothing wrong with that . My counsel tells me there is no controlling legal authority that says that is any violation of any law . " The phrase " no controlling legal authority " was criticized by columnist Charles Krauthammer , who stated : " Whatever other legacies Al Gore leaves behind between now and retirement , he forever bequeaths this newest weasel word to the lexicon of American political corruption . " Robert Conrad Jr. was the head of a Justice Department task force appointed by Attorney General Janet Reno to investigate Gore 's fund @-@ raising controversies . In Spring 2000 , Conrad asked Reno to appoint an independent counsel to continue the investigation . After looking into the matter , Reno judged that the appointment of an independent counsel was unwarranted . 
 During the 1990s , Gore spoke out on a number of issues . In a 1992 speech on the Gulf War , Gore stated that he twice attempted to get the U.S. government to pull the plug on support to Saddam Hussein , citing Hussein 's use of poison gas , support of terrorism , and his burgeoning nuclear program , but was opposed both times by the Reagan and Bush administrations . In the wake of the Al @-@ <unk> Campaign , during which Hussein staged deadly mustard and nerve gas attacks on Kurdish Iraqis , Gore cosponsored the Prevention of Genocide Act of 1988 , which would have cut all assistance to Iraq . The bill was defeated in part due to intense lobbying of Congress by the Reagan @-@ Bush White House and a veto threat from President Reagan . In 1998 , at a conference of APEC hosted by Malaysia , Gore objected to the indictment , arrest and jailing of President Mahathir Mohammad 's longtime second @-@ in @-@ command Anwar Ibrahim , a move which received a negative response from leaders there . Ten years later , Gore again protested when Ibrahim was arrested a second time , a decision condemned by Malaysian foreign minister Datuk Seri Dr Rais Yatim . 
 Soon afterwards , Gore also had to contend with the Lewinsky scandal , involving an affair between President Clinton and an intern , Monica Lewinsky . Gore initially defended Clinton , whom he believed to be innocent , stating , " He is the president of the country ! He is my friend [ ... ] I want to ask you now , every single one of you , to join me in supporting him . " After Clinton was impeached , Gore continued to defend him stating , " I 've defined my job in exactly the same way for six years now [ ... ] to do everything I can to help him be the best president possible . " 
 = = = Second presidential run ( 2000 ) = = = 
 There was talk of a potential run in the 2000 presidential race by Gore as early as January 1998 . Gore discussed the possibility of running during a March 9 , 1999 , interview with CNN 's Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer . In response to Wolf Blitzer 's question : " Why should Democrats , looking at the Democratic nomination process , support you instead of Bill Bradley " , Gore responded : 
 I 'll be offering my vision when my campaign begins . And it will be comprehensive and sweeping . And I hope that it will be compelling enough to draw people toward it . I feel that it will be . But it will emerge from my dialogue with the American people . I 've traveled to every part of this country during the last six years . During my service in the United States Congress , I took the initiative in creating the Internet . I took the initiative in moving forward a whole range of initiatives that have proven to be important to our country 's economic growth and environmental protection , improvements in our educational system . 
 Former UCLA professor of information studies Philip E. <unk> and journalist Eric Boehlert argued that three articles in Wired News led to the creation of the widely spread urban legend that Gore claimed to have " invented the Internet " , which followed this interview . In addition , computer professionals and congressional colleagues argued in his defense . Internet pioneers Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn stated that " we don 't think , as some people have argued , that Gore intended to claim he ' invented ' the Internet . Moreover , there is no question in our minds that while serving as Senator , Gore 's initiatives had a significant and beneficial effect on the still @-@ evolving Internet . " Cerf would later state : " Al Gore had seen what happened with the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act of 1956 , which his father introduced as a military bill . It was very powerful . Housing went up , suburban boom happened , everybody became mobile . Al was attuned to the power of networking much more than any of his elective colleagues . His initiatives led directly to the commercialization of the Internet . So he really does deserve credit . " In a speech to the American Political Science Association , former Republican Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Newt Gingrich also stated : " In all fairness , it 's something Gore had worked on a long time . Gore is not the Father of the Internet , but in all fairness , Gore is the person who , in the Congress , most systematically worked to make sure that we got to an Internet , and the truth is -- and I worked with him starting in 1978 when I got [ to Congress ] , we were both part of a " futures group " — the fact is , in the Clinton administration , the world we had talked about in the ' 80s began to actually happen . " Finally , Wolf Blitzer ( who conducted the original 1999 interview ) stated in 2008 that : " I didn 't ask him about the Internet . I asked him about the differences he had with Bill Bradley [ ... ] Honestly , at the time , when he said it , it didn 't dawn on me that this was going to have the impact that it wound up having , because it was distorted to a certain degree and people said they took what he said , which was a carefully phrased comment about taking the initiative and creating the Internet to — I invented the Internet . And that was the sort of shorthand , the way his enemies projected it and it wound up being a devastating setback to him and it hurt him , as I 'm sure he acknowledges to this very day . " 
 Gore himself would later poke fun at the controversy . In 2000 , while on the Late Show with David Letterman he read Letterman 's Top 10 List ( which for this show was called , " Top Ten Rejected Gore – Lieberman Campaign Slogans " ) to the audience . Number nine on the list was : " Remember , America , I gave you the Internet , and I can take it away ! " In 2005 when Gore was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award " for three decades of contributions to the Internet " at the Webby Awards he joked in his acceptance speech ( limited to five words according to Webby Awards rules ) : " Please don 't recount this vote . " He was introduced by Vint Cerf who used the same format to joke : " We all invented the Internet . " Gore , who was then asked to add a few more words to his speech , stated : " It is time to reinvent the Internet for all of us to make it more robust and much more accessible and use it to reinvigorate our democracy . " 
 Gore formally announced his candidacy for president in a speech on June 16 , 1999 , in Carthage , Tennessee , with his major theme being the need to strengthen the American family . He was introduced by his eldest daughter , Karenna Gore Schiff . In making the speech , Gore also distanced himself from Bill Clinton , who he stated had lied to him . Gore was " briefly interrupted " by AIDS protesters claiming Gore was working with the pharmaceutical industry to prevent access to generic medicines for poor nations and chanting " Gore 's greed kills . " Additional speeches were also interrupted by the protesters . Gore responded , " I love this country . I love the First Amendment [ ... ] Let me say in response to those who may have chosen an inappropriate way to make their point , that actually the crisis of AIDS in Africa is one that should command the attention of people in the United States and around the world . " Gore also issued a statement saying that he supported efforts to lower the cost of the AIDS drugs , provided that they " are done in a way consistent with international agreements . " 
 Gore faced an early challenge by former New Jersey senator Bill Bradley . Bradley was the only candidate to oppose Gore and was considered a " fresh face " for the White House . Gore challenged Bradley to a series of debates which took the form of " town hall " meetings . Gore went on the offensive during these debates leading to a drop in the polls for Bradley . Gore eventually went on to win every primary and caucus and , in March 2000 even won the first primary election ever held over the Internet , the Arizona Presidential Primary . By then , he secured the Democratic nomination . , On August 13 , 2000 , Gore announced that he had selected Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut as his vice presidential running mate . Lieberman became " the first person of the Jewish faith to run for the nation 's second @-@ highest office . " Many pundits saw Gore 's choice of Lieberman as further distancing him from the scandals of the Clinton White House . Gore 's daughter , Karenna , together with her father 's former Harvard roommate Tommy Lee Jones , officially nominated Gore as the Democratic presidential candidate during the 2000 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles , California . Gore accepted his party 's nomination and spoke about the major themes of his campaign , stating in particular his plan to extend Medicare to pay for prescription drugs and to work for a sensible universal health @-@ care system . Soon after the convention , Gore hit the campaign trail with running mate Joe Lieberman . Gore and Bush were deadlocked in the polls . Gore and Bush participated in three televised debates . While both sides claimed victory after each , Gore was critiqued as either too stiff , too reticent , or too aggressive in contrast to Bush . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 On election night , news networks first called Florida for Gore , later retracted the projection , and then called Florida for Bush , before finally retracting that projection as well . Florida 's Republican Secretary of State , Katherine Harris , eventually certified Florida 's vote count . This led to the Florida election recount , a move to further examine the Florida results . 
 The Florida recount was stopped a few weeks later by the U.S. Supreme Court . In the ruling , Bush v. Gore , the Justices held that the Florida recount was unconstitutional and that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline , effectively ending the recounts . This 7 – 2 vote ruled that the standards the Florida Supreme Court provided for a recount were unconstitutional due to violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment , and further ruled 5 – 4 that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline . This case ordered an end to recounting underway in selected Florida counties , effectively giving George W. Bush a 537 vote victory in Florida and consequently Florida 's 25 electoral votes and the presidency . The results of the decision led to Gore winning the popular vote by approximately 500 @,@ 000 votes nationwide , but receiving 266 electoral votes to Bush 's 271 ( one District of Columbia elector abstained ) . On December 13 , 2000 , Gore conceded the election . Gore strongly disagreed with the Court 's decision , but in his concession speech stated that , " for the sake of our unity as a people and the strength of our democracy , I offer my concession . " 
 The 2000 election is the subject of a 2008 made @-@ for @-@ TV movie directed by Jay Roach , produced by , and starring Kevin Spacey called <unk> . It premiered on the HBO cable network on May 25 , 2008 . 
 = = Post Vice Presidency = = 
 After maintaining an informal public distance for eight years , Bill Clinton and Gore reunited for the media in August 2009 after Clinton arranged for the release of two journalists who were being held hostage in North Korea . The two women were employees of Gore 's Current TV . 
 = = = Criticism of Bush = = = 
 Beginning in late 2002 , Gore began to publicly criticize the Bush administration . In a September 23 , 2002 , speech given before the Commonwealth Club of California , Gore criticized President George W. Bush and Congress for the rush to war prior to the outbreak of hostilities in Iraq . He compared this decision to the Persian Gulf War ( which Gore had voted for ) stating , " Back in 1991 , I was one of a handful of Democrats in the United States Senate to vote in favor of the resolution endorsing the Persian Gulf War [ ... ] But look at the differences between the resolution that was voted on in 1991 and the one this administration is proposing that the Congress vote on in 2002 . The circumstances are really completely different . To review a few of them briefly : in 1991 , Iraq had crossed an international border , invaded a neighboring sovereign nation and annexed its territory . Now by contrast in 2002 , there has been no such invasion . " In a speech given in 2004 , during the presidential election , Gore accused George W. Bush of betraying the country by using the 9 / 11 attacks as a justification for the invasion of Iraq . The next year , Gore gave a speech which covered many topics , including what he called " religious zealots " who claim special knowledge of God 's will in American politics . Gore stated : " They even claim that those of us who disagree with their point of view are waging war against people of faith . " After Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , Gore chartered two planes to evacuate 270 people from New Orleans and criticized the Bush administration 's response to the hurricane . In 2006 , Gore criticized Bush 's use of domestic wiretaps without a warrant . One month later , in a speech given at the Jeddah Economic Forum , Gore criticized the treatment of Arabs in the U.S. after 9 / 11 stating , " Unfortunately there have been terrible abuses and it 's wrong [ ... ] I do want you to know that it does not represent the desires or wishes or feelings of the majority of the citizens of my country . " Gore 's 2007 book , The Assault on Reason , is an analysis of what Gore refers to as the " emptying out of the marketplace of ideas " in civic discourse during the Bush administration . He attributes this phenomenon to the influence of television and argues that it endangers American democracy . By contrast , Gore argues , the Internet can revitalize and ultimately " redeem the integrity of representative democracy . " In 2008 , Gore argued against the ban of same @-@ sex marriage on his Current TV website , stating , " I think that gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual men and women to make contracts , have hospital visiting rights , and join together in marriage . " In a 2009 interview with CNN , Gore commented on former Vice President Dick Cheney 's criticism of the Obama administration . Referring to his own previous criticism of the Bush administration , Gore stated : " I waited two years after I left office to make statements that were critical , and then of the policy [ ... ] You know , you talk about somebody that shouldn 't be talking about making the country less safe , invading a country that did not attack us and posed no serious threat to us at all . " 
 While Gore has criticized Bush for his Katrina response , he has not spoken publicly about his part in the evacuation of 270 patients on September 3 & 4 , 2005 , from Charity Hospital in New Orleans to Tennessee . On September 1 , Gore was contacted by Charity Hospital 's Neurosurgeon Dr. David Kline , who had operated on his son Albert , through Greg Simon of <unk> . Kline informed Gore and Simon of the desperate conditions at the hospital and asked Gore and Simon to arrange relief . On Gore 's personal financial commitment , two airlines each provided a plane with one flight latter underwritten by Larry Flax . The flights were flown by volunteer airline crews and medically staffed by Gore 's cousin , retired Col. Dar LaFon , and family physician Dr. Anderson <unk> and were accompanied by Gore and Albert III . Gore used his political influence to expedite landing rights in New Orleans . 
 = = = Presidential run speculation = = = 
 Gore was a speculated candidate for the 2004 Presidential Election ( a bumper sticker , " Re @-@ elect Gore in 2004 ! " was popular ) . On December 16 , 2002 , however , Gore announced that he would not run in 2004 . Despite Gore taking himself out of the race , a handful of his supporters formed a national campaign to draft him into running . One observer concluded it was " Al Gore who has the best chance to defeat the incumbent president " , noting that " of the 43 Presidents , only three have been direct descendents of former Presidents : " John Quincy Adams , Benjamin Harrison , and George W. Bush , that " all three won the office only after ... anomalies in the Electoral College " , that the first two were defeated for re @-@ election in a populist backlash , and finally that " the men who first lost to the presidential progeny and then beat them " ( i.e. Andrew Jackson and Grover Cleveland ) " each won a sort of <unk> his image placed on a unit of US currency " , and that Gore should answer this call of history . The draft movement , however , failed to convince Gore to run . 
 The prospect of a Gore candidacy arose again between 2006 and early 2008 in light of the upcoming 2008 presidential election . Although Gore frequently stated that he had " no plans to run " , he did not reject the possibility of future involvement in politics which led to speculation that he might run . This was due in part to his increased popularity after the release of the 2006 documentary , An Inconvenient Truth . The director of the film , Davis Guggenheim , stated that after the release of the film , " Everywhere I go with him , they treat him like a rock star . " After An Inconvenient Truth was nominated for an Academy Award , Donna Brazile ( Gore 's campaign chairwoman from his 2000 campaign ) speculated that Gore might announce a possible presidential candidacy during the Oscars . During the 79th Academy Awards ceremony , Gore and actor Leonardo DiCaprio shared the stage to speak about the " greening " of the ceremony itself . Gore began to give a speech that appeared to be leading up to an announcement that he would run for president . However , background music drowned him out and he was escorted offstage , implying that it was a rehearsed gag , which he later acknowledged . After An Inconvenient Truth won the Academy Award for Best Documentary , speculation increased about a possible presidential run . Gore 's popularity was indicated in polls which showed that even without running , he was coming in second or third among possible Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton , Barack Obama , and John Edwards . Grassroots draft campaigns also developed with the hope that they could encourage Gore to run . Gore , however , remained firm in his decision and declined to run for the presidency . 
 Interest in having Gore run for the 2016 Presidential election arose in 2014 and again in 2015 , although he did not declare any intention to do so . 
 = = = Involvement in presidential campaigns = = = 
 After announcing he would not run in the 2004 U.S. presidential election , Gore endorsed Vermont governor Howard Dean in December 2003 , weeks before the first primary of the election cycle . He was criticized for this endorsement by eight Democratic contenders particularly since he did not endorse his former running mate Joe Lieberman ( Gore preferred Dean over Lieberman because Lieberman supported the Iraq War and Gore did not ) . Dean 's campaign soon became a target of attacks and eventually failed , with Gore 's early endorsement being credited as a factor . In The New York Times , Dean stated : " I actually do think the endorsement of Al Gore began the decline . " The Times further noted that " Dean instantly amplified his statement to indicate that the endorsement from Mr. Gore , a powerhouse of the establishment , so threatened the other Democratic candidates that they began the attacks on his candidacy that helped derail it . " Dean 's former campaign manager , Joe <unk> , also stated that after Gore 's endorsement of Dean , " alarm bells went off in every newsroom in the country , in every other campaign in the country " , indicating that if something did not change , Dean would be the nominee . Later , in March 2004 , Gore endorsed John Kerry and gave Kerry $ 6 million in funds left over from his own unsuccessful 2000 bid . Gore also opened the 2004 Democratic National Convention . 
 During the 2008 primaries , Gore remained neutral toward all of the candidates which led to speculation that he would come out of a brokered 2008 Democratic National Convention as a " compromise candidate " if the party decided it could not nominate one . Gore responded by stating that these events would not take place because a candidate would be nominated through the primary process . When Senator Barack Obama became the presumptive Democratic nominee for president on June 3 , 2008 , speculation began that Gore might be tapped for the vice presidency . On June 16 , 2008 ( a week after Hillary Clinton had suspended her campaign ) , Gore endorsed Obama in a speech given in Detroit , Michigan which renewed speculation of an Obama @-@ Gore ticket . Gore stated , however , that he was not interested in being Vice President again . On the timing and nature of Gore 's endorsement , some argued that Gore waited because he did not want to repeat his calamitous early endorsement of Howard Dean during the 2004 Presidential Election . On the final night of the 2008 Democratic National Convention , shortly before Obama delivered his acceptance address , Gore gave a speech offering his full support . Such support led to new speculation after Obama was elected President during the 2008 Presidential election that Gore would be named a member of the Obama administration . This speculation was enhanced by a meeting held between Obama , Gore , and Joe Biden in Chicago on December 9 , 2008 . However , Democratic officials and Gore 's spokeswoman stated that during the meeting the only subject under discussion was the climate crisis , and Gore would not be joining the Obama administration . On December 19 , 2008 , Gore described Obama 's environmental administrative choices of Carol Browner , Steven Chu , and Lisa Jackson as " an exceptional team to lead the fight against the climate crisis . " 
 Gore repeated his neutrality eight years later during the Democratic presidential primaries of 2016 until endorsing Hillary Clinton on July 25 , 2016 , the first day of the that year 's Democratic National Convention . 
 = = = Environmentalism = = = 
 = = = = Overview = = = = 
 Gore has been involved with environmental issues since 1976 , when as a freshman congressman , he held the " first congressional hearings on the climate change , and co @-@ sponsor [ ed ] hearings on toxic waste and global warming . " He continued to speak on the topic throughout the 1980s , and is still prevalent in the environmental community . He was known as one of the Atari Democrats , later called the " Democrats ' Greens , politicians who see issues like clean air , clean water and global warming as the key to future victories for their party . " 
 In 1990 , Senator Gore presided over a three @-@ day conference with legislators from over 42 countries which sought to create a Global Marshall Plan , " under which industrial nations would help less developed countries grow economically while still protecting the environment . " In the late 1990s , Gore strongly pushed for the passage of the Kyoto Protocol , which called for reduction in greenhouse gas emissions . He was opposed by the Senate , which passed unanimously ( 95 – 0 ) the Byrd – Hagel Resolution ( S. Res. 98 ) , which stated the sense of the Senate was that the United States should not be a signatory to any protocol that did not include binding targets and timetables for developing as well as industrialized nations or " would result in serious harm to the economy of the United States " . 
 In 2004 , he co @-@ launched Generation Investment Management , a company for which he serves as Chair . A few years later , Gore also founded The Alliance for Climate Protection , an organization which eventually founded the We Campaign . Gore also became a partner in the venture capital firm , Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers , heading that firm 's climate change solutions group . He also helped to organize the Live Earth benefit concerts . 
 In 2013 , Gore became a vegan . He had earlier admitted that " it 's absolutely correct that the growing meat intensity of diets across the world is one of the issues connected to this global crisis -- not only because of the [ carbon dioxide ] involved , but also because of the water consumed in the process " and some speculate that his adoption of the new diet is related to his environmentalist stance . In a 2014 interview , Gore said " Over a year ago I changed my diet to a vegan diet , really just to experiment to see what it was like . ... I felt better , so I 've continued with it and I 'm likely to continue it for the rest of my life . " 
 = = = = Criticism = = = = 
 Gore 's involvement in environmental issues has been criticized . For example , he has been labeled a " carbon billionaire " and accused of profiting from his advocacy ; a charge which he has denied , by saying , among other things , that he has not been " working on this issue for 30 years ... because of greed " . A conservative Washington D.C. think tank , and a Republican member of Congress , among others , have claimed that Gore has a conflict @-@ of @-@ interest for advocating for taxpayer subsidies of green @-@ energy technologies in which he has a personal investment . Additionally , he has been criticized for his above @-@ average energy consumption in using private jets , and in owning multiple , very large homes , one of which was reported in 2007 as using high amounts of electricity . Gore 's spokesperson responded by stating that the Gores use renewable energy which is more expensive than regular energy and that the Tennessee house in question has been retrofitted to make it more energy @-@ efficient . 
 Data in An Inconvenient Truth have been questioned . In a 2007 court case , a British judge said that while he had " no doubt ... the film was broadly accurate " and its " four main scientific hypotheses ... are supported by a vast quantity of research " , he upheld nine of a " long schedule " of alleged errors presented to the court . He ruled that the film could be shown to schoolchildren in the UK if guidance notes given to teachers were amended to balance out the film 's one @-@ sided political views . Gore 's spokeswoman responded in 2007 that the court had upheld the film 's fundamental thesis and its use as an educational tool . In 2009 , Gore described the British court ruling as being " in my favor . " 
 In the late 1980s and 1990s , Gore was criticized for his involvement in asking the EPA for less strict pollution controls for the Pigeon River . 
 Organizations including People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) criticized Gore for not advocating vegetarianism as a way for individuals to reduce their carbon footprint . Gore agreed that meat production contributes to increased carbon emissions , but did not want to " go quite as far as ... saying everybody should become a vegetarian " . He said that although he was not a vegetarian , he had " cut back sharply " on his consumption of meat . 
 When asked by Bjørn <unk> to debate whether spending on health and education should take priority over limiting carbon emissions , Gore responded that he would not debate because the " scientific community has gone through this chapter and verse . We have long since passed the time when we should pretend this is a ' on the one hand , on the other hand ' issue . . . . It 's not a matter of theory or conjecture . " 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Gore is the recipient of a number of awards , including the Nobel Peace Prize ( together with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ) in 2007 , a Primetime Emmy Award for Current TV in 2007 , a Webby Award in 2005 and the Prince of Asturias Award in 2007 for International Cooperation . He also starred in the 2006 documentary An Inconvenient Truth , which won an Academy Award for Best Documentary in 2007 and wrote the book An Inconvenient Truth : The Planetary Emergency of Global Warming and What We Can Do About It , which won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album in 2009 . 
 President Obama praised Gore for advancing the cause of peace . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 = Business routes of U.S. Route 131 = 
 There are six business routes of US Highway 131 in the state of Michigan , and previously there was one bypass route . All of the business routes are former sections of US Highway 131 ( US 131 ) . These former sections of the mainline highway , along with the necessary connecting roads , allow traffic to access the downtowns business districts of cities bypassed by sections of US 131 built since the 1950s . The extant business loops connect to Constantine , Three Rivers , Kalamazoo , Grand Rapids , Big Rapids , Cadillac , and Manton . The former bypass route in Grand Rapids allowed traffic to bypass that city 's downtown at a time when US 131 still ran through the heart of the city . 
 = = Constantine = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is a business loop running through downtown Constantine . It starts south of the village in Constantine Township near some farm fields and runs northward . The highway passes a mobile home park and a couple of businesses before veering northwesterly on Washington Street through a residential neighborhood on the south side of Constantine . Bus . US 131 crosses the St. Joseph River and then turns northeasterly on Broad Street . The loop runs parallel to the banks of the river as the highway exits the northern side of the village . Bus . US 131 ends in Constantine Township where it intersects the northern end of the Constantine Bypass . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) has been studying a freeway upgrade for US 131 through St. Joseph County for several years . In late 2005 , MDOT decided not to pursue an upgrade of the highway , but rescinded that decision in April 2006 under political pressure in the state . The department began building a two @-@ lane bypass west of Constantine . The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials , which is in charge of US Highway numbering assignments and routings , approved the relocation of the US 131 designation out of Constantine on November 16 , 2012 . The group 's Special Committee on U.S. Route Numbering also approved the creation of a business route for the old highway through town . The bypass opened on October 30 , 2013 , and the business route designation was put into service that day . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in St. Joseph County . 
 = = Three Rivers = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is a three @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) business loop running through downtown Three Rivers . It follows M @-@ 60 ( Michigan Avenue ) eastward from a commercial district on the main highway into downtown . Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 60 passes through a residential neighborhood and crosses the Rocky River near its confluence with the St. Joseph River . On the east side of the river , the business loop turns north @-@ northwesterly onto Main Street , separating from M @-@ 60 at an intersection that also features M @-@ 86 . Bus . US 131 ( Main Street ) passes several more businesses and turns due north through a residential area . Near the northern terminus , the business loop passes a handful of businesses before ending at an intersection with US 131 on the north side of town . 
 The Three Rivers Bypass opened in the middle of 1953 , and the former route of the highway through downtown was redesignated as the business loop at that time . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Three Rivers , St. Joseph County . 
 = = Kalamazoo = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is an almost 10 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 km ) business loop running through downtown Kalamazoo . The southern end of the highway is at an interchange for exit 36 along US 131 west of downtown Kalamazoo in Oshtemo Township . Bus . US 131 runs concurrently with Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) eastward along the five @-@ lane Stadium Drive through a commercial area north of Asylum Lake . Near the campus of Western Michigan University , BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 131 turns northeasterly along the edge of the campus . Northeast of Waldo Stadium and the campus , the street name changes to Michigan Avenue . BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 131 merges with M @-@ 43 at the intersection with Main Street , and Michigan Avenue turns eastward as a one @-@ way , four @-@ lane street into downtown Kalamazoo . This intersection also marks the western end of the one @-@ way pairing of Michigan Avenue ( eastbound ) and Kalamazoo Avenue ( westbound ) , using Michikal Street to connect the two southbound . The two directions of traffic are separated by three blocks as they travel through downtown . At the one @-@ way pairing of Park Street ( northbound ) and Westnedge Avenue ( southbound ) , Bus . US 131 turns north – south ; south of this complex of intersecting one @-@ way streets , Westnedge and Park carries M @-@ 331 , an unsigned highway . Westnedge and Park run two blocks apart on four @-@ lane streets and pass through residential areas north of downtown . North of town , Westnedge curves northeasterly to run next to Park , and the two streets form the opposing two @-@ lane carriageways of a freeway . This freeway runs north and then turns westward . There is a half folded diamond interchange for Douglas Avenue . West of that interchange , the freeway turns northwesterly , passing between suburban residential subdivisions before terminating at a partial interchange with US 131 . At this endpoint , northbound Bus . US 131 traffic must enter northbound US 131 , and only southbound US 131 traffic has access to the southbound direction of the business loop . 
 On December 7 , 1959 , the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway opened on the south side of Kalamazoo , and US 12 was shifted to follow the new freeway . The former route through downtown Kalamazoo and along Stadium Drive was redesignated Bus . US 12 . The next year , it was renumbered BL I @-@ 94 . In 1963 , the US 131 freeway opened on the northwest side of Kalamazoo . US 131 followed M @-@ 43 eastward from the end of the freeway into the downtown area to reconnect to its original routing along Westnedge and Park . The next year , another section of US 131 opened southwest of Kalamazoo , and US 131 was rerouted out of downtown completely . The freeway section north of downtown opened in 1964 , and Bus . US 131 was designated along it into downtown and along BL I @-@ 94 back out to the US 131 freeway west of downtown . Later in 1965 , Kalamazoo and Michikal avenues were transferred to state jurisdiction to set up the one @-@ way pairing east – west through downtown . Kalamazoo and Michikal are then signed as southbound Bus . US 131 from Westnedge Avenue to Stadium Drive while Main Street and Michigan Avenue continued to serve northbound traffic only between Stadium Drive and Park Street . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Kalamazoo County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = Grand Rapids bypass = = 
 Bypass US Highway 131 ( Byp . US 131 ) was a bypass route around downtown Grand Rapids . The highway followed 28th Street eastward from the intersection with US 131 ( Division Street ) south of downtown . From this starting point eastward , it ran concurrently with Byp . US 16 and Byp M @-@ 21 . M @-@ 37 also followed 28th Street at the time eastward from the intersection at Kalamazoo Avenue . At the intersection with East Beltline and Broadmoor avenues in Paris Township ( now Kentwood ) , <unk> 16 / Byp . US 131 / <unk> @-@ 21 turned northward to follow East Beltline , and M @-@ 37 turned southward on Broadmoor . The bypass route continued northward through Grand Rapids Township . At the intersection with US 16 / M @-@ 50 ( Cascade Road ) , Byp . US 16 ended , and Byp . M @-@ 21 ended less than half a mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) north of that at the intersection with M @-@ 21 ( Fulton Street ) . North of the intersection with Fulton Street , Byp . US 131 was the only designation along East Beltline Avenue at the time . The highway ran northward into Plainfield Township , and it terminated at an intersection with US 131 at Plainfield Avenue and Northland Drive just south of the Grand River . 
 By 1945 , Byp . US 131 , along with the other various bypass routes , was designated along the Grand Rapids beltline system , replacing M @-@ 114 . Byp . US 131 followed the south beltline ( 28th Street ) and East Beltline Avenue between Division Avenue and Plainfield Avenue , allowing north – south traffic to bypass downtown Grand Rapids . In late 1949 , M @-@ 37 was rerouted onto 28th Street between Kalamazoo and East Beltline / Broadmoor avenues . Then in 1953 , US 131 was rerouted onto the <unk> to replace its bypass route ; the former mainline through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 131 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway was in Kent County . 
 = = Grand Rapids business loop = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( BUS US 131 ) is a 2 @.@ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) business loop running through downtown Grand Rapids . The southern end is at a partial interchange with US 131 south of the S @-@ Curve near the Grand River . Only northbound traffic on US 131 can directly access the business loop at this interchange , running northward on a long ramp that connects to Ottawa Avenue at an intersection with Cherry Street . Bus . US 131 follows Ottawa Avenue northward between parking lots , and after one block , it turns eastward onto Oakes Street immediately south of the Van Andel Arena . The business loop travels three blocks along Oakes Street past commercial properties before turning northward onto Division Street . As the highway runs along Division Street , it passes the various businesses , the campuses of Kendall College of Art and Design and Grand Rapids Community College . It also passes under Michigan Avenue at the base of the hill that makes up the Medical Mile . Immediately north of the Michigan Avenue overpass , Bus . US 131 passes under Interstate 196 ( I @-@ 196 ) without an interchange . Division Street here runs at the base of Belknap Hill through an area of the city dominated by industrial @-@ type properties . North of an intersection with <unk> Street , the business loop switches to Plainfield Avenue and turns northeasterly . One block later , Bus . US 131 turns westward onto Leonard Street . The business loop follows Leonard for a few blocks and then crosses the Grand River . On the western bank of the river , Bus . US 131 meets its parent highway at exit 87 and terminates . The streets that carry the business loop have either two or four lanes with an additional center turn lane . 
 The designation was created when US 131 was rerouted on the Grand Rapids beltline system in 1953 . Previously , a Bypass US 131 ( BYP US 131 ) designation was used on the beltline system following 28th Street and East Beltline Avenue . After the change , the former mainline through downtown on Division Street and Plainfield Avenue was redesignated Bus . US 131 , and the mainline US 131 replaced Byp . US 131 . In 1961 , the US 131 freeway was extended northward to the west of downtown , and between 28th Street and the downtown exit , it was initially designated as part of Bus . US 131 . In December 1962 , the I @-@ 296 / US 131 freeway was completed west of downtown . Afterwards , Bus . US 131 was truncated on its southern end to the modern exit <unk> interchange on the south side of downtown . At the same time , the northern end was also truncated , using <unk> Street and Monroe Avenue to Leonard Street to connect back to the freeway . 
 In 1986 , the city and state transferred jurisdiction over some streets at the northern end of the business loop , smoothing out the routing of the northern end of Bus . US 131 and eliminating some extra turns between Plainfield Avenue and Leonard Street . The construction of the Van Andel Arena in 1995 and 1996 severed the connection from southbound Bus . US 131 to US 131 . This gap was rejoined with the reconstruction of the " S @-@ Curve " in 1999 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Grand Rapids , Kent County . 
 = = Big Rapids = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is a 6 @.@ 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 11 @.@ 1 km ) business loop running through downtown Big Rapids . The southern end of the highway is at an interchange with US 131 and M @-@ 20 west of downtown in Big Rapids Township . At this interchange , M @-@ 20 leaves the freeway to run concurrently eastward with the business loop along the four @-@ lane Perry Street into town . Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 20 passes several commercial properties on the western edge of Big Rapids before crossing the city limits . South of Perry Street in the city is part of the campus of Ferris State University , including <unk> Golf Course ; the north side of the street contains various businesses . At the intersection with State Street , Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 20 turns northward toward downtown Big Rapids , passing the northern end of the FSU campus . North of campus , the business loop passes through residential neighborhoods . At the intersection with Maple Street immediately west of downtown , M @-@ 20 turns easterly and separates from Bus . US 131 . North of the downtown area , State Street ends , and the business loop follows Northland Drive parallel to the Muskegon River . On the northern edge of the city , the highway passes <unk> – Hood Airport before exiting town as a two @-@ lane road . Running in a rural area in Big Rapids Township , the business loop turns westward onto 19 Mile Road . Bus . US 131 ends at an interchange with US 131 and County Road B @-@ 96 . 
 In 1983 with the extension of the US 131 freeway west of Big Rapids to the interchange with 19 Mile Road , the former route of US 131 through Big Rapids on State Street and Northland Drive north of Perry Street was designated as a business loop , using M @-@ 20 ( Perry Street ) to connect back to the freeway on the southern end . At the time , 19 Mile Road between the freeway Northland Drive was used by the mainline to connect to its pre @-@ existing routing north of Big Rapids to Reed City . The US 131 freeway was completed north of 19 Mile Road in 1986 , and Bus . US 131 was extended over the 19 Mile Road portion of US 131 to connect with its parent route at exit 142 northwest of Big Rapids . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Mecosta County . 
 = = Cadillac = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is a 5 @.@ 60 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 9 @.@ 01 km ) business loop running through downtown Cadillac . The southern end is at an interchange with US 131 / M @-@ 55 in Clam Lake Township south of Cadillac , and the business loop runs northward along Mitchell Street away from the freeway , passing several businesses and the Maple Hill Cemetery . North of the cemetery , Mitchell Street descends a hill through a residential neighborhood south of downtown . At Howard Street , the business loop turns northwesterly into downtown near Lake Cadillac . North of downtown , Mitchell Street turns more northerly and passes the Wexford County Civic Center . At the intersection with Boon Road next to the Wexford County Airport , Bus . US 131 turns eastward onto Boon Road to connect back to the freeway in Haring Township . The business loop has at least four lanes , two in each direction , and some segments also feature a center turn lane . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) started construction of a freeway bypass of Cadillac in 1999 . With the completion of the southern half of the bypass in 2000 , M @-@ 55 was rerouted out of town along the new freeway . Once the northern half of the bypass was completed on October 30 , 2001 , US 131 was rerouted out of town along the new highway to the end of the freeway where it joined the old alignment north of town . Mitchell Street through downtown Cadillac was redesignated as Bus . US 131 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Wexford County . 
 = = Manton = = 
 Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) is a 5 2 ⁄ 3 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 9 @.@ 1 km ) business loop running through downtown Manton . The business loop starts at an interchange with US 131 and M @-@ 42 east of downtown Manton in Cedar Creek Township . Bus . US 131 runs concurrently with M @-@ 42 for about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) westerly into town along a roadway with a travel lane in each direction separated by a center turn lane . At the intersection with Michigan Avenue ( Old US 131 ) , M @-@ 42 terminates and Bus . US 131 turns northward onto Michigan Avenue . The business loop runs through downtown Manton before exiting the northern end of town . North of Manton , the turn lane is eliminated , and the surrounding landscapes are dominated by farm fields broken by intermittent patches of forest . Bus . US 131 curves northwesterly before returning to a due northward course . As the business loop approaches northern end of the freeway mainline in Liberty Township , it curves northeasterly to meet it at an at @-@ grade intersection . 
 With the completion of the Manton Bypass in 2003 , US 131 was rerouted out of downtown Manton . The former route through town was designated Bus . US 131 , using M @-@ 42 to connect back to the freeway east of town . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Wexford County . 
 = USS West Alsek ( ID @-@ 3119 ) = 
 USS West Alsek ( ID @-@ 3119 ) was a cargo ship in the United States Navy during World War I. She had been built as SS West Alsek for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) as part of the West boats , cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States . She sailed on two voyages for the U.S. Navy before she was decommissioned after the Armistice . 
 West Alsek was selected for a test program by the addition of coal <unk> — units that crushed coal and mixed it with air for injection into the boilers . She became the first steamship to cross the Atlantic ocean depending solely on pulverized coal . Test results showed that she sailed faster and used less coal than before the conversion . West Alsek was later abandoned by the USSB and scrapped in 1933 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Alsek , named , in part , after the Alsek River in Alaska . West Alsek was one of some 24 West ships built by Skinner & Eddy of Seattle , Washington . 
 West Alsek ( Skinner & Eddy No. 22 , USSB No. 87 ) was launched on 4 May 1918 and delivered to the United States Navy upon completion later in the month . West Alsek was built in a total of 78 working days , 92 calendar days , and was tied with three other ships for tenth place on a list of the ten fastest constructed ocean @-@ going vessels compiled in 1920 . Skinner & Eddy received a $ 25 @,@ 000 bonus for completing the ship early . 
 The ship was 5 @,@ 637 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 409 feet 5 inches ( 124 @.@ 79 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) abeam . West Alsek had a steel hull and a mean draft of 24 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) . She displaced 12 @,@ 226 t , and had a deadweight tonnage of 8 @,@ 529 DWT . The ship had a single triple @-@ expansion steam engine powered by three coal @-@ fired boilers that generated 2 @,@ 700 horsepower ( 2 @,@ 000 kW ) and drove her single screw propeller , and moved the ship at a 10 @.@ 5 @-@ knot ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ) pace . 
 = = Military career = = 
 USS West Alsek ( ID @-@ 3119 ) was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) on 4 June with Lieutenant Commander J. S. Gibson , USNRF , in command . West Alsek took on an initial load of 7 @,@ 067 tons of flour and departed the Pacific Northwest on 15 June . After transiting the Panama Canal , she reached New York on 16 July . On 1 August , West Alsek joined Convoy HB @-@ 8 with West Bridge , United States Army cargo transport Montanan , and 13 other ships for France . 
 Escorted by armed yacht Noma , destroyers Burrows and Smith , and French cruiser Marseillaise , the convoy was some 500 nautical miles ( 900 km ) west of its destination of Le Verdon @-@ sur @-@ Mer by the end of the day on 15 August . At sundown , shortly before 18 : 00 , one of three torpedoes from German submarine U @-@ 90 struck Montanan , while another torpedo from U @-@ 107 hit West Bridge , which was already adrift with engine trouble . Meanwhile , West Alsek and the other surviving ships of the convoy continued on and arrived at Verdon @-@ sur @-@ mer on 18 August . 
 After unloading her cargo of flour and returning to the United States , West Alsek next sailed on 27 October in convoy to Quiberon and Nantes . West Alsek unloaded her cargo in Nantes from 15 November — four days after the Armistice — to 30 December . Sailing for New York on that date , West Alsek arrived there on 19 January 1919 . She was decommissioning on 27 January and returned to the USSB . 
 = = Civilian career = = 
 Little is known about West Alsek 's subsequent civilian career until early 1929 . In February of that year , West Alsek , still under USSB ownership , was selected for the addition of pulverized coal @-@ fired boilers for testing purposes . Coal <unk> would take coal — often cheaper , inferior grades normally unsuitable for marine use — and grind them into coal dust . This dust would then be mixed with air and automatically injected into the boilers without the need for hand @-@ feeding . West Alsek entered the Todd Brooklyn shipyard to undergo the conversion in late February . 
 Upon completion of the conversion work , West Alsek was taken out for trials over two passes on a 16 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 30 km ) course on 19 June . Representatives from the USSB , the Navy Department , the United States Coast Guard , the Cunard Line , and Todd and other shipbuilders were on board — some 125 guests in all . The ship cruised at an average of 12 @.@ 7 knots ( 23 @.@ 5 km / h ) , some 1 @.@ 5 knots ( 2 @.@ 8 km / h ) faster than she had ever steamed . 
 After returning her guests to New York , West Alsek sailed to Baltimore , Maryland , for operation by the Oriole Line . She sailed for Cardiff , becoming the first ship depending only on pulverized coal to cross the Atlantic , and back to Baltimore on 18 August . Early results showed that in addition to making the transatlantic crossings about 10 % faster than she had before , West Alsek used about 30 % less coal during the voyage . West Alsek continued to be a test platform for assessing the pulverized coal system during a voyage to Glasgow , her second for the Oriole Line . 
 No information on West Alsek 's career after the coal pulverizing tests is available , but it is known that she was abandoned by the USSB , and scrapped in the fourth quarter of 1933 . 
 = Richard Hawes = 
 Richard Hawes ( February 6 , 1797 – May 25 , 1877 ) was a United States Representative from Kentucky and the second Confederate Governor of Kentucky . He was part of the politically influential Hawes family . His brother , uncle , and cousin also served as U.S. Representatives , and his grandson Harry B. Hawes was a member of the United States Senate . 
 Hawes began his political career as an ardent Whig and was a close friend of the party 's founder , Henry Clay . When the party declined and dissolved in the 1850s , Hawes became a Democrat , and his relationship with Clay cooled . 
 At the outbreak of the Civil War , Hawes was a supporter of Kentucky 's doctrine of armed neutrality . When the Commonwealth 's neutrality was breached in September 1861 , Hawes fled to Virginia and enlisted as a brigade commissary under Confederate general Humphrey Marshall . When Kentucky 's Confederate government was formed in Russellville , Hawes was offered the position of state auditor , but declined . Months later , he was selected to be Confederate governor of the Commonwealth following George W. Johnson 's death at the Battle of Shiloh . 
 Hawes and the Confederate government traveled with Braxton Bragg 's Army of Tennessee , and when Bragg invaded Kentucky in October 1862 , he captured Frankfort and held an inauguration ceremony for Hawes . The ceremony was interrupted , however , by forces under Union general Don Carlos Buell , and the Confederates were driven from the Commonwealth following the Battle of Perryville . Hawes relocated to Virginia , where he continued to lobby President Jefferson Davis to attempt another invasion of Kentucky . 
 At the end of the war , the Confederate government of Kentucky in exile ceased to exist , and Hawes returned to his home in Paris , Kentucky . He swore an oath of allegiance to the Union , and was allowed to return to his law practice . He was elected county judge of Bourbon County , a post he held until his death in 1877 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Hawes was born on February 6 , 1797 near Bowling Green , Caroline County , Virginia . He was one of eleven children born to Richard and Clara [ a ] Walker Hawes . The <unk> were a political family ; Richard 's brother , Albert Gallatin Hawes , nephew , Aylett Hawes , and cousin , Aylett Hawes Buckner , all served in the U.S. House of Representatives . In 1810 , the family moved to Kentucky , settling in Fayette County , near Lexington . Part of Hawes 's early education was obtained through the Jessamine County school conducted by Samuel Wilson . 
 On November 13 , 1818 , Hawes married Hetty Morrison Nicholas of Lexington . He pursued classical studies at Transylvania University , then studied law under Robert C. Wickliffe . Hawes and Wickliffe became law partners upon the former 's admission to the bar in 1818 . Due to overcrowding of the bar in Lexington , Hawes moved to Winchester in 1824 . While there , he became part owner of a rope and bagging factory with Benjamin H. Buckner . 
 = = = Political career = = = 
 Hawes began his political career in 1828 when he was elected as a Whig to represent Clark County , Kentucky in the Kentucky House of Representatives . As a member of the state militia , Hawes saw limited service in the Black Hawk War in 1832 , and returned to his position in the Kentucky House in 1834 . He was an unsuccessful candidate for U.S. Representative in 1834 , but was elected to represent Henry Clay 's " Ashland District " three years later , serving from March 4 , 1837 to March 3 , 1841 . He then moved to Paris , Kentucky in 1843 and continued the practice of law . 
 Hawes was once close friends with Clay , though the friendship between them cooled when Hawes supported Zachary Taylor instead of Clay for president in 1848 . When the Whig Party dissolved in the 1850s , Hawes became a Democrat , supporting presidential candidates James Buchanan in 1856 and John C. Breckinridge in 1860 . 
 Though alarmed by the election of Abraham Lincoln in the election of 1860 , Hawes was an opponent of secession , supporting instead the idea of armed neutrality . In May 1861 , Hawes , Breckinridge , and Kentucky governor Beriah Magoffin represented the Southern Rights viewpoint at a convention to decide Kentucky 's course in the Civil War . He attended another such convention in September 1861 . Neither convention produced a conclusive decision . 
 A July 1861 address to the people of Bourbon County , authored by Hawes and other like @-@ minded Democrats , blamed Republicans for starting the Civil War , denounced the coercion of states to remain in the Union , and warned that the Lincoln administration would fight to end slavery . The address called for an end to the war , recognition of the Confederate States of America as a sovereign nation , and equitable distribution of the national debt and federal property . 
 = = = Military service = = = 
 When Kentucky 's neutrality was breached in September 1861 , Hawes fled to Virginia to escape imprisonment by Federal authorities . While there , he enlisted as a brigade commissary under Confederate general Humphrey Marshall and was given the rank of major . Though his ability to obtain supplies for Marshall 's brigade was commendable given the difficult conditions , his age ( 64 ) and lack of military experience lessened his value to Marshall 's unit , and his predilection for jumping the chain of command and communicating directly with Confederate Secretary of War Judah P. Benjamin put him at odds with Marshall personally . 
 In November 1861 , the self @-@ appointed members of the Confederate state sovereignty convention in Russellville , Kentucky appointed Hawes state auditor of the Commonwealth 's Confederate government , but he declined in order to continue his military service . However , he wrote President Davis on January 25 , 1862 to inform him that he was traveling to Bowling Green , Kentucky at Confederate Governor George W. Johnson 's request in order to assist Johnson in administering the state government . He resigned his military commission two days later , but his departure for Bowling Green was delayed when he was stricken with typhoid fever . 
 = = Confederate Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Governor Johnson was killed while participating in the Battle of Shiloh . Following the resolutions of the Russellville Convention , the provisional Confederate government 's ten legislative councillors selected Hawes to succeed Johnson as governor . ( Under these provisions , the councillors could not select one of their own . ) He joined the leaderless and nomadic shadow government , which had been traveling with the Army of Tennessee , in Corinth , Mississippi , and took the oath of office on May 31 . The army 's leader , General Braxton Bragg , had been considering an invasion of Kentucky . On August 27 , Hawes was dispatched to Richmond , Virginia to favorably recommend this action to President Jefferson Davis , but Davis was non @-@ committal . Bragg and Edmund Kirby Smith proceeded with the invasion nonetheless , while the leaders of Kentucky 's Confederate government remained in Chattanooga , Tennessee , awaiting Hawes 's return . They departed on September 18 , and caught up with Bragg and Smith in Lexington , Kentucky on October 2 . 
 Bragg , desiring to enforce the Confederate Conscription Act in the Commonwealth , decided to install the provisional government in the recently captured state capital of Frankfort . The ceremony took place on October 4 , 1862 . Humphrey Marshall gave the opening remarks , then General Bragg introduced Governor Hawes . Hawes delivered a lengthy inaugural address in which he declared , " It is now a truth and a fact that the late Union cannot be restored . " He promised to call a convention to provide for a permanent government as soon as such a convention was feasible , and denounced the Union 's goal of freeing the slaves . In the celebratory atmosphere of the inauguration ceremony , however , the Confederate forces let their guard down , and were ambushed and forced to retreat by Union general Don Carlos Buell . Hawes later denied ever taking the oath of office , and became a vocal critic of Bragg . 
 Displaced from their home state , the legislative council dispersed to places where they could make a living or be supported by relatives until Governor Hawes called them into session . Scant records show that , on December 30 , 1862 , Hawes summoned the council , auditor , and treasurer to his location at Athens , Tennessee for a meeting on January 15 , 1863 . Hawes unsuccessfully lobbied President Davis to remove Hawes 's former superior , Humphrey Marshall , from command . On March 4 , he told Davis by letter that " our cause is steadily on the increase " and assured him that another foray into the Commonwealth would produce better results than the first had . 
 The government 's financial woes also continued . Hawes was embarrassed to admit that neither he nor anyone else seemed to know what became of approximately $ 45 @,@ 000 that had been sent from Columbus to Memphis , Tennessee during the Confederate occupation of Kentucky . Another major blow was Davis 's decision not to allow Hawes to spend $ 1 million that had been secretly appropriated in August 1861 to help Kentucky maintain its neutrality . Davis reasoned that the money could not be spent for its intended purpose , since Kentucky was now a part of the Confederacy . 
 By 1864 , Hawes had joined his sister at the small Virginia settlement of Nelly 's Ford . His wife and daughter joined him there . This location was only 100 miles ( 160 km ) from Richmond , allowing Hawes to travel easily to the Confederate capital for audiences with President Davis . Records show that as late as September 16 , 1864 , Hawes still maintained hope for another military advance into Kentucky . In the summer of 1864 , Colonel R. A. Alston of the Ninth Tennessee Cavalry requested Governor Hawes 's assistance in investigating crimes allegedly committed by General John Hunt Morgan during his unauthorized raid into Kentucky . Hawes never had to act on the request , however , as Morgan was suspended from command on August 10 and killed by Union troops on September 4 , 1864 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Hawes remained at Nelly 's Ford until May 1865 . Finally satisfied that it was safe to return to Kentucky , Hawes arrived in Paris to find his home had been burned by Union troops . Four of Hawes 's sons served in the Confederate Army , including brigadier general James Morrison Hawes ; only three sons returned home from the war . [ b ] On September 18 , 1865 , Hawes took an oath of allegiance to the United States , and was allowed to return to his previous career as a lawyer . 
 In 1866 , he was elected county judge of Bourbon County . His most notable ruling in this capacity was to nullify the apprenticeship contracts of the Freedmen 's Bureau in Kentucky . Hawes based this decision on the fact that the Bureau 's powers extended only to states that had been part of the rebellion , which Kentucky had not . Hawes was also chosen master commissioner of the circuit court in 1866 . In 1871 , Hawes was mentioned as a possible candidate for governor of Kentucky . In 1876 , he helped frame his party 's response to the disputed Hayes – Tilden presidential election . Hawes died in Paris , Kentucky on May 25 , 1877 and was interred in Paris Cemetery . 
 = Hearts and Souls = 
 " Hearts and Souls " is the fifth episode of the sixth season and 115th overall of the American crime drama NYPD Blue . " Hearts and Souls " originally aired in the United States on ABC on Tuesday November 24 , 1998 , at 9 : 30 pm Eastern time as a 90 @-@ minute special . The episode was directed by Paris Barclay and written by Steven Bochco , David Milch , Bill Clark and Nicholas Wootton . It was the culmination of months of public speculation on the method of closure that would be employed to write Jimmy Smits 's critically acclaimed Bobby Simone character out of the regular cast and clear the way for Smits ' replacement , Rick Schroder . " Hearts and Souls " was a critical and commercial success , achieving both high ratings and positive critical feedback and is now regarded as one of the greatest television episodes in television history . It marked the second high @-@ profile replacement of the partner for lead character , Detective Andy Sipowicz , played by Dennis Franz . 
 At the 51st Primetime Emmy Awards , this episode won awards for Direction for Paris Barclay and Guest Actress for Debra Monk as well as a nominations in Writing for Steven Bochco , David Milch , Bill Clark and Nicholas Wootton . Barclay also won a Directors Guild of America Award . The episode also won an Eddie Award and a Banff Rockie Award as well as a Cinema Audio Society Award nomination . 
 This was Smits ' last regular appearance as Simone , although he returned for one scene in an episode during the twelfth season . The episode highlights his rapid and mysterious physical demise , which has culminated in his need for a heart transplant . Many emotional portrayals are included to represent the feelings of loved ones , friends and colleagues when someone that they care about is suddenly in dire medical need . In another storyline , the episode simultaneously highlights the stress that can be caused when alcoholism afflicts a family through a critically acclaimed guest appearance by Debra Monk as the ex @-@ wife of Sipowicz . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a special five @-@ minute extended " Previously on NYPD Blue " segment that retraces Simone 's ( Jimmy Smits ) whole character history . The final portion of the <unk> presents Lt. Arthur Fancy 's ( James McDaniel ) prior episode persuasion of a police widow to directly donate her husband 's heart to give Simone a chance to live . The regular portion of the episode begins after the completed heart transplant . The episode focuses on whether Simone 's heart transplant was successful . It starts ten days after the heart transplant with his anticipated hospital release . Simone 's recovery is hampered by an internal chest infection , which leaves him weakened . The doctors attempt diagnosis of the infection and weakness , which appear to be minor , with tests . Tensions run high in the department from almost the beginning of the episode . Greg Medavoy ( Gordon Clapp ) has a scene where his verbal aggression with a citizen complainant provides a respite and represents the frustration and helplessness of Simone 's friends and colleagues . James Martinez ' ( Nicholas Turturro ) generally good manners are also tested . Sipowicz displays deep emotions to his wife ADA Sylvia Costas ( Sharon Lawrence ) . The doctors differ in their opinions of which treatment to use . One advises Simone and wife Diane Russell ( Kim Delaney ) to pursue surgery , while another advises natural progression . Sipowicz 's ( Dennis Franz ) ex @-@ wife Katie ( Debra Monk ) catches him <unk> by appearing at the station drunk and asking for his help . She is preparing a pro se defense against DWI charges , but when Sipowicz is about to respond with assistance , she slips away . The personal turmoil drags him away from his compassionate watch . When he is distracted , Simone 's health deteriorates to the point where his demise seems imminent . Dr. Carreras suggests ending the suffering , while Dr. Swan disagrees , but Carreras believes his sentiment is masking office politics that govern how statistics are attributed to various departments . Russell is conflicted on which doctor to take advice from . Sipowicz manages his wife 's crisis by negotiating agreed Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . After Simone receives his last rites , his colleagues say their goodbyes , while Simone dreams aloud of his mentor Patsy <unk> . In Simone 's waking dream , Patsy acts as a medium , helping Simone transition out of life . In the end , with his wife Russell by his side , Simone fades away , and the screen fades to white ( as opposed to black ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After one season on NYPD Blue , David Caruso decided to leave his role as Detective John Kelly and pursue a movie career when he was unable to secure a salary increase from $ 80 @,@ 000 ( US $ 127 @,@ 723 in 2016 dollars ) per episode to $ 100 @,@ 000 ( US $ 159 @,@ 654 ) . At the time , Caruso had a pending Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series nomination for the 46th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1994 . Meanwhile , ABC was enduring the odd combination of high ratings , high critical praise and largescale network affiliate boycotts of its breakthrough use of nudity and profanity on public television that forced it to offer discounted advertising rates in spite of its success . Smits , who had left his Emmy Award @-@ winning role as Victor <unk> on L.A. Law in 1991 , was signed as a replacement on August 18 , 1994 . Caruso would continue in his role for the first four episodes of the second season , and Smits replaced him in a new role in episode 5 in November . Smits originally hoped to sign with the show for three years , while ABC sought a more standard five @-@ year contract . 
 In April 1998 , toward the end of the fifth season , Smits told Liz Smith that he would only perform in a handful of episodes in the sixth season in order to smoothly transition his character 's departure . Smits declined interviews and made a written statement , but show creator Steven Bochco noted that Smits had come to the decision several weeks before he announced it . Smits earned five consecutive Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series nominations as well as three nominations for Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama for the Simone role . Smits , who earned the Golden Globe Award at the 53rd Golden Globe Awards in 1996 for the role , stated that " I accomplished what I sought to do - to prove I can act - and now it 's time to seek another course . " 
 In mid @-@ June 1998 , rumors surfaced that Rick Schroder would replace Smits . The following week , Schroder was officially announced as the replacement . By late September , the buildup the Smits ' departure was set to commence with the first episode of season 6 , on October 20 . On October 7 , ABC announced that Smits would be stabbed in the opening episode of the season . The week before the season premiere , Mark Tinker revealed that Smits would be written out in the fifth episode of the season and Schroder would enter in the subsequent episode . Bochco revealed that National Enquirer and other gossip tabloids had offered to pay for details about the storyline . The five @-@ week story arc was scheduled so that the final three weeks were in the November sweeps with Schroder 's debut marking the final week of the sweeps . When the network decided to pre @-@ empt the show on Election Night ( November 3 ) , the final episode was moved back to the second last night of sweeps . 
 The first week stabbing was regarded as similar to the Murder of Jonathan Levin . ABC sent the media the first two episodes prior to the season 6 premiere . In the first episode , Smits is both stabbed and inadvertently cut by his dentist . Based on the first two episodes , Dave Matheny and Neal Justin of the Star Tribune determined that Simone would endure a worsening mysterious illness . In the third episode of the arc , Smits was hospitalized and in need of a heart transplant . The fourth episode was a buildup to impending heart surgery as he struggles with cardiomyopathy . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In April , Bochco stated that he did not intend to kill off Smits ' character , Simone . On L.A. Law , Smits had returned to the show for critically acclaimed guest appearances during sweeps episodes after leaving his regular role . Whether Smits ' character would overlap with Schroder 's character on screen was undetermined when Schroder was announced in June , but at the time Season 6 production was scheduled to commence on August 10 , 1998 . As of mid @-@ July , Smits ' departing episode was not scheduled to film until September . 
 On the eve of the season 6 premiere , NYPD Blue executives assured the public that Smits ' storyline would not be irreversible . However , this led to doubt among critics who did not feel it was possible to have a sensible storyline that retained the services of Kim Delaney in the role of Simone 's wife Detective Diane Russell . A humorous piece in Newsweek described the general consensus as " He 's gonna die . He looks like he 's dying ... If he dies , it 's easy to keep his wife ( played by Kim Delaney ) on the show . " In addition , his castmates noted that their characters would grieve . However , some sources , such as National Public Radio 's Noah Adams and Robert Siegel , read into the fact that " Network publicity speaks of Simone 's departure , not his demise ... " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In late August , Schroder participated in a New York City Police Department ride @-@ a @-@ long to prepare for his role . Season 6 production began the week of September 5 . David Milch , who had had multiple <unk> influenced the storyline so that it would represent " the alienation and disempowerment that almost everyone feels in a hospital , without demonizing the hospital " . Milch employed his brother , who is a doctor , as a consultant . He explained to his hometown newspaper , The Buffalo News , that the five @-@ story arc was chosen because a surprise event would not have worked in this media age with the audience 's expectation of the character 's departure . According to Kim Delaney , during the filming of this episode the cast was repeatedly breaking down emotionally as if they were experiencing a personal death in the family . 
 The 90 @-@ minute special extended into the Sports Night time slot that preceded NYPD Blue during the 1998 – 99 United States network television season . Smits appeared in the November 9 , 2004 " The Vision Thing " episode in his only return guest performance . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jimmy Smits as Det . Bobby Simone 
 Dennis Franz as Det . Andy Sipowicz 
 James McDaniel as Lt. Arthur Fancy 
 Nicholas Turturro as Det . James Martinez 
 Sharon Lawrence as <unk> Sylvia Costas 
 Gordon Clapp as Det . Greg Medavoy 
 Kim Delaney as Det . Diane Russell 
 Andrea Thompson as Det . Jill <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards and ratings = = = 
 In 2009 , TV Guide created TV Guide 's 100 Greatest Episodes of All @-@ Time , with this episode ranked number 30 . Ron Epstein of Variety named it as the best of the 261 episodes of the series on March 1 , 2005 on the day of the series ' final episode . Director Paris Barclay won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series and a Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing - Drama Series for his work in this episode . Debra Monk won Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series for this episode . Jane Kass won an American Cinema Editors Eddie Award in the category Best Edited One @-@ Hour Series for Television for this episode . Steven Bochco Productions won a Banff Rockie Award for the Best Continuing Series at the Banff Television Festival for this episode . Elmo <unk> ( re @-@ recording mixer ) , J. Stanley Johnston ( re @-@ recording mixer ) and Joe Kenworthy ( production mixer ) were nominated for a Cinema Audio Society Award for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Television Series . Steven Bochco , David Milch , Bill Clark and Nicholas Wootton were nominated for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for the episode , while the other four nominees in the category were episodes of The Sopranos . 
 The episode finished second to 60 Minutes ( 23 @.@ 56 million ) for the week ending November 29 with a Nielsen Media Research estimated viewership of 22 @.@ 10 million . It was the largest overall viewership in three years for the series and the best 18 @-@ 49 demographic rating in two years . 
 = = = Critical commentary = = = 
 = = = = Buildup = = = = 
 Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe noted that the buildup to the finale added intrigue at the cost of cliche . John Levesque of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer said " the whole six @-@ episode arc strikes me as a B or B @-@ minus effort that got bogged down in one character and gave us all @-@ too @-@ familiar subplots that were lacking in imagination . " Phil Rosenthal of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times described the arc as a " lingering exit " . Associated Press Television critic Frazier Moore found the entire story arc to be " a dramatic and fitting farewell for the character - and a proud performance by Smits " . The Buffalo News describes the arc as " a brilliant five @-@ episode story line " . 
 = = = = Episode = = = = 
 Dusty Saunders of Rocky Mountain News described the farewell episode as " Unforgettable " , praising several acting performances . Of Simone ( Smits ) , he described his performance as " spellbinding " noting his " Particularly effective " and metaphorical scenes with his pigeons in addition to saying " Smits is not the first TV actor to portray a character , lying in bed , facing death . Such scenes are as common as headache relief commercials . However , Smits ' compassionate portrayal is as realistic as weekly TV drama gets . " He described Russell ( Delaney ) as " ... superb Tuesday night , displaying both helpless agony and feisty determination . " Although he praised her role as a wife , he noted that as a detective her dealings with her partner Det . Jill <unk> ( Andrea Thompson ) were cliched . He noted that Greg Medavoy 's ( Gordon Clapp ) " ... frustration epitomizes the concern of the precinct crew as it monitors Bobby 's Simone 's battle for life . " He noted that Sipowicz ' ( Franz ) storyline with his first wife , Katie ( Monk ) " ... provides a needed diversion from the hospital room drama . " 
 Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer 's Levesque claimed the finale had its ups and downs . He describes the Sipowicz subplot as the only " viable " one in the episode , stating that Monk 's performance had " a frantic loneliness that almost brings the show back to its dark , gritty @-@ streets realism " . He claims this performance is tempered by the dramatic , but unrealistic " overwrought behavior " of Simone 's fretful colleagues . He summarized the episode as " well written ( by Nicholas Wootton ) and generally well acted , with several characters having to experience a range of emotions " , but was most disappointed in Delaney 's performance as Russell . 
 The Chicago Sun @-@ Times 's Rosenthal described the episode as " wrenching " and a " powerful piece " . He says the focus of the episode is whether Simone 's transplant took and that the episode downplayed <unk> , while highlighting the interpersonal . He noted that the performance made Simone an Emmy Award favorite . He notes that a lot of emotions are displayed by Simone 's colleagues and that the episode also has a meaningful secondary storyline in which Sipowicz shows volatility in the face of " Simone 's uncertain health and the reappearance of his alcoholic ex @-@ wife " . Kevin Newman of ABC 's Good Morning America described the finale as " very touching " and noted that Smits , himself , claimed to have warned his own mother not to watch because it would be " too emotional " . The Associated Press ' Moore described the episode as " moving " . 
 Immediately before the finale , The Boston Globe 's Gilbert praised the episode as " one of the series ' most memorable " and " a highly emotional and yet restrained 90 minutes , with a satisfying resolution " . He describes the special introduction as " a nice touch " . He commends the writers for focusing the episode on " medical themes " rather than " crime investigation " . He praises Delaney 's performance over a range of emotions . He describes Monk 's Katie Sipowicz " a prisoner of grief for their late son " . He notes that Smits ends his NYPD Blue tenure with " grace and power " . 
 The Buffalo News describes the finale as a " heart @-@ pounding resolution " , noting that the final moment between Sipowicz and Simone was " also emotional despite its simplicity " . They note that the medical ethics consideration outdoes ER . They note that the " acting is uniformly excellent " , praising Smits in particular for conveying emotion without much dialogue as well as Delaney for " capturing Diane 's anxiety and heartache " . They praise the pigeon scenes ' ability to complement to the symbolic achievement of the episode that lives up to its billing . 
 Monica Collins of the Boston Herald said the episode " lives up to the hype " with " high melodrama " that offset " graceful , gutsy storytelling " . She lauded the script , which delved into " the politics of medicine " . The episode demonstrates the emotions of several relationships . Sipowicz endured <unk> suffering due to the friendship that had grown beyond his imagination , while his ex @-@ wife needed his emotional support and connections regarding her legal situation . He says Delaney had " an incredible performance " as " a perfect picture of pain and panic " , while Smits " ... goes out with dignity , with a performance that 's all heart ... " 
 = Havørn Accident = 
 The Havørn Accident ( Norwegian : Havørn @-@ ulykken ) was a controlled flight into terrain of a Junkers Ju 52 aircraft into the mountain <unk> in <unk> , Norway on 16 June 1936 at 07 : 00 . The aircraft , operated by Norwegian Air Lines , was en route from Bergen to Tromsø . The pilots were unaware that they were flying a parallel to the planned course , 15 to 20 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 3 to 12 @.@ 4 mi ) further east . The crew of four and three passengers were all killed in what was the first fatal aviation accident in Norway . The aircraft landed on a shelf on the mountain face . A first expedition found four bodies , but attempts to reach the shelf with the main part of the aircraft and three more bodies failed . A second party was sent out two days later , coordinated by Bernt Balchen and led by Boye Schlytter and Henning Tønsberg , saw the successful salvage of the remaining bodies . 
 = = Accident = = 
 The air service between Bergen and Tromsø was started by Norwegian Air Lines on 7 June 1936 . It was operated with Havørn , a Junkers Ju 52 , registration LN @-@ <unk> , which had been bought from Deutsche Lufthansa . On 16 June 1936 at 06 : 30 Central European Time , the flight departed from the water aerodrome in <unk> , Bergen . On board was a crew of four and three passengers , and a load of 13 bags of 50 kilograms ( 110 lb ) of post . 
 The aircraft 's captain was <unk> Pentz Smith . Aged 27 , he had started flying for the Norwegian Army Air Service in 1930 , and later become a civilian pilot for Widerøe . He was considered one of the country 's most renowned pilots and was active with competition flights . He was assisted by First Officer Erik Storm , aged 32 , who had a background from the Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service . The reserve pilot was Peter Ruth <unk> , aged 21 , and the radio operator was Per Erling Hegle , aged 28 and a trained mechanic . All four had been chosen to regularly fly the Bergen – Tromsø route . The three passengers were Inspector Sven <unk> <unk> , Consul Wilhelm Andreas <unk> Dall and journalist Harald <unk> of Bergens Tidende . 
 The weather report , which had been delivered orally by meteorologist @-@ on @-@ duty of the Forecasting Division of Western Norway at the airport , stated wind from southeast at 5 to 15 kilometers per hour ( 3 to 9 mph ) , overcast and clouds down to 200 meters ( 700 ft ) , although it could be even lower certain places . The visibility was 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . The last radio contact between the aircraft and the airport in Bergen was at 06 : 54 , when Hegle reported clouds at 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 meters ( 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 ft ) elevation and between 4 and 10 kilometers ( 2 and 6 mi ) visibility . He reported that the aircraft held a course towards <unk> , which was procedure during such weather conditions , and that the aircraft was south of <unk> . 
 However , the aircraft was not where the pilots thought it was — instead it was 15 to 20 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 3 to 12 @.@ 4 mi ) further east . Eyewitnesses reported that after it had crossed Sognefjorden , it had changed course westward and started to ascend . At 07 : 00 , a loud crash was heard , although there were no eyewitnesses to the crash itself . The aircraft had followed a parallel , but more eastern , course and had hit <unk> , a mountain rising up from <unk> , at 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) above mean sea level . The aircraft caught fire and was highly visible from the surrounding area . Parts of the aircraft fell to the foot of the mountain , and the wreckage was scattered across the base of the mountain . The controlled flight into terrain was the first fatal aviation accident in Norway . 
 = = Salvage and investigation = = 
 Several locals rushed to the foot of the mountain , and at 08 : 30 , Sheriff Kaare Bredvik arrived at the scene . Two corpses were found immediately , but were so scorched that they could not be identified until at hospital . There were rumors of survivors as movement had been spotted on the mountain side . Bredvik had difficulty communicating with his superiors in Sogn Police District , and had to contact them via Bergen . From there , the press was also alerted , and several locals became ad hoc correspondents . The home of Deputy Mayor Hans A. <unk> was used as a base of operations . However , searching was made difficult by the lack of any radio connection at the foot of the hill . Eventually a " shouting relay " was created , allowing messages to be sent effectively . A party of experienced mountaineers , who had many times succeeded at getting sheep down from shelves , attempted to reach the wreck , which was located on a shelf 100 meters ( 300 ft ) above the foot . Despite three attempts the first day , they did not succeed at reaching the aircraft . 
 Chief of Police Alf <unk> arrived in the afternoon and took over responsibility . Later , the ship Mira , belonging to Bergen Steamship Company ( BSD ) , arrived with two doctors , two nurses , material from the Red Cross , specialist police officers , fire fighters , representatives from the airline and Norway Post , and journalists . The sister aircraft <unk> arrived later in the afternoon with relatives of the deceased and journalists ; its main objective was to search for survivors , but there was no possibility for it to land on the mountain and so could not help with the salvaging . Later a Widerøe aircraft arrived as well , which transported DNL 's technical director Bernt Balchen , Captain <unk> , who worked for the aviation authorities , and <unk> from the insurance company . The three , along with <unk> and Bredvik , became the investigation commission . 
 After Balchen had investigated the accident site from the plane , a party of five climbers started at 18 : 00 to climb the mountain side . When they reached the shelf , they found two bodies , a large amount of post and parts from the plane , including a wing . The bodies were sent down the mountain side . They then attempted to climb further up to the main wreck where the last three bodies were presumed to be , but this was deemed too dangerous by Balchen , and the operation terminated . Mira returned to Bergen at 02 : 00 . The following day , four people attempted to climb down the mountain face to reach the wreck . Magnus <unk> was lowered 50 meters ( 160 ft ) , but it was impossible to descend the remaining 70 to 80 meters ( 230 to 260 ft ) . Balchen concluded that it was impossible to reach the aircraft , and returned to Oslo the same afternoon . 
 However , the locals were determined to reach the aircraft : Magnus <unk> , along with Robert and Bernt Porten , who along with two others descended a further 30 meters ( 100 ft ) . Although they were able to salvage two post bags , they were not able to reach the wreck . The operation took ten hours . From then , the police stationed an officer at the top of the mountain , both to hinder theft and to enforce a climbing ban . 
 In a letter to the editor in Aftenposten on 17 June , submitted by Robert M. Steen , it was suggested that reaching the ledge would be a suitable challenge for the mountaineering association Norsk <unk> . The newspaper contacted the club , and offered to cover all expenses . The club sent Boye Schlytter and Henning Tønsberg to Bergen , where they joined forces with police officer Hermann Heggenes and photographer and firefighter Alf <unk> . The expedition was led by Balchen , arriving with the BSD vessel Vulcanus . Arne Næss , Jr. had just used bolts to climb the Dolomites , and these had been lent to Tønsberg . As such , it was the first time bolts were used for climbing in Norway . 
 They started the ascent at 19 : 00 and reached the first shelf about two hours later . Here , a field radio was stationed . Later the same evening , they reached the main shelf where the aircraft body lay . Although finding the remaining bodies , the team only salvaged some post , concluding that it would be too difficult for them to take down the bodies . They were down again at 01 : 30 . At 10 : 00 on 20 June , the team again ascended the mountain . Bernt Porten climbed halfway up at least a dozen times , taking water up and bringing down bodies wrapped in tarpaulin . All three bodies and the climbers were down again at 21 : 00 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The airline offered compensation to the locals , but this was rejected in a letter date 27 June , in which the locals collectively stated that they were just happy to help . In a Council of State on 21 August , Schlytter , Tønsberg , Robert Porten and Heggenes were awarded the Medal for Heroic Deeds . The medals were presented in a ceremony at Hotel Continental , Oslo some days later . 
 In early 1937 , news surfaced that the widow and father of Erik Storm filed a lawsuit against the Norwegian Air Lines . The father , Major B. Storm , stated that his goal was " rehabilitation of my son as well as compensation " . The family had received NOK 45 @,@ 000 of insurance money , but reportedly wanted more , and also desired to have the airline take the responsibility for the accident . The family sent a formal petition to the Parliament of Norway asking for further accident investigation , but after acquiring statements from the Chief of Police of Sogn and the <unk> and cycling the case through Ministry of Defence , the Parliament declared that no action should be taken . In addition , the lawsuit was dropped , after the airline reached an " agreement " with Storm 's family , and had a letter publicly printed in which Storm was cleared of all responsibility for the accident . 
 On 23 May 1937 , a group of four climbers descended the face on a different route and were able to find a golden ring and a golden watch , which they sent to the airline . The found some body parts which they offered to recover for 500 Norwegian krone , but this was rejected . Heggenes stated that these were parts which had been buried by the previous expedition . 
 To replace the aircraft , DNL bought another Ju @-@ 52 , named <unk> , used from Lufthansa . Parts from the wreck are on display at <unk> Museum , Sola . On 14 June 2008 , a memorial was erected halfway up the mountain , with 200 people attending the ceremony . 
 = 2001 German Grand Prix = 
 The 2001 German Grand Prix ( formally the <unk> Großer Mobil 1 Preis von Deutschland ) was a Formula One motor race held on 29 July 2001 at the Hockenheimring , Baden @-@ Württemberg , Germany . It was the twelfth round of the 2001 Formula One season and the 63rd German Grand Prix . The 45 @-@ lap race was won by Williams driver Ralf Schumacher after starting from the second position . Rubens Barrichello finished second for Ferrari with BAR driver Jacques Villeneuve third . 
 Juan Pablo Montoya started from pole position alongside Ralf Schumacher . Michael Schumacher , the eventual Drivers ' Champion started fourth , behind Mika Häkkinen of McLaren . The race was marked by an airborne accident going into the first corner involving Michael Schumacher and Luciano Burti for Prost , which caused the track to be scattered with shreds of carbon fibre and the race restarted as a result . Both Williams drivers retained their positions at the end of the first lap , with Michael Schumacher passing Häkkinen for third . Over the course of the race , Montoya extended a considerable lead over Ralf Schumacher . Montoya lost the lead on lap 24 when an issue with a refulling rig caused him to be stationary for more than 20 seconds . Ralf Schumacher thus inherited the lead and held it to win his third victory of the season . 
 As a consequence of the race , Michael Schumacher retained his points advantage in the Drivers ' Championship over nearest rival David Coulthard as both drivers retired from the event . Ralf Schumacher moved ahead of Barrichello to take over third position . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari retained their lead , while Williams reduced the deficit to McLaren by ten points , with five races of the season remaining . This was the last Grand Prix to be held on the former Hockenheimring circuit ; the race was held on a shorter reconfigured track from 2002 . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were Ferrari , McLaren , Williams , Benetton , BAR , Jordan , Arrows , Sauber , Jaguar , Minardi and Prost . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 84 points , ahead of David Coulthard on 47 points and Rubens Barrichello with 34 points . Ralf Schumacher was fourth on 31 points , and Mika Häkkinen was fifth on 19 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 118 points , forty @-@ eight ahead of second place team McLaren . Williams were third on 46 points , while Sauber with 19 points , and Jordan on 15 points contended for fourth place . Ferrari , McLaren and Williams had so far secured all eleven victories of the season . Championship drivers Barrichello and Juan Pablo Montoya had secured second place podium finishes , while Nick Heidfeld , Jacques Villeneuve and Eddie Irvine had all achieved third place podium finishes . 
 After the British Grand Prix on 15 July , eight teams conducted mid @-@ season testing at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza between 17 – 20 July to prepare for the upcoming German Grand Prix at the Hockenheimring . Ricardo Zonta set the fastest times on the first day , ahead of McLaren test driver Alexander Wurz . Michael Schumacher lost control of the rear @-@ end of his car at the Seconda Variante chicane , causing him to slide along the barriers and his car rested in the tyre barriers . Testing was suspended for one hour for the barriers to be repaired . Ferrari later found the crash occurred by a broken diffuser from riding on the kerbs which created a loss of downforce under braking . Michael Schumacher took a medical check and was declared fit to race . Ralf Schumacher was fastest on the second day where it was held in wet weather conditions during the afternoon . Sauber and BAR went to Circuit Ricardo Tormo for three days where <unk> and set @-@ up testing was undertaken . Coulthard was scheduled to join Wurz during the session but withdrew because of food poisoning . Irvine was quickest on the third and final days of testing . Arrows elected not to perform any testing and concentrated on work on aerodynamics at their headquarters at Leafield . 
 There was one driver change heading into the race . Having been in one of the Jordan cars since the first race of the season in Australia , Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen was sacked by his team and was replaced by Jordan 's third driver Zonta . Frentzen announced he would take legal action against Jordan and team principal Eddie Jordan said that Frentzen 's management was not happy with Jordan 's current performance but denied rumours that a heated row occurred . The Schumacher brothers were <unk> towards Frentzen who felt unhappy about the manner in which he was sacked . Irvine came to Jordan 's defence and said that he believed the decision was influenced by problems Jordan had with 1996 World Champion Damon Hill who had similar poor performances like Frentzen . In an interview with The Sunday Independent in 2005 , Jordan later claimed that Frentzen was sacked because engine supplier Honda wanted Japanese driver Takuma Sato to race for Jordan in 2002 and to retain Honda 's engine supply . During the week of the race , the organisers of the German Grand Prix signed an extension to continue hosting the event at the Hockenheimring until 2008 with an option for a further five years . 
 Some teams made modifications to their cars in preparation for the Grand Prix . Williams , Jaguar , Ferrari , Sauber and Prost all brought updated front wings . Ferrari also introduced a new underfloor and brought more powerful versions of their V10 engines for qualifying and the race . Williams installed extra cooling on their cars to combat high temperatures in qualifying . Minardi planned to introduce a new revision to their cars aerodynamic package which included a new engine cover , a titanium gearbox and rear suspension geometry . The team decided to only test the gearbox during the first free practice session . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday practice sessions were held in dry and hot weather conditions . Barrichello set the fastest time in the first practice session , a 1 : 41 @.@ 953 , which was three @-@ tenths of a second quicker than Pedro de la Rosa of Arrows . Coulthard was third fastest despite going off the circuit at the Clark chicane . Michael Schumacher went off at the Senna chicane en route to recording the fourth quickest lap , ahead of Ralf Schumacher . Häkkinen , Montoya , Irvine , Giancarlo Fisichella and Jarno Trulli rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session . In the second practice session , Irvine was running quicker by setting the fastest time of the day of 1 : 41 @.@ 424 , ahead of Montoya in second . Häkkinen was third quickest , in front of Barrichello in fourth . Michael Schumacher took fifth place , running wide at the circuit 's chicanes which prevented him from setting a quicker lap. de la Rosa , Coulthard , Jean Alesi , Trulli and Ralf Schumacher , who collided with the tyre barrier at the <unk> corner , followed in the top ten . 
 The weather remained hot and dry for the Saturday practice sessions . Michael Schumacher was the quickest driver in the third practice session , with a time of 1 : 39 @.@ 937 . Barrichello was second quickest , almost half a second slower than Michael Schumacher . The two Williams drivers were third and fourth ; Ralf Schumacher ahead of Montoya . Coulthard secured the fifth fastest time , two @-@ tenths of a second faster than teammate Häkkinen in sixth . Heidfeld , Villeneuve , Irvine and Kimi Räikkönen rounded out the top ten . Benetton driver Jenson Button did not set a time . In the final practice session , Ralf Schumacher was the quickest driver with a lap of 1 : 39 @.@ 188 , almost three @-@ tenths of a second ahead of Montoya . Michael Schumacher was unable to improve his time from the previous session and was third fastest . He was ahead of Häkkinen in fourth , Heidfeld in fifth and Barrichello in sixth . Irvine was seventh with Panis in eighth . Coulthard , who beached his McLaren in the gravel trap at Agip corner , took ninth and Trulli completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry and hot weather conditions ; the air temperature ranged between 30 and 33 ° C ( 86 and 91 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 34 and 41 ° C ( 93 and 106 ° F ) . Montoya clinched his first pole position of his Formula One career , with a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 117 . Although he was pleased with his starting position , he was surprised at his team 's performance in qualifying ; Montoya lost two tenths of a second in the second sector and found time in the stadium section . He was joined on the front row of the grid by teammate Ralf Schumacher who recorded a lap 0 @.@ 019 seconds slower than Montoya who displaced Schumacher from pole during the middle of qualifying . It marked the first time since the 1997 British Grand Prix that both Williams cars started on the front row . Häkkinen qualified third and praised the handling of his car for his good performance . Michael Schumacher secured fourth and was disappointed not to be ahead of the two McLarens . Coulthard started fifth having suffered from <unk> on his tyres and conserved his tyre use by abandoning his final qualifying run . Barrichello managed sixth having been unable to improve his time because of a spin . Behind the leading six , the two Sauber cars were seventh and eighth , Heidfeld qualifying in front of Räikkönen , with both drivers having their cars modified helping them to run faster ( Heidfeld adjusted his set @-@ up while Räikkönen raised his ride height for his third run ) . 
 De la Rosa and Irvine qualified in ninth and eleventh positions respectively for Jaguar ; the pair were separated by Trulli in the Jordan who 's engine failed on his third run and was unable to return to the pit lane to use his team 's spare car . The three drivers were ahead of Villeneuve in the faster of the two BAR 's , who in turn , qualified in front of teammate Panis ; both drivers struggled to find grip throughout the one @-@ hour period . Alesi qualified in 14th position , more than four tenths of a second in front of Prost teammate Luciano Burti ; the latter spun off in the circuit 's stadium section which caused a yellow flag to be shown . The two were split by Zonta in the slower Jordan car who rode a kerb at the Senna chicane on his third run of the session which lost him time and he encountered traffic . The Benetton cars filled the ninth row of the grid with Fisichella 17th and Button 18th ; the latter 's car had a change of gearbox and pulled to the side of the track with an expired engine . Behind them , the Arrows drivers managed to qualify in 18th and 19th ; Enrique Bernoldi qualifying ahead of Jos Verstappen . Bernoldi improved his car 's handling although his potential best run was disrupted because of Button 's engine failure and Verstappen spun on his final timed lap . The times were completed by Fernando Alonso and <unk> Marques in the Minardis . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 ; 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in dry weather conditions . Both Williams drivers maintained their good place from qualifying ; Ralf Schumacher had the fastest time , 1 : 42 @.@ 621 . Montoya finished with the second fastest time . Coulthard was third quickest , and Michael Schumacher completed the top four , one @-@ tenth of a second behind Ralf Schumacher . Alonso spun at the <unk> corner and skated across the gravel trap towards the tyre barriers . 
 The weather conditions on the grid were dry before the race ; the air temperature was 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) and the track temperature 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) . The race started at 14 : 00 local time . A total of approximately 100 @,@ 000 spectators attended the race . As the drivers were preparing to start the formation lap , both Minardis were in the pit lane due to technical difficulties . Both Alonso and Marques initially started from the pit lane . Both Williams drivers maintained first and second positions going into the first corner . Further back , Michael Schumacher slowed with an issue with his gear selection , which resulted in drivers being forced to swerve to avoid him . Burti was unable to view the Ferrari as Panis was blocking his view and hit the rear of Schumacher 's car , launching Burti into the air and he rolled over the top on Bernoldi 's car and narrowly landed on Verstappen 's Arrows . Burti 's car lost one of its wheels , landing of Bernoldi 's Arrows which resulted in a broken engine cover and rear wing for Bernoldi . Burti 's car bounced across the gravel trap and came to a rest on the tyre barriers at <unk> corner . The race was red @-@ flagged as strands of carbon fibre were scattered across the track and marshals were needed to clear the debris . 
 Burti and Michael Schumacher cars had been damaged beyond repair , both were thus required to race their team 's spare cars . The Minardi cars were able to undergo further repairs and both drivers were able to start on the grid for the restart . Barrichello 's rear wing was replaced after Häkkinen made contact with him , for which the McLaren driver apologised . At the restart , Montoya and Ralf Schumacher again held their positions , while Häkkinen led the Ferraris and his teammate Coulthard going into the first corner . Further down the field , de la Rosa lost control of his Jaguar as he braked late going into the entry to the Clark chicane and hit the Sauber of Heidfeld . Michael Schumacher clinched third place from Häkkinen heading into the same area . Going into the stadium section , Barrichello passed Coulthard on the outside for fifth position . Verstappen made the best start of the field , moving from 20th to eleventh by the end of the first lap , while Button made up five positions over the same distance . As the drivers completed the first lap , Montoya led by 1 @.@ 4 seconds from Ralf Schumacher , who was followed in turn by Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Barrichello , Coulthard , Räikkönen , Irvine , Trulli , Villeneuve , Verstappen , Zonta , Button , Panis , Bernoldi , Fisichella , Burti , Alesi , Alonso and Marques . 
 Montoya began to gradually pull away from Ralf Schumacher . Bernoldi passed Fisichella to take 14th place on lap two . Barrichello overtook Häkkinen at the <unk> corner to move into third one lap later . Further down the field , Button lost 13th position when he was passed by Panis on the same lap . On lap five , Panis made up a further position as he overtook Zonta for twelfth , while Bernoldi passed Button to take 14th . Barrichello moved into second position after he overtook Michael Schumacher at the Senna chicane on lap six . On the same lap , Zonta went into the rear of Verstappen 's car , causing the Jordan driver to lose his front wing . Verstappen fell behind Panis after the collision . Zonta made a pit stop for repairs , but retired after driving one exploratory lap . Verstappen made his pit stop and rejoined at the back of the field . Alesi passed Burti to move into 15th position on lap nine , and Panis overtook teammate Villeneuve for tenth place one lap later . On the tenth lap , Panis attempted to overtake Trulli for ninth by taking the inside line , but was unable to complete the manoveure . Panis again tried to pass Trulli but by taking the outside line on the next lap , although he could not <unk> the pass because of a lack of straightline speed . During the twelfth lap , Panis made his third attempt at passing Trulli and managed to get ahead of the Italian . Trulli pulled into the slipstream of Panis , and attempted to reclaim the position but spun at the <unk> corner , and fell to 17th . 
 Häkkinen retired from the race when he slowed and later pulled to the side of the track with fluid leaking from his engine on lap 14 . His retirement allowed Räikkonen to move into the first points @-@ scoring position of sixth . By lap 15 , Montoya had a lead of 8 @.@ 3 seconds over Ralf Schumacher , who in turn was 3 @.@ 3 seconds in front of Barrichello . Michael Schumacher was a further 9 @.@ 2 seconds behind his Ferrari teammate , but was drawing ahead of Coulthard in fifth . Barrichello and Panis were the first drivers to make scheduled pit stops on lap 16 . The Ferrari and Williams teams were employing different pit stop strategies – the Ferrari were planning a two stop strategy for Barrichello whereas the Williams team were only planning for one stop . Räikkonen slowed on track with an driveshaft failure but managed to return to the pit lane and retire on the same lap , while Irvine retired with an misfiring engine . Two laps later , Burti lost tenth position after he spun and was passed by Trulli and Panis . Barrichello attempted to get past Coulthard for fourth position on lap 19 , but Coulthard moved onto a defensive line to keep the position . Montoya continued to pull away from Ralf Schumacher — setting the race 's fastest lap of 1 : 41 @.@ 808 on lap 20 — to maintain his first position after his one and only pit stop . Barrichello was able to overtake Coulthard at the Agip corner on the same lap . 
 Montoya made his top on lap 22 . However , his pit stop proved problematic : the signal lights at his pit box stopped working , causing the Williams refuller to switch to the fuel rig for Ralf Schumacher and Montoya remained stationary for 20 seconds longer than usual . Montoya was also fuelled for longer than his team planned . Ralf Schumacher thus inherited the lead with Michael Schumacher behind him and Montoya re @-@ emerged in fourth place . One lap later , Michael Schumacher took his pit stop and he came out with a fuel pressure problem which meant he pulled to the side of the main straight and retired . Burti spun off and beached his car in the gravel trap at <unk> on the same lap . Ralf Schumacher made his pit stop on lap 24 and rejoined with a 10 @-@ second advantage . Villeneuve , Button and Alonso all followed Ralf Schumacher into the pit lane on the same lap . Alonso encountered a problem when leaving his pit box : the Minardi refuelling valve had a problem , and his car 's afterburner remained on , though the flames extinguished themselves when Alonso accelerated out of the pit lane . Montoya pulled over to the side of the track on lap 25 , with smoke billowing from his engine , and retired . Fisichella made a pit stop from fourth on lap 26 and re @-@ emerged in fifth behind Villeneuve . Marques retired from the race with a gearbox problem on the same lap . Coulthard made a pit stop on lap 27 and immediately became the race 's next retirement when he <unk> away from his pit box with a blown engine . The resulting event meant he pulled to the side of the circuit . Panis made his pit stop on lap 31 and came out behind Button and Alesi . Barrichello became the final driver to make a scheduled pit stop on the 32nd lap . 
 At the completion of lap 33 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the race order was , Ralf Schumacher , Barrichello , Villeneuve , Fisichella , Button , Alesi , Panis , Trulli , Bernoldi , Verstappen and Alonso . Trulli became the final retirement after he stopped at the side of the circuit because his car developed a hydraulic pump issue on lap 35 . Ralf Schumacher began to reduce his pace by lap 37 but managed to lap quicker than Barrichello . He received a pit board three laps later which advised him to refill his car 's fluids . Fisichella went off the circuit on lap 43 while he was catching Villeneuve , and both Arrows drivers avoided a collision for eighth position . With his closest challenger over 46 seconds behind , Ralf Schumacher crossed the finish line on lap 45 to secure his third victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 18 : 17 @.@ 873 , at an average speed of 146 @.@ 240 miles per hour ( 235 @.@ 350 km / h ) . <unk> finished in second 46 @.@ 1 seconds behind , ahead of Villeneuve in third , Fisichella in fourth , Button fifth , and Alesi rounded out the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Panis in seventh was the final driver on the lead lap , with Bernoldi , Verstappen and Alonso the last of the classified finishers . The attrition rate was high , with ten of the twenty @-@ two starters finishing the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Ralf Schumacher said that it was " a great feeling " when he asked to describe how he felt by winning his " home " Grand Prix . He also revealed that he had brakes issues during the start of the race and that he was ensuring that his engine would last the full race distance . Barrichello said that he was " happy " with finishing in second and revealed that before the race he believed that he would finish no higher than third . Villeneuve stated that he was " surprised " that he achieved a podium position . Furthermore , he believed that more work was undertaken to improve his car than his previous third place in the Spanish Grand Prix . 
 Both Benetton drivers managed to finish both their cars in the points for the first time in the season . Fisichella said he was " very happy , for Jenson and myself " and thanked members of his team for his result . Button believed that his team 's good result was because of improved changes to the balance on his Benetton . He later revealed that he removed his water bottle tube from his mouth which caused water to spray on his face under braking . The result lead to Benetton technical director Mike Gascoyne to describe the race as " a useful kick @-@ start before the final races of the season " and said Benetton would ensure that the result was not " a one @-@ off " . Alesi described the weekend as " a very important one for the team " because of his sixth @-@ place finish . 
 Montoya admitted to feeling disappointed after the race , having been leading until his only pit stop on lap 22 . The Williams driver stated : " I am so disappointed I cannot find the words to describe how I feel . Up to the pit stop the race was going perfectly for me . " Williams technical director Patrick Head was not happy with the refulling rigs supplied by the Federation Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) . One of the rigs was sent back to manufacturer Intertechnique who said they could not find any issues with the system . Michael Schumacher , placed fourth before his retirement from a fuel pressure problem on lap 23 , shared similar feelings to Montoya : " I am not too disappointed as the situation in the championship remains the same and there is one less race to go . It was a shame not to finish the race and pick up a further six points . " 
 After the crash between himself and Burti on the first lap , Michael Schumacher said that although he saw Burti in his rear @-@ view mirrors , he did not know which line he wanted to take and he could not take avoiding action because of his gear selection problem . Burti said that the accident " looked worse on TV " and that he stated his spin on lap 18 was caused because his left arm was aching from the crash . Coulthard questioned the decision to stop the race by saying : " Accidents or injury off the track is not normally a reason to stop the race . There 's lots of races that would have benefited from being red @-@ flagged to give people a show . " He also said he felt consistency was needed but accepted that the organisers had the final say on stopping a race . Villeneuve also agreed with Coulthard 's view . A spokesman for the FIA confirmed and defended the red @-@ flag decision and they said it was shown to prevent a larger accident . Michelin Motorsport Director Pierre Dupasquier agreed with the view of the FIA and stated he was concerned about cars hitting the strands of debris and catching a puncture . 
 The race result meant that Michael Schumacher still retained his lead in the Drivers ' Championship , ahead of Coulthard . Race winner Ralf Schumacher , on 41 points , moved into the third place and Barrichello 's second @-@ place resulted in him being relegated to fourth . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's failure to score points , resulted in Ferrari extending their lead to be fifty @-@ six points in front . Williams retained third on 56 points , but were ten points closer to McLaren , with five races of the season remaining . This was the final Formula One event to be held at the high @-@ speed configuration of the Hockenheimring circuit ; the circuit was shortened by 1 @.@ 5 miles which was used starting from the 2002 season . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Vishal Bhardwaj = 
 Vishal Bhardwaj ( born 4 August 1965 ) is an Indian film director , screenwriter , producer , music composer and playback singer . He is known for his work in Hindi cinema , and is the recipient of a Filmfare Award and seven National Film Awards in four categories . 
 Bhardwaj made his debut as a music composer with the children 's film Abhay ( The Fearless ) ( 1995 ) , and received wider recognition with his compositions in Gulzar 's Maachis ( 1996 ) . He received the Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent for the latter . He went on to compose music for the films Satya ( 1998 ) and Godmother ( 1999 ) . For the latter , he garnered the National Film Award for Best Music Direction . Bhardwaj made his directorial debut with the children 's film <unk> ( 2002 ) , for which he also composed the music . He garnered critical acclaim and several accolades for writing and directing the Indian adaptations of three tragedies by William Shakespeare : Maqbool ( 2003 ) from Macbeth , Omkara ( 2006 ) from Othello , and Haider ( 2014 ) from Hamlet . He has also directed the caper thriller Kaminey , the black comedy 7 Khoon Maaf ( 2011 ) , and the satire Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola ( 2013 ) . 
 In addition , Bhardwaj produces films under his banner VB Pictures . He has co @-@ written and produced the films Ishqiya ( 2010 ) , its sequel Dedh Ishqiya ( 2014 ) , and the semi @-@ biographical thriller Talvar ( 2015 ) , among others . He has composed the musical score for each of his directorial and production ventures , and frequently collaborates with the lyricist Gulzar . He is married to playback singer Rekha Bhardwaj . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bhardwaj was born on 4 August 1965 , in Chandpur village , near Bijnor , Uttar Pradesh . His mother Satya Bhardwaj , was a homemaker , and father Ram Bhardwaj , was a sugarcane inspector . His father also wrote poetry and lyrics for Hindi films . He and his family lived in <unk> until he completed class fifth in school . They later moved to Meerut , where he used to play cricket for the states under @-@ 19 team . He could not pursue cricket because the day before a tournament , his thumb broke during a practise session . He had an elder brother , who struggled for years in Mumbai to become a film producer and later died of a heart attack . He composed a song at the age of seventeen . After hearing it , his father discussed it with music director Usha Khanna . She used it for the film <unk> Kasam ( 1985 ) . Bhardwaj later moved to Delhi to pursue his graduation at the Hindu College , University of Delhi . He met his wife and playback singer Rekha Bhardwaj during the college annual function ; where she was a year senior to him . He is also an avid tennis player . 
 = = Career = = 
 Bhardwaj started playing harmonium for friends who were ghazal singers . After few years , he took up a job with a music company called CBS in Delhi . He later came to Mumbai to become a music composer , he took to directing films only to create the opportunity to compose music . His interest in film direction kindled after watching Quentin Tarantino 's Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) , and Krzysztof Kieślowski 's television series The Decalogue , during a film festival in Thiruvananthapuram . 
 = = = Music composer = = = 
 In 1995 , Bhardwaj made his debut as a music composer for the children 's film Abhay ( The Fearless ) . He then went on to compose music for <unk> ( 1995 ) , and <unk> ( 1996 ) . In 1996 , he served as the music director for Gulzar 's Maachis ( 1996 ) , for which he received the Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent . The film depicted the transformation of boys into terrorists during the Punjab insurgency in Punjab in the 1980s . The soundtrack composed by Bhardwaj became an anthem for the politically restive college youth at that time . He later collaborated with him on TV serials such as Alice in Wonderland and Gubbare . His further projects included <unk> ( 1997 ) , <unk> Ki Tina ( 1997 ) , Satya ( 1998 ) and Hu Tu Tu ( 1999 ) . At the 46th National Film Awards , Bhardwaj received the National Film Award for Best Music Direction for his critically acclaimed score in Godmother ( 1999 ) . In 2010 , he composed the music for his production venture Ishqiya , which garnered him his second National Film Award for Best Music Direction . He also composed music for Jungle Book Shōnen Mowgli , the Hindi dubbed version of the anime adaptation of Rudyard Kipling 's original collection of stories , The Jungle Book . Apart from feature films , Bhardwaj has provided music for music albums such as : Sunset Point ( 2000 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 2002 ) and Barse Barse ( 2011 ) . He frequently collaborates with Gulzar . 
 = = = Writer and director = = = 
 Bhardwaj made his directorial debut with the horror film <unk> ( 2002 ) , starring Shabana Azmi , <unk> Deshpande and Shweta Prasad . The film tells the story of twin young girls and an alleged witch in a mansion . It was screened in the Critics ' Week ( Spotlight on India ) section at the 2003 Cannes Film Festival . 
 Bhardwaj had read a short version of William Shakespeare 's Macbeth and wanted to turn it into a gangster film . He had seen Akira Kurosawa 's Throne of Blood ( 1957 ) , which was also inspired by Macbeth . It inspired Bhardwaj to make it into a feature film . He then started working with Abbas <unk> to adapt the play . Bhardwaj then came up with its film adaptation Maqbool ( 2003 ) , starring Pankaj Kapur , Irrfan Khan and Tabu ; it was set against the backdrop of Mumbai underworld . The film was screened at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival and at the 2003 Toronto Film Festival . Sita Menon of Rediff.com in her review called it " .. a visual gallery that is an intelligent blend of dark , tragic overtones and comic , satirical undertones . " CNN @-@ IBN listed Maqbool as " one of the 100 greatest Indian films of all time " in a 2013 list . In 2010 , Film critic Raja Sen mentioned it in " The Top 75 Hindi Films of the Decade " list . 
 In 2006 , Bhardwaj again adapted Shakespeare 's tragedy Othello , as Omkara . Set against the backdrop of the political system in Uttar Pradesh , the film had Ajay Devgan as the titular character . It premiered at the 6th Marrakech International Film Festival , and was screened at the Cairo International Film Festival . At the 54th National Film Awards , Bhardwaj received the Special Jury Award for the film . Omkara met with critical acclaim , but was a box @-@ office disappointment . It however opened to positive box @-@ office response in North America and the United Kingdom . 
 Bhardwaj 's next project was the children 's film , The Blue Umbrella ( 2005 ) , based on Ruskin Bond 's novel of the same name . It won the National Film Award for Best Children 's Film in 2005 . His followup was Blood Brothers ( 2007 ) , a short @-@ film on HIV / AIDS , with a run time of 13 minutes . It tells the story of a young man who , after finding out that he is HIV positive , allows his life to fall apart . It was a part of the ' AIDS <unk> ' , a series of four short films , directed by Mira Nair , Santosh Sivan , and Farhan Akhtar in a joint initiative by Nair and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation . The series premiered at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival . The same year , he also served as a writer for Sanjay Gupta 's anthology film , Dus <unk> . 
 In 2009 , Bhardwaj came up with the Caper thriller Kaminey , starring Shahid Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra . The film follows the rivalry between identical twins , one with a lisp and one with a stammer . The story was bought by him from a Kenyan writer . It opened to generally positive reviews . Anupama Chopra gave a rating of 4 out of 5 and wrote " Kaminey is the best Bollywood film I 've seen this year . It 's an audacious , original rollercoaster ride . Written and directed by Vishal Bhardwaj , Kaminey requires patience and attention but the pay off is more than worth it . " Kaminey was also a financial success earning over ₹ 700 million ( US $ 10 million ) worldwide . 
 7 Khoon Maaf ( 2011 ) , a film based on the Ruskin Bond 's short story , Susanna 's Seven Husbands , was Bhardwaj 's next directorial venture . The story revolves around Susanna Anna @-@ Marie Johannes ( played by Priyanka Chopra ) who murders her seven husbands in an unending quest for love . The film was written collaboratively by Bhardwaj , Bond and American writer Matthew Robbins . It released on 18 February 2011 and met with mixed to positive reviews . Zee News in its four out of five star review mentioned : " Vishal Bhardwaj does it again . The maverick filmmaker has once again woven magic with his latest blockbuster Saat Khoon Maaf " . 
 In 2013 , Bhardwaj directed Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola , a political satire set in the rustic surroundings of a village in Haryana . It starred Anushka Sharma and Imran Khan in the lead roles , with Pankaj Kapur and Shabana Azmi in supporting ones . Bhardwaj also choreographed a song " Oye boy Charlie " in the film . The film received mixed reviews from critics , and underperformed at the box office . 
 In 2014 , Bhardwaj made his stage debut with the opera ' A Flowering Tree ’ . It was based on a classic folk tale by Kannada writer and scholar A. K. Ramanujan . He completed his William Shakespeare 's trilogy with Haider ( 2014 ) , based on the tragedy Hamlet . Set during the Kashmir conflict of 1995 , the film starred Shahid Kapoor in the titular role , for which he along with Bhardwaj charged no money . Haider garnered critical acclaim , though was controversial among Hindu nationalists for its portrayal of the conflict in Kashmir . CNN @-@ IBN 's Rajeev Masand called it " .. an elegant , thrilling film that casts a brave , unflinching eye on the Kashmir struggle . " At the 62nd National Film Awards , Bhardwaj won the Best Music Director and Best Screenplay ( Dialogues ) award . It also received nominations for Best Film and Best Director at the 60th Filmfare Awards . 
 As of November 2015 , Bhardwaj is filming Rangoon , a romantic drama set during World War II , starring Kangana Ranaut , Saif Ali Khan and Shahid Kapoor . 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 Bhardwaj has been producing his own films under his banner VB Pictures . In 2010 , he produced the black comedy Ishqiya . Starring Vidya Balan , Naseeruddin Shah and Arshad Warsi ; the film was directed by debutant Abhishek Chaubey . Chaubey had earlier assisted and co @-@ wrote several of Bhardwaj 's film . The film was an average grosser at the box @-@ office . He teamed up with Ekta Kapoor 's Balaji Motion Pictures to produce the supernatural thriller Ek Thi Daayan ( 2013 ) . Dealing with the themes of witchcraft , the film was based on ' Mobius Trips ' , a short story written by Konkona Sen Sharma 's father . It received mixed reviews from critics , but proved to be a profitable venture at the box @-@ office . 
 His next production venture was Dedh Ishqiya , a sequel to the 2010 film Ishqiya . Starring Madhuri Dixit , Naseeruddin Shah , Huma Qureshi and Arshad Warsi ; the film was a critical and commercial success with earning ₹ 270 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 1 million ) in India and abroad . In 2015 , Bhardwaj wrote and co @-@ produced Meghna Gulzar 's crime drama Talvar . The film was based on the 2008 Noida double murder case , and starred Irrfan Khan , Konkana Sen Sharma and Neeraj <unk> . Talvar premiered at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival , and was released in India on 2 October 2015 , to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = = Playback singer = = = 
 Apart from composing music , Bhardwaj has also lend his voice for various songs for films like Omkara , No Smoking ( 2007 ) , U Me Aur Hum ( 2008 ) , Kaminey , Striker ( 2010 ) , 7 Khoon Maaf , Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola and Haider . 
 = = Craft and style = = 
 Bhardwaj 's film are often twisted with portrayal of character 's with grey shades . He also frequently adapts short stories and plays in films . The Blue Umbrella and 7 Khoon Maaf were adapted from Ruskin Bond 's short stories . Maqbool , Omkara and Haider were adaptation 's of William Shakespear 's tragedies . Some of Bhardwaj 's films often takes clue from real @-@ life incidents . The Kashmir conflict was shown in Haider , the Mumbai underworld in Maqbool , and Talvar being based on the 2008 Noida double murder case . Bhardwaj frequently collaborates with writer @-@ lyricist Gulzar and calls him his " father " and " mentor " . Most of the treatment of his film 's are like documentaries . Haider was co @-@ written by journalist @-@ writer <unk> Peer , who was an eye witness of the Kashmir conflict . He evolves his script till the filming . 
 Bhardwaj is influenced by the film @-@ making styles of Satyajit Ray , Ritwik Ghatak , Akira Kurosawa and Krzysztof Kieślowski . <unk> 's The Decalogue ( 1989 ) inspired him to become a film @-@ maker . Veteran actor Naseeruddin Shah says : " I think he makes interesting films , even though I haven ’ t liked all his works . But even his poor work is more interesting than a lot of people ’ s so @-@ called good work . ” 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 In 1996 , Bhardwaj won the Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent for Maachis . He later won the National Film Award for Best Music Direction for Godmother . He then went on to win two consecutive awards : The Blue Umbrella , which won the National Film Award for Best Children 's Film , and National Film Award – Special Jury Award for Omkara . Bhardwaj got two Filmfare nominations for Kaminey in Best Director and Best Music Director categories . He won his second National Film Award for Best Music Direction , for his production venture Ishqiya . At the 62nd National Film Awards , Bhardwaj won the Best Music Director and Best Screenplay ( Dialogues ) award for Haider . In 2016 , Bhardwaj was awarded with Yash Bharti award by the Government of Uttar Pradesh for his contribution in the field of cinema . He also received the National Film Award for Best Screenplay for writing Talvar . Bhardwaj 's Shakespearean trilogy — Maqbool , Omkara and Haider — was screened as part of an event marking William Shakespear 's 400th death anniversary co @-@ hosted by the British Film Institute in London . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Rhythm Killers = 
 Rhythm Killers is a studio album by Jamaican musical duo Sly and Robbie , released in May 1987 by Island Records . After their prolific output in reggae , the duo experimented with electronic sounds and contemporary recording technology , while branching out into international , cross @-@ genre endeavors during the 1980s . For the album , they enlisted record producer and mentor Bill Laswell and recorded with an ensemble of musicians at Quad Recording in New York City . Along with their live instruments , Sly and Robbie used electronic recording equipment such as the Fairlight CMI synthesizer and electronic drums . 
 A funk and dance album , Rhythm Killers has a dense sound that incorporates contrasting musical elements and disparate styles , including reggae , hip hop , hard rock , worldbeat , and downtown music . Arranged in two side @-@ long gapless suites , the album 's songs are characterized by electronic grooves , striking beats , improvisational rhythms , string synthesizers , and cross @-@ rhythms produced by turntable scratches , African and Latin @-@ influenced percussion , and percussive raps . The album has been noted by music writers for its electronic rhythms , treatment of African @-@ American music elements , and Laswell 's densely layered production . 
 Rhythm Killers charted in four countries , including the United Kingdom , where it peaked at number 35 . It was promoted with two singles , including the UK hit " Boops ( Here to Go ) " . The album received positive reviews from critics and was ranked in year @-@ end lists by NME magazine and Village Voice critic Robert Christgau , who named it the seventh best record of 1987 . Encouraged by its success , Sly and Robbie continued their digital direction on subsequent albums . Rhythm Killers has since been out of print . 
 = = Background = = 
 Amid their prolific reggae output as sessions musicians , solo artists , and production duo , Sly and Robbie — drummer Sly Dunbar and bassist Robbie Shakespeare — opened their own record label Taxi Records and attained a distribution deal with Island Records during the early 1980s . After Island founder and executive Chris Blackwell hired them to work with singer Grace Jones , the duo developed a more sparse , robotic production style with funk and dub influences . This deviated from their past reggae work , as well as the genre 's roots sound and light rhythms . Sly and Robbie recorded primarily at Blackwell 's Compass Point Studios in the Bahamas with state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art equipment , which led to Dunbar 's experimentation with electronic drums and drum machines . 
 After their work with Black Uhuru and that group 's line @-@ up change , Sly and Robbie pursued more international music endeavors . They branched out into cross @-@ genre experiments with a conceptual , ensemble @-@ oriented approach , while developing a mentorship with record producer Bill Laswell , whom they met through Blackwell and by working on Mick Jagger 's 1985 album She 's the Boss . In 1985 , they collaborated with Laswell on their album Language Barrier , which had guest contributions from Herbie Hancock , Bob Dylan , Afrika Bambaataa , and Manu <unk> . Its recording developed from a track the duo had revisited from their work on the soundtrack to the 1983 film Never Say Never Again . The track had been done with electronic drums at Compass Point Studios , but scrapped as a rhythm track for later use . 
 A dub album , Language Barrier showcased a musical clash between the duo 's characteristic rhythms and Laswell 's own production style , with African jazz influences , predominant use of the Fairlight CMI sampling synthesizer , and experimentations with tempo and dub techniques . Dunbar was enthused by newer recording technology and , in a 1987 interview for The Sydney Morning Herald , said that he wanted to " be a part of it , not be left out . " Although it had a lukewarm reception from music critics , Language Barrier was Sly and Robbie 's first work to receive international exposure . For their next album , they sought to record a like @-@ minded album to expand their audience . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After releasing The Sting ( 1986 ) and Electro Reggae ( 1987 ) as members of their Taxi Gang band , Sly and Robbie enlisted Laswell again to work on Rhythm Killers . They recorded the album over a period of three months at Quad Recording in New York City . Before entering the studio , Sly and Robbie originally had planned music and demos to work with , but scrapped them after Chris Blackwell of Island discouraged the idea . Blackwell wanted the duo to come up with original material at the studio , as they had been known to do since their early years in Jamaica . 
 In an effort to crossover with music listeners outside of reggae 's market , Sly and Robbie heightened their experimentation with other musical sounds , particularly funk and occasional hip hop music . Despite his eclectic output , Laswell himself had started out as a bass player in funk groups , an experience that inspired him to compose his musical arrangements with a rhythmic foundation . Dunbar explained their approach for the album in an interview for Musician at the time , saying that " We 're trying to get new fans . Once they come into the funk , they 're going to have to come into the reggae , because that 's where we 're going to take them . " Sly and Robbie 's direction was also influenced by the supervision of Blackwell who , according to Dunbar , " wanted us to make two tracks , 17 minutes long . So we cut two tracks and extended them , each side consisting of three songs . Non @-@ stop dancing , that 's the idea . " 
 In the early stage of recording , Sly and Robbie focused primarily on constructing difficult grooves for songs . To record their rhythm tracks , Dunbar worked in the studio alone and cut a drum part without having a melody in mind . He recounted his approach for the album to Musician , saying that " I just played what I felt , working from a sense of ' now I 'll do 103 beats per minute . ' And Robbie would come in the next night and lay a bass part . " Unlike most reggae or funk bassists , Shakespeare approached his playing as a jazz soloist and attempted numerous subtle variations to his riff . He said that his inspiration " comes from God . Sometimes endless ideas just keep coming to me . Sometimes I 'll change the drum pattern to a bass line and Sly will play the bass line on the drums . " Along with live percussion , Dunbar played Simmons drums , and the duo integrated contemporary electronic music technology such as the Fairlight CMI synthesizer in the album 's recording . Dunbar used his recorded live drums to trigger the synthesizer 's sampled drum sounds . 
 Sly and Robbie worked with an ensemble of musicians , including funk artists Bootsy Collins , Bernie Worrell , and Gary " <unk> " Cooper , reggae vocalist Shinehead , avant @-@ garde jazz musicians Karl Berger and Henry Threadgill , hip hop artist <unk> , turntablist <unk> , and guitarist Nicky <unk> . Rhythm Killers was produced by Laswell with his band Material , which included Shakespeare , vocalist Bernard Fowler , and percussionist <unk> Dieng , among others . Sly and Robbie recorded songs in single takes and cut approximately 20 tracks a day with Laswell and engineer Robert Musso , who used reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape recording . Laswell also hired violinist Mark Feldman , who was working at a dinner theater in Connecticut at the time . He had Feldman read charts in the strings section and play syncopated lines , which he found " a little more funky " than the theater . The album was mixed at The Power Station and mastered by Howie Weinberg at Masterdisk in New York City . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Rhythm Killers is characterized as a work of funk music by Musician magazine 's Alan di Perna , while Stereo Review called it a dance album . The album 's songs feature contrasting musical elements . Writer and musicologist Robert Palmer viewed it as an attempt at " an ambitious dance @-@ music synthesis , with funk the stylistic common denominator " , adding that the " funk ethos – less is more , the groove is the tune – underlies all of Mr. Laswell 's work " . Although it is not a reggae album , Rhythm Killers exhibits Sly and Robbie 's Taxi Records production aesthetic , which drew on their cultural connection to Jamaican dance halls and their collective interest in experimental electronic sounds . Dunbar was particularly fascinated with the <unk> instrument , and Rhythm Killers is one of the last albums to feature live drums by him . Incorporating mechanized beats , rocksteady tempos , and sinuous bass , the aesthetic presaged ragga music and the rise of digital instrumentation in reggae during the 1980s . Similar to Language Barrier , Rhythm Killers has a dense , thudding sound and heavy @-@ handed , humorless tone , but features more recognizable hooks . 
 The songs on Rhythm Killers are typified by deep bass , striking beats , low @-@ frequency grooves , improvisational rhythms , electronic percussion , disco @-@ era string synthesizers , aggressive guitar riffs , and stylistic influences from reggae , early hip hop , downtown music , hard rock , and worldbeat genres . They are densely layered in a fashion similar to Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound production . Bud Kliment of Trouser Press said they comprise a groove @-@ oriented " song cycle " that is " heavy @-@ bottomed from start to finish " . Similar to the album 's funk instrumentation , the guest rappers have exclamatory , confrontational tones and percussive vocals . The vocals are complemented by improvisatory turntable scratches and both African- and Latin @-@ influenced percussion , which resulted in cross @-@ rhythms during the songs . Carl Matthews of the Baltimore Afro @-@ American observed " a noticeable looseness in the vocals and a sort of P @-@ Funk quality to the rhythm tracks . " Mat Smith from Melody Maker said the enthusiastic music was driven by a " schizophrenic art of noise attack all lashed around a nonstop rhythm that bumps each track nose to tail tight . " 
 According to the Spin Alternative Record Guide ( 1995 ) , Rhythm Killers " truly broke ground " after the experimentation on Language Barrier and served as " the story of late @-@ 20th @-@ century black music done as symphony . " Music journalist Peter Shapiro noticed " a striking collision of urban sounds " in the album 's music , while Robert Hilburn called it an " unpredictable salute to the liveliness and character of urban pop music in its broadest sense . " Mike Joyce of The Washington Post found it " more punchy and elastic " than Language Barrier and felt " the accent is still on electronic rhythms , but the mood is vibrantly expansive " . Robert Christgau called the album Sly and Robbie 's " <unk> art @-@ funk statement " . He characterized the duo as a " world pop " rhythm section and said their style is complemented by " a chauvinistic variation on Bill Laswell 's usual international brigade " . John Leland argued that the album is " the continuous synthesis that Laswell promised on Herbie Hancock 's ' Rockit ' " , " extended in both length and scope " , as it features " a knack for unexpected juxtapositions and no respect for artificial boundaries . " According to The Nation , the sounds on the record ranged from Ludwig van Beethoven to Jimi Hendrix . 
 The album 's songs are arranged into a gapless suite on each side , both of which begin with covers of early 1970s R & B songs . Stereo Review writes that each side is stylistically " derived " from its respective opening track and distinguishes the two side @-@ opening tracks as " anchoring songs [ that ] serve as starting points for uninterrupted improvisations in rhythm that build to multiple climaxes while drawing from wildly disparate musical styles . " " Fire " , a cover of the Ohio Players ' 1974 song of the same name , was reworked as an extended vamp with an uncredited sample of Liquid Liquid 's 1983 song " Cavern " , and lyrics proclaiming " bass " to be " the final frontier " . It features vocals by Shinehead , whose rap begins with a Howard Cosell impersonation , and Bootsy Collins , who advises listeners that " you have one desire and that 's to dance until you drop . " " Boop " is a Jamaican Patois slang term for a man who spends money for the benefit of a younger woman . Both " Fire " and " Boops ( Here to Go ) " touch on popular dancehall topics . 
 Opening the second side , " Yes , We Can Can " is a cover of the Pointer Sisters 1973 song of the same name , originally written by Allen Toussaint . It eschews the original song 's jazz influence for hip hop elements , gritty dub , and Art of Noise @-@ like grooves . Co @-@ written by Shinehead , " Rhythm Killer " features aggressive percussion , frantic toasting by Shinehead , descending strings , and downtown saxophone phrases by Henry Threadgill . It was featured in the 1988 film Colors . The song 's groove transitions into " Bank Job " , which has a relaxed style , lavish production , and accented electronic rhythms . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Rhythm Killers was released by Island Records in May 1987 , on CD , LP , and cassette formats . It reached the record charts in the Netherlands , Sweden , and New Zealand , where it reached its highest overall position at number 12 and charted for eight weeks . In the United Kingdom , it spent five weeks on the albums chart , peaking at number 35 . It did not chart in the United States . The album 's lead single , " Boops ( Here to Go ) " , reached number 22 on the US Billboard Dance Club Play Singles . It was a hit in the UK , where it charted for 11 weeks and reached number 12 on the UK Singles Chart . The song was later sampled on Robbie Williams ' 2006 song " Rudebox " . " Fire " , the second single , peaked at number 14 in New Zealand , where it charted for nine weeks . It also peaked at number 60 and charted for four weeks in the UK . 
 Rhythm Killers was well received by contemporary critics . In a review for The Philadelphia Inquirer , Ken Tucker remarked that having mastered reggae , Sly and Robbie proved they could perform funk music just as well . Steve Hochman from the Los Angeles Times hailed it as one of 1987 's best records from any genre because of how Sly and Robbie drew on the funk 's past 20 years , " from Sly & the Family Stone through George Clinton , along the way throwing in reggae , rap and even a bit of Rossini . " In Rolling Stone , Gavin Edwards called it " a thirty @-@ five @-@ minute dance party full of surprises and strange noises " , writing that it " sounds like the Great Missing DJ Set — albeit one played by live musicians with perfect telepathy . " i @-@ D magazine 's Simon Witter said it was the most entertaining and exceptionally conceived dance album of the year , while Stereo Review called it one of the best dance records in some time because the duo 's creative yet accessible urban dance music showed how to combine the best parts of older music with contemporary recording techniques . In a negative review , Greg Taylor from The Sydney Morning Herald criticized the music as " wallpaper " undermined by a gaudy hip hop production . John Leland of Spin wrote that while Rhythm Killers may be ambitious and successful as a " dialogue on the <unk> elasticity of the funk " , it lacked vigor as actual funk music and never got beyond its concept and " into the funk " . In The New York Times , Palmer found the musical ideas innovative and its concept " a worthy one " — that " funk is the Rosetta Stone of contemporary dance music " — but he observed an excess of disordered effects and funk @-@ derived sounds on what were otherwise expressive rhythm tracks . 
 At the end of 1987 , it was named the year 's eighth best album by The Face magazine , and 25th best album by NME , who also named " Boops ( Here to Go ) " the year 's 18th best single . <unk> ranked Rhythm Killers 11th best , and " Boops ( Here to Go ) " the sixth best song of 1987 . The album also finished 25th in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published in The Village Voice . Christgau , the poll 's creator and supervisor , named it the seventh best album of the year . Encouraged by the record 's success , Sly and Robbie recorded The Summit ( 1988 ) , an instrumental ragga album with digital riddims that was decried by roots critics , and Silent Assassin ( 1990 ) , a collaboration with several American rappers . The latter album 's fusion of Jamaican dub and American hip hop was a precursor to the rise of dancehall in the US during the early 1990s . Bootsy Collins , who had kept a low profile for much of the 1980s , followed @-@ up his appearance on Rhythm Killers with a comeback album , What 's Bootsy Doin ' ? , in 1988 . Shinehead 's own appearance on the album bolstered his mainstream exposure as he was receiving American radio airplay with his debut single and performing on an international tour . Rhythm Killers was reissued by Island on 4 June 1990 , but eventually became out of print . 
 In retrospect , culture critic Mark Anthony Neal deemed Rhythm Killers an essential album of 1980s underground funk , while reggae historian Steve Barrow cited it as one of the most engaging projects Sly and Robbie were involved in during the 1980s . In a retrospective article , The State wrote that on albums such as Rhythm Killers , they frequently attempted to broaden the role of their instruments and consequently took bass and drums to " unexplored rhythmic frontiers " . Music journalist Mark Coleman , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide , said that the album was " so coherent and smooth that you could mistake it for a suite if it wasn 't also so thoroughly down and dirty . " In The Rough Guide to Rock ( 2003 ) , Peter Shapiro cited the album as Laswell 's " best outside production " and one that " fulfilled his fusion / fission concept ... in which some of the finest dance musicians in the world jam on two side @-@ long grooves that imply New Orleans R & B , 70s funk , hip @-@ hop and ragga are all part of the same continuum . " In a mixed review , AllMusic editor Stephen Cook called it " a valiant venture gone awry " and felt that the songs are monotonous and comprising " one tired electronic groove after another " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were produced by Bill Laswell and Material . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Arctic tern = 
 The Arctic tern ( Sterna paradisaea ) is a seabird of the tern family Sternidae . This bird has a circumpolar breeding distribution covering the Arctic and sub @-@ Arctic regions of Europe , Asia , and North America ( as far south as Brittany and Massachusetts ) . The species is strongly migratory , seeing two summers each year as it migrates along a convoluted route from its northern breeding grounds to the Antarctic coast for the southern summer and back again about six months later . Recent studies have shown average annual roundtrip lengths of about 70 @,@ 900 km ( 44 @,@ 100 mi ) for birds nesting in Iceland and Greenland and c . 90 @,@ 000 km ( 56 @,@ 000 mi ) for birds nesting in the Netherlands . These are by far the longest migrations known in the animal kingdom . The Arctic tern flies as well as glides through the air , performing almost all of its tasks in the air . It nests once every one to three years ( depending on its mating cycle ) ; once it has finished nesting it takes to the sky for another long southern migration . 
 Arctic terns are medium @-@ sized birds . They have a length of 28 – 39 cm ( 11 – 15 in ) and a wingspan of 65 – 75 cm ( 26 – 30 in ) . They are mainly grey and white plumaged , with a red / orangish beak and feet , white forehead , a black nape and crown ( streaked white ) , and white cheeks . The grey mantle is 305 mm , and the scapulae are fringed brown , some tipped white . The upper wing is grey with a white leading edge , and the collar is completely white , as is the rump . The deeply forked tail is whitish , with grey outer webs . 
 Arctic terns are long @-@ lived birds , with many reaching fifteen to thirty years of age . They eat mainly fish and small marine invertebrates . The species is abundant , with an estimated one million individuals . While the trend in the number of individuals in the species as a whole is not known , exploitation in the past has reduced this bird 's numbers in the southern reaches of its range . 
 The Arctic tern was known as sea swallow describing their slender shape as they swoop over the water . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The genus name Sterna is derived from Old English " stearn " , " tern " . The specific paradisaea is from Late Latin <unk> , " paradise " . The Scots names <unk> , <unk> and their many variants are also believed to be onomatopoeic , derived from the distinctive call . Due to the difficulty in distinguishing the two species , all the informal common names are shared with the common tern . 
 = = Distribution and migration = = 
 The Arctic tern has a continuous worldwide circumpolar breeding distribution ; there are no recognized subspecies . It can be found in coastal regions in cooler temperate parts of North America and Eurasia during the northern summer . While wintering during the southern summer , it can be found at sea , reaching the northern edge of the Antarctic ice . 
 The Arctic tern is famous for its migration ; it flies from its Arctic breeding grounds to the Antarctic and back again each year , the shortest distance between these areas being 19 @,@ 000 km ( 12 @,@ 000 mi ) . The long journey ensures that this bird sees two summers per year and more daylight than any other creature on the planet . One example of this bird 's remarkable long @-@ distance flying abilities involves an Arctic tern ringed as an unfledged chick on the Farne Islands , Northumberland , UK , in the northern summer of 1982 , which in October 1982 , just three months from fledging , reached Melbourne , Australia . Assuming a direct route of flight , the distance covered would have been more than 22 @,@ 000 km ( 14 @,@ 000 mi ) . Another example is that of a chick ringed in Labrador , Canada , on 23 July 1928 . It was found in South Africa four months later . 
 A 2010 study using tracking devices attached to the birds showed that the above examples are not unusual for the species . In fact , it turned out , previous research had seriously underestimated the annual distances travelled by the Arctic tern . Eleven birds that bred in Greenland or Iceland covered 70 @,@ 900 km ( 44 @,@ 100 mi ) on average in a year , with a maximum of 81 @,@ 600 km ( 50 @,@ 700 mi ) . The difference from previous estimates is due to the birds ' taking meandering courses rather than following a straight route as was previously assumed . The birds follow a somewhat convoluted course in order to take advantage of prevailing winds . The average Arctic tern lives about thirty years , and will , based on the above research , travel some 2 @.@ 4 million km ( 1 @.@ 5 million mi ) during its lifetime . 
 A 2013 tracking study of half a dozen Arctic terns breeding in the Netherlands shows average annual migrations of c . 90 @,@ 000 km ( 56 @,@ 000 mi ) . On their way south , these birds roughly followed the coastlines of Europe and Africa . Having rounded the southern tip of Africa , they then turned east , some flying approximately halfway to Australia before again turning south to eventually reach Wilkes Land in the north @-@ eastern Antarctic . One bird flew several hundred kilometres along the south coast of Australia before turning south for the Antarctic , while one flew along the entire south coast of Australia , passing between Australia and Tasmania . Having reached the Melbourne area , it turned south and flew in an arc to Wilkes Land in the north @-@ east Antarctic , passing the south @-@ western tip of New Zealand 's South Island en route . Once back in the Netherlands , this bird had journeyed c . 91 @,@ 000 km ( 57 @,@ 000 mi ) , the longest migration yet recorded for any animal . 
 Arctic terns usually migrate sufficiently far offshore that they are rarely seen from land outside the breeding season . 
 = = Description and taxonomy = = 
 The Arctic tern is a medium @-@ sized bird around 33 – 36 cm ( 13 – 14 in ) from the tip of its beak to the tip of its tail . The wingspan is 76 – 85 cm ( 30 – 33 in ) . The weight is 86 – 127 g ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 5 oz ) . The beak is dark red , as are the short legs and webbed feet . Like most terns , the Arctic tern has high aspect ratio wings and a tail with a deep fork . 
 The adult plumage is grey above , with a black nape and crown and white cheeks . The upperwings are pale grey , with the area near the wingtip being translucent . The tail is white , and the underparts pale grey . Both sexes are similar in appearance . The winter plumage is similar , but the crown is whiter and the bills are darker . 
 Juveniles differ from adults in their black bill and legs , " scaly " appearing wings , and mantle with dark feather tips , dark carpal wing bar , and short tail streamers . During their first summer , juveniles also have a whiter forecrown . 
 The species has a variety of calls ; the two most common being the alarm call , made when possible predators ( such as humans or other mammals ) enter the colonies , and the advertising call . The advertising call is social in nature , made when returning to the colony and during aggressive encounters between individuals . It is unique to each individual tern and as such it serves a similar role to the bird song of passerines , identifying individuals . Eight other calls have been described , from begging calls made by females during mating to attack calls made while swooping at intruders . 
 While the Arctic tern is similar to the common and roseate terns , its colouring , profile , and call are slightly different . Compared to the common tern , it has a longer tail and mono @-@ coloured bill , while the main differences from the roseate are its slightly darker colour and longer wings . The Arctic tern 's call is more nasal and rasping than that of the common , and is easily distinguishable from that of the roseate . 
 This bird 's closest relatives are a group of South Polar species , the South American ( Sterna <unk> ) , Kerguelen ( S. virgata ) , and Antarctic ( S. vittata ) terns . On the wintering grounds , the Arctic tern can be distinguished from these relatives ; the six @-@ month difference in moult is the best clue here , with Arctic terns being in winter plumage during the southern summer . The southern species also do not show darker wingtips in flight . 
 The immature plumages of Arctic tern were originally described as separate species , Sterna <unk> and Sterna <unk> . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Breeding begins around the third or fourth year . Arctic terns mate for life and , in most cases , return to the same colony each year . Courtship is elaborate , especially in birds nesting for the first time . Courtship begins with a so @-@ called " high flight " , where a female will chase the male to a high altitude and then slowly descend . This display is followed by " fish flights " , where the male will offer fish to the female . Courtship on the ground involves strutting with a raised tail and lowered wings . After this , both birds will usually fly and circle each other . 
 Both sexes agree on a site for a nest , and both will defend the site . During this time , the male continues to feed the female . Mating occurs shortly after this . Breeding takes place in colonies on coasts , islands and occasionally inland on tundra near water . It often forms mixed flocks with the common tern . It lays from one to three eggs per clutch , most often two . 
 It is one of the most aggressive terns , fiercely defensive of its nest and young . It will attack humans and large predators , usually striking the top or back of the head . Although it is too small to cause serious injury to an animal of a human 's size , it is still capable of drawing blood , and is capable of repelling many raptorial birds and smaller mammalian predators such as foxes and cats . Other nesting birds , such as alcids , often incidentally benefit from the protection provided by nesting in an area defended by Arctic terns . 
 The nest is usually a depression in the ground , which may or may not be lined with bits of grass or similar materials . The eggs are mottled and camouflaged . Both sexes share incubation duties . The young hatch after 22 – 27 days and fledge after 21 – 24 days . If the parents are disturbed and flush from the nest frequently the incubation period could be extended to as long as 34 days . 
 When hatched , the chicks are downy . Neither altricial nor precocial , the chicks begin to move around and explore their surroundings within one to three days after hatching . Usually they do not stray far from the nest . Chicks are brooded by the adults for the first ten days after hatching . Both parents care for hatchlings . Chick diets always include fish , and parents selectively bring larger prey items to chicks than they eat themselves . Males bring more food than females . Feeding by the parents lasts for roughly a month before being weaned off slowly . After fledging , the juveniles learn to feed themselves , including the difficult method of plunge @-@ diving . They will fly south to winter with the help of their parents . National Geographic calculated that during the lifespan of 30 years , an Arctic tern would have migrated over 2 @.@ 4 Million <unk> , the equivalent of a roundtrip from Earth to the Moon over 3 times . 
 Arctic terns are long @-@ lived birds that spend considerable time raising only a few young , and are thus said to be K @-@ selected . The bird has life span that was thought be around 20 years , however National Geographic , The University of Alberta & Massachusetts Institute of Technology , concluded in 2010 that more than 50 % of the species will live past their 30th birthday . A study in the Farne Islands estimated an annual survival rate of 82 % . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The diet of the Arctic tern varies depending on location and time , but is usually carnivorous . In most cases , it eats small fish or marine crustaceans . Fish species comprise the most important part of the diet , and account for more of the biomass consumed than any other food . Prey species are immature ( 1 – 2 @-@ year old ) shoaling species such as herring , cod , <unk> , and capelin . Among the marine crustaceans eaten are amphipods , crabs and krill . Sometimes , these birds also eat molluscs , marine worms , or berries , and on their northern breeding grounds , insects . 
 Arctic terns sometimes dip down to the surface of the water to catch prey close to the surface . They may also chase insects in the air when breeding . It is also thought that Arctic terns may , in spite of their small size , occasionally engage in kleptoparasitism by swooping at birds so as to startle them into releasing their catches . Several species are targeted — conspecifics , other terns ( like the common tern ) , and some auk and grebe species . 
 While nesting , Arctic terns are vulnerable to predation by cats and other animals . Besides being a competitor for nesting sites , the larger herring gull steals eggs and hatchlings . <unk> eggs help prevent this , as do isolated nesting sites . While feeding , skuas , gulls , and other tern species will often harass the birds and steal their food . They often form mixed colonies with other terns , such as common and Sandwich terns . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Arctic terns are considered threatened or a species of concern in certain states . They are also among the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds applies . The species reduced population in New England in the late nineteenth @-@ century because of hunting for the millinery trade . Exploitation continues today in western Greenland , where the population of the species has been reduced greatly since 1950 . 
 At the southern part of their range , the Arctic tern has been reducing in numbers . Much of this is due to lack of food . However , most of these birds ' range is extremely remote , with no apparent trend in the species as a whole . 
 BirdLife International has considered the species to be at lower risk since 1988 , believing that there are approximately one million individuals around the world . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The Arctic tern has appeared on the postage stamps of several countries and dependent territories . The territories include the Åland Islands , Alderney , and Faroe Islands . Countries include Canada , Finland , Iceland , and Cuba . 
 = 2000 Football League Second Division play @-@ off Final = 
 The 2000 Football League Second Division play @-@ off final was a football match played at Wembley Stadium on 28 May 2000 , to determine the third and final team to gain promotion from the Second Division to the First Division of The Football League in the 1999 – 2000 season . Gillingham faced Wigan Athletic in one of the last competitive fixtures to be played at the original Wembley Stadium . 
 The match was Gillingham 's second consecutive appearance in the Second Division play @-@ off final after a defeat to Manchester City in a penalty shoot out the previous season . Wigan had been defeated in the semi @-@ finals the previous season and had never previously reached a play @-@ off final . The teams reached the final by defeating Stoke City and Millwall respectively in the semi @-@ finals . 
 Gillingham took the lead in the first half of the final , but Wigan equalised to send the game into extra time . During the extra period Wigan took a 2 – 1 lead , but Gillingham scored two goals in the last six minutes through substitutes Steve Butler and Andy Thomson to win 3 – 2 . Gillingham thus gained promotion to the second tier of English football for the first time in the club 's 107 @-@ year history , in what proved to be manager Peter Taylor 's final match in charge . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Gillingham had finished the 1999 – 2000 Football League season in third place in Division Two , one place ahead of Wigan . Both therefore missed out on the two automatic promotion places and instead took part in the play @-@ offs to determine the third promoted team . On the final day of the league season Gillingham had the opportunity to finish in second place in the table and thereby clinch an automatic promotion place , but a 1 – 0 defeat away to Wrexham meant that Burnley were able to overtake them thanks to their 2 – 1 win over Scunthorpe United . Wigan had looked on course for an automatic promotion place in the first half of the season but the team 's form fell away dramatically after Christmas . Both teams were appearing in the play @-@ offs for a second consecutive season . In the 1998 – 99 season both Wigan and Gillingham had qualified for the play @-@ offs but been defeated in the semi @-@ finals and final respectively by eventual winners Manchester City . 
 In the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals , Wigan were paired with fifth @-@ placed Millwall and Gillingham with sixth @-@ place finishers Stoke City . Wigan drew 0 – 0 in the first leg against Millwall , but Darren Sheridan 's goal gave them a 1 – 0 win in the second leg and therefore a 1 – 0 aggregate win . Gillingham lost the first leg of their tie 3 – 2 away to Stoke , but overturned the deficit with a 3 – 0 second leg win . Barry Ashby , Iffy Onuora and Paul Smith scored the goals in an emotionally charged match in which Stoke had two players sent off . 
 = = Match summary = = 
 The two teams were competing for promotion to the second tier of the English football league system , at the time called the First Division , a level which neither club had ever previously reached . The attendance of 53 @,@ 764 was significantly down on the figure of 76 @,@ 935 registered at the equivalent fixture in the previous season , and there was a significant disparity in the number of tickets sold to the fans of the two clubs , with only around 10 @,@ 000 Wigan fans in attendance compared to over 40 @,@ 000 Gillingham fans . A specific revenue figure for the match was not made public , but half of the gate receipts went to The Football League to distribute amongst its member clubs , with Gillingham and Wigan each receiving twenty @-@ five per cent and no additional television broadcast fee . 
 Gillingham manager Peter Taylor picked eight of the players who had started the previous season 's playoff final , but made the decision to drop the team 's captain , Paul Smith , from the starting line @-@ up due to personal issues , which led to the player requesting a transfer . Wigan manager John Benson , who was taking charge of the team for the last time before the appointment of a new manager , included five players in the starting line @-@ up who had played at Wembley in the previous season 's Football League Trophy final , but left out captain Carl Bradshaw , as well as first @-@ choice goalkeeper Roy Carroll , who had missed both semi @-@ final matches following an appendix operation . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Wigan started off the stronger team , with Darren Sheridan dominating the midfield play and Andy Liddell causing problems for Gillingham 's defenders . After four minutes Simon Haworth headed for goal , but Gillingham goalkeeper Vince Bartram made a comfortable save . Haworth also hit the crossbar with a long @-@ range shot on goal . 
 Gillingham took the lead after 35 minutes after Andy Hessenthaler passed to Carl Asaba , whose shot was deflected into his own goal by Wigan defender Pat McGibbon , under pressure from Iffy Onuora . Wigan 's Arjan De Zeeuw attempted to keep the ball out of the goal , but after checking with his assistant referee , referee Rob Styles ruled that the ball had crossed the line and awarded a goal to Gillingham . At half @-@ time the score remained 1 – 0 to Gillingham . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Wigan again dominated play after the half @-@ time interval and equalised in the 53rd minute . Wigan 's de Zeeuw crossed the ball from a wide position and Simon Haworth flicked it up and then hit a shot from six yards out past Bartram and into the net , to score what The Independent described as " one of Wembley 's great goals " . In the 65th minute , de Zeeuw 's header was cleared off the line by Gillingham 's Nicky Southall , who appeared to be standing behind the goal line . Wigan 's supporters believed that the ball had in fact crossed the line and entered the goal , but the assistant referee ruled otherwise . Gillingham had several chances on goal in the latter stages of the game , but Wigan goalkeeper Derek <unk> prevented any further goalscoring . Shortly before the end of the game Wigan defender Kevin Sharp , who had earlier been cautioned for dissent , was sent off for a foul on Southall , reducing his team to ten men . The match remained deadlocked at 1 – 1 after 90 minutes and therefore went into a 30 @-@ minute period of extra time . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 In the early stages of extra time , Wigan again looked stronger despite their numerical disadvantage . After approximately nine minutes of the extra period , Gillingham 's Barry Ashby was adjudged to have fouled Darren Sheridan , resulting in a penalty kick for Wigan , which Stuart Barlow scored to give his team a 2 – 1 lead . Gillingham 's Andy Hessenthaler rallied his unsettled team , and in the 114th minute team @-@ mate Steve Butler , who had come on as a substitute a few minutes earlier , headed in a cross from Junior Lewis to level the match once again . Four minutes later another Gillingham substitute , Andy Thomson , beat Stuart Balmer to the ball after a cross from Ty Gooden and scored to give the Kent club the lead with only two minutes remaining . Wigan were unable to score any further goals in the short time remaining , and the match finished 3 – 2 to Gillingham . 
 = = = Post @-@ match = = = 
 After the final whistle Gillingham 's temporary captain Adrian Pennock received the winners ' trophy jointly with the team 's usual captain , Paul Smith , who had come on as a substitute . Peter Taylor commented that " These players , especially the ones that were here last year , deserved it . All season they 've shown unbelievable character , and that 's what they have done today . They never know when they are beaten . " John Benson , commenting particularly on the goal which Wigan felt they were denied , said that " You feel cheated , but decisions like that are part of the game " . 
 In the aftermath of the match Gillingham offered a new contract to manager Peter Taylor , but two weeks after leading the club to victory at Wembley he left to take over as manager of Premier League team Leicester City . Wigan manager John Benson had already announced before the play @-@ off final that he would be leaving his post whatever the result , and he was replaced by Bruce Rioch . As a result of their victory , Gillingham gained promotion to the second tier of English football for the first time in the club 's 107 @-@ year history , and went on to spend five seasons at that level . Wigan finally gained promotion to the second tier of English football in the 2002 – 03 season and achieved further promotion to the Premier League two years later . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = Toraja = 
 The Toraja are an ethnic group indigenous to a mountainous region of South Sulawesi , Indonesia . Their population is approximately 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 , of whom 450 @,@ 000 live in the regency of Tana Toraja ( " Land of Toraja " ) . Most of the population is Christian , and others are Muslim or have local animist beliefs known as aluk ( " the way " ) . The Indonesian government has recognized this animist belief as Aluk To Dolo ( " Way of the Ancestors " ) . 
 The word <unk> comes from the Bugis Buginese language term to <unk> , meaning " people of the uplands " . The Dutch colonial government named the people Toraja in 1909 . Torajans are renowned for their elaborate funeral rites , burial sites carved into rocky cliffs , massive peaked @-@ roof traditional houses known as tongkonan , and colorful wood carvings . Toraja funeral rites are important social events , usually attended by hundreds of people and lasting for several days . 
 Before the 20th century , Torajans lived in autonomous villages , where they practised animism and were relatively untouched by the outside world . In the early 1900s , Dutch missionaries first worked to convert Torajan highlanders to Christianity . When the Tana Toraja regency was further opened to the outside world in the 1970s , it became an icon of tourism in Indonesia : it was exploited by tourism developers and studied by anthropologists . By the 1990s , when tourism peaked , Toraja society had changed significantly , from an agrarian model — in which social life and customs were outgrowths of the Aluk To Dolo — to a largely Christian society . Today , tourism and remittances from migrant Torajans have made for major changes in the Toraja highland , giving the Toraja a celebrity status within Indonesia and enhancing Toraja ethnic group pride . 
 = = Ethnic identity = = 
 The Torajan people had little notion of themselves as a distinct ethnic group before the 20th century . Before Dutch colonization and Christianization , Torajans , who lived in highland areas , identified with their villages and did not share a broad sense of identity . Although complexes of rituals created linkages between highland villages , there were variations in dialects , differences in social hierarchies , and an array of ritual practices in the Sulawesi highland region . " Toraja " ( from the coastal languages ' to , meaning people ; and <unk> , uplands ) was first used as a <unk> expression for highlanders . As a result , " Toraja " initially had more currency with outsiders — such as the Bugis and Makassarese , who constitute a majority of the lowland of Sulawesi — than with insiders . The Dutch missionaries ' presence in the highlands gave rise to the Toraja ethnic consciousness in the Sa 'dan Toraja region , and this shared identity grew with the rise of tourism in the Tana Toraja Regency . Since then , South Sulawesi has four main ethnic groups — the Bugis ( the majority , including shipbuilders and seafarers ) , the Makassarese ( lowland traders and seafarers ) , the <unk> ( traders and fishermen ) , and the Toraja ( highland rice cultivators ) . 
 = = History = = 
 From the 17th century , the Dutch established trade and political control on Sulawesi through the Dutch East Indies Company . Over two centuries , they ignored the mountainous area in the central Sulawesi , where Torajans lived , because access was difficult and it had little productive agricultural land . In the late 19th century , the Dutch became increasingly concerned about the spread of Islam in the south of Sulawesi , especially among the Makassarese and Bugis peoples . The Dutch saw the animist highlanders as potential Christians . In the 1920s , the Reformed Missionary Alliance of the Dutch Reformed Church began missionary work aided by the Dutch colonial government . In addition to introducing Christianity , the Dutch abolished slavery and imposed local taxes . A line was drawn around the Sa 'dan area and called Tana Toraja ( " the land of Toraja " ) . Tana Toraja was first a subdivision of the Luwu kingdom that had claimed the area . In 1946 , the Dutch granted Tana Toraja a <unk> , and it was recognized in 1957 as one of the regencies of Indonesia . 
 Early Dutch missionaries faced strong opposition among Torajans , especially among the elite , because the abolition of their profitable slave trade had angered them . Some Torajans were forcibly relocated to the lowlands by the Dutch , where they could be more easily controlled . Taxes were kept high , undermining the wealth of the elites . Ultimately , the Dutch influence did not subdue Torajan culture , and only a few Torajans were converted . In 1950 , only 10 % of the population had converted to Christianity . 
 In the 1930s , Muslim <unk> attacked the Torajans , resulting in widespread Christian conversion among those who sought to align themselves with the Dutch for political protection and to form a movement against the Bugis and Makassarese Muslims . Between 1951 and 1965 ( following Indonesian independence ) , southern Sulawesi faced a turbulent period as the Darul Islam separatist movement fought for an Islamic state in Sulawesi . The 15 years of guerrilla warfare led to massive conversions to Christianity . 
 Alignment with the Indonesian government , however , did not guarantee safety for the Torajans . In 1965 , a presidential decree required every Indonesian citizen to belong to one of five officially recognized religions : Islam , Christianity ( Protestantism and Catholicism ) , Hinduism , or Buddhism . The Torajan religious belief ( aluk ) was not legally recognized , and the Torajans raised their voices against the law . To make aluk accord with the law , it had to be accepted as part of one of the official religions . In 1969 , Aluk To Dolo ( " the way of ancestors " ) was legalized as a sect of Agama Hindu Dharma , the official name of Hinduism in Indonesia . 
 = = Society = = 
 There are three main types of affiliation in Toraja society : family , class and religion . 
 = = = Family affiliation = = = 
 Family is the primary social and political grouping in Torajan society . Each village is one extended family , the seat of which is the tongkonan , a traditional Torajan house . Each tongkonan has a name , which becomes the name of the village . The familial dons maintain village unity . Marriage between distant cousins ( fourth cousins and beyond ) is a common practice that strengthens kinship . Toraja society prohibits marriage between close cousins ( up to and including the third cousin ) — except for nobles , to prevent the dispersal of property . Kinship is actively reciprocal , meaning that the extended family helps each other farm , share buffalo rituals , and pay off debts . 
 Each person belongs to both the mother 's and the father 's families , the only bilateral family line in Indonesia . Children , therefore , inherit household affiliation from both mother and father , including land and even family debts . Children 's names are given on the basis of kinship , and are usually chosen after dead relatives . Names of aunts , uncles and cousins are commonly referred to in the names of mothers , fathers and siblings . 
 Before the start of the formal administration of Toraja villages by the Tana Toraja Regency , each Toraja village was autonomous . In a more complex situation , in which one Toraja family could not handle their problems alone , several villages formed a group ; sometimes , villages would unite against other villages . Relationship between families was expressed through blood , marriage , and shared ancestral houses ( tongkonan ) , practically signed by the exchange of water buffalo and pigs on ritual occasions . Such exchanges not only built political and cultural ties between families but defined each person 's place in a social hierarchy : who poured palm wine , who wrapped a corpse and prepared offerings , where each person could or could not sit , what dishes should be used or avoided , and even what piece of meat constituted one 's share . 
 = = = Class affiliation = = = 
 In early Toraja society , family relationships were tied closely to social class . There were three strata : nobles , commoners , and slaves ( slavery was abolished in 1909 by the Dutch East Indies government ) . Class was inherited through the mother . It was taboo , therefore , to marry " down " with a woman of lower class . On the other hand , marrying a woman of higher class could improve the status of the next generation . The nobility 's condescending attitude toward the commoners is still maintained today for reasons of family prestige . 
 Nobles , who were believed to be direct descendants of the descended person from heaven , lived in <unk> , while commoners lived in less lavish houses ( bamboo shacks called <unk> ) . Slaves lived in small huts , which had to be built around their owner 's tongkonan . Commoners might marry anyone , but nobles preferred to marry in @-@ family to maintain their status . Sometimes nobles married Bugis or Makassarese nobles . Commoners and slaves were prohibited from having death feasts . Despite close kinship and status inheritance , there was some social mobility , as marriage or change in wealth could affect an individuals status . Wealth was counted by the ownership of water buffaloes . 
 Slaves in Toraja society were family property . Sometimes Torajans decided to become slaves when they incurred a debt , pledging to work as payment . Slaves could be taken during wars , and slave trading was common . Slaves could buy their freedom , but their children still inherited slave status . Slaves were prohibited from wearing bronze or gold , carving their houses , eating from the same dishes as their owners , or having sex with free women — a crime punishable by death . 
 = = = Religious affiliation = = = 
 Toraja 's indigenous belief system is polytheistic animism , called aluk , or " the way " ( sometimes translated as " the law " ) . In the Toraja myth , the ancestors of Torajan people came down from heaven using stairs , which were then used by the Torajans as a communication medium with Puang Matua , the Creator . The cosmos , according to aluk , is divided into the upper world ( heaven ) , the world of man ( earth ) , and the underworld . At first , heaven and earth were married , then there was a darkness , a separation , and finally the light . Animals live in the underworld , which is represented by rectangular space enclosed by pillars , the earth is for mankind , and the heaven world is located above , covered with a saddle @-@ shaped roof . Other Toraja gods include Pong <unk> di <unk> ( god of Earth ) , Indo ' <unk> @-@ <unk> ( a goddess who can cause earthquakes ) , Pong <unk> ( god of death ) , and Indo ' Belo <unk> ( goddess of medicine ) ; there are many more . 
 The earthly authority , whose words and actions should be cleaved to both in life ( agriculture ) and death ( funerals ) , is called to <unk> ( an aluk priest ) . Aluk is not just a belief system ; it is a combination of law , religion , and habit . Aluk governs social life , agricultural practices , and ancestral rituals . The details of aluk may vary from one village to another . One common law is the requirement that death and life rituals be separated . Torajans believe that performing death rituals might ruin their corpses if combined with life rituals . The two rituals are equally important . During the time of the Dutch missionaries , Christian Torajans were prohibited from attending or performing life rituals , but were allowed to perform death rituals . Consequently , Toraja 's death rituals are still practised today , while life rituals have diminished . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Tongkonan = = = 
 Tongkonan are the traditional Torajan ancestral houses . They stand high on wooden piles , topped with a layered split @-@ bamboo roof shaped in a sweeping curved arc , and they are incised with red , black , and yellow detailed wood carvings on the exterior walls . The word " tongkonan " comes from the Torajan <unk> ( " to sit " ) . 
 Tongkonan are the center of Torajan social life . The rituals associated with the tongkonan are important expressions of Torajan spiritual life , and therefore all family members are impelled to participate , because symbolically the tongkonan represents links to their ancestors and to living and future kin . According to Torajan myth , the first tongkonan was built in heaven on four poles , with a roof made of Indian cloth . When the first Torajan ancestor descended to earth , he imitated the house and held a large ceremony . 
 The construction of a tongkonan is laborious work and is usually done with the help of the extended family . There are three types of tongkonan . The tongkonan <unk> is the house of the highest authority , used as the " center of government " . The tongkonan <unk> belongs to the family members who have some authority in local traditions . Ordinary family members reside in the tongkonan <unk> . The exclusivity to the nobility of the tongkonan is diminishing as many Torajan commoners find lucrative employment in other parts of Indonesia . As they send back money to their families , they enable the construction of larger tongkonan . 
 Architecture in the style of a tongkonan is still very common . Various administration buildings were built in this style in recent years , e.g. the <unk> building in Rantepao . 
 = = = Wood carvings = = = 
 To express social and religious concepts , Torajans carve wood , calling it Pa <unk> ( or " the writing " ) . Wood carvings are therefore Toraja 's cultural manifestation . 
 Each carving receives a special name , and common motifs are animals and plants that symbolize some virtue . For example , water plants and animals , such as crabs , tadpoles and water weeds , are commonly found to symbolize fertility . In some areas noble elders claim these symbols refer to strength of noble family , but not everyone agrees . The overall meaning of groups of carved motifs on houses remains debated and tourism has further complicated these debates because some feel a uniform explanation must be presented to tourists . The image to the left shows an example of Torajan wood carving , consisting of 15 square panels . The center bottom panel represents buffalo or wealth , a wish for many buffaloes for the family . The center panel represents a knot and a box , a hope that all of the family 's offspring will be happy and live in harmony , like goods kept safe in a box . The top left and top right squares represent an aquatic animal , indicating the need for fast and hard work , just like moving on the surface of water . It also represents the need for a certain skill to produce good results . 
 Regularity and order are common features in Toraja wood carving ( see table below ) , as well as abstracts and geometrical designs . Nature is frequently used as the basis of Toraja 's ornaments , because nature is full of abstractions and geometries with regularities and ordering . Toraja 's ornaments have been studied in <unk> to reveal their mathematical structure , but Torajans base this art only on approximations . To create an ornament , bamboo sticks are used as a geometrical tool . 
 = = = Funeral rites = = = 
 In Toraja society , the funeral ritual is the most elaborate and expensive event . The richer and more powerful the individual , the more expensive is the funeral . In the aluk religion , only nobles have the right to have an extensive death feast . The death feast of a nobleman is usually attended by thousands and lasts for several days . A ceremonial site , called <unk> , is usually prepared in a large , grassy field where shelters for audiences , rice barns , and other ceremonial funeral structures are specially made by the deceased family . Flute music , funeral chants , songs and poems , and crying and wailing are traditional Toraja expressions of grief with the exceptions of funerals for young children , and poor , low @-@ status adults . 
 The ceremony is often held weeks , months , or years after the death so that the deceased 's family can raise the significant funds needed to cover funeral expenses . Torajans traditionally believe that death is not a sudden , abrupt event , but a gradual process toward Puya ( the land of souls , or afterlife ) . During the waiting period , the body of the deceased is wrapped in several layers of cloth and kept under the tongkonan . The soul of the deceased is thought to linger around the village until the funeral ceremony is completed , after which it begins its journey to Puya . 
 Another component of the ritual is the slaughter of water buffalo . The more powerful the person who died , the more buffalo are slaughtered at the death feast . Buffalo carcasses , including their heads , are usually lined up on a field waiting for their owner , who is in the " sleeping stage " . Torajans believe that the deceased will need the buffalo to make the journey and that they will be quicker to arrive at Puya if they have many buffalo . <unk> tens of water buffalo and hundreds of pigs using a machete is the climax of the elaborate death feast , with dancing and music and young boys who catch spurting blood in long bamboo tubes . Some of the slaughtered animals are given by guests as " gifts " , which are carefully noted because they will be considered debts of the deceased 's family . However , a cockfight , known as <unk> <unk> , is an integral part of the ceremony . As with the sacrifice of the buffalo and the pigs , the cockfight is considered sacred because it involves the spilling of blood on the earth . In particular , the tradition requires the sacrifice of at least three chickens . However , it is common for at least 25 pairs of chickens to be set against each other in the context of the ceremony . 
 There are three methods of burial : the coffin may be laid in a cave or in a carved stone grave , or hung on a cliff . It contains any possessions that the deceased will need in the afterlife . The wealthy are often buried in a stone grave carved out of a rocky cliff . The grave is usually expensive and takes a few months to complete . In some areas , a stone cave may be found that is large enough to accommodate a whole family . A wood @-@ carved effigy , called Tau tau , is usually placed in the cave looking out over the land . The coffin of a baby or child may be hung from ropes on a cliff face or from a tree . This hanging grave usually lasts for years , until the ropes rot and the coffin falls to the ground . 
 In the ritual called Ma <unk> , that takes place each year in August , the bodies of the deceased are exhumed to be washed , groomed and dressed in new clothes . The mummies are then walked around the village . 
 = = = Dance and music = = = 
 Torajans perform dances on several occasions , most often during their elaborate funeral ceremonies . They dance to express their grief , and to honour and even cheer the deceased person because he is going to have a long journey in the afterlife . First , a group of men form a circle and sing a monotonous chant throughout the night to honour the deceased ( a ritual called Ma <unk> ) . This is considered by many Torajans to be the most important component of the funeral ceremony . On the second funeral day , the Ma <unk> warrior dance is performed to praise the courage of the deceased during life . Several men perform the dance with a sword , a large shield made from buffalo skin , a helmet with a buffalo horn , and other ornamentation . The Ma <unk> dance precedes a procession in which the deceased is carried from a rice barn to the <unk> , the site of the funeral ceremony . During the funeral , elder women perform the Ma <unk> dance while singing a poetic song and wearing a long feathered costume . The Ma <unk> dance is performed to remind the audience of the generosity and loyalty of the deceased person . After the bloody ceremony of buffalo and pig slaughter , a group of boys and girls clap their hands while performing a cheerful dance called Ma <unk> . 
 As in other agricultural societies , Torajans dance and sing during harvest time . The Ma <unk> dance celebrates the thanksgiving event , and the Ma <unk> dance is performed while Torajans are pounding rice . There are several war dances , such as the <unk> dance performed by men , followed by the Ma <unk> dance performed by women . The aluk religion governs when and how Torajans dance . A dance called Ma <unk> can be performed only once every 12 years . Ma <unk> is a major Toraja ceremony in which priests wear a buffalo head and dance around a sacred tree . 
 A traditional musical instrument of the Toraja is a bamboo flute called a Pa <unk> ( suling is an Indonesian word for flute ) . This six @-@ holed flute ( not unique to the Toraja ) is played at many dances , such as the thanksgiving dance Ma <unk> , where the flute accompanies a group of shirtless , dancing men with long fingernails . The Toraja have indigenous musical instruments , such as the Pa <unk> ( made from palm leaves ) and the Pa <unk> ( the Torajan version of a jaw harp ) . The Pa <unk> is played during harvest time and at house inauguration ceremonies . 
 = = Language = = 
 The ethnic Toraja language is dominant in Tana Toraja with the main language as the Sa 'dan Toraja . Although the national Indonesian language is the official language and is spoken in the community , all elementary schools in Tana Toraja teach Toraja language . 
 Language varieties of Toraja , including <unk> , <unk> , Tae ' , <unk> ' , <unk> ' , and Toraja @-@ Sa 'dan , belong to the Malayo @-@ Polynesian language from the Austronesian family . At the outset , the isolated geographical nature of Tana Toraja formed many dialects between the Toraja languages themselves . After the formal administration of Tana Toraja , some Toraja dialects have been influenced by other languages through the transmigration program , introduced since the colonialism period , and it has been a major factor in the linguistic variety of Toraja languages . 
 A prominent attribute of Toraja language is the notion of grief . The importance of death ceremony in Toraja culture has characterized their languages to express intricate degrees of grief and mourning . The Toraja language contains many terms referring to sadness , longing , depression , and mental pain . Giving a clear expression of the psychological and physical effect of loss is a catharsis and sometimes lessens the pain of grief itself . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Prior to Suharto 's " New Order " administration , the Torajan economy was based on agriculture , with cultivated wet rice in terraced fields on mountain slopes , and supplemental cassava and maize crops . Much time and energy were devoted to raising water buffalo , pigs , and chickens , primarily for ceremonial sacrifices and consumption . Coffee was the first significant cash crop produced in Toraja , and was introduced in the mid 19th century , changing the local economy towards commodity production for external markets and gaining an excellent reputation for quality in the international market . 
 With the commencement of the New Order in 1965 , Indonesia 's economy developed and opened to foreign investment . In Toraja , a coffee plantation and factory was established by Key Coffee of Japan , and Torajan coffee regained a reputation for quality within the growing international specialty coffee sector Multinational oil and mining companies opened new operations in Indonesia during the 1970s and 1980s . Torajans , particularly younger ones , relocated to work for the foreign companies — to Kalimantan for timber and oil , to Papua for mining , to the cities of Sulawesi and Java , and many went to Malaysia . The out @-@ migration of Torajans was steady until 1985 @.@ and has continued since , with remittances sent back by emigre Torajans performing an important role within the contemporary economy . 
 Tourism commenced in Toraja in the 1970s , and accelerated in the 1980s and 1990s . Between 1984 and 1997 , a significant number of Torajans obtained their incomes from tourism , working in and owning hotels , as tour guides , drivers , or selling souvenirs . With the rise of political and economic instability in Indonesia in the late 1990s — including religious conflicts elsewhere on Sulawesi — tourism in Tana Toraja has declined dramatically . Toraja continues to be a well known origin for Indonesian coffee , grown by both smallholders and plantation estates , although migration , remittances and off @-@ farm income is considered far more important to most households , even those in rural areas . 
 = = Tourism and Cultural Change = = 
 Before the 1970s , Toraja was almost unknown to Western tourism . In 1971 , about 50 Europeans visited Tana Toraja . In 1972 , at least 400 visitors attended the funeral ritual of Puang of <unk> , the highest @-@ ranking nobleman in Tana Toraja and the so @-@ called " last pure @-@ blooded Toraja noble . " The event was documented by National Geographic and broadcast in several European countries . In 1976 , about 12 @,@ 000 tourists visited the regency and in 1981 , Torajan sculpture was exhibited in major North American museums . " The land of the heavenly kings of Tana Toraja " , as written in the exhibition brochure , embraced the outside world . 
 In 1984 , the Indonesian Ministry of Tourism declared Tana Toraja Regency the prima donna of South Sulawesi . Tana Toraja was heralded as " the second stop after Bali " . Tourism was increasing dramatically : by 1985 , a total number of 150 @,@ 000 foreigners had visited the Regency ( in addition to 80 @,@ 000 domestic tourists ) , and the annual number of foreign visitors was recorded at 40 @,@ 000 in 1989 . Souvenir stands appeared in Rantepao , the cultural center of Toraja , roads were sealed at the most @-@ visited tourist sites , new hotels and tourist @-@ oriented restaurants were opened , and an airstrip was opened in the Regency in 1981 . 
 Tourism developers have marketed Tana Toraja as an exotic adventure — an area rich in culture and off the beaten track . Western tourists expected to see stone @-@ age villages and pagan funerals . Toraja is for tourists who have gone as far as Bali and are willing to see more of the wild , " untouched " islands . However , they were more likely to see a Torajan wearing a hat and denim , living in a Christian society . Tourists felt that the tongkonan and other Torajan rituals had been preconceived to make profits , and complained that the destination was too commercialized . This has resulted in several clashes between Torajans and tourism developers , whom Torajans see as outsiders . 
 A clash between local Torajan leaders and the South Sulawesi provincial government ( as a tourist developer ) broke out in 1985 . The government designated 18 Toraja villages and burial sites as traditional tourist attractions . Consequently , zoning restrictions were applied to these areas , such that Torajans themselves were barred from changing their <unk> and burial sites . The plan was opposed by some Torajan leaders , as they felt that their rituals and traditions were being determined by outsiders . As a result , in 1987 , the Torajan village of <unk> <unk> and several other designated tourist attractions closed their doors to tourists . This closure lasted only a few days , as the villagers found it too difficult to survive without the income from selling souvenirs . 
 Tourism has also transformed Toraja society . Originally , there was a ritual which allowed commoners to marry nobles ( <unk> ) and thereby gain nobility for their children . However , the image of Torajan society created for the tourists , often by " lower @-@ ranking " guides , has eroded its traditional strict hierarchy . High status is not as esteemed in Tana Toraja as it once was . Many low @-@ ranking men can declare themselves and their children nobles by gaining enough wealth through work outside the region and then marrying a noble woman . 
 At least 25 cyclist teams from 20 countries will join " Tour de Toraja " in early 2012 . The cycling event efforts to promote the province 's tourism mainly Toraja area . 
 = Shenandoah ( band ) = 
 Shenandoah is an American country music group founded in Muscle Shoals , Alabama in 1984 by Marty Raybon ( lead vocals , acoustic guitar ) , Ralph Ezell ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) , Stan Thorn ( keyboards , backing vocals ) , Jim Seales ( lead guitar , backing vocals ) , and Mike McGuire ( drums , background vocals ) . Thorn and Ezell left the band in the mid @-@ 1990s , with Rocky Thacker taking over on bass guitar ; Keyboardist Stan Munsey joined the line up in 1995 . The band split up in 1997 after Raybon left . Seales , Munsey , Thacker and McGuire reformed the band in 2000 with lead singer Brent Lamb , who was in turn replaced by Curtis Wright and then by Jimmy Yeary . Ezell rejoined in the early 2000s , and after his 2007 death , he was replaced by Mike Folsom . Raybon returned to the band in 2014 . That same year , Jamie Michael replaced the retiring Jim Seales on lead guitar . 
 Shenandoah has released nine studio albums , of which two have been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The band has also charted twenty @-@ six singles on the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts , including the Number One hits " The Church on Cumberland Road , " " Sunday in the South " and " Two Dozen Roses " from 1989 , " Next to You , Next to Me " from 1990 , and " If Bubba Can Dance ( I Can Too ) " from 1994 . The late 1994 @-@ early 1995 single " Somewhere in the Vicinity of the Heart , " which featured guest vocals from Alison Krauss , won both artists a Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . 
 = = History = = 
 Lead guitarist Jim Seales and drummer Mike McGuire formed Shenandoah in 1984 as a house band in Muscle Shoals , Alabama , with bass guitarist Ralph Ezell and keyboardist Stan Thorn , as well as lead singer Marty Raybon , who had been in his father 's bluegrass band since childhood called American Bluegrass Express , as well as Heartbreak Mountain . Before that , Seales , Thorn , McGuire and Ezell were session musicians . McGuire invited songwriting friend Robert Byrne to one of the session band 's shows . Byrne then invited them into his recording studio to record a demo , which he then pitched to Columbia Records ' CBS Records division . The band first wanted to assume the name The MGM Band , a name which was rejected for legal reasons . CBS suggested Rhythm Rangers and Shenandoah as possible names , and Raybon chose the latter because he thought that the name Rhythm Rangers " sounded like an amateur band . " 
 = = = 1987 – 1990 : Shenandoah and The Road Not Taken = = = 
 In 1987 , Shenandoah released its self @-@ titled debut studio album , which Byrne and Rick Hall produced . This album accounted for the band 's first two charting singles in " They Don 't Make Love Like We Used To " and " Stop the Rain " . The latter was the band 's first Top 40 country hit , peaking at number 28 on the Billboard Hot Country Singles ( now Hot Country Songs ) charts . John Bush of Allmusic wrote that this album " leaned a little close to the pop @-@ schmaltz they later rebelled against . " 
 The Road Not Taken was the band 's second album , released in 1988 . This album 's first two singles — " She Doesn 't Cry Anymore " , previously found on Shenandoah , and " Mama Knows " — brought the band to the Top Ten for the first time . After these singles came three consecutive Billboard number @-@ one hits : " The Church on Cumberland Road " , " Sunday in the South " and " Two Dozen Roses " . " The Church on Cumberland Road , " with its two @-@ week run at Number One , marked the first time in country music history that a country music band 's first number @-@ one single spent more than one week at the top . This song was originally recorded by its one of its three writers , former Rockets and Billy Hill member Dennis Robbins as the B @-@ side to his 1987 single " Two of a Kind , Workin ' on a Full House " ; Garth Brooks would later reach number one in 1991 with a rendition of the latter song . Byrne co @-@ wrote " Two Dozen Roses " with Mac McAnally , a veteran songwriter and session musician who has recorded both as a solo singer and as a member of Jimmy Buffett 's Coral Reefer Band . The last single from The Road Not Taken , " See If I Care " , reached number 6 on Billboard and number one on Gavin Report . On January 22 , 1991 , The Road Not Taken earned a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Tom Roland of Allmusic gave The Road Not Taken four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , with his review saying , " The songs mix the day @-@ to @-@ day struggles of everyday @-@ Joe with a steady respect for love , personal roots , and family . " In the wake of The Road Not Taken 's success , the band played 300 shows in 1989 . 
 = = = 1990 – 1992 : Extra Mile and lawsuits = = = 
 The band achieved its biggest hit in 1990 with the three @-@ week number @-@ one single " Next to You , Next to Me . " Written by then @-@ solo singers Robert Ellis Orrall and Curtis Wright , this was the first of five singles from Shenandoah 's third album , Extra Mile . " Ghost in This House , " " I Got You " ( co @-@ written by Teddy Gentry of the band Alabama ) and " The Moon Over Georgia " all peaked in the Billboard top ten between late 1990 and mid @-@ 1991 , with the latter two reaching number one on Gavin Report ; " When You Were Mine , " the fifth single , stopped at number 38 on Billboard in 1991 . Also that year , the band won the Academy of Country Music 's Vocal Group of the Year award . 
 Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly gave Extra Mile a B rating , saying that it was " unflinchingly commercial " but adding that " the band goes beyond Alabama 's jingoistic flag @-@ waving and Restless Heart 's vapid mood @-@ <unk> to showcase intelligent ballads and jaunty rhythm numbers . " An uncredited review in the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said that the band " proved that no matter how overcrowded the field is , there 's always room for quality . " Extra Mile earned a gold certification in the United States . 
 Following the release of Extra Mile , a band from Tennessee threatened to sue Shenandoah over the use of the name Shenandoah . After a financial settlement was made with the Tennessee band , four other bands all filed lawsuits over Shenandoah 's name . The lawsuits depleted the money earned by the band on the road , which led to Raybon asking the label to pay one @-@ third of their legal costs . The label refused , and Shenandoah filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in early 1991 after paying more than $ 200 @,@ 000 on court settlements . Although the lawsuits allowed Shenandoah to keep its name , the bankruptcy filing terminated the contract with Columbia after a 1992 Greatest Hits package . The label 's officials then filed a lawsuit against the band , claiming that it had tried to void its agreement with the label . After Shenandoah 's departure , there were no other bands on Columbia 's Nashville division ; as a result , producer Larry Strickland assembled three musicians to create a new band called Matthews , Wright & King in an attempt to keep a commercially successful band on the label . 
 = = = 1992 – 1994 : Long Time Comin ' and Under the Kudzu = = = 
 In 1992 , the band had moved to RCA Records Nashville , releasing Long Time Comin ' on it that year . This album was produced by Byrne and Keith Stegall , a former solo singer best known for producing Alan Jackson 's albums . " Rock My Baby " ( another Curtis Wright co @-@ write ) led off the single releases , reaching number 2 on Billboard and Radio & Records and number 1 on Gavin Report . After it came the top 30 hits " Hey Mister ( I Need This Job ) " and " Leavin 's Been a Long Time Comin ' " , whose music video featured a guest appearance by Eddy Arnold . The band was nominated as Vocal Group of the Year at the Academy of Country Music again in 1992 . Long Time Comin ' received a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating from the Chicago Tribune , whose Jack Hurst said that it was " an excellent brand of rural @-@ toned blue @-@ collar music . " Nash gave a B- rating in Entertainment Weekly , where she said that the album had a more country pop @-@ oriented sound than its predecessors , but commended the " sincerity " of Raybon 's voice and the themes of " family and friendship . " 
 Under the Kudzu , Shenandoah 's second RCA album , followed in 1993 . It was produced by Don Cook , who was also Brooks & Dunn 's producer at the time . " Janie Baker 's Love Slave " , written by " Burning Love " writer Dennis Linde , was a top 15 Billboard hit from the album early that year . Next came " I Want to Be Loved Like That " , which peaked at number three on Billboard , number two on Gavin Report and number one on Radio & Records . The album also included the band 's fifth and final Billboard number @-@ one hit , " If Bubba Can Dance ( I Can Too ) " , which Raybon and McGuire wrote with veteran Nashville songwriter Bob <unk> after seeing a television commercial for line dancing instructions . " I 'll Go Down Loving You , " the last single from the album , spent eleven weeks on the Billboard charts and peaked at number 46 , thus becoming the band 's first single to miss the Top 40 since " They Don 't Make Love Like We Used To " in 1987 . Michael Corcoran of The Dallas Morning News called Under the Kudzu " their strongest album to date " , and Jack Hurst gave it three stars , saying , " Shenandoah carries most of this album with impassioned vocals rather than superior song content . " 
 = = = 1994 – 1995 : In the Vicinity of the Heart and collaborations = = = 
 Columbia 's parent company Sony Music Entertainment released ten of the band 's Columbia songs in a Super Hits compilation in May 1994 , which was certified gold in 2002 . Shenandoah also collaborated with country and bluegrass singer Ricky Skaggs on the 1994 Keith Whitley tribute Keith Whitley : A Tribute Album , recording a cover version of Whitley 's " All I Ever Loved Was You " . Later in 1994 , the band left RCA for Liberty Records , then the name for the Nashville division of Capitol Records . RCA gave Liberty the master recordings for a nearly @-@ completed album , to which Liberty added " Somewhere in the Vicinity of the Heart " , a song featuring guest vocals from bluegrass musician Alison Krauss . Liberty released the album in November 1994 as In the Vicinity of the Heart , with the number seven @-@ peaking title track also serving as the first single release . This song was also Krauss ' first top 40 country hit , and its success helped boost sales of her album Now That I 've Found You : A Collection . 
 Vicinity became the band 's fastest @-@ selling album , and the first 175 @,@ 000 copies were distributed with prepaid telephone cards which included an 800 number that could be called to receive a greeting from the band members . The album also produced the band 's last Top Ten hit in " Darned If I Don 't ( <unk> If I Do ) . " Originally the B @-@ side to " Somewhere in the Vicinity of the Heart , " this song was co @-@ written by Ronnie Dunn ( of Brooks & Dunn ) and songwriter Dean Dillon , best known for co @-@ writing several of George Strait 's singles . " Heaven Bound ( I 'm Ready ) " ( another Dennis Linde song ) and " Always Have , Always Will , " peaking at numbers 24 and 40 , were the last two releases from the album . Jim Ridley gave the album a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating in New Country magazine , citing the vocal performances on the title track and " I Wouldn 't Know " as standouts , but saying that the rest of the album did not take any risks . 
 Raybon released a solo gospel music album for Sparrow Records in July 1995 , and in October of the same year , that label released a multi @-@ artist country @-@ gospel album entitled Amazing Grace — A Country Salute to Gospel , to which the band contributed a rendition of " Beulah Land . " Shenandoah also covered The Beatles ' " Can 't Buy Me Love " on the mid @-@ 1995 album Come Together : America Salutes The Beatles . " Somewhere in the Vicinity of the Heart " won Shenandoah and Krauss won the 1995 Grammy Award for Best Country Vocal Collaboration and the Country Music Association award for Vocal Event , and " Darned If I Don 't " was nominated for Grammy Award for Best Country Vocal by a Duo or Group the same year . 
 = = = 1995 – 1996 : Now and Then and Shenandoah Christmas = = = 
 Stan Thorn and Ralph Ezell left in late 1995 and early 1996 , respectively , with Rocky Thacker unofficially replacing Ezell , and songwriter / keyboardist Stan Munsey replacing Thorn . During this time , Liberty Records was renamed Capitol Records Nashville . The band 's first album for Capitol , 1996 's Now and Then , comprised re @-@ recordings of eight Columbia singles , the original recording of " Somewhere in the Vicinity of the Heart " , and five new songs . Among these new songs was the album 's only single , " All Over but the <unk> ' , " which peaked at number 43 on Billboard . 
 Nash gave this album an A- rating in Entertainment Weekly , saying that Raybon 's voice " beautifully capture [ s ] the rites of passage in Small Town , USA . " Larry Stephens of Country Standard Time also reviewed the album favorably , saying , " The familiar hits on this album have all been re @-@ recorded , but they 've lost none of their familiar and loved sound , " while Allmusic critic William Ruhlmann gave it two stars out of five and referred to it as a " stopgap . " 
 Shenandoah 's first Christmas music album , Shenandoah Christmas , was released in September 1996 , also on Capitol . Except for the original song " There 's a Way in the Manger , " it comprised acoustic renditions of popular Christmas songs . It received a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating from Allmusic , whose critic Thom Owens said that none of the renditions were " particularly noteworthy . " 
 = = = 1997 : Departure of Marty Raybon and disbanding of Shenandoah = = = 
 Marty Raybon and his brother Tim recorded one album as the Raybon Brothers for MCA Nashville Records in mid @-@ 1997 . They charted within the top 40 on both the country and Billboard Hot 100 charts with a rendition of the Bob Carlisle song " Butterfly Kisses , " followed by the number 64 country release " The Way She 's Lookin ' . " Marty continued to tour with Shenandoah until the end of the year , when the remaining members disbanded and he sold the naming rights . In 2000 , he released a second solo album and charted his only solo country chart hit , the number 63 " Cracker Jack Diamond . " Raybon remained a solo artist , while Thorn self @-@ released a solo jazz album titled In a Curious Way in 2001 . 
 = = = 2000 – present : Reunion and Shenandoah 2000 = = = 
 Seales , McGuire , Munsey and Thacker reunited as Shenandoah in 2000 , with two new members : lead singer Brent Lamb , and guitarist / vocalist Curtis Wright . Before joining Shenandoah , Wright had been a member of the Super Grit Cowboy Band in the 1980s , then a solo artist and one @-@ half of the duo Orrall & Wright with Robert Ellis Orrall . Wright also wrote " Next to You , Next to Me " and " Rock My Baby " , collaborating with Orrall on the former . In 2000 , the new lineup recorded the band 's next album , Shenandoah 2000 , under the Free Falls label . It produced the band 's last chart single in the number 65 " What Children Believe . " Jolene Downs of About.com gave this album a positive review , saying that it was a " very strong country album " and " a slightly different sound from the original group , but not bad at all . " The band toured small venues in 2001 to promote it . 
 Lamb left in 2002 , with Wright succeeding him on lead vocals and original bassist Ralph Ezell later re @-@ joining . In 2006 , Shenandoah released the album Journeys on the Cumberland Road label . Ezell died of a heart attack on November 30 , 2007 , and Mike Folsom succeeded him on bass guitar . Also , Wright left the band to join a re @-@ established Pure Prairie League , and songwriter Jimmy Yeary took over as lead singer . In April 2009 , the lineup of Yeary , Folsom , McGuire , Munsey and Seales performed a benefit concert in Muscle Shoals , in which Wright and Raybon also participated . 
 Yeary and McGuire co @-@ wrote a song entitled " You Never Know " as a tribute to Ezell . Darryl Worley recorded this song on his 2009 album Sounds Like Life , saying that he considered it " dead @-@ on " for him . Shenandoah has continued to tour in 2009 and 2010 with Yeary on lead vocals , mostly playing at community festivals and county fairs . Yeary engaged country @-@ gospel singer Sonya Isaacs ( of The Isaacs ) in November 2009 . They have since become married and had one son in 2011 . He has also written songs for other artists , including " In Another World " by Joe Diffie , " Why Wait " by Rascal Flatts , " Summer Thing " by Troy Olsen , " I 'm Gonna Love You Through It " by Martina McBride , and " I Drive Your Truck " by Lee Brice . Yeary left in 2011 , with Doug Stokes taking over on lead vocals , and Chris Lucas ( Roach ) on bass . 
 In August 2014 , Marty Raybon re @-@ joined as lead singer of the band , replacing Doug Stokes . At the time of his rejoining , the band consists of Raybon , McGuire , Munsey , and bassist Chris Lucas , later replaced by Paul Sanders . In October , Jamie Michael replaced the retiring Jim Seales on lead guitar . 
 = = Musical styles = = 
 The band 's sound is defined by country , bluegrass and gospel influences . John Bush of Allmusic calls Shenandoah " one of the first groups to rebel against the urban cowboy image of the ' 80s and lead the way to the new traditionalism of the ' 90s . " Marty Raybon 's vocals have been described as " blend [ ing ] the soulfulness of rhythm and blues with the lonely intensity of great country music . " Alanna Nash wrote that the band 's work relies on " sentimental lyrics revolving around the Southern experience , " and said that Shenandoah " forged its very commercial reputation on a soulful gospel @-@ and @-@ bluegrass blend , with lead singer Marty Raybon 's searing sincerity making even the <unk> songs about small @-@ town Southern values and attitudes memorable . " Logan Smith of the St. Petersburg Times said that the band has " woven together a highly polished sound built around precision musicianship and pristine harmonies , very much a hybrid of Raybon 's bluegrass roots . " Writing for the Associated Press , Joe Edwards cited the variety of sounds on the band 's second album , referring to " The Church on Cumberland Road " as a " spirited up @-@ tempo , " also making note of the Southern imagery in " Sunday in the South " and the " truest country music tradition " of the ballad " She Doesn 't Cry Anymore . " 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Current = = = 
 Paul Sanders - bass , backing vocals ( 2014 @-@ present ) 
 Mike McGuire ( born December 28 , 1958 ) – drums , backing vocals ( 1984 – 1997 , 2000 – present ) 
 Stan Munsey – keyboards ( 1995 – 1997 , 2000 – present ) 
 Marty Raybon – lead vocals , acoustic guitar ( 1984 – 1997 , 2014 – present ) 
 Jamie Michael - lead guitar , backing vocals ( 2014 @-@ present ) 
 = = = Former = = = 
 Chris Lucas ( Roach ) - bass guitar ( 2011 – 2014 ) 
 Ralph Ezell – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1984 – 1996 , 2002 – 2007 ; died 2007 ) 
 Mike Folsom – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 2007 – 2011 ) 
 Brent Lamb – lead vocals ( 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Jim Seales ( born March 20 , 1954 ) – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1984 – 1997 , 2000 – 2014 ) 
 Doug Stokes – lead vocals ( 2011 – 2014 ) 
 Rocky Thacker – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1996 – 1997 , 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Stan Thorn – keyboards , backing vocals ( 1984 – 1995 ) 
 Curtis Wright – lead and backing vocals , acoustic guitar ( 2000 – 2007 ) 
 Jimmy Yeary – lead vocals , acoustic guitar ( 2007 – 2011 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Shenandoah ( 1987 ) 
 The Road Not Taken ( 1989 ) 
 Extra Mile ( 1990 ) 
 Long Time Comin ' ( 1992 ) 
 Under the Kudzu ( 1993 ) 
 In the Vicinity of the Heart ( 1994 ) 
 Shenandoah Christmas ( 1996 ) 
 Shenandoah 2000 ( 2000 ) 
 Journeys ( 2006 ) 
 = = = Billboard number @-@ one hits = = = 
 " The Church on Cumberland Road " ( 2 weeks , 1989 ) 
 " Sunday in the South " ( 1 week , 1989 ) 
 " Two Dozen Roses " ( 1 week , 1989 ) 
 " Next to You , Next to Me " ( 3 weeks , 1990 ) 
 " If Bubba Can Dance ( I Can Too ) " ( 1 week , 1994 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life = 
 Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life ( <unk> ～ It 's a Wonderful Life ～ , Tomoyo <unk> ~ It 's a Wonderful Life ~ ) is a Japanese adult visual novel developed by Key released on November 25 , 2005 for Windows PCs . The game is a spin @-@ off of Key 's earlier all ages game Clannad . Key later released versions of Tomoyo After without the erotic content , and the game was ported to the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable , Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 under the title Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life CS Edition ; CS stands for " consumer software " . The story follows the lives of Tomoya Okazaki , a young man who recently graduated from high school , and his close friend Tomoyo Sakagami as they start to see more of each other in a romantic relationship . 
 The gameplay in Tomoyo After follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the title character Tomoyo . Being a spin @-@ off of Clannad , where Tomoyo is one of the game 's heroines , Tomoyo After provides an expansion of Tomoyo 's story after the events of Clannad and is written by Jun Maeda and Leo Kashida . The art was done by Fumio , as opposed to Itaru Hinoue who had done the art in Clannad . The game ranked as the best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan for the time of its release , and charted in the national top 50 twice more afterwards . A manga adaptation illustrated by Yukiko Sumiyoshi , under the title Tomoyo After : Dear Shining Memories , was serialized in Fujimi Shobo 's Dragon Age Pure in 2007 . Unlike the game which is told from Tomoya 's point of view , the manga is told from Tomoyo 's perspective . A single tankōbon volume was released in Japan in December 2007 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tomoyo After is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Tomoya Okazaki . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . Tomoyo After follows a branching plot line with multiple endings ; depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and make different choices to bring the plot in an alternate direction . In the adult versions of the game , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Tomoya and Tomoyo having sex . Later , Key released versions of Tomoyo After without the erotic content . Additional gameplay in Tomoyo After is a minigame called " Dungeons & Takafumis " , which gives the player chances to play in a role @-@ playing video game setting . " Dungeons & Takafumis " becomes available to play after the game is completed once . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 Tomoyo After 's story revolves around Tomoya Okazaki ( <unk> <unk> , Okazaki Tomoya , voiced by : Yūichi Nakamura ( all ages Windows , PSP , PS3 , Xbox 360 ) , Yūichi Nitta in the role @-@ playing mode only ) , the male protagonist from Clannad , and Tomoyo Sakagami ( <unk> <unk> , Sakagami Tomoyo , voiced by : Ryōko Tanaka ) , one of the main heroines of the same game and the title character of Tomoyo After . Tomoya has already completed his first year of being a full @-@ fledged member of society ; he works as a garbage collector and a repairman . Initially , he is living in an apartment alone , as opposed with living with his father Naoyuki Okazaki ( <unk> <unk> , Okazaki Naoyuki , voiced by : Shunsuke Tani ) with whom he does not get along well . Tomoya still has a close friendship with Tomoyo , who has her story expanded upon than what was seen in Clannad . She has stayed in touch with Tomoya and they are starting to see more of each other in a romantic relationship . 
 The story takes place a month after the events of Clannad during summer vacation after Tomoya has graduated from high school ; he is still in the same town Clannad was set in . One day it is discovered that Tomoyo has a younger half @-@ sister named Tomo Mishima ( <unk> <unk> , Mishima Tomo , voiced by : Akari Sasaki ) who had been living with her mother . Tomo , a young kindergartner , is the illegitimate child of Tomoyo 's father and another woman named Yūko Mishima ( <unk> <unk> , Mishima Yūko , voiced by : Soyo <unk> ) . Tomo moves into Tomoya 's apartment due to her mother 's psychological problems which greatly affected the young girl . Tomoyo loves her half @-@ sister very much and takes care of her constantly since she has always had a weakness for children . 
 Tomoyo also has a younger brother named Takafumi Sakagami ( <unk> <unk> , Sakagami Takafumi , voiced by : Keiko Suzuki ) who is very skilled with computers . He installs a personal computer in Tomoya 's room , and then comes to live in the apartment . Takafumi has an ex @-@ girlfriend named Kanako ( <unk> , voiced by : Keiko Suzuki ) with a foul mouth and who is excessively sarcastic , whose surname is not revealed . She is not happy that her mother remarried and thus does not like to live at home . She too comes to live in Tomoya 's apartment . She has a cameo appearance roughly eighteen minutes into episode six of the Clannad anime series . A central theme in the story is the ties between families , much like in Clannad . 
 = = Development = = 
 After releasing Clannad , Jun Maeda decided to make a game based on Tomoyo 's scenario from Clannad . Maeda handled the game 's planning and scenario , and Leo Kashida , a new member of the team , accompanied him . As opposed to Itaru Hinoue who was the character designer and art director for Clannad , Fumio was the art director for Tomoyo After , while Hinoue helped Fumio with the character design . As such , characters who appeared in Clannad such as Tomoya and Tomoyo look similar but visibly different from when in Clannad . Maeda also composed the music for the game along with Key 's signature composers Shinji Orito and Magome Togoshi . 
 When Tomoyo After was ported to the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) , improvements to the game were included . This edition 's scenario was expanded by the original staff after the removal of the adult content consisting of sex scenes . Yūto Tonokawa wrote some of the additional story for Takafumi and Kanako . With the added scenario and visuals combined , the PS2 edition is 1 @.@ 5 times longer than the Windows edition . In the original version , the entire cast excluding Tomoya Okazaki , had full voice acting ; this was not changed for the PlayStation 2 version . Added support was included so as to make the visuals on the television sharper than in the past with visual novels played on a consumer console rather than on a computer screen . The PS2 version also reduced flickering of the picture , reducing eyestrain . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 Tomoyo After was released as an adult game on November 25 , 2005 as a limited edition version , playable on Windows PCs as a DVD , and as a bonus came bundled with the visual novel 's original soundtrack . The manufacturing of the adult version has since been suspended . An updated all ages version compatible for Windows Vista PCs was released by Key on July 31 , 2009 in a box set containing five other Key visual novels called Key 10th Memorial Box ; this version contains the additional scenario from the PS2 version , and features full voice acting , including Tomoya . The version of Tomoyo After available in Key 10th Memorial Box was re @-@ released on April 30 , 2010 with updated compatibility for Windows 7 PCs under the title Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life Memorial Edition . Key released an updated version titled Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life Perfect Edition on September 26 , 2014 for Windows . The Perfect Edition contains the additional content featured in the consumer ports as well as the adult content from the original version . Tomoyo After was released in English on July 1 , 2016 . 
 The first consumer console port of the game was released for the PS2 on January 25 , 2007 by Prototype under the title Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life CS Edition ; CS stands for " consumer software " . An all ages version playable on FOMA mobile phones was released on May 29 , 2008 by Prototype through VisualArt 's Motto , but did not include the role @-@ playing video game " Dungeons & Takafumis " . A PlayStation Portable version of the CS Edition , along with full voice acting including Tomoya , was released on March 19 , 2009 by Prototype . An Xbox 360 version of the CS Edition was released by Prototype on September 22 , 2010 . A PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) version of the CS Edition was released by Prototype on July 29 , 2012 as a limited edition originally sold only at the VisualArt 's <unk> event held that day in commemoration of the 20th anniversary of VisualArt 's . The PS3 version has subsequently been sold at three other events : at Comiket 83 between December 29 – 31 , 2012 , at the 2013 Tokyo Game Show between September 21 – 22 , and at the <unk> exhibition on May 1 , 2016 to raise money for victims of the 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes , totaling ¥ 272 @,@ 506 . A downloadable version of the PS3 release via the PlayStation Store was released by Prototype on May 29 , 2013 . A version playable on Android devices was released on February 27 , 2013 , but did not include " Dungeons & Takafumis " . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga adaptation , illustrated by Yukiko Sumiyoshi and titled Tomoyo After : Dear Shining Memories , was serialized in Fujimi Shobo 's shōnen manga magazine Dragon Age Pure between April 20 and October 20 , 2007 . The story is based on the visual novel version that preceded it , though instead of the story being told from Tomoya 's point of view , the manga is told from Tomoyo 's perspective . A single tankōbon volume was released in Japan on December 8 , 2007 containing four chapters . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The visual novel has two main theme songs : the opening theme " Light colors " and the ending theme " Life is like a Melody " , both sung by Lia . The Tomoyo After Original Soundtrack , bundled with the original release of Tomoyo After , was released on November 25 , 2005 bearing the catalog number KSLA @-@ 0020 ; it was re @-@ released on April 27 , 2007 . The soundtrack contains 21 tracks composed , arranged , and produced by Jun Maeda , Shinji Orito , Magome Togoshi , Yuki Shimizu , Miu <unk> ( Maiko Iuchi ) , and Kazuya <unk> of I 've Sound . A piano arrange album was released on December 29 , 2005 titled Piano no Mori which contains five tracks from Tomoyo After and five from Clannad . Each of the albums were released on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the original Tomoyo After Windows release premiered at number one in the rankings . This game stayed on the charts for a month longer , ranking in at 35 and 36 . Tomoyo After for Windows was the eighth most widely sold game of 2005 on <unk> In 2006 , the Japanese gaming magazine PC News reported that the PS2 version of Tomoyo After was the fourth @-@ highest selling bishōjo game of 2005 with 49 @,@ 226 units sold . 
 = Mother India = 
 Mother India is a 1957 Indian Hindi @-@ language epic drama film , directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Nargis , Sunil Dutt , Rajendra Kumar , and Raaj Kumar . A remake of Khan 's earlier film Aurat ( 1940 ) , it is the story of a poverty @-@ stricken village woman named Radha ( Nargis ) who , in the absence of her husband , struggles to raise her sons and survive against a cunning money @-@ lender amidst many troubles . Despite her hardship , she sets a goddess @-@ like moral example of an ideal Indian woman . 
 The title of the film was chosen to counter American author Katherine Mayo 's 1927 polemical book Mother India , which vilified Indian culture . Allusions to Hindu mythology are abundant in the film , and its lead character has been seen as a metonymic representation of a Hindu woman who reflects high moral values and the concept of what it means to be a mother to society through self @-@ sacrifice . Mother India metaphorically represents India as a nation in the aftermath of independence , and alludes to a strong sense of nationalism and nation @-@ building . While some authors treat Radha as the symbol of women empowerment , others see her cast in female stereotypes . The Oedipal elements between Radha and her son Birju have also been discussed by authors . The film was shot in Mumbai 's Mehboob Studios and in the villages of Maharashtra , Gujarat , and Uttar Pradesh states . The music by Naushad introduced Western classical music and Hollywood @-@ style orchestra to Hindi cinema . 
 The film was the most expensive Hindi cinema ( Bollywood ) production and earned the highest revenue for any Hindi film at that time . Adjusted for inflation , Mother India still ranks among the all @-@ time Indian box office hits . It was released in India amid fanfare in October or November 1957 , and had several high @-@ profile screenings , including one at the capital New Delhi attended by the country 's president and prime minister . Mother India became a definitive cultural classic and is regarded as one of the best films in Indian and world cinema . It was India 's first submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1958 , where it got the nomination and lost the award by just one vote . The film won the Filmfare Best Film Award for 1957 , and Nargis and Khan won the Best Actress and Best Director awards respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film is set in 1957 , the present day at the time of shooting . When construction of an irrigation canal to the village is completed , Radha ( Nargis ) , considered to be the " mother " of the village , is asked to inaugurate the canal . She remembers her past , when she was newly married . 
 The wedding between Radha and Shamu ( Raaj Kumar ) is paid for by Radha 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , who borrows the money from the moneylender Sukhilala . The conditions of the loan are disputed , but the village elders decide in favour of the moneylender , after which Shamu and Radha are forced to pay three quarters of their crop as interest on the loan of ₹ 500 ( valued at about US $ 105 in 1957 ) . While Shamu works to bring more of their rocky land into use , his arms are crushed by a boulder . Ashamed of his helplessness ( being without arms ) and humiliated by Sukhilala for living on the earnings of his wife , Shamu decides that he is of no use to his family and permanently leaves Radha and their three sons , walking to his own probable death by starvation . Soon after , Radha 's youngest son and her mother @-@ in @-@ law die . A severe storm and the resulting flood destroys houses in the village and ruins the harvest . Sukhilala offers to save Radha and her sons if she trades her body to him for food . Radha vehemently refused his offer , but had to also lose her infant ( her fourth son ) to the atrocities of the storm . Although the villagers begin initially to evacuate the village , they decide to stay and rebuild it , persuaded by Radha . 
 Several years later , Radha 's two surviving children , Birju ( Sunil Dutt ) and Ramu ( Rajendra Kumar ) , are young men . Birju , embittered since childhood by the demands of Sukhilala , takes out his frustrations by pestering the village girls , especially Sukhilala 's daughter , Rupa . Ramu , by contrast , has a calmer temperament and is married soon after . Birju 's anger finally becomes dangerous and , after being provoked , he attacks Sukhilala and his daughter and steals Radha 's <unk> ( marriage bracelets ) that were pawned with Sukhilala . He is chased out of the village and becomes a bandit . Radha promises Sukhilala that she will not let Birju cause harm to Sukhilala 's family . On Rupa 's wedding day , Birju returns with his gang of bandits to exact his revenge . He kills Sukhilala and kidnaps Rupa . When he tries to flee the village on his horse , Radha , his mother , shoots him . He dies in her arms . The film returns to 1957 ; Radha opens the gate of the canal and its reddish water flows into the fields . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Nargis as Radha , the heroine and an archetypal Indian woman 
 Sunil Dutt as Birju , Radha 's rebellious younger son , who turns into a bandit 
 Rajendra Kumar as Ramu , Radha 's elder son , who follows his mother 's path of <unk> 
 Raaj Kumar as Shamu , Radha 's husband 
 <unk> as Sukhilala " Lala " , a cunning money @-@ lender 
 <unk> Maa as Sundar @-@ Chachi , the mother @-@ in @-@ law of Radha 
 <unk> as Champa , the wife of Ramu 
 <unk> as Rupa , Sukhilala 's daughter 
 Sheela Naik as Kamala , a family friend 
 <unk> as Shambu , a family friend , and Kamala 's husband 
 Azra as Chandra , daughter of a schoolmaster of the village 
 Sajid Khan as a young Birju 
 Surendra as a young Ramu 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The title Mother India was inspired by American author Katherine Mayo 's 1927 polemical book of the same name , in which she attacked Indian society , religion and culture . Written against the Indian demands for self @-@ rule and independence from British rule , the book pointed to the treatment of India 's women , the untouchables , animals , dirt , and the character of its nationalistic politicians . Mayo singled out the rampant and fatally weakening sexuality of its males to be at the core of all problems , leading to masturbation , rape , homosexuality , prostitution , venereal diseases , and , most importantly , premature sexual intercourse and maternity . The book created an outrage across India , and it was burned along with her effigy . It was criticised by Mahatma Gandhi as a " report of a drain inspector sent out with the one purpose of opening and examining the drains of the country to be reported upon " . The book prompted over fifty angry books and pamphlets to be published to highlight Mayo 's errors and false perception of Indian society , which had become a powerful influence on the American people 's view of India . 
 Mehboob Khan had the idea for the film and the title as early as 1952 , five years after India 's independence ; in October that year , he approached the import authorities of the Indian government to seek permission for importing raw stocks for the film . In 1955 , the ministries of External Affairs and Information @-@ and @-@ Broadcasting learned of the title of the forthcoming film and demanded that the director send them the script for review , suspicious that it was based on the book and thus a possible threat to national interest . The film team dispatched the script along with a two @-@ page letter on 17 September 1955 saying : 
 There has been considerable confusion and misunderstanding in regard to our film production Mother India and Mayo 's book . Not only are the two incompatible but totally different and indeed opposite . We have intentionally called our film Mother India , as a challenge to this book , in an attempt to evict from the minds of the people the scurrilous work that is Miss Mayo 's book . 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Khan was inspired by American author Pearl S. Buck and her books The Good Earth ( 1931 ) and The Mother ( 1934 ) ; he also saw the film The Good Earth ( 1937 ) , directed by Sidney Franklin . The Mother chronicled the life of a Chinese woman , including her married life and lonely struggle after being abandoned by her husband . Aspects of Mother India , such as moneylenders , toiling on land , and rearing children through hardship were part of the story . Khan originally drew upon these influences in making his 1940 film Aurat , the original version of Mother India . Khan bought the rights of Aurat from the production company National Studios for ₹ 35 @,@ 000 ( valued at about US $ 7 @,@ 350 in 1957 ) . Stylistic elements of Mother India show similarities with Vsevolod Pudovkin 's Soviet silent film Mother ( 1926 ) ; Our Daily Bread ( 1934 ) , directed by King Vidor ; and films of Alexander <unk> . Certain imagery in the film , such as " happy farmers , sickles in their hand , smiling from behind ripening crops " , resemble posters by Soviet constructivist artists . 
 The script of Aurat was devised by Wajahat Mirza , based upon a story by <unk> Mehta . For Mother India , it was reworked by Mirza and the young screenwriter S. Ali Raza . Apart from Mehboob Khan , Mirza and Raza , prominent screenwriters <unk> <unk> , Zia <unk> , Akhtar Mirza , music director Naushad , assistant director <unk> Desai and many others were consulted . The dialogue , reworked by Mirza and Raza , mixed vernacular Hindi with its literary counterpart . 
 The script was intentionally written in a way that promoted the empowerment of women in Indian society ( including the power to resist sexual advances ) and the maintenance of a sense of moral dignity and purpose as individuals ; this was contrary to what Mayo had claimed in her book . These themes , present in Aurat , were further developed with a strong sense of nationalism and nation @-@ building , utilising characters personifying abstract qualities such as " beauty and goodness , wealth and power , poverty and exploitation , community spirit " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Nargis was the director 's first choice for the role of Radha , and despite only being aged 26 at the time , she played the role of the new wife , young single mother and an aged mother of two sons . Nargis — the reigning queen of Hindi cinema at the time — had started her career in a leading role with Khan 's <unk> ( 1943 ) and acted under his direction in Humayun ( 1945 ) and <unk> ( 1949 ) too . Mother India is generally regarded as Nargis 's best performance and was her last major film , before retirement after marriage . 
 Khan had wanted to cast Sabu Dastagir , a Hollywood star of Indian origin , as Birju . Dastagir travelled to India from Los Angeles , stayed in a hotel in Mumbai ( then known as Bombay ) and received a retainer . However , delays and obstacles in beginning shooting and getting a work permit for Dastagir led to his dismissal from the project . Dilip Kumar , an established actor in the Hindi film industry , had originally expressed an interest in playing Birju , which Khan found agreeable ; Dilip Kumar agreed to play Shamu as well . However , Nargis objected that the public would not accept their casting as mother and son because she had done several romantic films alongside him . Sunil Dutt — with the experience of just one film — was finally cast , after <unk> , a comedian in the film , introduced him to Khan . Sajid Khan , the actor who portrayed the young Birju , was unknown at the time , and was from a poor family from the Mumbai slums . Sajid 's salary in the film was ₹ 750 . He was later adopted by Mehboob Khan . Subsequently , Raaj Kumar was cast as Shamu and Rajendra Kumar as Ramu . Mother India was the first successful film and a turning point in the careers of Dutt , Raaj Kumar and Rajendra Kumar . 
 Before principal photography began , Nargis and Raaj Kumar familiarised themselves with farming practices such as ploughing the fields , reaping and sowing , and cotton picking . The extras in the song and dance sequences of the film were from local dance groups in villages where the shooting took place instead of the usual ones from Mumbai . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The initial filming for Mother India began unexpectedly , even before the script and cast were finalised . In 1955 , parts of Uttar Pradesh suffered from major flooding . Cinematographer <unk> Irani travelled to flood @-@ afflicted districts to shoot generic flood scenes . The scheduled principal photography started in 1955 with a budget of ₹ 20 – 25 lakh ( approximately US $ 420 @,@ 000 – 525 @,@ 000 in 1957 ) . However , the budget increased to ₹ 35 – 40 lakh ( approximately US $ 735 @,@ 000 – 840 @,@ 000 in 1957 ) by the end of the filming because of the outdoor sessions and cast and crew 's salaries . This budget , a record at the time , was surpassed by Mughal @-@ e @-@ Azam in 1960 . 
 Several indoor scenes for the film were shot in 1956 at Mehboob Studios in Bandra , Mumbai . Khan and Irani attempted to shoot frequently on location to make the film as realistic as possible . Locations included various villages in Maharashtra , Gujarat ( Maharashtra and Gujarat together formed Bombay State then ) and Uttar Pradesh . The film was shot in 35mm . Contemporary cinematographer Anil Mehta has noted the mastery of Irani 's cinematic techniques in shooting the film , including his " intricate tracks and pans , the detailed mise en scène patterns Irani conceived , even for brief shots — in the studios as well as on location " . The film took about three years to make , from early organisation , planning , and scripting to completion of filming . In a November 1956 interview , Nargis described the film shoot and her role as the most demanding of her career . Mother India was shot in <unk> , later converted to Technicolor . It was shot mostly using the sync sound technique , which was common at the time ; some scenes were dubbed . 
 For shooting the flood scene , a farmer agreed to flood 500 acres ( 200 ha ) of his land . In the exodus scene following the flood , 300 bullock carts , 200 farmers and many horses , tractors and ploughs were used . Gayatri Chatterjee writes about the popular belief that all these were made available by villagers without reimbursement , in her book . However , account ledgers of the production revealed that the villagers were paid . There was a protracted scene in the film in which Radha runs between burning haystacks in search for her son Birju , a renegade bandit , who was hiding there . The fire scene was shot in <unk> area of Surat , Gujarat , by burning bales of hay . Nargis and Dutt acted in the fire scene without doubles . On 1 March 1957 , an accident occurred during the fire scene when the wind direction changed and the fire grew out of control , trapping Nargis . She was saved by Dutt , who quickly grabbed a blanket , plunged inside , and rescued her . Shooting halted temporarily as both had sustained injuries . Dutt was hospitalised for the burns and Nargis helped nurse him , at Khan 's place in <unk> . Nargis — a popular actress at the time — fell in love with Dutt , who was in early stages of his film career and played her son in the film ; they married on 11 March 1958 . Nargis wished to marry soon after the film , but Khan protested that real @-@ life marriage of the onscreen mother @-@ son would be disastrous for the film . Owing to their relationship , Nargis also found it difficult to perform a scene where she beat Dutt with a lathi . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Various authors identify the character of Radha with Hindu mythological goddesses and characters , such as Radha ( the lover of the god Krishna , personifying love and romance ) , Sita ( the divine heroine of the Hindu epic Ramayana , personifying high moral value ) , Savitri ( representing great morality and loyalty to husband ) , Draupadi ( personifying duty and morality ) , <unk> @-@ mata ( earth @-@ mother goddess ) and Lakshmi ( Hindu goddess of prosperity ) . Besides these gentle goddesses , the character of Radha has shades of more ferocious warrior goddesses like Durga and Kali . Film scholars have compared the mild @-@ mannered , obedient son Ramu with the god Rama of the epic Ramayana , and the romantic outlaw Birju — a name of Krishna — with the god Krishna , known for his transgressions . Shamu ( another name of Krishna ) , Radha 's husband who leaves her , is also equated with Krishna , who left his lover Radha in mythological accounts . The title Mother India and Radha 's character are described to be allusions not only to the Hindu Mother Goddess , but also to Bharat Mata ( literally " Mother India " ) , the national personification of India , generally represented as a Hindu goddess . 
 According to professor Nalini Natarajan of the University of Puerto Rico , Nargis 's Mother India is a metonymic representation of a Hindu woman , reflecting high Hindu values , with virtuous morality and motherly self @-@ sacrifice . Film scholar Jyotika Virdi wrote that Mother India could also be seen as a metaphor of the trinity of mother , God , and a dynamic nation . Vijay Mishra , in his 2002 book Bollywood Cinema : Temples of Desire , opined that the Mother India figure is an icon in several respects — being associated with a goddess , her function as a wife , as a lover , and even compromising her femininity at the end of the film by playing the role of Vishnu the Preserver and Shiva the Destroyer , masculine gods . 
 According to Indian film scholars Gokulsing and Dissanayake , while aspiring to traditional Hindu values , the character of Mother India also represents the changing role of the mother in Indian cinema and society in that the mother is not always subservient or dependent on her husband , refining the relationship to the male gender or patriarchal social structures . The New Internationalist said in an 1999 review that Radha transforms from a submissive wife to an independent mother , thereby breaking female stereotypes in Hindi film . In contrast , in a 2012 article in the newspaper The Hindu , author <unk> <unk> has pointed out tropes such as upholding female chastity , wifely devotion and saintly motherhood that reinforce gender stereotypes . While the action of sacrificing motherhood to uphold a woman 's dignity is termed as feminist by some , other authors see it as an attempt of a community woman to protect the patriarchal village structure , that <unk> <unk> ( honour ) of women . A promotional pamphlet to introduce the social context of the film to western audiences described Indian women as being " an altar in India " , and that Indians " measure the virtue of their race by the chastity of their women " , and that " Indian mothers are the nucleus around which revolves the tradition and culture of ages . " 
 In a 2002 review in The New York Times , film critic Dave Kehr compares the film with Stella Dallas ( 1937 ) for the thematic similarity of series of sacrifices made by the female lead , and with Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) as an epic mirroring social upheavals . Film critic Mark Cousins and author <unk> <unk> agree that the film is the Gone with the Wind of Indian cinema . 
 The term " Mother India " has been defined as " a common icon for the emergent Indian nation in the early 20th century in both colonialist and nationalist discourse " . Many authors , including Gayatri Chatterjee , author of Mother India ( 2002 ) , interpret the film as an allegory signifying patriotism and the changing situation in the newly independent nation , and how India was functioning without British authority . It echoes the tale of a modern India , liberating itself from " feudal and colonial oppression " . The film , an archetypal nationalistic picture , is symbolic in that it demonstrated the euphoria of " Mother India " in a nation that had only been independent for 10 years , and it had a long @-@ lasting cultural impact upon the Indian people . Film scholar Saibal Chatterjee considers Mother India a " mirror of independent India " , highlighting problems of a nascent nation , including rural exploitation of farmers by money @-@ lenders , in a dramatic fashion understandable to the common viewer . It also represents the agrarian poverty and hardship of the people at the time . The red water that flows from the canal irrigating the green fields at the end of the film is seen by Chatterjee as a metaphor to represent the blood of Indians in the struggle for independence , flowing to nourish a new free India . The canal is described by Virdi to signal the imminent end of the feudal order . However , despite Radha 's struggle against feudal oppression depicted in the film , her action of stopping the rebellious Birju and upholding status quo — the feudal and patriarchal order — is seen as " regressive " by various authors . 
 In a study of media and popular culture in South Asia , author <unk> Barua draws parallel between the film 's metaphorical representation of the mother as nation , and the metonymic identification with India that Indira Gandhi , India 's only woman prime minister , sought and tried for during her tenure ( 1966 – 77 , and 1980 – 84 ) . In his book Terrorism , Media , Liberation , John David Slocum argues that like Satyajit Ray 's classic masterpiece Pather Panchali ( 1955 ) , Khan 's Mother India has " vied for alternative definitions of Indianness " . However , he emphasises that the film is an overt mythologising and <unk> of the nation in which Indian audiences have used their imagination to define it in the nationalistic context , given that in reality the storyline is about a poverty @-@ stricken peasant from northern India , rather than a true ideal of a modernising , powerful nation . 
 The Radha – Birju relationship is described to have " Oedipal elements " by many authors ; Virdi has argued that in her chastity , Radha channels her sexual desires into maternal love for her sons who effectively become " substitute erotic subjects " . Mishra opines that the crushing of arms of Radha 's husband and the mellowness of the older son symbolise castration , which is in contrast with the rebellion of Birju , identified with sexual potency . Birju 's obsession with his mother 's bracelets is an expression of his oedipal longings , according to Chakravarty . Rachel Dwyer , Professor of Indian Cultures and Cinema at SOAS , describes how " suspiciously smoothly " the Oedipal elements fits into the film and the off @-@ screen romance between Nargis and Dutt , playing mother and son in the film . Radha 's actions at the end of the film in shooting her own son was a breaking of traditional mother – son relationship to safeguard morality , according to author William van der Heide . Virdi points out that this brought ambiguity to the mother figure who acts as a sacrificing provider and also as a destroyer , annihilating her own son , something rare in Hindi cinema . She interprets Birju 's sexual advances on a village girl ( which is incest in north Indian village culture ) as being a substitute in the plot for the incestuous mother – son relationship and his death at the end as a punishment for violation of the taboo . 
 Authors such as <unk> and Woods state that Radha and Ramu are the archetypal champions of virtue in battling hardship and injustice , while Birju is a mischievous child who becomes the anarchist whose uncontrollable rebellion destroys order . Mishra has noted that although Radha upholds Dharma ( the natural law or order ) in the film , it is Birju who achieves identification from the spectators ; in his rebellion lies the agenda of political action that will usher social change . Mishra notes that due to such conflicting ideas , the film is very much conforming , and yet " defiantly subversive " . 
 Film scholar Vijay Mishra has pointed out the presence of " highly syncretic hyphenated Hindu – Muslim nature " of Bollywood in the film . Parama Roy has interpreted that Nargis 's legendary status as the titular Mother India is due to <unk> of the role and her real @-@ life marriage with a Hindu ; she is , according to Roy , scripted as a renouncer of Muslim separatism in the film . Mishra has found <unk> value in Salman Rushdie 's commentary on the film in his novel The Moor 's Last Sigh ( 1995 ) in which Rushdie describes : 
 In Mother India , a piece of Hindu myth @-@ making directed by a Muslim socialist , Mehboob Khan , the Indian peasant women is idealised as bride , mother , and producers of sons , as long @-@ suffering , stoical , loving , redemptive , and conservatively wedded to the maintenance of the social status quo . But for Bad Birju , cast out from his mother 's love , she becomes , as one critic mentioned , ' that image of an aggressive , treacherous , annihilating mother who haunts the fantasy of Indian males ' . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The production team had planned to release Mother India to commemorate the tenth anniversary of India 's independence on 15 August 1957 , but the film was released over two months later . It premiered at the Liberty Cinema in Mumbai on 25 October 1957 , during Diwali ; it ran continuously at Liberty for over a year . It was released in Kolkata ( then called Calcutta ) the same day and in Delhi a week later . It had reached all regions in India by the end of November . Government ministers and other officials were invited to the premieres , and a special screening was held in Rashtrapati Bhavan ( the presidential quarter ) in New Delhi on 23 October 1957 ; the event was attended by President Rajendra Prasad , Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and his daughter Indira Gandhi . Chief Minister of West Bengal Bidhan Chandra Roy and Governor Padmaja Naidu attended a screening in Kolkata . Impressed with the film 's nationalistic message , Chief Minister of Bombay State Morarji Desai granted it exemption from entertainment tax in the state . 
 No reliable data is available on the box office earnings of Mother India . It was in continuous distribution in theatres in India until the mid @-@ 1990s . There was a renewed interest in the film in the 1970s causing an upsurge in ticket sales . Film trade websites provide estimates of its business . <unk> gives ₹ 40 million ( US $ 590 @,@ 000 ) as its gross , and ₹ 1 @,@ 173 million ( US $ 17 million ) as its adjusted net gross , as of 2012 . According to Chatterjee , it did exceptionally good business in Delhi , Uttar Pradesh , Gujarat , Karnataka ( then called Mysore State ) and Maharashtra . The film 's success led Khan to name his next film Son of India . Released in 1962 , it was not well received . 
 Mother India was dubbed in several European languages including Spanish , French and Russian ; it did substantial business in Greece , Spain and Russia and was released in the Eastern Bloc countries . Technicolor arranged one screening of the film in Paris on 30 June 1958 , under the name Les bracelets d 'or ( " The Gold Bracelets " ) . It did minimal business in Paris , but fared better in French colonies . It was successful in the Latin American countries of Peru , Bolivia , and Ecuador . Mother India was also acclaimed across the Arab world , in the Middle East , parts of Southeast Asia , and North Africa and continued to be shown in countries such as Algeria at least ten years after its release . It was released in US on 9 July 1959 to lukewarm response , and the UK release in 1961 was also a commercial failure . The initial international version with English subtitles was 40 minutes shorter than the Indian release . 
 As of 2013 , Mother India is available in DVD in all regions NTSC format , distributed by the Eros Entertainment . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 <unk> Patel of the film magazine <unk> ( December 1957 ) described Mother India after its release as " the greatest picture produced in India " and wrote that no other actress would have been able to perform the role as well as Nargis . A review in Monthly Film Bulletin in 1958 remarked that audiences in UK should be grateful that the international version was shortened by 40 minutes , and termed it a " rag @-@ bag pantomime " . After its US release in 1959 , Irene <unk> reviewed the film in the New York Post in which she praised its " striking dramatic appeal " , but feared it might not be accepted by American audiences due to cultural differences . In a 1976 article in the journal Studies : An Irish Quarterly Review , author Michael Gallagher found the film " an amazing mixture of political allegory and cheap musical , a cross between the impressiveness of Eisenstein and the banality of Show Boat " . The New Internationalist in 1999 found Nargis 's acting " exemplary " , and noted " a clever interplay — artistically and politically — between the traditional and the radical " evident in Mother India . 
 In a 2002 article in The Village Voice , film critic J. Hoberman described the film as " an outrageous masala of apparently discordant elements . " He characterised it as a mixture of " indigenous versions of Soviet @-@ style tractor @-@ opera , Italian neo @-@ realism , Hollywood kiddie @-@ cuteness , a dozen Technicolor musical numbers , and , most significantly , a metaphoric overlay of pop Hinduism . " Hoberman criticised the acting as " broad " , and also wrote about the " vaguely left @-@ wing " nationalist overtone of the film . Author Phill Hall , writing for Film Threat in 2002 , described the film as exceptionally sluggish and one @-@ dimensional , and lampooned it saying " it takes the strongest of constitutions to endure this film without entertaining notions of matricide . " Jonathan Romney in his 2002 report in The Independent observed the earth @-@ mother Radha as " India 's answer to Anna Magnani " and the film as " an all @-@ out exercise in ideological myth @-@ making . " Women 's Feature Service , in a 2007 article , noted Mother India as " one of the most outstanding films of the post @-@ Independence era . " Ziya Us Salam of The Hindu wrote in her 2010 report , " Mehboob was able to blend the individual with the universal , thereby enhancing the film 's appeal without compromising on its sensitivity . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Mother India , its star Nargis , and the director Khan received many awards and nominations . Nargis won the Filmfare Best Actress Award in 1958 and became the first Indian to receive the Best Actress award at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival in present @-@ day Czech Republic . Mother India won the Filmfare Award for Best Film and scooped several other Filmfare awards including Best Director for Khan , Best Cinematographer for <unk> Irani , and Best Sound for R. Kaushik . In 1958 , the film became India 's first submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film and was chosen as one of the five nominations for the category . The international version , 120 minutes long , was sent for Oscars . Additionally , this version had English subtitles , and dropped Mehboob Productions ' logo , which featured the Communist hammer and sickle , to appease the Academy . The 120 @-@ minute version was later distributed in the US and UK by Columbia Pictures . The film came close to winning the Academy Award but lost to Federico Fellini 's Nights of Cabiria by a single vote . Khan was utterly disappointed at not winning the award . " He had seen the other films in the fray and believed Mother India was far superior to them " recalled Sunil Dutt years later . It also won two awards at the 5th National Film Awards in 1957 : an All India Certificate of Merit for Best Feature Film and Certificate of Merit for Best Feature Film in Hindi . 
 = = Music = = 
 The score and soundtrack for Mother India was composed by Naushad . Mehboob Khan had worked on eight films with Naushad and developed a rapport with him . The lyrics were by Shakeel Badayuni . The soundtrack consists of 12 songs and features vocals by Mohammed Rafi , <unk> Begum , Lata Mangeshkar , and Manna Dey . It was not particularly well received upon release , and critics said it did not match the high pitch and quality of the film . However , its later reception has been more positive : the soundtrack made Planet Bollywood 's list of " 100 Greatest Bollywood Soundtracks Ever " , compiled in the 2000s . The review gave the album 7 @.@ 5 stars out of 10 . 
 Mother India is the earliest example of a Hindi film containing Western classical music and Hollywood @-@ style orchestra . An example is a coda during the scene in which Birju runs away from his mother and rejects her . It features a powerful symphonic orchestra with strings , woodwinds and trumpets . This orchestral music contains extensive chromaticism , diminished sevenths , and augmented scales . It also features violin tremolos . Anne Morcom writes in Hindi Film Songs and the Cinema that the piece is unmelodic and " profoundly disturbing " . This use of a western @-@ style orchestra in Indian cinema influenced many later films , such as Mughal @-@ e @-@ Azam ( 1960 ) , which features similar dissonant orchestral music to create atmosphere at tense moments . The song " Holi Aayi Re Kanhai " , sung by <unk> Begum , has been cited as a typical Hindi film song which is written for and sung by a female singer , with an emotional charge that appeals to a mass audience . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mother India has been described as " perhaps India 's most revered film " , a " cinematic epic " , a " flag @-@ bearer of Hindi cinema and a legend in its own right " , Mehboob Khan 's magnum opus and an " all @-@ time blockbuster " , which ranks highly among India 's most successful films . It was in continuous distribution , being played in theatres , for more than three decades ; the record ended in the mid @-@ 1990s with the advent of satellite television and a change in Indian film @-@ viewing habits . Mother India belongs to only a small collection of films , including Kismet ( 1943 ) , Mughal @-@ e @-@ Azam ( 1960 ) , Sholay ( 1975 ) and Hum Aapke Hain Koun .. ! ( 1994 ) , which are repeatedly watched throughout India and are viewed as definitive Hindi films with cultural significance . It is also among the only three Indian films to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film ( the others being Salaam Bombay ! and Lagaan ) . The Hindustan Times ( in 2007 ) identifies the " film 's pungent social references " which are " too harsh to be sold at a profit today . But this heartrending tale filled Indians with hope and pride then . " 
 Mother India is ranked No. 80 in Empire magazine 's " The 100 Best Films of World Cinema " in 2010 . It is listed among the only three Hindi films in the book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die ( the others being Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge and Deewaar ) . Film critic Anupama Chopra included it in her list of top 100 films in world cinema . In 2005 , Indiatimes Movies ranked the film amongst the " Top 25 Must See Bollywood Films " . It was ranked third in the British Film Institute 's 2002 poll of " Top 10 Indian Films " . It was also included TIME 's list of the best Bollywood classics in 2010 , and in CNN @-@ IBN 's list of the " 100 greatest Indian films of all time " in 2013 . The film was premiered in the Cannes Classics section of the 2004 Cannes Film Festival . 
 Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN notes that Mother India " didn 't just put India on the world map , it also defined Hindi cinema for decades that followed . " Film critic Dave Kehr agrees that it influenced Indian films for the next 50 years . A 1983 Channel 4 documentary on Hindi cinema describes the film as setting a benchmark in Indian cinema . The shooting stance of Nargis at the end of the film is one of the all @-@ time iconic images of Hindi cinema . Other iconic scenes include Radha pulling the plough through the field ( see film poster at the top ) and feeding <unk> to her two sons as they pull the plough . The Hindustan Times states that Nargis symbolised mothers in " which all the mothers [ in later films ] had the same clichéd roles to play . Representing both motherhood and Mother Earth , who also nurtures and occasionally punishes , Nargis immortalised the Indian mother on celluloid . " The film pioneered the portrayal of two morally opposed brothers personifying good and evil , which became a repeated motif in Hindi films , including Gunga Jumna ( 1961 ) and Deewar ( 1975 ) . The rebellious Birju also inspired the " angry young man " stock character that arose in 1970s Hindi cinema . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Ramprasad Sen = 
 <unk> Rāmprasād Sen ( Bengali : <unk> ্ <unk> <unk> ; c . 1718 or c . 1723 – c . 1775 ) was a Shakta poet and saint of eighteenth century Bengal . His bhakti poems , known as Ramprasadi , are still popular in Bengal — they are usually addressed to the Hindu goddess Kali and written in Bengali . Stories of Ramprasad 's life typically include legends and myths mixed with biographical details . 
 It is said that , Ramprasad was born into a Tantric family , and showed an inclination towards poetry from an early age . He became a disciple of <unk> Agamavagisha , a Tantric scholar and yogi . Ramprasad became well known for his devotional songs , eventually becoming the court poet of Raja <unk> of Nadia . His life has been the subject of many stories depicting his devotion to , and relationship with , Kali . Ramprasad 's literary works include Vidyasundar , Kali @-@ kirtana , Krishna @-@ kirtana and Shaktigiti . 
 Ramprasad is credited with creating a new compositional form that combined the Bengali folk style of Baul music with classical melodies and kirtan . The new style took root in Bengali culture with many poet @-@ composers combining folk and raga @-@ based melodies , mixing every common style of music from classical to semi @-@ classical and folk . His songs are sung today , with a popular collection — Ramprasadi <unk> ( " Songs of Ramprasad " ) — sold at Shakta temples and pithas in Bengal . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Biographies of Ramprasad are a mixture of biography , metaphor , and legend . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Ramprasad was born in <unk> , a village on the banks of the Ganges about thirty @-@ five miles north of Kolkata , into a Tantric Vaidya family . Due to the absence of birth records , his actual birth date is not known , but it is believed to be around 1718 or 1723 . His father , Ramram Sen , was an Ayurvedic doctor and Sanskrit scholar . Ramprasad 's mother <unk> was Ramram 's second wife . Ramprasad was sent to a Sanskrit <unk> ( school ) where he learned Sanskrit grammar , literature , Persian , and Hindi . As a youth , he had a talent for poetry and learning new languages . 
 Ramram hoped his son would follow in his profession , but Ramprasad showed no interest in practical pursuits . As he grew up , his spiritual inclinations caused a great deal of anxiety to his parents . Believing that marriage would make Ramprasad more responsible , his parents married him to a girl named <unk> when he was twenty @-@ two years old . In keeping with the family custom , the newly wed couple was initiated by the family 's spiritual teacher , <unk> . According to traditional accounts , during initiation when the guru whispered the mantra to him , Ramprasad became consumed by intense longing for the goddess Kali . One year after the initiation he lost his guru . Ramprasad later became the disciple of <unk> Agamavagisha , a Tantric yogi and scholar . Agamavagisha was a well known devotee of Kali and the author of the Bengali book Tantrasara . Agamavagisha instructed Ramprasad in Tantric sadhanas ( spiritual disciplines ) and worship of Kali . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 Instead of following his parents wishes and looking for a job , it is said that Ramprasad devoted most of his time to sadhana . Ramram died before he could make provisions to support the family . Forced finally by poverty , Ramprasad moved to Kolkata and worked as an accountant in the household of Durga Charan Mitra for a monthly salary of thirty rupees . According to traditional accounts , during his employment Ramprasad would write devotional songs to Kali . His fellow employees were appalled to see Ramprasad write poems in his account book , and reported him to their employer . Durga Charan Mitra , upon reading Ramprasad 's work , was moved by his piety and literary skill . Instead of dismissing Ramprasad from work , he asked him to return to his village and compose songs to Kali , while continuing to pay his salary . 
 = = = Sadhana and poetry = = = 
 After returning to his village , Ramprasad spent most of his time in sadhana , meditation , and prayer . Traditional accounts tell of several esoteric sadhanas that he performed , including standing neck @-@ deep in the river Ganges , singing songs to Kali . Ramprasad would regularly practice his sadhana in a <unk> : a grove with five trees — banyan , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> — all regarded as holy in Tantric tradition . He would reportedly spend hours meditating on a <unk> asana ( an altar inside which are interred five skulls – that of a snake , frog , rabbit , fox , and man ) . According to popular stories he had a vision of Kali in her form of <unk> Mahamaya . 
 The Maharaja Krishna Chandra of Nadia , a landlord under Nawab <unk> of Bengal , heard Ramprasad 's hymns . Being an ardent devotee of Kali , he appointed Ramprasad as his court poet . Ramprasad rarely attended the Maharaja 's court and would spend his time in sadhana and worship of Kali instead . Krishna Chandra became Ramprasad 's benefactor , giving him 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ; 0 @.@ 16 sq mi ) of tax free land . Ramprasad , in return , dedicated his book Vidyasundar ( " Beautiful Knowledge " ) to the Maharaja . Krishna Chandra also gave Ramprasad the title <unk> ( " Entertainer of poets " ) . During the Maharaja 's last years , Ramprasad stayed beside him , singing hymns to Kali . Ramprasad 's mysticism was recognized by <unk> and Nawab <unk> . Ramprasad is said to have visited the court of the Nawab at the Nawab 's fervent request . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 During Ramprasad 's old age , he was looked after by his son <unk> and daughter @-@ in @-@ law <unk> . A folk story is told of Ramprasad 's death . Ramprasad was very fond of taking part in Kali puja on the night of Diwali , the festival of lights . On one Kali puja night , he performed the puja and sang throughout the night . In the morning , Ramprasad carried the jar of Divine Mother 's sanctified water on his head to the Ganges . He was followed by the devotees , who carried the clay image of Kali to be immersed in the Ganges after the night of worship . Ramprasad waded into the holy river , until the water was neck deep , all the while singing for Kali . As Kali 's image was immersed , Ramprasad died — this was believed to be around 1775 . 
 However , recent documentary evidence , a <unk> dated April 1794 bearing the sign of Ramprasad Sen as a witness , clearly proves the fact that Ramprasad Sen was alive in 1794 . The said <unk> has been preserved and displayed at <unk> <unk> in <unk> . 
 = = Stories and legends = = 
 In Bengal , popular stories and legends are told of Ramprasad . One of the most well known stories is about a " radiant girl " who helped him one day . Ramprasad was repairing a fence with the assistance of his daughter , who left shortly thereafter . Soon a " radiant girl " , whom he didn 't recognize , came to help him . After finishing the task , she vanished . According to the story , Ramprasad then realized that she was a manifestation of Kali . 
 Another popular story is told of Ramprasad 's vision of goddess Annapurna of Varanasi . Ramprasad was on his way to the river for his daily ritual bath when a beautiful young woman stopped him , asking if she could hear him sing a devotional song to the Divine Mother . Ramprasad requested her to wait , since it was getting late for his noon worship . When he returned , he couldn 't find her , and began to think that it may have been the " play of Divine Mother . " Sitting down to meditate , he was surrounded by a radiant light and heard a female voice saying , " I am Annapurna ( … ) I came all the way from Varanasi to hear your songs but , alas , I had to leave disappointed . " Ramprasad was angry with himself and immediately left for Varanasi to find Mother Annapurna and sing for her . After walking many miles , he reached Triveni , where he took rest under a tree on the bank of the Ganges . Here he reportedly received another vision , saw the same mystical light , and heard the Mother 's voice saying , " Stay here and sing for me . ( … ) Varanasi is not the only place where I live ; I pervade the whole universe . " 
 = = Poetry and influence = = 
 Ramprasad Sen is regarded as one of the notable figures of the bhakti movement in Bengal during the eighteenth century . He is credited with popularizing the bhakti Shakta tradition and Shyama Sangeet — devotional songs to the goddess Kali . Ramprasad was the first Shakta poet to address Kali with such intimate devotion , and to sing of her as a tender loving mother or even as a little girl . After him , a school of Shakta poets continued the Kali @-@ bhakti tradition . 
 Ramprasad created a new compositional form that combined the Bengali folk style of Baul music with classical melodies and kirtan . This new form took root in Bengali culture for the next hundred and fifty years , with hundreds of poet @-@ composers combining folk and raga @-@ based melodies , and bringing together styles of music that included classical , semi @-@ classical , and folk . His poetic style has been described as " sweet , familiar and unsophisticated " , though his lyrics were sung in classical style rather than a folk style . Two of his notable successors as composers in the same style were <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 Ramprasad 's songs are known as Ramprasadi . The devotion to Kali often included as a background the events in Bengal during his time , such as the Bengal famine of 1770 , economic hardships , and the deterioration of rural culture . His poems were very popular during his lifetime . 
 Ramprasad 's literary works include Vidyasundar ( or <unk> @-@ gala ) ( ca. sixth or seventh decade of the 18th century ) , Kali @-@ kirtana , the fragmentary Krishna @-@ kirtana , and Shaktigiti . Kali @-@ kirtana is a collection of lyric and narrative poetry describing the early life of Uma . Krishna @-@ kirtana is an incomplete book of poems and songs to Krishna — the complete collection is yet to be discovered . <unk> Kavya is written in a narrative style that was already popular in Bengali literature , telling the traditional love story of Vidya and Sundara — children of kings who are aided by Kali in meeting , falling in love , and marrying . Shaktigiti is Ramprasad 's well known and respected work , in which he expresses his deepest feelings and love for Kali . In Shaktigiti , he shares the most intimate relationship with Kali — a child who can both love and quarrel with his mother over the inequities of human birth . 
 Ramakrishna Paramahamsa , a mystic of nineteenth century Bengal , often sang his songs and regarded Ramprasad as his beloved poet . Many of these songs are recorded in The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna , which at one point mentions , " … he ( Ramakrishna ) would spend hours singing the devotional songs of great devotees of the Mother , such as <unk> and Ramprasad . Those rhapsodic songs describing direct vision of God … " <unk> Yogananda also was an admirer of Ramprasad and his devotional songs , frequently singing them . Sister Nivedita compared Ramprasad with the English poet William Blake . 
 One of Ramprasad 's hymns to the Goddess is as follows : 
 Another of his popular poems describes the human attempt to understand the Goddess : 
 Ramprasad 's songs are still popular in Bengal and recited regularly in the worship of Kali . Scholar Shuma <unk> notes that his songs are " broadcast over the radio and sung on the streets and in the homes and temples of Calcutta by a cross @-@ section of people — children , the elderly , housewives , businessmen , scholars , the illiterate , monks , householders , and the youth of all classes " . Many of his songs were sung by popular Shyama Sangeet singers like <unk> Bhattacharya , <unk> Bhattacharya , and Anup Ghosal . Still his master literature combination of simple words in the songs melts one 's hearts and floods the eye with tears . An [ <unk> ] <unk> reading of Ramprasad 's texts is also found . 
 = Battle of Sungei Koemba = 
 The Battle of Sungei Koemba ( 27 May – 12 June 1965 ) took place during the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation . Involving Australian and Indonesian troops , the battle consisted of a series of ambushes launched by the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , along the Sungei Koemba river in Kalimantan ( Indonesian Borneo ) . The ambushes were part of the wider Operation Claret which involved cross @-@ border operations by British @-@ Commonwealth units from bases in Sarawak , penetrating up to 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) into Indonesian territory with the aim of disrupting the movement and resupply of Indonesian forces and to keep them off balance . 
 The first ambush was conducted by two platoons from B Company on 27 May 1965 and resulted in significant Indonesian casualties , for no loss to the Australians . The second ambush was conducted a fortnight later and was set a little further downstream from the last one , this time by a platoon from C Company , occurring on 12 June 1965 and again resulting in heavy Indonesian casualties for no loss to the Australians . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
