 = = = Planning = = = 
 In late November 2009 Syracuse Crunch owner , Howard Dolgon began attempts to have an American Hockey League ( AHL ) outdoor game for his franchise . Cost estimates for hosting the game were close to $ 1 million . Unlike the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Winter Classic , the league did not run the event , meaning the Crunch had to finance the entire project . The high cost of hosting was a reason for other franchises not pursuing outdoor games prior . 
 Dolgon originally wanted the game to be played at Alliance Bank Stadium in Syracuse and asked the Onondaga County Legislature to help fund the game . A proposal for the county to put in $ 350 @,@ 000 was voted down by a 16 – 2 margin . After the proposal was denied , Dolgon thought the project was dead , then he received a phone call from United States Senator Charles Schumer encouraging him to go forward with the game . Schumer later stated his encouragement stemmed from the opportunity for the event to be " a national event focused on Upstate and Central New York " . 
 With the game plans moving forward , Dolgon managed to recruit corporate sponsors to help alleviate the cost . The Crunch received $ 350 @,@ 000 from several sponsors , including Mirabito Energy Products which lent its name to the events title . Mirabito decided to sponsor the event because they were opening stores in the Central New York area and wanted to establish their brand name . New York Governor David Paterson secured a $ 75 @,@ 000 grant from the Empire State Development Corporation and helped the Crunch gain use of the New York State Fairgrounds free of charge . Even with the additional funding the Crunch still needed to pay upwards of $ 550 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Rink = = = 
 The rink was built on the fairgrounds in front of a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ seat permanent grandstand on a dirt auto racing track and leveled with what was described as " tons of granite " . With demands for over the 15 @,@ 000 seats occupancy of the grandstands , the Crunch rented additional temporary bleachers . Since there was no scoreboards on or near the track Syracuse rented two large video screens to show the score , time remaining , penalty times , and other information . The installation of the temporary rink cost an estimated $ 400 @,@ 000 and took a month and a half to complete . 
 = = = Associated events = = = 
 As plans moved forward the decision was made not just to play the game but make it an event celebrating New York hockey history . For the game the Crunch played their intrastate rivals the Binghamton Senators . The days before the game local youth hockey teams played on the ice , and then the day after there was a pond hockey tournament played on the rink featuring 16 local teams . The fairgrounds also featured VIP tents , fan zones , bands , and ice sculpting for the celebration , as well as appearances by former players for New York 's various professional teams . 
 = = Game = = 
 The game was the first outdoor game in the 74 @-@ year history of the AHL and the first minor league hockey outdoor game . The attendance of 21 @,@ 508 set a new AHL record surpassing the old mark of 20 @,@ 672 set in 1997 at the Greensboro Coliseum . The record was later broken by subsequent Outdoor Classics . Prior to the game the 174th Fighter Wing of the New York Air National Guard performed a flyover , and recording artist Jessie James sang The Star @-@ Spangled Banner . For the ceremonial puck drop , a skydiver delivered a puck from the National Hockey League 's first foray into outdoor games from the 1991 Las Vegas exhibition game . 
 There was a slight delay in the start of the game as some of the glass needed to be fixed . Once the game was under way it took just 1 : 50 before the Crunch 's Jon <unk> and the Senators ' Jeremy <unk> engaged in the first fight in Outdoor Classic history . <unk> had previously stated that he was going to be involved in the first outdoor fight . The physical play continued and minutes later at the 3 : 29 mark Paul <unk> and Mike <unk> were given matching roughing minor penalties . Not long after the matching minors Mike <unk> made a pass to Alexandre Picard to send him on a breakaway . Picard became the first player to score in an Outdoor Classic when he beat Senators ' goaltender Mike Brodeur putting the Crunch up 1 – 0 . The score remained the same at the end of a penalty @-@ filled first period . Eight total penalties were called on the two clubs through the first 20 minutes of the game . 
 Early in the second period the Crunch got another power play opportunity when Senators ' captain Drew Bannister took a hooking penalty . The man advantage did not benefit Syracuse as the Senators tied the game 1 – 1 when Martin St. Pierre found an open Josh Hennessy , who put the puck past Kevin Lalande for the shorthanded goal . Binghamton seemed to be gaining the advantage in the second period outshooting the Crunch 16 – 9 . But , with just 11 @.@ 7 seconds remaining in the period , Crunch defenseman David <unk> scored the go @-@ ahead goal from the high slot . During the third period the score remained the same , when with just 1 : 30 left in the game Syracuse 's Kevin Harvey took an interference penalty giving the Senators a chance to tie the game on the power play . Binghamton was unable to score in the first minute of the power play and pulled Brodeur to give them the six on four advantage . Even with the two man advantage the Senators failed to post a second goal on Lalande , who stopped 36 of the 37 shots he faced during the game helping the Crunch to the 2 – 1 victory . His performance earned him the first Star of the Game . The game was a penalty @-@ filled affair with 26 infractions called on the two teams and a total of 18 power plays awarded . Neither team was able to capitalize on the opportunities , with Binghamton going 0 – 10 and Syracuse 0 – 8 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The event was considered a success not only did it set a new attendance record it also generated considerable exposure for both the Crunch and the AHL . The game was originally going to be aired just in New York by Time Warner Cable , but was picked up by the NHL Network for broadcast across Canada and the United States . The players and coaches appeared to enjoy the game as well . Crunch head coach Ross Yates stated , " it was unbelievable . It 's hard to describe " . <unk> described the game as " a little taste of what it feels like to play college football " while Picard added , " I ’ ll do that every game for the rest of my life . " AHL President Dave Andrews further noted that it made him proud to be a part of the league . 
 Due in part to his success of putting on the event , Dolgon was awarded the James C. Hendy Memorial Award as the AHL 's outstanding executive . With the success of the Mirabito Outdoor Classic , multiple outdoor games have subsequently been held by AHL teams . 
 = = Team rosters = = 
 ^ ‡ : Holt and <unk> dressed as the back @-@ up goaltenders and did not enter the game . 
 = = = Coaches = = = 
 Binghamton : 
 Head coach : Don <unk> 
 Assistant coach : Mike <unk> : 
 Head coach : Ross Yates 
 Assistant coach : Trent Cull 
 Assistant coach : Karl <unk> 
 = = = Officials = = = 
 Referee — Terry Koharski 
 Linesmen — Dan Murphy , Tim <unk> 
 Source : AHL Box Score 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Scoring summary 
 Penalty summary 
 Three star selections 
 Source : AHL Box Score 
 = Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines = 
 Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines is a 2004 action role @-@ playing video game developed by Troika Games and released by Activision for Microsoft Windows . Set in White Wolf Publishing 's World of Darkness , the game is based on White Wolf 's role @-@ playing game Vampire : The Masquerade and follows either a male or female character who is killed and subsequently revived as a fledgling vampire . The game depicts the fledgling 's journey through 21st @-@ century Los Angeles to uncover the truth behind a recently discovered relic that heralds the end of all vampires . 
 Bloodlines is presented from first- and third @-@ person perspectives . The player assigns their character to one of several vampire clans — each with unique powers , customize their combat and dialog abilities and progress through Bloodlines with violent and nonviolent methods . The selection of clan affects how the player is perceived in the game world , and which powers and abilities they possess ; this opens up different avenues of exploration and methods of interacting with or manipulating other characters . The player is able to complete side missions away from the primary storyline by moving freely between the available hubs : Santa Monica , Hollywood , downtown Los Angeles , and Chinatown . 
 Troika 's 32 @-@ member team began development of Bloodlines in November 2001 , as an indirect sequel to the previous year 's Vampire : The Masquerade – Redemption . Troika used Valve Corporation 's Source game engine , then @-@ in @-@ development , which was being used for Valve 's own Half @-@ Life 2 . The game 's production was turbulent , as the design 's scope exceeded the available resources , and the team were left without a producer for nearly a year until Activision appointed David Mullich to the role , where he found designs and levels unfinished or abandoned . After three years in development with no end in sight and running over budget , Activision set a strict deadline for completion , and Bloodlines was released incomplete in November 2004 . 
 Released in competition with Half @-@ Life 2 and several other titles , Bloodlines sold fewer than 80 @,@ 000 copies during its initial release , which was considered a poor performance . It divided critics at the time ; although they praised the game 's writing and scale of choice , they criticized its technical flaws . It was Troika Games ' last production before its failure in early 2005 , when it was unable to secure additional projects . The game has a cult following as a rarely replicated example of gameplay and narrative , and contemporary criticism has recognised it as a flawed masterpiece . As of 2014 , Bloodlines had received ten years of post @-@ release support from its fans , who have supplied fixes and restored lost and deleted content . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Bloodlines is an action role @-@ playing video game optionally presented from the first- or third @-@ person perspective . Before the game begins , players create a male or female vampire character by selecting a vampire clan and configuring available points in three areas — Attributes , Abilities and Disciplines ( vampiric powers ) — or by answering questions , which create a character for the player . The player can select one of seven vampire clans : the powerful Brujah , the decadent Toreador , the insane Malkavian , the aristocratic Ventrue , the monstrously @-@ deformed Nosferatu , the blood @-@ magic wielding Tremere , or the animalistic Gangrel . 
 The player builds their character by spending acquired points to increase their ratings in the three areas . The points spent on Attributes and Abilities combine to determine a player 's success or effectiveness in performing tasks such as using firearms , brawling , and lock @-@ picking ; for example , determining how accurate or how far the player can shoot , or if they can hack a computer . Attributes are represent by physical ( strength , dexterity , and stamina ) , social ( charisma , manipulation , and appearance ) , and mental ( perception , intelligence , and wit ) . Abilities are talents ( such as brawling and dodging ) , skills ( such as firearms and melee ) and knowledge ( such as computers and investigation ) . The player is initially assigned points to spend in the three areas , with the amount they can spend determined by clan ; for example , the Brujah can spend the most points on physical and skill attributes . During character creation , each upgrade costs one point . The upgrade cost increases as the game progresses . Each ability can be raised from zero to five , and it is impossible to accrue enough experience points to complete every skill ( allowing the player to specialize or balance their character ) . Experience points are gained by completing quests , finding items or unlocking secret paths , rather than killing enemies , and are used to increase or unlock the character 's statistics and abilities . The game features a main story , and optional side quests that can be completed at any time ; the player is able to move between the available areas at will to revisit locations , characters , or merchants . 
 The player 's clan affects their skills and powers . Although the attractive Toreadors receive bonuses for seduction and persuasion , opening additional dialog options , they are physically weak ; the Nosferatu are forced to travel in the shadows or through sewers to avoid alerting humans , but receive bonuses to their intelligence and computer skills , which enables access to more information . The Malkavians have separate dialog options , reflecting their inherent insanity . Upgrading some skills provides additional dialog options ; attractive and charismatic characters seduce to get their way , aggressive characters threaten , and others persuade their targets to cooperate . 
 Firearms combat is first @-@ person , with character points assigned to the firearms skill determining the shot 's accuracy and how long it takes to target an opponent . Melee combat is third @-@ person , with access to weapons such as katanas and sledgehammers for melee combat , or pistols , crossbows and flamethrowers for firearm combat . If a player sneaks up on an opponent , they can perform an instant kill ; weapons provide unique instant kill animations . The player can block attacks manually or automatically , by leaving their character idle . They can use stealth in missions by sneaking past guards and security cameras , picking locks , and hacking computers to locate alternative routes . 
 Each clan has specific Disciplines , which can be used in combat and to create approaches to quests . Although some powers overlap clans , no two clans share the same three Disciplines . More physical vampires can enhance themselves to become fast and lethal killers or summon spirit allies to attack their foes ; others can mentally dominate their targets to force their cooperation or render themselves invisible to hide from detection ; and others can boil their opponent 's blood from afar . Some Disciplines , such as <unk> ( which boosts perception , highlighting other characters ' auras through obstacles ) and Blood Buff ( which temporarily upgrades strength , dexterity , stamina and lockpicking ) are common to all vampires . Several abilities can be active at the same time . Blood is a primary currency in Bloodlines , used to activate Disciplines and abilities . It is drained with each use , and can be replenished by drinking from rats , visiting blood banks or drinking from humans by attacking or seducing them ; the player can feed on enemies during combat . Drinking from innocents for too long can kill them , costing a character humanity points . 
 Players are penalized for using certain vampiric abilities in front of witnesses ; exposing their existence loses masquerade points . Violating the masquerade five times draws the ire of vampire hunters and loses the game , although additional masquerade points can be earned with quests and other actions . The player has humanity points , representing the vampire 's humanity . Some actions cost humanity points ; a low humanity score alters available dialog options to become more aggressive , and increases the chance of entering a frenzied state and embarking on a killing spree , when the vampire 's blood is low . This frenzy can also be triggered by a large amount of damage . Like masquerade points , losing all humanity points ends the game , with the vampire becoming a mindless beast . Some areas , known as Elysium , prevent the use of Disciplines or weapons . Players can recruit a female ghoul , Heather , as a customizable servant who gives them blood , gifts , and money . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines takes place in four areas of 21st @-@ century Los Angeles : Santa Monica , Hollywood , downtown Los Angeles , and Chinatown . Set in the World of Darkness , the game depicts a world in which vampires , werewolves , demons , and other creatures shape human history . The vampires are bound by a code to maintain their secrecy ( forbidding the use of vampiric abilities in front of humans ) and avoid unnecessary killing ( to preserve the vampire 's last shreds of humanity ) . The vampires are divided into seven clans of the Camarilla , the vampire government , with distinctive traits and abilities . The Toreadors are the closest to humanity , with a passion for culture ; the Ventrue are noble , powerful leaders ; the Brujah are idealists who excel at fighting ; the Malkavians are cursed with insanity , or blessed with insight ; the Gangrel are loners , in sync with their animalistic nature ; the secretive , untrustworthy Tremere wield blood magic ; and the monstrous Nosferatu are condemned to a life in the shadows to avoid humanity . The clans are loosely united by their belief in the Camarilla 's goals and opposition to the Sabbat : vampires who revel in their nature , embracing the beast within . The Anarchs are a faction of idealistic vampires opposed to the Camarilla 's political structure , believing that power should be shared by all vampires . 
 The main character of Bloodlines , whom the player controls , is an unnamed fledgling vampire , transformed at the start of a game and belonging to one of the clans . The fledgling is employed by Sebastian LaCroix ( voiced by Andy Milder ) , prince of Los Angeles ' vampires . The fledgling 's travels through the vampire world bring them into contact with other undead creatures such as the deformed information broker Bertram Tung , the <unk> Smiling Jack , and the mentally @-@ unstable <unk> sisters , Jeanette and Therese . Chinatown is controlled by the Kuei @-@ Jin , Asian vampires led by Ming @-@ Xiao , who do not require blood and consider themselves superior to the other vampires . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game begins with the player character , an unnamed human , being killed and resurrected as a fledgling vampire . For this unauthorized act , the fledgling and their Sire are brought before the Camarilla . The Sire is executed by order of LaCroix ; the fledgling is spared the same fate by the intervention of the <unk> , Nines Rodriguez , and employed by the prince . 
 LaCroix sends the fledgling to Santa Monica to help his ghoul , Mercurio , destroy a Sabbat warehouse . Following his success the fledgling travels to downtown Los Angeles , meeting separately with Nines , LaCroix , and Jack . LaCroix tasks the player with investigating a docked ship , the Elizabeth Dane , for information about an <unk> sarcophagus rumored to contain the body of an <unk> , one of the oldest and most powerful vampires , whose arrival would herald the vampire apocalypse , Gehenna . The fledgling discovers that the sarcophagus seems to have been opened from within . 
 Increased Sabbat activity coincides with the disappearance of the Malkavian chief , Alistair Grout . At Grout 's mansion , the fledgling sees Nines leaving and discovers Grout 's remains in the mansion with vampire hunter Grunfeld Bach , who denies involvement in Grout 's death . Learning about Nines ' presence at the mansion , LaCroix tells the other chiefs to approve Nines ' execution . The fledgling is sent to the Museum of Natural History to recover the sarcophagus , but finds that it has been stolen . Jack later suggests to the fledgling that LaCroix wants the sarcophagus to drink the blood of the ancient within , gaining its power . 
 Believing that Gary , the Nosferatu chief , has stolen the sarcophagus , the fledgling is sent to Hollywood to find him ; after locating a captured Nosferatu for Gary , he reveals that the sarcophagus was stolen by the Giovanni vampire clan . The fledgling infiltrates the Giovanni mansion and finds the sarcophagus guarded by the Kuei @-@ Jin , who claim their leader , Ming @-@ Xiao , has formed an alliance with LaCroix . The locked sarcophagus is returned to LaCroix 's tower and Beckett , a vampire historian , tells the fledgling that the only person who can open it has been abducted by Grunfeld to lure LaCroix . The fledgling kills Grunfeld and learns that the sarcophagus ' key has been stolen . 
 They return to LaCroix , learning that the Sabbat tried to steal the sarcophagus to destroy it and prevent Gehenna , and kill the Sabbat leader to disperse his followers . The fledgling is met by Ming @-@ Xiao , who offers to form an alliance . Ming @-@ Xiao reveals that she has the key , and LaCroix killed Grout to prevent his powerful insight from unveiling LaCroix 's plans ; Ming @-@ Xiao changed into Nines at the mansion to frame him . Denying Ming @-@ Xiao 's claims , LaCroix rescinds the blood hunt on Nines and entrusts the fledgling with recruiting the Anarchs to punish the Kuei @-@ Jin for murdering Grout . The fledgling finds Nines hiding in the forest , and they are then attacked by a werewolf and Nines is badly injured . The fledgling escapes with Jack , who reveals that LaCroix has issued an execution order on the fledgling for framing Nines on orders from Ming @-@ Xiao . 
 The end varies , depending on whom , if anyone , the fledgling allies with . If the fledgling supports LaCroix or Ming @-@ Xiao , each sends the fledgling to kill the other . LaCroix opens the sarcophagus , to be killed with the fledgling by hidden explosives ; Ming @-@ Xiao betrays the fledgling , chaining them to the sarcophagus and sinking it in the ocean . Supporting the Anarchs or no one makes the fledgling kill Ming @-@ Xiao and maim LaCroix , who is killed after he opens the sarcophagus . If the fledgling opens the sarcophagus , they die in the explosion . If the fledgling is a Tremere , they kill Ming @-@ Xiao ; LaCroix is replaced by Tremere leader Maximillian Strauss , and the sarcophagus is stored . Each ending has Jack watching from afar with the mummy taken from the coffin and the enigmatic taxi driver who transports the fledgling between locations , who says " The blood of Caine controls our fate ... Farewell , vampire . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The development of Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines began at Troika Games in November 2001 . The developers wanted to put a role @-@ playing game in a first @-@ person setting , believing that the genre had become stale . Troika approached publisher Activision with its idea ; Activision suggested using the Vampire : The Masquerade license used a year earlier in Nihilistic Software 's Vampire : The Masquerade – Redemption , which had experienced sufficient success to merit a sequel . Instead of developing a sequel to Redemption , the development team researched the White Wolf property , including the game 's rules and its storylines . Troika was a small game studio , with five developers and a total staff of thirty @-@ two ( including lead writer Brian Mitsoda , who joined the team less than a year after development began ) . Although some preliminary design and levels were completed , much of the work was abandoned or redeveloped . 
 Troika wanted to make a 3D game , but was uncertain whether to build a new game engine or license an existing one and whether to use first- or third @-@ person . At that time , the Source game engine was being built by Valve Corporation . Valve employee Scott Lynch approached Troika about using the engine , and it was the first external team to use it . Troika chose Source for its facial animation and lip @-@ synching system , since it wanted players to speak to the characters face @-@ to @-@ face . Since the engine was in development with Bloodlines and Valve 's own Half @-@ Life 2 , Troika was working with unfamiliar code and tools , forcing it to write its own code to compensate for the unfinished engine , and with only a single source for technical support . Troika developed a lighting system to create distinctive , moody illumination for the nighttime setting , a particle system for the special effects accompanying the vampire Disciplines , and a cloth system for clothing flow . Source lacked its later artificial intelligence ( AI ) coding , and Troika 's code worked poorly with the Source engine . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Many of the central plot elements existed before designer Brian Mitsoda 's involvement : the prince , the <unk> being upset , aspects of the Gehenna storyline , and Jack and the sarcophagus as a major subplot . The designers broadly tied the overarching story into each hub and level . Each designer controlled their assigned section of the game , and working with a small team enabled quick decision making and ease in keeping plot elements consistent . Mitsoda became the primary writer for many of the characters and their quests , dialog , and side content in the game , such as emails , which helped retain a consistent narrative . He was given freedom with respect to the script , with no restrictions on language or content , and could rewrite characters when he thought his initial draft weak . Although the story was developed by Troika , it is inspired by White Wolf 's Time of Judgment novels about a vampire apocalypse . Bloodlines ' story was accepted as canonical by White Wolf , with the game serving as a prequel to Time of Judgment and including characters from the White Wolf game , such as Jack . Discussing character design , Mitsoda said he tried to disguise the need for characters who simply point a player in an appropriate direction : 
 " You need a character to pose a problem or give out a quest or be a barrier of some kind . I don 't like to make the [ character ] outright say ' I need you to do X , then I 'll give you Y ' ... – it makes the character into an automated quest kiosk . I like the characters to come off like people actually do – they don 't say ' hi ' when strangers come knocking , they say ' who the hell are you ? ' or they 're expecting you and know more than they let on , or they don 't care . I don 't like my [ characters ] to be standing around as if their lives begin when the character starts talking to them and end when the player leaves . 
 Single purpose characters needed a distinctive personality trait to quickly establish them with the player , rather than serving as a disposable item , while major characters had to reflect the player 's progression and actions through the game . Mitsoda wrote the characters by thinking about who each character was , assigning them motivations determining why they were where they were , what they thought about the player and what they wanted from them . In accordance with a suggestion by fellow writer Chad Moore the Malkavian player character has a dialog script distinct from that of the other eight clans ; Mitsoda said it was one of the simpler aspects of the development cycle . He wrote the Malkavian script last , with time running out on development , and the overwork and lack of sleep contributed to what Mitsoda considered an unhealthy state of mind , ideal for writing insane dialog . He wanted to highlight their madness , without making it comical . Since the story is set during the Camarilla 's takeover of Los Angeles , the team simplified the plot by only allowing the player to belong to one of the LA @-@ based clans . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Troika co @-@ founder Jason Anderson 's research on Vampire : The Masquerade source material and fansites found that character interaction and involvement in the vampire societies , not statistics and powers , was the game 's main attraction . Troika tried to remain true to the pen @-@ and @-@ paper role @-@ playing game , hoping not to alienate the game 's fans , but rules designed for multiple players did not translate well to single player computer game design . The team attempted to discover which elements could work equally well in pen @-@ and @-@ paper and computer games . Although much of the character system and attributes translated , not all the attributes ( such as " knowledge of law " ) made sense in the computer game . Of 30 pen @-@ and @-@ paper abilities , 15 reached the final design . 
 Another difficult area was feats . Although common feats worked well , with a random chance of success or failure , uncommon ones would appear to fail more often . To avoid this , randomization was replaced by a degree of difficulty in accomplishing the feat . Although pen @-@ and @-@ paper falling damage is random , the computer game bases damage on the distance of the fall . The team 's biggest challenge was adapting disciplines . The pen @-@ and @-@ paper version may require a little blood that requires a long time to use , or have no blood cost and can be used at will ; upgraded disciplines had additional requirements considered too confusing for a computer game . Troika attempted to equalize the disciplines , keeping the effect intact and normalizing the cost , so a first level power requires one blood point , a second level two points and so on . To balance the clans the aristocratic Ventrue were only allowed to feed on noble blood , though this was changed to allow them to feed on lower @-@ class humans , receiving less blood . During character creation , the game had an optional character biography with unique positive and negative characteristics ( increasing one ability while limiting another ) . This was removed from the released game ; Activision felt that there was insufficient test time , and removing it was a more stable option . 
 The team 's previous experience was with turn @-@ based combat games , and it struggled to develop a real @-@ time combat system affected by customizable attributes and abilities that provided feedback to the player on how those statistics were affecting the battle . It initially found that by adhering too closely to the White Wolf source material rules for guns , where the effectiveness of a shot is determined in a contest between the player 's skill and the opponent 's defense , the firearms seemed broken ; the player would not hit where they aimed . Troika found it difficult to mesh the available factors in a real @-@ time setting . Melee combat had to deal with a variety of melee weapons and animations and adjust for melee @-@ on @-@ melee and melee @-@ on @-@ ranged combat . 
 Troika used first @-@ person perspective to immerse the player in the setting , interacting face @-@ to @-@ face with the characters and seeing their facial reactions to the player . It chose to follow a single @-@ character to aid the immersion , creating the isolation of a vampire unable to trust any other character . This aided the story and compensated for the technical issues of allowing multiple player characters . 
 Choice is a significant aspect of the game , requiring a non @-@ linear design to accommodate the customized characters . Level design began with a list of factors such as Disciplines , stealth and feats . Each area had to be viable for a shooting character ( sufficient ammunition ) , a discipline @-@ focused character ( sufficient blood sources to keep the powers fueled ) and a melee specialist ( to reach enemies without being killed ) , with stealth options and option combinations . Level design began with a focus on stealth , taking into consideration the positioning of guards and the character 's potential stealth capability at that point in the game . Then direct , combat @-@ heavy and dialog paths were added . The amusement arcade area was to feature playable versions of Activision arcade games such as Pitfall ! , though the idea was abandoned due to time constraints . 
 Director Leonard Boyarsky considered the animation system important in the team 's choice of the Source engine . The integrated " <unk> " tool allowed Troika to customize facial animations , expressions , gestures and lip @-@ synching , eliminating the need to explain what a character was doing . Every non @-@ player character required a voiceover , which helped Troika define its characters more quickly . The engine had a physics system permitting new features , such as monsters hurling corpses at the player or dying characters realistically crumbling into pieces , instead of requiring pre @-@ built animations . Although Troika had ignored first @-@ person engines due to technical limitations , such as a low polygon count and limited texture memory , as the technology improved , it thought it could create a real @-@ time action game without sacrificing the immersion and story of a role @-@ playing game . 
 Describing the choice of developing a game based on the existing White Wolf property over creating their own , Boyarsky said that although an original property lacked the constraints of an existing one the downside was that it had not been tested and could be rejected by its potential audience ; an existing property was proven . Troika tried to stay as close as possible to the White Wolf rules , while reducing the number of abilities and disciplines to those relevant to Bloodlines gameplay . 
 = = = Later development = = = 
 Activision introduced the game in May 2003 , but , that October , Valve experienced a security breach in which hackers stole the source code for Half @-@ Life 2 . The breach required new security implementations for the engine , delaying both games ; the release of Bloodlines was postponed until early 2005 . Until May 2004 , Troika and Activision said that the game would feature a multiplayer component and modes including a team of vampires against a team of vampire hunters , with the ability to upgrade characters between each round . The team was left without a producer by Activision for over a year before David Mullich was assigned to the project . With no producer oversight , Mullich found the game 's design incomplete , game levels created and abandoned , and several technical issues , including problems with code for the proposed multiplayer option . The Source multiplayer code was in its infancy , increasing its development time , and the idea was abandoned . 
 In addition to problems with the Source engine , the designers found that the game 's scope exceeded their resources . Bloodlines has several styles of gameplay , requiring different interfaces , animations and artificial intelligence for stealth and melee combat , and first- or third @-@ person capability . Compared to contemporary first @-@ person shooters , with 10 to 20 animated character models , Bloodlines had over 150 characters with 3 @,@ 000 unique animations , in addition to boss characters , with their own styles of movement . The designers underestimated the length of time required to develop and improve these systems . The game 's scope suffered from content not being removed when necessary ; other components would be endlessly refined without being finalized , preventing the developers from focusing on other parts of the game system . All content additionally required approval by White Wolf and Activision . 
 After three years in development , the game was progressing slowly and it was unknown when it would be finished . Activision set a series of deadlines for the project 's development to ensure Troika would have sufficient time to effectively test the game , though these milestones were repeatedly extended , and Bloodlines eventually ran over budget . In 2003 , Activision intervened , ordering that the game be ready for release in the next few months , and even advancing more money to Troika to complete its work on The Temple of Elemental Evil for Atari , freeing the Troika team to work on Bloodlines exclusively . Activision eventually issued an ultimatum that the project be finished within months , on September 15 , 2004 . Troika delivered a version of Bloodlines on the required date ; due to its scale , the game underwent three weeks of testing . Activision decided that the game was suitable for release , but was contractually @-@ bound to withhold Bloodlines until after the debut of Half @-@ Life 2 in November 2004 . Troika convinced Activision to use the delay to fund further development ; the additional budget was not enough to pay all of Troika 's staff , and some employees worked unpaid to complete the project . This version underwent another three weeks of testing to become the final release code ; the game was still unfinished when Activision forced its release . Bloodlines ' creative director Jason Anderson blamed Activision , saying that the publisher took the game from Troika without providing enough time to test and polish it . During the nearly four years of development , he estimated that the team worked overtime for all but two months . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's original score was composed and produced by Rik Schaffer . Troika licensed many songs for the game , and posters for real bands are featured on the walls of the game 's clubs . The soundtrack was released as a limited edition CD to customers who pre @-@ ordered the game through Best Buy . It features nine tracks by artists including Daniel Ash , <unk> , Tiamat , Darling Violetta , <unk> , and Lacuna Coil . " Bloodlines " , performed by Al Jourgensen and Ministry , was composed and performed specifically for the game . The licensed tracks were chosen by Activision without input from Troika . 
 = = Release = = 
 Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines was released on November 16 , 2004 in competition with Half @-@ Life 2 , Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater , Halo 2 , and several other titles . Valve 's contract for Troika 's use of the Source engine guaranteed that Bloodlines could not be released before Half @-@ Life 2 , and could not be introduced to the public until after the announcement of Half @-@ Life 2 , over eighteen months after development began . In February 2004 , the game was scheduled for release in spring 2005 , partially to avoid competing with Half @-@ Life 2 and the competitive Christmas period , before Activision moved the date to November 2004 . 
 In a 2013 interview , Mitsoda said that it was released at " the worst possible time - most people didn 't even know we were out ... fans and the Troika [ developers ] are always going to wonder what the game could have been like with another six months . " Activision obtained model Erin Layne to play Jeanette in promotional material for the game . Layne worked with Bloodlines artist Tim Bradstreet for a day to provide the poses chosen by Activision to represent Jeanette in the game 's posters , clothing , and other items . 
 Despite generally favorable reviews , Bloodlines ' initial release sold 72 @,@ 000 copies and earned approximately $ 3 @.@ 4 million in sales , below Troika 's other games , Arcanum : Of Steamworks and Magick Obscura ( 234 @,@ 000 units , $ 8 @.@ 8 million ) and The Temple of Elemental Evil ( 128 @,@ 000 units , $ 5 @.@ 2 million ) . In comparison , Bloodlines ' release competitor Half @-@ Life 2 had sold 6 @.@ 5 million copies by 2008 . Bloodlines ‍ ' relative failure contributed to the demise of Troika Games . 
 Shortly after its debut , most of the development staff were laid off ; the remaining staff tried to patch Bloodlines and develop game concepts to secure funding to keep Troika in business . Troika , unable to obtain further funding from Activision or other publishers , released its employees in two waves : the first in November 2004 , followed by the remaining staff in December , except for its three founders , Anderson , Boyarsky , and Tim Cain . Some employees worked without pay to fix the game . When the company closed in February 2005 , it had secured no other game development deals . That month , Boyarsky confirmed that Troika had not been working on a patch for the game since most of its staff were gone since December 2004 . In a November 2004 interview Boyarsky said that although the team would like to pursue a Bloodlines sequel , the decision was Activision 's . In a 2006 interview , Anderson said that although Troika Games ' library had been critically well received , consistent technical issues had marred the perception of the company 's games , contributing to Troika 's difficulty in obtaining new projects . 
 Unofficial patches have been created by the game 's fans to address Bloodlines ' technical problems , and restore missing and incomplete content . After experiencing problems with the first versions of an unofficial patch created by Dan Upright , analytical chemist Werner Spahl continued patching the game from version 1 @.@ 2 with permission and instructions . The game community tested Spahl 's patches , providing reports on bugs and spelling errors . Although the game 's complexity meant that repairing one aspect often broke another , as work on the patches progressed Spahl began restoring removed and incomplete content in the game files , adding quests , items , weapons , and characters , with fan help to provide voice acting , models , and reinstating whole levels . The changes altered the original game so much that Spahl was criticized by some of the game 's fans . This resulted in two patch versions : a basic version , fixing the game 's technical issues , and a " plus " version with the additional content . As of April 2014 , the game has had almost 10 years of post @-@ release support with the release of version 9 of the patch . The game fared better following its release on Valve 's Steam digital distribution service in March 2007 , where , as of 2015 , it has sold 492 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines received a mixed response , with reviewers praising its writing and presentation and criticizing its technical problems . The aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic give it a score of 81 % ( based on 68 reviews ) and 80 out of 100 ( based on 61 reviews ) , respectively . 
 The game has been called a flawed masterpiece . The scale and variety of choice and effect was highlighted by reviewers as Bloodlines ' greatest success , including the variety of clans , with specific dialog options , and the specific reactions from other characters , each with their own clan loyalty and bias . GameSpy called it a nearly flawless classic role @-@ playing game ; the The New York Times described it as brilliant but unfinished . Eurogamer praised its " effortlessly intelligent " script , saying that " no other game has come close . Nothing 's even tried " . VideoGamer.com opined that at its best , Bloodlines stands among the greatest RPGs of the preceding five years , although its technical problems should be remembered . According to <unk> , the game " may not be polished and may end with a sigh instead of a shout , but for its ambition alone it deserves stream after stream of compliments . " Reviewers compared it to other successful role @-@ playing games , including Fallout , Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic , The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind , Planescape : Torment , Baldur 's Gate II , and Deus Ex ; Eurogamer described Bloodlines as Deus Ex with vampires . 
 IGN appreciated Bloodlines ' rewarding exploration outside the main story , and the New York Times and GameSpy praised its " wonderfully imaginative " missions . Reviewers noted that later parts of the game were disappointing , delivering repetitive combat @-@ focused missions with regenerating enemies , abandoning dialog and stealth and punishing players who build characters with more social skills than combat abilities . GameSpy said that it had never seen a role @-@ playing game so affected by player actions with everything , from clan choice and character build to actions in missions , influencing future options and dialog . 
 Its writing was consistently praised by reviewers . The narrative was considered deep , successfully using White Wolf 's Vampire : The Masquerade content . Eurogamer said it had the best script the website had ever seen in a video game , and others described it as a superbly crafted tale of conspiracies , underworld subterfuge , fun and intrigue . Reviewers appreciated the use of adult themes , such as sex and death , in the storyline of a contemporary video game which no other games had tackled with similar effectiveness . The mature themes succeeded without being gratuitous or exploitative , and were explored honestly and intelligently by a knowledgeable writer . The game 's characters were praised for their memorable , developed personalities , with most major characters possessing their own backstory and presented as living people instead of ciphers . Its ending had a mixed response , with some reviewers appreciating their ability to choose one of the game 's four endings ( adding an incentive to replay the game ) and others considering the ending anti @-@ climatic . 
 GameSpot and GameSpy called the dialog was sharply written , with many memorable lines . Eurogamer noted that the characters ' frequent use of vulgar language worked ; written as real people , such language fit their character rather than giving the game an adult veneer . The website appreciated the breadth of dialog options , allowing the player greater control of how to play their character . PC Zone opined that the quantity of well written dialog did not guarantee quality ; many player choices seemed to have little effect on a conversation 's outcome , and the best response was often the most obvious . The voice acting was repeatedly praised for the actors ' quality and the amount of voice work , due to the many dialog options . 
 Much of Bloodlines ' criticism focused on technical problems when it was released , undermining the game experience or making it unplayable . Several reviewers noted errors which closed the game and typographical errors in on @-@ screen text . Others cited frequent , sometimes @-@ lengthy load times <unk> while moving between hubs and entering or exiting buildings and areas . GameSpot called the game 's artificial intelligence poor , often causing enemies to rush at an armed player , fire at them from too great a distance to be effective or become immobilized while waiting for the player 's next attack . IGN noted that stealth broke the AI , allowing traps to be triggered and leaving the assailants standing still , unable to locate a hidden player . GameSpy said that the Source engine was Bloodlines ' greatest weakness ; although the RPG aspects were the game 's strong suit , features of the Source engine , such as first @-@ person shooting , were where it stumbled . 
 Combat was also criticized . Reviewers called it poor , clumsy , and unsatisfactory , complaining that Bloodlines favors melee combat ; firearms were weak , unwieldy and slow , even for characters specializing in guns . PC Zone , however , called the first @-@ person shooting entertaining and challenging . Although melee combat was criticized as sluggish and difficult due to enemy attacks interrupting the player 's , reviewers considered it overpowered ; according to GameSpot , a boss character was killed with melee weapons on a first attempt after the repeated failure to do so with a gun . The New York Times found the unavoidable combat in the last part of the game to be so difficult that they had to cheat to succeed . Stealth was criticized , with IGN noting that even with low stealth skill it was possible to sneak around many enemies and feed from a guard without alerting another guard next to them . GameSpot opined that some of the best missions were stealth @-@ based , as combat was more straightforward . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2004 , IGN named Bloodlines the Best PC RPG of that year and GameSpy called the " Ocean House Hotel " quest the Level of the Year . In 2005 , Computer Gaming World called it the Role Playing Game of 2004 , saying that it offered " a deep , balanced character creation system , a truckload of interesting quests , a good story and great NPCs to interact with . " In 2006 , PC Zone listed Bloodlines the seventh @-@ best PC game which people were unlikely to have played , calling it the " best buggy game ever released " . In 2007 , the game was 80th on Computer & Video Games ' list of its top 100 games , and 86th on PC Gamer 's 2014 list of the same , moving to 63rd in PC Gamer 's 2015 edition . In 2011 , Rock , Paper , Shotgun called Bloodlines one of the most important PC games of all time ( " it signposts a direction to a future of games that we were denied " ) , listing it as one of the 122 Best PC Games Ever . Cinema Blend called it one of the most underappreciated games of the decade . In 2011 , Official Xbox Magazine called it one of the ten PC franchises it wanted on the Xbox 360 console . In 2013 , PC Gamer named it one of the 100 Best Horror Games on PC , and <unk> called it the seventh @-@ best PC role @-@ playing game . In 2014 , Bloodlines was 90th in Empire 's readers ' poll of the 100 Greatest Video Games of All Time , and Maximum PC chose it as one of the games they wanted to be remastered for contemporary game systems . In 2015 , Rock , Paper , Shotgun listed Bloodlines as the PC 's 19th Best RPG and 15th Best Horror Game . 
 Retrospective critiques continue to praise the game 's narrative and degree of choice . In 2009 , an article in Rock , Paper , Shotgun declared : " The sense of sorrow comes from the realisation that there 's nothing like [ Bloodlines ] on the horizon ... why should there be so few games like this ? Oh right , because it 's so very hard to do ... the lack of games comparable to Bloodlines is one of the great tragedies of our time . " Eurogamer called the game inspirational , with an unmatched level of narrative detail . In 2010 , The Escapist called Bloodlines a flawed masterpiece which could have been a genuine masterpiece with more time , money and staff ; although great games may inspire awe , it instead created a devoted fan base which continued to develop the game . Bloodlines is considered a cult classic . 
 = Won 't Get Fooled Again = 
 " Won 't Get Fooled Again " is a song by the English rock band The Who , written by Pete Townshend . It was released as a single in June 1971 , reaching the top 10 in the UK , while the full eight @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute version appears as the final track on the band 's 1971 album Who 's Next , released that August . 
 Townshend wrote the song as a closing number of the Lifehouse project , and the lyrics criticise revolution and power . To symbolise the spiritual connection he had found in music via the works of Meher Baba and Inayat Khan , he programmed a mixture of human traits into a synthesizer and used it as the main backing instrument throughout the song . The Who tried recording the song in New York in March 1971 , but re @-@ recorded a superior take at Stargroves the next month using the synthesizer from Townshend 's original demo . Ultimately , Lifehouse as a project was abandoned in favour of Who 's Next , a straightforward album , where it also became the closing track . The song has been performed as a staple of the band 's setlist since 1971 , often as the set closer , and was the last track drummer Keith Moon played live with the band . 
 As well as a hit , the song has achieved critical praise , appearing as one of Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . It has been covered by several artists , such as Van Halen who took their version to No. 1 on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . It has been used for several TV shows and films , and in some political campaigns . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was originally intended for a rock opera Townshend had been working on , Lifehouse , which was a multi @-@ media exercise based on his followings of the Indian religious avatar Meher Baba , showing how spiritual enlightenment could be obtained via a combination of band and audience . The song was written for the end of the opera , after the main character , Bobby , is killed and the " universal chord " is sounded . The main characters disappear , leaving behind the government and army , who are left to bully each other . Townshend described the song as one " that screams defiance at those who feel any cause is better than no cause " . He later said that the song was not strictly anti @-@ revolution despite the lyric " We 'll be fighting in the streets " , but stressed that revolution could be unpredictable , adding , " Don 't expect to see what you expect to see . Expect nothing and you might gain everything . " Bassist John Entwistle later said that the song showed Townshend " saying things that really mattered to him , and saying them for the first time . " 
 Townshend had been reading Universal Sufism founder Inayat Khan 's The Mysticism of Sound and Music , which referred to spiritual harmony and the universal chord , which would restore harmony to humanity when sounded . Townshend realised that the newly emerging synthesizers would allow him to communicate these ideas to a mass audience . He had met the BBC Radiophonic Workshop which gave him ideas for capturing human personality within music . Townshend interviewed several people with general practitioner @-@ style questions , and captured their heartbeat , brainwaves and astrological charts , converting the result into a series of audio pulses . For the demo of " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , he linked a Lowrey organ into a EMS VCS 3 filter that played back the pulse @-@ coded modulations from his experiments . He subsequently upgraded to an ARP 2500 . The synthesizer did not play any sounds directly as it was monophonic ; instead it modified the block chords on the organ as an input signal . The demo was completed by Townshend overdubbing drums , bass , electric guitar , vocals and handclaps . Overall , the song ran at a slower pace to the version later recorded by the Who . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Who 's first attempt to record the song was at the Record Plant on W 44 Street , New York City , on 16 March 1971 . Manager Kit Lambert had recommended the studio to the group , which led to his producer credit , though the de facto work was done by Felix Pappalardi . This take featured Pappalardi 's Mountain band mate , Leslie West , on lead guitar . 
 Lambert proved to be unable to mix the track , and a fresh attempt at recording was made at the start of April at Mick Jagger 's house , Stargroves , using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio . Glyn Johns was invited to help with production , and he decided to re @-@ use the synthesized organ track from Townshend 's original demo , as the re @-@ recording of the part in New York was felt to be inferior to the original . Keith Moon had to carefully synchronise his drum playing with the synthesizer , while Townshend and Entwistle played electric guitar and bass . Townshend played a 1959 Gretsch <unk> Chet Atkins hollow body guitar fed through an Edwards volume pedal to a Fender Bandmaster amp , all of which he had been given by Joe Walsh while in New York . This combination became his main electric guitar recording setup for subsequent albums . Although intended as a demo recording , the end result sounded so good to the band and Johns , they decided to use it as the final take . Overdubs , including an acoustic guitar part played by Townshend , were recorded at Olympic Studios at the end of April . The track was mixed at Island Studios by Johns on 28 May . After Lifehouse was abandoned as a project , Johns felt " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , along with other songs , were so good that they could simply be released as a standalone single album , which became Who 's Next . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Won 't Get Fooled Again " was first released as a single A @-@ side on 25 June 1971 , edited down to 3 : 35 . It replaced " Behind Blue Eyes " as the choice of single as the group felt it didn 't fit the Who 's established musical style . It was released on 17 July in the US . The B @-@ side , " I Don 't Even Know Myself " was recorded at Eel Pie Studios in 1970 for a planned EP that was never released . The single reached No. 9 in the UK charts and No. 15 in the US . Initial publicity material showed an abandoned cover of Who 's Next featuring Moon dressed in drag and brandishing a whip . 
 The full @-@ length version of the song appeared as the closing track of Who 's Next , released on 14 August in the US and 27 August in the UK , where it topped the album charts . " Won 't Get Fooled Again " drew strong praise from critics , who were impressed that a synthesizer had managed to be integrated so successfully within a rock song . Who author Dave Marsh described singer Roger Daltrey 's scream near the end of the track as " the greatest scream of a career filled with screams " . In 2011 , the song was ranked number 134 on Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Who first performed the song live at the opening date of a series of Lifehouse related concerts in the Young Vic theatre , London on 14 February 1971 . It has subsequently been part of every Who concert since , often as the set closer and sometimes extended slightly to allow Townshend to smash his guitar or Moon to kick over his drumkit . The group performed live over the synthesizer part being played on a backing tape , which required Moon to wear headphones to play in sync with it . It was the last track Moon played live in front of a paying audience on 21 October 1976 and the last song he ever played with the Who at Shepperton Studios on 25 May 1978 , which was captured on the documentary film The Kids Are Alright . The song was part of the Who 's set at Live Aid in 1985 , Live 8 in 2005 , T4 on the Beach in 2008 and Capital FM 's Summertime Ball concert in 2009 , 2010 and 2015 and the radio station 's Jingle Bell Ball concerts in 2009 and 2015 . 
 In October 2001 , The Who performed the song at The Concert for New York City to help raise funds for the families of firemen and police officers killed during the 9 / 11 attacks . They finished their set with ' Won 't Get Fooled Again ' to a responsive and emotional audience , with close @-@ up aerial video footage of the World Trade Center buildings playing behind them on a huge digital screen . In February 2010 , the group closed their set during the halftime show of Super Bowl XLIV with this song . While the Who have continued to play the song live , Townshend has expressed mixed feelings for it , alternating between pride and embarrassment in interviews . Who biographer John Atkins described the track as " the quintessential Who 's Next track but not necessarily the best . " 
 Several live and alternative versions of the song have been released on CD or DVD . In 2003 , a deluxe version of Who 's Next was reissued to include the Record Plant recording of the track from March 1971 and a live version recorded at the Young Vic on 26 April 1971 . The song is also included on the album Live at the Royal Albert Hall , from a 2000 show with Noel Gallagher guesting . 
 Daltrey , Entwistle and Townshend have each performed the song at solo concerts . Townshend has re @-@ arranged the song for solo performance on acoustic guitar . On 30 June 1979 , he performed a duet of the song with classical guitarist John Williams for the 1979 Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman 's Ball . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song was first covered in a distinctive soul style by Labelle on their 1972 album Moon Shadow . Van Halen began covering the song in concert in 1993 . Eddie Van Halen re @-@ arranged the track so that the synthesizer part was played on the guitar . A live recording was released on Live : Right Here , Right Now , and made it to number one on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . 
 Both Axel Rudi Pell ( on Diamonds Unlocked ) and Hayseed Dixie ( on Killer Grass ) covered the song in their established styles of metal and bluegrass respectively . Richie Havens covered the track on his 2008 album , " Nobody Left to Crown " , playing the song at a slower tempo to the original . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The original Who recording has been used in politics on several occasions . In an April 2006 editorial for Time magazine , retired United States Marine Corps Lieutenant General Greg Newbold referenced the song , labeling it an " antiwar anthem " that " conveyed a sense of betrayal by the nation 's leaders , who had led our country into a costly and unnecessary war in Vietnam . " In 2014 , the British Government ran an advertisement for superfast broadband using the song as its theme music . 
 Townshend has taken an interest in licensing the Who 's work to media and advertising , and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " has made several appearances on TV and film . A portion of the song has been used as the opening theme for the CBS series CSI : Miami , while a cover version of the track was played on The Simpsons ' " A Tale of Two Springfields " which featured the Who as special guests . However , Townshend refused permission for director Michael Moore to play the song over the closing credits of Fahrenheit 9 / 11 , as he was suspicious of Moore 's journalistic credentials and did not want his work to be associated with a possibly inaccurate film . Townshend later said " [ o ] nce I had an idea what the film was about , I was 90 % certain my song was not right for them . " In response Moore accused Townshend of supporting the Iraq War , which Townshend denied . 
 The Tampa Bay Lightning use the song as their entrance music . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Roger Daltrey : vocals 
 Pete Townshend : acoustic and electric guitars , synthesized organ ( ARP 2500 , EMS VCS 3 ) and backing vocals 
 John Entwistle : bass guitar 
 Keith Moon : drums 
 = Homer at the Bat = 
 " Homer at the Bat " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 20 , 1992 . The episode follows the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant softball team , led by Homer , having a winning season and making the championship game . Mr. Burns makes a large bet that the team will win and brings in nine ringers from the " big leagues " to ensure his success . It was written by John Swartzwelder , who is a big baseball fan , and directed by Jim Reardon . 
 Roger Clemens , Wade Boggs , Ken Griffey , Jr . , Steve Sax , Ozzie Smith , José Canseco , Don Mattingly , Darryl Strawberry and Mike Scioscia all guest starred as themselves , playing the ringers hired by Mr. Burns . Terry Cashman sang a song over the end credits . The guest stars were recorded over several months , with differing degrees of cooperation . The episode is often named among the show 's best , and was the first to beat The Cosby Show in the ratings on its original airing . In 2014 , showrunner Al Jean selected it as one of five essential episodes in the show 's history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 It is softball season in Springfield and many of the workers at Springfield Nuclear Power Plant are reluctant to sign up for the Power Plant team due to their previous unsuccessful year . Homer reveals that he has a secret weapon , a homemade bat named " Wonder Bat " and his co @-@ workers eagerly join the team . Thanks in large part to Homer , the team goes through its season undefeated and earns the right to play in the championship game against the Shelbyville Nuclear Power Plant . 
 Mr. Burns makes a million dollar bet with Aristotle Amadopoulos , owner of the Shelbyville plant , that his team will win . To secure victory in the game , Mr. Burns decides to hire major league stars and assembles a team that includes Shoeless Joe Jackson , Pie Traynor , Harry Hooper , Honus Wagner , Cap Anson , Nap Lajoie , Gabby Street , Mordecai " Three Finger " Brown , and Jim Creighton ( the last of whom had been dead for 130 years ) . Waylon Smithers informs Mr. Burns that the players he picked have all retired and died , and so Mr. Burns changes tactics and orders Smithers to find some current superstar players . He hires nine Major League Baseball players — Roger Clemens , Wade Boggs , Ken Griffey , Jr . , Steve Sax , Ozzie Smith , Jose Canseco , Don Mattingly , Darryl Strawberry and Mike Scioscia — and gives them token jobs at the plant so that they can play on the team , much to the dismay of the plant workers who got the team to the championship game in the first place . 
 Mr Burns hires a hypnotist to train the team , and they all mouth back his words ( such as ' You will beat Shelbyville ' ) in unison ( ' We will beat Shelbyville ' ) until the hypnotist says ' You will give 110 % ' , at which point the team mouth back , still in perfect unison , ' That 's impossible . No one can give more than 100 % . By definition , that is the most anyone can give ' . 
 However , before the game , eight of the nine all @-@ star players suffer unrelated misfortunes that prevent them from playing : Clemens suddenly behaves like a chicken due to the hypnotist 's incompetence , Boggs is knocked unconscious by Barney after a bizarre argument at Moe 's Tavern ( over who was England 's greatest Prime Minister , Lord Palmerston or Pitt the Elder ) , Griffey , Jr. takes an overdose of nerve tonic , resulting in an extreme case of gigantism , Sax is arrested and put in jail for every unsolved murder in New York City , Smith disappears in the " Springfield mystery spot " , Canseco is too busy rescuing a woman and her possessions from a fire , Mattingly is kicked off the team by Mr. Burns due to sideburns only he can see , and Scioscia is hospitalized due to radiation poisoning from the plant , having taken his token job all too seriously . Mr. Burns is forced to use his original employees , along with Strawberry , the only star who can play . He made a speech that he knows that his team hated him for what he did to them and he tells them to win . Homer remains on the bench as Strawberry plays his position . 
 With the score tied and bases loaded with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning , Mr. Burns elects to field a right @-@ handed hitter against a left @-@ handed pitcher and pinch hits Homer for Strawberry . The very first pitch hits Homer in the head , rendering him unconscious , but forcing in the winning run . The team wins the title and Homer , still unconscious , is paraded as a hero . Smithers holds the trophy . Mr. Burns thinks about it . Homer lying on the ground . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Homer at the Bat " took a long time to produce . It was written by John Swartzwelder , who is a big baseball fan , but was suggested by Sam Simon , who wanted an episode filled with real Major League Baseball players . Executive producers Al Jean and Mike Reiss doubted that they would be able to get nine players , thinking that they would be able to get three at best . However , they succeeded , and the nine players who agreed to guest star were recorded over a period of six months , whenever they were playing the Los Angeles Dodgers or California Angels . Each player recorded their part in roughly five minutes and spent the next hour writing autographs for the staff . In several cases , the writers were unable to get the player who was their first choice . Two of the players who turned down the chance to guest star were Ryne Sandberg and Carlton Fisk . 
 All of the players were cooperative except for Jose Canseco , who was intimidating . He disliked his original part and insisted it be rewritten , and the writers grudgingly made him as heroic as possible . He was originally slated to wake up in bed with Edna Krabappel and miss the game , but Canseco 's then @-@ wife , Esther Haddad , objected . He disliked his caricature , stating that " the animation looked nothing like [ him ] , " but that he found the acting was very easy . When asked in 2007 about his part by the San Jose Mercury News , he responded , " that was 100 years ago , " hung up the phone and did not answer any of the paper 's subsequent calls for an interview about his guest spot . 
 Ken Griffey , Jr. did not understand his line " there 's a party in my mouth and everyone 's invited " and got quite frustrated when he was recording it . He was directed by Mike Reiss , and his father Ken Griffey , Sr. was also present , trying to coach his son . Roger Clemens , who made his own chicken noises , was directed by Jeff Martin , as was Wade Boggs . Mike Reiss directed most of the other players . Mike Scioscia accepted his guest spot in " half a second , " while Ozzie Smith has stated that he would like to guest star again " so [ he ] can get out [ of the Springfield Mystery spot ] . " Don Mattingly , who was forced to shave off his " sideburns " by Mr. Burns during the episode , would later have an actual " haircut controversy " , while he was playing for the New York Yankees . The coaching staff forced him to cut his long hair , and was briefly dropped from the team line @-@ up for not doing so . Many people believed the joke in the episode to be a reference to the incident , but " Homer at the Bat " was recorded a year before it happened . Many of the guest stars , including Terry Cashman , Wade Boggs and Darryl Strawberry all admit that they are more well known because of their appearance in the episode , Cashman having " Talkin ' Softball " requested more often than " Talkin ' Baseball " . 
 One of the hardest pieces of editing was the hypnotist segment , which featured several of the guest stars speaking in unison . It was difficult because the parts were recorded over a period of several months and thus it was hard to sync their voices . Rich Moore was originally intended to direct the episode , but as he did not know anything about baseball he was switched with Jim Reardon , who was a baseball fan . Moore was given the episode " Lisa the Greek " instead . Many of the player designs were difficult , because the animators had a hard time designing real world people during the early years . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode makes several allusions to the film The Natural . Homer 's secret weapon , his self @-@ created " <unk> " , is akin to Roy Hobbs 's " Wonderboy " , and both bats are eventually destroyed . The scene featuring the explosion of stadium lights as Homer circles the basepaths is also taken directly from the film . The end song " Talkin ' Softball " is a parody of " Talkin ' Baseball " by Terry Cashman . Jeff Martin wrote the new version of the song , but Cashman was brought in to sing it . The scenes of the Power Plant team traveling from city to city by train , overlaid with the pennant of the city they are going to , is a reference to the 1942 film The Pride of the Yankees . Carl batting with a piano leg is a reference to Norm Cash of the Detroit Tigers , who once tried to bat with a table leg in a game where Nolan Ryan was extremely overpowering and threw a no @-@ hitter . The episode 's title references " Casey at the Bat " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During the previous season , Fox had put The Simpsons in a timeslot that meant it was in direct competition with The Cosby Show , which won the timeslot every time . " Homer at the Bat " had a 15 @.@ 9 rating and 23 % share to win its timeslot while The Cosby Show had a 13 @.@ 2 rating and 20 % share . This was the first time that a new Simpsons episode beat a new Cosby Show episode . Former executive producer Sam Simon and current showrunner Al Jean named it as their favorite episode . Regular cast members Harry Shearer and Julie Kavner disliked the episode because of its focus on the guest stars and its surreal tone . They were particularly annoyed by the Mattingly sideburns joke . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , praised the episode , calling it " a great episode because the accidents that befall the pro players are so funny . " Chris Turner , the author of the book Planet Simpson , said that the episode was the indication that " the Golden Age [ of the show ] had arrived . " Nate Meyers gave the episode four and a half out of five , stating " the script makes great use of the baseball superstars , giving each of them a strong personality and plenty of pep ( the highlight has to be Mattingly 's clash with Mr. Burns ) . " Colin Jacobson disliked the episode : " when [ " Homer at the Bat " ] originally aired , I didn 't like it . While I 've warmed up to the show slightly over the last decade , I still think it 's generally weak , and I 'd definitely pick it as Season Three 's worst . " 
 Entertainment Weekly placed the episode fifteenth on their top 25 The Simpsons episodes list , noting it was " early proof that The Simpsons could juggle a squad of guest stars without giving the family short shrift . " It was placed third on AskMen.com 's " Top 10 : Simpsons Episodes " list , Rich Weir called it " one of the show 's more memorable moments " and " effective as it combines a slew of guest stars with some hilarious material for Homer . " The entire episode was placed first on ESPN.com 's list of the " Top 100 Simpsons sport moments " , released in 2004 . Greg Collins , the author of the list , gave great praise of the episode . He stated that this is the " king of all sports episodes , and perhaps the greatest Simpsons episode ever . " A friend of Collins later met guest star Mike Scioscia and told him that he thought his guest spot was the best thing Scioscia had ever done , he responded " Thanks , I think " . Eric <unk> , Brian Moritz and John Hill of Press & Sun @-@ Bulletin named the episode the fourth best in the show 's history , and a journalist for The Toronto Star named Homer 's conversation with Darryl Strawberry as the " greatest conversation of all time , involving the word yes " . 
 IGN.com ranked the <unk> ' performances as the seventeenth best guest appearance in the show 's history , calling " each of these appearances was hilarious , making this a classic episode . " The Phoenix.com praised the performances of each of the guest stars , but Darryl Strawberry , whom they put in the fifth position , was the only one to make their " Top 20 guest stars " list . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The episode has been credited with helping to save several lives . During the scene in which Homer chokes on a donut , a poster explaining how the Heimlich maneuver works is on the wall behind him . In May 1992 , Chris <unk> was able to save his brother 's life by performing the Heimlich Maneuver on him , having seen it in the episode , and in December 2007 Aiden Bateman was able to save his friend Alex Hardy 's life by recalling the same . 
 = Ottoman cruiser Berk @-@ i Satvet = 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet was a torpedo cruiser of the Ottoman Navy , the second and final member of the Peyk @-@ i Şevket class . She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Germany in 1906 – 07 , and was delivered to the Ottoman Navy in November 1907 . The ship 's primary armament consisted of three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes and a pair of 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , and she was capable of a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The ship 's early career was uneventful ; the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 passed without any action of the Ottoman fleet . Berk @-@ i Satvet saw action during the Balkan Wars of 1912 – 13 in the Aegean and Black Seas , against Greek and Bulgarian opponents , respectively . 
 After the Ottoman Empire entered World War I , Berk @-@ i Satvet was employed in patrols in the Black Sea . These included attacks on Russian ports with the ex @-@ German warships Yavuz Sultan Selim and Midilli . In January 1915 , Berk @-@ i Satvet struck a naval mine while escorting a convoy to Zonguldak ; the explosion severely damaged the ship and kept her out of service until April 1918 . For the remainder of the war , she patrolled the Black Sea . The ship was renamed Berk in 1923 and modernized twice , in the mid @-@ 1920s and in the late @-@ 1930s . She remained in service until 1944 , when she was stricken from the naval register . Berk was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1953 – 55 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet , classified as a torpedo cruiser by the Ottoman Navy , was also sometimes referred to as a torpedo gunboat . She was 80 m ( 260 ft ) long , with a beam of 8 @.@ 4 m ( 28 ft ) and a draft of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 775 t ( 763 long tons ; 854 short tons ) while on sea trials . The ship was powered by a pair of vertical triple @-@ expansion engines each driving a screw propeller . The engines were rated at 5 @,@ 100 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 800 kW ) for a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) ; Berk @-@ i Satvet had a cruising radius of 3 @,@ 240 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 730 mi ) . Her crew numbered 105 officers and enlisted men . 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet 's primary offensive armament was her three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , above water , and the other two were in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She was armed with a pair of 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns that were placed in shielded single mounts on the forecastle and quarterdeck . She also carried six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns , four of which were mounted in sponsons , and a pair of 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . She had no armor protection . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet was ordered on 18 January 1903 and laid down down in February 1906 at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , Germany . She was launched on 1 December of that year , and completed in 1907 . After completing sea trials , she was transferred to the Ottoman Navy , arriving in Constantinople on 13 November , where she was formally commissioned into the Ottoman fleet . In 1909 , she and her sister participated in the first fleet maneuver conducted by the Ottoman Navy in twenty years . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Berk @-@ i Satvet was assigned to the Reserve Division , which was centered on the elderly ironclads Mesudiye and Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik . She did not see action during the conflict , since the Ottoman fleet spent the war in port . 
 = = = Balkan Wars = = = 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet was transferred to the Black Sea on 9 December 1912 , to reinforce the squadron there during the First Balkan War . On 4 February 1913 , Berk @-@ i Satvet bombarded Bulgarian positions at Şarköy on the northern coast of the Sea of Marmara in preparation for an amphibious assault . Four days later , the Ottoman navy returned to support the landing at Şarköy . Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin , along with two small cruisers provided artillery support to the right flank of the invading force once it went ashore . The ships were positioned about one kilometer off shore , with Berk @-@ i Satvet leading the line , which also included the cruiser Mecidiye and the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis . The Bulgarian army resisted fiercely , which ultimately forced the Ottoman army to retreat , though the withdrawal was successful in large part due to the gunfire support from the fleet . Berk @-@ i Satvet and Mecidiye covered the left flank while the two battleships supported the left during the evacuation . In the course of the operation , Berk @-@ i Satvet had fired eighty @-@ four 105 mm shells . 
 On 9 March , Berk @-@ i Satvet joined a sweep toward Imbros , an island in the Aegean Sea at the entrance to the Gulf of Saros ; she briefly engaged a pair of Greek destroyers and stopped a steamer flying under the French flag . The vessel , which appeared to be supplying Bulgarian forces , was taken as a prize by the destroyer <unk> . Later in March , she again escorted Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis in the Black Sea , while the two battleships bombarded Bulgarian troops that were attempting to breach the line of defenses at Çatalca . On 13 April , Berk @-@ i Satvet joined a fleet consisting of Barbaros Hayreddin , Turgut Reis , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik , and several smaller warships . The ships sortied out of the Dardanelles and encountered a Greek fleet . After a brief engagement at extreme range , the Ottomans and Greeks withdrew to the Dardanelles and Imbros , respectively . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In late July 1914 , World War I broke out in Europe , though the Ottomans initially remained neutral . On 14 August , Berk @-@ i Satvet joined patrols of the Dardanelles , the defenses of which were strengthened with several new minefields . Tensions between the Ottomans and a British fleet patrolling the entrance to the Dardanelles increased until 5 November , when Britain and France declared war on the Ottoman Empire . In the meantime , Berk @-@ i Satvet had been transferred to the Black Sea . She joined the cruiser Midilli , formerly the German Breslau , for an attack on the Russian port of Novorossiysk on 29 October . Berk @-@ i Satvet embarked on another attack , this time with the battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim , formerly the German Goeben . The battlecruiser shelled Sevastopol while Berk @-@ i Satvet observed ; she had been sent with Yavuz Sultan Selim primarily to train her crew . 
 Berk @-@ i Satvet sortied with her sister and Yavuz Sultan Selim on 5 December to provide distant support to a troop convoy headed to Rize . On 2 January 1915 at 15 : 00 , she , Midilli , and the cruiser Hamidiye steamed out of the Bosporus to escort a transport to Zonguldak , after which the three cruisers are to conduct a patrol off the port . At 18 : 00 into the voyage , a Russian mine exploded , which led Berk @-@ i Satvet 's commander to take evasive action . The ship struck a mine in the darkness , which caused significant damage . The mine destroyed both of her propellers and caused serious flooding at her stern . Two tugs arrived and towed Berk @-@ i Satvet to İstinye with Hamidiye as an escort . The damage was so severe that the ship was disabled for most of the war . After lengthy repairs , the ship was recommissioned on 1 April 1918 and patrols between Constantinople and Batumi . She remained in the Black Sea through the end of the war . On 30 November , the Ottoman Empire signed the Armistice of Mudros with the Entente powers , which concluded the conflict . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 The ship was renamed Berk in 1923 following the end of the Turkish War of Independence , which saw the Republic of Turkey replace the old Ottoman Empire . At the time , the ship had been placed out of service . From 1924 to 1925 , she was modernized at the Gölcük Naval Shipyard and was recommissioned in 1925 . In 1927 , the ship visited İzmir . She was rebuilt in 1937 – 39 and incorporated substantial improvements . Her stem was replaced and her superstructure was rebuilt . The old gun armament was replaced with a pair of 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) 45 @-@ caliber guns and four 37 mm 40 @-@ caliber guns , and equipment to handle 25 mines was installed . The ship continued in service until 1944 , when she was stricken from the naval register . She was hulked at the Gölcük shipyard in 1950 , and broken up for scrap between 1953 and 1955 . 
 = Ohio State Route 607 = 
 State Route 607 ( SR 607 ) is a north – south highway near <unk> , Ohio . The route starts at SR 60 and travels north to its terminus at SR 78 , all located inside Morgan County . SR 607 was designated in 2011 , after Monastery Road was transferred from township @-@ maintenance to state @-@ maintenance . The road was then repaved and realigned in 2012 , and became signed on July 25 , 2013 . The route opened to the public on the next day . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of SR 607 is located in central Morgan County , Ohio . The state route starts at the intersection of SR 60 near <unk> . SR 607 travels north for the majority of the length . SR 607 passes near an Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) county garage near the beginning of the road . Halfway through the route , SR 607 meets Township Road 696 in a T @-@ intersection , where the route moves slightly westward . After that , there is an Ohio Army National Guard training site at Hawk Drive . The route keeps moving north until it ends at SR 78 at another T @-@ intersection . The route goes through mostly forests and small hills . In 2012 , ODOT calculated 1 @,@ 975 vehicles traveling south of McGovern Lane . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . No part of SR 607 is included within the National Highway System , a system of routes deemed most important for the economy , defense and mobility of the country . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning of Monastery Road ( Township Road 209 ) improvements began in 2003 . At that time , $ 3 @.@ 8 million in state funding was set aside for the project , but the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) did not receive the money until 2005 . By 2007 , most of the earmarked money was spent on preliminary engineering and planning . Without the money , Morgan Township officials could not afford to upgrade the road , and ODOT was barred from spending money on local roads . In 2011 , deputy director Steve Williams devised a new plan that made the township road a state route , and Morgan Township officials transferred the road to ODOT . 
 Monastery Road was closed 0 @.@ 7 mi ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) north of SR 60 , and 0 @.@ 4 mi ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) south of SR 78 in April 2012 , for nine months . The road was realigned and resurfaced , and it cost around $ 1 @.@ 5 million . The road was also widened at the northern terminus with SR 78 , and the southern terminus with SR 60 . On July 25 , 2013 , ODOT erected state route signs on the road . The next day , Williams announced the upgrade of Monastery Road to State Route 607 and reopened the road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Morgan Township , Morgan County . 
 = SK Ull = 
 Skiklubben Ull was a Norwegian Nordic skiing club based in Oslo . Founded in 1883 , Skiklubben Ull attracted several skilled sportsmen who between 1883 and 1891 won six Ladies ' Cups and one King 's Cup in national skiing events . The sporting facilities belonging the club were located in Vestre Aker , with the ski jumping hill Ullbakken near Frognerseteren being opened in 1884 . The prestigious Husebyrennet was staged there once . Members of SK Ull were later instrumental in moving this prestigious contest to the hill Holmenkollbakken . 
 Club members also held important positions in the general administration of skiing in Norway . The first Ull chairman Johan Bechholm was also the first secretary of the Association for the Promotion of Skiing ; Karl Roll became the first chairman of the Norwegian Ski Federation , Hjalmar Krag became chairman in the Confederation of Sports and Fritz R. Huitfeldt was a pioneer in several respects . 
 The club was founded by students and its membership later drew from the upper social strata . During the first ten years of club history , forty @-@ four of the sixty members admitted into the club belonged to one of four prestigious professions ; physician , military officer , jurist or engineer . The club was furthermore exclusive , in that it only had 119 members during its first 100 years of existence . In 1893 the club raised its own cabin , thus grouping it together with other so @-@ called " cabin ski clubs " such as Christiania SK . SK Ull eventually evolved from a skiing club to a social club in a skiing setting , using the old cabin for member meetings , which were also visited by the King of Norway . 
 = = The most active sporting period , 1883 – 1898 = = 
 Skiklubben Ull was founded on 29 January 1883 , and named after the Norse deity Ullr . In Norse mythology , Ullr was a god for hunting and competition , superior with his skis and his bow . SK Ull has been credited as being the second @-@ oldest skiing club in the world , after Christiania SK . The club founders were a group of university students who socialized in apartments in Wessels gate . The young men usually conversed about their studies or played card games , but they were also hobby cross @-@ country skiers , and decided to take up skiing in a more organized form by starting a club . The term describing a club member was <unk> . 
 The founding members were Thoralf Fabritius , Paul <unk> , Petter Dahl Thams , Andreas Bechholm , Johan Bechholm , Otto Dahl , Sigurd <unk> and Michael <unk> Lie . New members were allowed every year until 1887 , after which new members were usually admitted biannually , in 1889 , 1891 , 1893 , 1895 , 1896 and 1897 . Notable members who joined the club shortly after the foundation include Fritz R. Huitfeldt , Henrik <unk> , Hans Grüner , Marius Grüner and Stefan <unk> . The first chairman was Johan Bechholm , followed by Sigurd <unk> from 1885 and Fritz R. Huitfeldt from 1887 to 1891 . The three honorary memberships proclaimed in the early period were Fritz R. Huitfeldt ( 1883 ) , Hans Grüner ( 1884 ) and Axel Huitfeldt ( 1889 ) . 
 The club saw sporting success on the national level ( international competitions were few or none ) in its first years . Johan Bechholm finished eleventh and won the Ladies ' Cup in Husebyrennet of 1883 . In 1884 Ingvald M. Smith @-@ Kielland , Sr. won the Ladies ' Cup and Richard <unk> won the King 's Cup . Vilhelm Nicolaysen finished fourth and won the Ladies ' Cup in 1886 , Karl Roll won the Ladies ' Cup in 1889 , Vilhelm Heiberg in 1890 and Otto Orre in 1891 . 
 Ull maintained its own ski jumping hill , Ullbakken , near Frognerseteren in Vestre Aker . It was opened in 1884 with a festive ski jumping contest , attended by Prince Eugen of Norway and Sweden . Ullbakken was the site of Husebyrennet in 1890 , when Kastellbakken was unusable . The dinner after this race was attended by Crown Prince Gustaf of Norway and Sweden . Karl Roll had an especially close relationship with the Swedish royal family , being a ski tutor for the princes while stationed in Stockholm between 1898 and 1904 . After Norway abolished the personal union in 1905 and elected its own king , Roll immediately became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp for the new monarch . 
 The club also staged the members @-@ only contest <unk> . In the invitation for <unk> and the subsequent banquet in 1897 , the members were asked to take their place at the table " according to rank , estate , age , dignity and skiing profess " . SK Ull also became the second in Norway to raise its own skiing cabin , " Ydale " at <unk> in 1893 . This was named after Ýdalir , the mythological dwelling of the deity Ullr . Some of Ull 's rival clubs were Christiania SK , Skuld , Fram and <unk> . Christiania , Skuld and Fram owned skiing cabins similar to that of Ull — they were collectively referred to as " cabin skiing clubs " . 
 Reportedly , it was SK Ull 's forays into the district around Holmenkollen for sporting purposes that spurred the establishment of the new hill Holmenkollbakken in 1891 . The knowledge of the area spurred Fritz R. Huitfeldt to pinpoint the location of the new hill , together with Hans Krag . This hill lay at a higher altitude than Kastellbakken , and thus had more favourable snow conditions . Holmenkollbakken quickly replaced Kastellbakken as the main hill in the district , and eventually became world @-@ famous . 
 SK Ull also saw some sporting success in the 1890s , although the last Ladies ' Cup was taken in 1891 . The club was joined by top skiers like Tobias <unk> and Jørgen Berg . In the late 1890s , however , as many members reached higher ages , SK Ull became more of a gentlemen 's social club than an active skiing club . This social club was exclusive by nature , with a clause in the by @-@ laws that the membership could not surpass forty . Actually the club never had more than thirty members , which was the case in 1890 , and rarely more than twenty . The members were drawn from the higher social strata of Norway 's capital region . Forty @-@ four of the sixty members admitted into the club up to the opening of Ydale belonged to one of four prestigious professions : physician , military officer , jurist or engineer . 
 = = 1900 – 1945 = = 
 After 1898 , there was a pause in admitting new members . Four were admitted between 1906 and 1908 , followed by only one in the 1915 , three in 1924 , and two in 1935 . In 1940 the average member age was 69 . 
 After finishing their active careers , some of Ull 's members entered the ranks of sports officials and administrators . Most notable was Karl Roll , who became the first chairman of the Norwegian Ski Federation in 1908 . Several members had already held positions in the older organization Association for the Promotion of Skiing , founded three weeks before Ull , in 1883 . Johan Bechholm was its first secretary , from 1883 to 1886 , and many others followed . Johan Sverre ( member since 1896 ) was a notable Olympic administrator after the Norwegian independence in 1905 , and Hjalmar Krag ( member since 1887 ) became chairman in the Confederation of Sports . Fritz R. Huitfeldt also became a known figure in his field ; for his ski bindings , and for pioneering Telemark skiing . Huitfeldt 's ski factory , which he started together with Richard <unk> , was named Ull . 
 During the first years of the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany , Ull continued to host private parties . Later , however , the club 's cabin Ydale was occupied by the Germans from December 1942 to March 1945 . Ull instead used the Grand Hotel for its sixtieth anniversary in 1943 and the annual convention of 1944 . Two new members were admitted during the war ; Sverre Martens and Einar Poulsson . 
 = = After 1945 = = 
 At the war 's end in 1945 , Ull only had fourteen members . Its average member age was lowered to 65 years after the admission of five new members in 1946 and 1947 . The post @-@ war period also saw the admission to SK Ull of men from more professional groups . One of the new members , Erik <unk> , would serve as chairman from 1951 to 1973 , when he backed down at the age of 84 . Another of the new post @-@ war members , Jakob <unk> , took over . He was then aged 68 . By 1953 , all the club 's elected positions were held by post @-@ war members . Three of the older members , some with experience dating to the 1880s , were admitted as honorary members , the first honorary members in SK Ull since 1889 . 
 After professor Johs . <unk> was admitted as a member in 1949 , the club admitted thirteen members in the 1950s ; seven in the 1960s as well as a corresponding member , Norwegian @-@ Canadian Herman Smith @-@ Johannsen ; and only three in the 1970s . One member was elected i 1980 , and three in 1983 ; Arvid Fossum , Odd <unk> and Birger Ruud . Three honorary members were proclaimed after 1960 : Erik <unk> in 1969 , Herman Smith @-@ <unk> in 1975 and Jakob <unk> in 1983 . 
 The cabin Ydale was still used for festivities , and became a small " museum " with skiing antiquities left behind by former members . The cabin was also used during the 1952 Winter Olympics as the residence of the Danish skiing team . A road leading to the cabin was named <unk> in 1964 . In 1983 the 100 @-@ year anniversary of Ull was hosted at Ydale with attendance from King Olav V of Norway . 
 = = List of position @-@ holders = = 
 This is a list of chairmen , deputy chairmen and managers / secretaries of SK Ull . 
 = Can 't Hold Us Down = 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera and rapper Lil ' Kim for the former 's fourth studio album Stripped ( 2002 ) . It was released by RCA Records on July 8 , 2003 , as the fourth single from the album . The track was written and produced by Scott Storch , with additional songwriting by Aguilera and Matt Morris . An R & B and hip hop song with dancehall elements , " Can 't Hold Us Down " criticizes gender @-@ related double standards . 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " received mixed reviews from music critics . It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 2004 ceremony , but lost to " Whenever I Say Your Name " by Sting and Mary J. Blige . The single peaked at number 12 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and charted within the top ten of record charts of several countries including Australia , Denmark , Ireland , and the United Kingdom . The song was included on the setlists of Aguilera 's three major concert tours : Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) and Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 08 ) . 
 A music video for " Can 't Hold Us Down " was directed by David LaChapelle , inspired by the Lower East Side of New York City in the 1980s . The single has been widely recognized as a feminist anthem , and its music video has been noted for being an example of cultural appropriation for how Aguilera depicted herself as an African @-@ American woman . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 American singer Christina Aguilera rose to prominence with the successes of her first three studio albums Christina Aguilera ( 1999 ) , Mi Reflejo ( 2000 ) , and My Kind of Christmas ( 2000 ) . However , she was dissatisfied with being marketed as what her then @-@ manager Steve Kurtz desired rather than Aguilera 's own wish . In late 2000 , Aguilera hired Irving Azoff as her new manager and announced that her forthcoming album would have more musical and lyrical depth . She named the album Stripped , explaining that the term represented " a new beginning , a re @-@ introduction of [ herself ] as a new artist " . Hip hop producer Scott Storch wrote and produced several tracks for the album , including " Can 't Hold Us Down " . Additional writing credits for the song were provided by Aguilera and Matt Morris . 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " was serviced to mainstream radio and rhythmic stations in the United States as the fourth single from Stripped by RCA Records on July 8 , 2003 . The song was distributed as a CD single from September to October 2003 in the United Kingdom , Germany , and Italy by RCA Records and Sony Music Entertainment . A 12 @-@ inch edition of the song was released in the United States on September 9 , 2003 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " is written in the key of E ♭ major . Chuck Taylor from Billboard described it as a R & B track , while The New York Times 's Kelefa Sanneh characterized it as a hip hop song . Todd Burns writing for Stylus Magazine also noted elements of dancehall towards the end of the track . Aguilera and Kim 's vocals on the track , which Taylor described as " faux @-@ R & B " , span two octaves , from F3 to F5 . 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " lyrically discusses feminism ; the song criticizes the " common " gender @-@ related double standards , in which men are applauded for their sexual behaviors , while women who behave in a similar fashion are disdained . In the book Therapeutic Uses of Rap and Hip @-@ Hop , Susan Hadley and George Yancy discuss that " Can 't Hold Us Down " is a hip hop song that " encourages young women to be proud , strong , and empowered to be all that they can be " . At the song 's first verse , Aguilera sings " Call me a bitch ' cause I speak what 's on my mind / Guess it 's easier for you to swallow if I sat and smiled " ; she later rejects that all women " should be seen , not heard " and encourages them to " shout louder " during the chorus . Aguilera comments on the double standard with the lyrics " The guy gets all the glory the more he can score / While the girl can do the same and yet you call her a whore " . Lil ' Kim shares a similar sentiment during her verse in the bridge , questioning why a man is able to give a woman " some sex or sex her raw " while " if the girl do the same and then she 's a whore " . 
 Media outlets speculated that the lyrics of " Can 't Hold Us Down " were directed towards rapper Eminem , who referred to Aguilera in his songs " Off the Wall " and " The Real Slim Shady " . Spin magazine 's Josh Kun wrote that Aguilera suggested Eminem " Must talk so big / To make up for smaller things " . According to Kelefa Sanneh writing for The New York Times , Aguilera referred to Eminem in the lyrics " It 's sad you only get your fame through controversy " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chuck Taylor from Billboard criticized the song as a " real waste of time and talent " , while Rolling Stone 's Jancee Dunn called the track " curiously lifeless " . Stylus Magazine 's Todd Burns was critical of the song 's " bland " lyrics yet appreciated the dancehall elements that emerged at the end of the track . Josh Kun of Spin praised the lyrics for being more confrontational than the works of her contemporary Britney Spears . Jacqueline Hodges writing for BBC Music appreciated Lil 's Kim 's inclusion on the track for adding " a bit of edge " . " Can 't Hold Us Down " was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 2004 Grammy Awards , but lost to " Whenever I Say Your Name " by Sting and Mary J. Blige . On reviewing Aguilera 's greatest hits album , Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits in 2008 , Nick Levine from Digital Spy shared disappointment because the song could not make it to the compilation . 
 " Can 't Hold Us Down " peaked at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 3 on the Pop Songs chart . The song peaked at number 4 on the Canadian Singles Chart . In Australia , " Can 't Hold Us Down " reached a peak position of number 5 on the Australian Singles Chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments of 35 @,@ 000 copies in the country . Additionally , it reached number 2 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It peaked at number 4 on the Hungarian Singles Chart , number 5 on the Irish Singles Chart , and number 6 on the UK Singles Chart . The single charted at numbers 7 and 15 on the Belgian Flanders and Walloon Singles Charts , respectively . On the Danish Singles Chart , " Can 't Hold Us Down " peaked at number 8 , while its highest position on the German Media Control Charts was number 9 . 
 The song has been recognized as a feminist anthem . Nicholas <unk> from The Charleston Gazette placed the song on his list of the top ten songs of female empowerment in 2013 , calling it a " great anthem about women sticking up for themselves in a misogynistic world " . Several writers for The AV Club included the track on their list of seventeen " well @-@ intended yet misguided feminist anthems " in 2010 ; they agreed that the song itself was " actually one of her better songs " , although they felt that its accompanying music video overshadowed its lyrical " [ confrontation of ] the double standard of female sexuality " since Aguilera conducted herself in a provocative fashion that conflicted its intended meaning . <unk> <unk> from Burton Mail listed " Can 't Hold Us Down " on her list of the " top ten empowering lady anthems " in 2013 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Can 't Hold Us Down " was directed by David LaChapelle , who previously directed the music video for Stripped 's lead single " Dirrty " in 2002 . It was filmed in a Los Angeles soundstage that depicted a 1980s Lower East Side neighborhood in Manhattan , New York City . LaChapelle described the concept of the video as his " ode to the ' 80s " . In the video , Aguilera wears a pink sleeveless shirt , a sleeveless sport jacket , a pair of shorts , a mauve baseball cap embroidered with the words " Lady C " , and white long socks . She is seen with dyed black hair and is wearing dark mascara and a gold nose ring . The residents of the neighborhood are mostly Latin and black people , resembling people living in a ghetto . 
 As the video begins , Aguilera is chatting with a group of women . When Aguilera leaves the conversation , a black man suddenly grabs her buttocks , making Aguilera stop and causing an argument between them . As she continues to sing , the nearby women in the neighborhood join her , while the male residents join the man and form their respective sides in the street . They perform their own hip hop dance skills against each other . At the bridge , Lil ' Kim appears in a bikini and a sheer black blouse , and dances in her high heels . The argument ends with Aguilera spraying the men with a water hose , which she holds between her legs and parodies the male penis . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jason Heller from The AV Club criticized <unk> for " [ swallowing ] the message " of the track by following an unrelated concept in the clip . In the book Music Video and the Politics of Representation , Diane Railton and Paul Watson felt that the video exemplified cultural appropriation , specifically noting how Aguilera conducted herself as an African @-@ American woman , and elaborated that it emphasized " a range of issues concerning the representation of gender and race " . Andy Cohn from The Fader provided a more favorable review , and opined that Aguilera 's " sass " helped to highlight her Irish and Ecuadorian background . 
 The music video for " Can 't Hold Us Down " has received scholarly attention as an example of cultural appropriation . Murali Balaji , author of the article " Vixen <unk> ' : Redefining black womanhood in hip @-@ hop music videos " published in the Journal of Black Studies , noted that " blackness and sexuality " has become characteristics by which African @-@ American women are able to self @-@ define . Consequently , he opined that the inclusion of Lil ' Kim in the clip represented an element of " ' primitive ' sexuality " , which Aguilera intended to imitate through her own behavior in the video . In their article " Naughty girls and red @-@ blooded women : Representations of female heterosexuality in music video " , published in Feminist Media Studies , Diane Railton and Paul Watson made specific note of the conflicting message raised by the lyrics " all my girls around the world " , while " blackness and whiteness are clearly inscribed on and through the bodies of Aguilera and Kim . " They suggested that this example detracted the message of the track by emphasizing the problem that " female heterosexuality " is confined to " the very limited range of ways " in mainstream culture , in this instance " gender and race [ and ] sexual behaviour " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Though the pair never performed the song together , Aguilera performed " Can 't Hold Us Down " on her Justified and Stripped Tour , which was held in support of Aguilera 's Stripped and Justin Timberlake 's album Justified ( 2002 ) . In late 2003 , the track was included on the setlist of The Stripped Tour , which acted as the Justified and Stripped Tour 's extension and happened without Timberlake 's acts . The performance in London was included on the singer 's first full @-@ length DVD Stripped Live in the U.K. ( 2004 ) . On her Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 08 ) , Aguilera performed excerpts of " Can 't Hold Us Down " in a medley with " Still Dirrty " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Credits adapted from " Can 't Hold Us Down " CD liner notes 
 Studios 
 Mixed at The Record Plant , Los Angeles , CA 
 Recorded at The Enterprise Studios , Burbank , CA , and Conway Studios , Hollywood 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Station model = 
 A station model is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station . Meteorologists created the station model to fit a number of weather elements into a small space on weather maps . This allows map users to analyze patterns in air pressure , temperature , wind , cloud cover , and precipitation . 
 Station model plots use an internationally accepted coding convention that has changed little since August 1 , 1941 . Elements in the plot show the key weather elements , including temperature , dew point , wind , cloud cover , air pressure , pressure tendency , and precipitation . 
 = = Measurement location and units = = 
 Weather maps primarily use the station model to show surface weather conditions , but the model can also show the weather aloft as reported by a weather balloon 's radiosonde or a pilot 's report . 
 Station model plots use a mixture of metric and Imperial units depending on the map 's location and what is being shown . Surface maps in the United States primarily use Imperial units , such as inches , degrees Fahrenheit , and knots . Most of the world , however , uses metric measurements for everything but wind speed , which is shown in knots . 
 = = <unk> winds = = 
 The station model uses a wind barb to show both wind direction and speed . The wind barb shows the speed using " flags " on the end . 
 Each half of a flag depicts five knots 
 Each full flag depicts 10 knots 
 Each pennant ( filled triangle ) depicts 50 knots 
 Winds are depicted as blowing from the direction the flags are facing . Therefore , a northeast wind will be depicted with a line extending from the cloud circle to the northeast , with flags indicating wind speed on the northeast end of this line . Once plotted on a map , an analysis of isotachs ( lines of equal wind speeds ) can be accomplished . Isotachs are particularly useful in diagnosing the location of the jet stream on upper level constant pressure charts , usually at or above the 300 hPa level . 
 The flags and pennants point to the low pressure , so it is possible to determine at which hemisphere the station is standing . The barbs in the figure at the right are located at the Northern Hemisphere , because the wind is circling counter clock @-@ wise around a low @-@ pressure area at the Northern Hemisphere ( the wind is blowing in the opposite direction at the Southern Hemisphere , see also Buys Ballot 's law ) . 
 More than a century ago , winds were initially plotted as arrows facing downwind , with feathers on both sides of the staff to indicate wind speed . In the United States , the change to the modern convention of flags shown on one side of the staff to indicate wind speed took effect on August 1 , 1941 . 
 = = Cloud cover = = 
 Along with wind direction , cloud cover is one of the oldest atmospheric conditions to be coded on a station model . The circle in the middle of the station model represents cloud cover . In the United Kingdom , when the observation is taken from an automated weather observation site , the shape is a triangle . If the shape is completely filled in , it is overcast . If conditions are completely clear , the circle or triangle is empty . If conditions are partly cloudy , the circle or triangle is partially filled in . The cloud cover shape has different looks depending upon how many <unk> ( eighths of the sky ) are covered by cloud . A sky half full of clouds would have a circle that was half white and half black . Below the shape indicating sky cover , the station model can indicate the coverage of low clouds , in <unk> , and the ceiling height in hundreds of feet . The ceiling height is the height at which more than half the sky is covered by clouds . 
 For pilots , knowledge of the sky cover helps determine if visual flight rules are being met . Knowing the degree of cloud cover can help determine whether or not various weather fronts , such as cold fronts or warm fronts , have passed by a location . A <unk> , contouring areas that are cloudy with scalloped lines , can be performed to indicate a system 's cloud and precipitation pattern . This technique is rarely performed nowadays , due to the prevalence of satellite imagery worldwide . 
 = = Cloud types = = 
 Above or below the circle for manned stations ( automatic stations do not report cloud types ) that indicates sky cover can lie one or more symbols indicating cloud types in any of the low , middle and high @-@ étages for tropospheric clouds . One predominant cloud type may be depicted for each of three étages , if known . The middle and high @-@ étage types are depicted above the sky cover circle of the station model , while the main low @-@ étage cloud type is indicated below the circle . Since the station model has limited room , it makes no special provision for vertical or multi @-@ level clouds that can occupy more than one étage at a particular time . Consequently , cloud genera with significant vertical development may be coded and plotted as low or middle depending on the altitude at which they normally form . Cumulus and cumulonimbus usually form in the low étage of the troposphere and achieve vertical extent by growing upward into the middle or high étage . Conversely , nimbostratus usually forms in the middle étage of the troposphere and becomes vertically developed by growing downward into the low étage . Although the SYNOP code has no separate formal group classification for vertical or multi @-@ level clouds , the observer procedure for selecting numerical codes is designed to give high reporting priority to those genera or species that show significant vertical development . 
 The symbols used for clouds emulate the cloud shape . Cirrus is indicated by a couple hooks , cumulus are indicated by a mound shape , with cumulonimbus indicated with an upside down trapezoid on top of the cumulus symbol to indicate its anvil . When there is more than one cloud type present per level , the cloud type with the highest priority is included . Knowing the cloud type at various locations can help determine whether or not a weather front has passed by a particular location . A low deck of stratus could indicate a station is still north of a warm front , while thunderstorms can indicate the approach of a squall line or cold front . 
 = = Present weather and visibility = = 
 To the left of the cloud shape in the center of the station model is the symbol depicting present weather . The present weather symbol depicts the current weather which normally is obstructing the visibility at the time of observation . The visibility itself is shown as a number , in statute miles in the United States and meters elsewhere , describing how far the observer can see at that time . This number is located to the left of the present weather symbol . For pilots , knowledge of the horizontal visibility helps determine if they are flying through instrument meteorological conditions , such as foggy or smokey conditions , as well as areas of intense precipitation . Present weather depicted with the station model can include : 
 Dust 
 Fog 
 Haze 
 Ocean spray 
 Precipitation 
 Sand 
 Smoke 
 Thunderstorms 
 Volcanic ash 
 = = Temperature and dew point = = 
 To left of center in the station model , the temperature and dew point are plotted . Within the United States on surface weather maps , they are still plotted in degrees Fahrenheit . Otherwise , they will be in units of degrees Celsius . This knowledge is important to meteorologists because when this data is plotted on a map , isotherms and <unk> ( lines of equal dew point ) are easily analyzed , either by man or machine , which can help determine location of weather fronts . 
 = = Sea level pressure and height of pressure surface = = 
 On the top right corner of the model for a surface weather map is the pressure , showing the last two integer digits of the pressure in millibars , or hectopascals , along with the first decimal . For instance , if the pressure at a certain location is 999 @.@ 7 hPa , the pressure portion of the station model will read 997 . Although the first digit or two of the pressure is left off , other nearby stations give away whether the pressure starts with a 10 or a 9 . Most of the time , choosing first digits that would lead to a value nearest to 1000 works out best . The plotting of this value within the station model allows for the analysis of isobars on weather maps . Within maps which plot data on constant pressure surfaces , the pressure is replaced with the height of the pressure surface . 
 = = Pressure tendency = = 
 Below the pressure will lie the pressure tendency figure , which indicates the pressure change over the past three hours . The number depicting the pressure change will usually have two digits and indicate the pressure change in 0 @.@ 1 millibar increments . There are nine different figures which represent the pressure change . A slant angled up and right indicates a steady rise , while a downward slant to the lower right indicates a steady fall . Steady rises can indicate improving conditions and approaching high pressure , and normally occur in the wake of a cold front . Steady falls can indicate deteriorating conditions and an approaching low pressure area , with the largest falls occurring in advance of a surface cyclone and its attendant warm front . 
 The time of the day must be considered , as there are two natural rises per day ( locally around 10 am and 10 pm ) and two natural falls per day ( locally around 4 am and 4 pm ) . These daily changes in pressure can mask the movement of pressure systems and fronts past a location . The lowest natural dip in the pressure , in a stagnant weather pattern , occurs around 4 pm while the highest natural peak in pressure occurs around 10 am . Once plotted on a map , the analysis of <unk> ( lines of equal pressure change ) can be plotted on a map , which can indicate the direction of motion of high and low pressures systems across the map domain . 
 = = Past weather = = 
 Station models can have past weather plotted within them , which would be located just under the pressure tendency . They indicate the type of weather experienced during the past six hours . The weather types are limited to obstructions of visibility and precipitation . 
 = Béla I of Hungary = 
 Béla I the Champion or the Wisent ( Hungarian : I. <unk> or <unk> Béla , Slovak : Belo I. ; before 1020 – 11 September 1063 ) was King of Hungary from 1060 until his death . He descended from a younger branch of the Árpád dynasty . Béla 's baptismal name was Adalbert . He left Hungary in 1031 , together with his brothers , Levente and Andrew , after the execution of their father , Vazul . Béla settled in Poland and married Richeza ( or Adelaide ) , daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland . 
 He returned to his homeland upon the invitation of his brother Andrew , who had in the meantime been crowned King of Hungary . Andrew assigned the administration of the so @-@ called ducatus or " duchy " , which encompassed around one @-@ third of the territory of the Kingdom of Hungary , to Béla . The two brothers ' relationship became tense when Andrew had his own son , Solomon , crowned king , and forced Béla to publicly confirm Solomon 's right to the throne in 1057 or 1058 . Béla , assisted by his Polish relatives , rebelled against his brother and dethroned him in 1060 . He introduced monetary reform and subdued the last uprising aimed at the restoration of paganism in Hungary . Béla was fatally injured when his throne collapsed while he was sitting on it . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood ( before 1031 ) = = = 
 Most Hungarian chronicles , including Simon of Kéza 's Gesta Hungarorum and the Illuminated Chronicle , record that Béla 's father was Ladislaus the Bald , a cousin of Stephen , the first King of Hungary . However , many of the same sources add that it " is sometimes claimed " that Béla and his two brothers — Levente and Andrew — were in fact the sons of Ladislaus the Bald 's brother , Vazul . The chronicles also refer to gossip claiming that the three brothers were their father 's illegitimate sons , born to " a girl from the Tátony clan " . Modern historians , who accept the latter reports ' reliability , unanimously write that the three brothers were the sons of Vazul and his concubine . 
 Béla was born between 1015 and 1020 . It is debated whether Béla was a second or a third son . The former view is represented , for example , by the Polish historian Wincenty Swoboda , and the latter by the Hungarian scholars Gyula Kristó and Ferenc Makk . Kristó and Makk write that Béla 's name " most probably " derived from the Turkish adjective <unk> ( " noble " ) . However , the name may also be connected to the Slavic word for white ( <unk> ) or to the Biblical name Bela . 
 = = = In exile ( 1031 – c . 1048 ) = = = 
 King Stephen 's only son who survived infancy , Emeric , died on 2 September 1031 . Thereafter , Vazul had the strongest claim to succeed the King . However , the monarch , suspecting that Vazul inclined towards paganism , favored his own sister 's son , Peter Orseolo . In order to ensure his nephew 's succession , Stephen had Vazul blinded . Béla and his two brothers fled from the kingdom . 
 They first settled in Bohemia , but their " condition of life was poor and mean " there . They moved to Poland , where " they received a warm reception " from King Mieszko II . According to the Hungarian chronicles , Béla participated in a Polish expedition against the pagan Pomeranians and defeated their duke " in single combat " . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that the Polish monarch " praised the boldness and strength of Duke Béla and bestowed on him all the Pomeranian tribute " . The King even gave his daughter — named either Richeza or Adelaide — in marriage to Béla and granted " a goodly quantity of land " to him . Makk says that Béla was not baptized until just before his marriage ; his baptismal name was the Germanic one of Adalbert . 
 At that time the Pomeranians refused to pay their yearly tribute to the Duke of Poland , to whom they were subject . The Duke set out to exact by force of arms the tribute due to him from the Pomeranians . Then the Pomeranians , who were pagans , and the Poles , who were Christians , agreed together that their leaders should meet each other in a duel , and if the Pomeranian fell defeated , he would render the customary tribute ; and if the Pole , then he might bewail its loss . Since [ the ] Duke [ Mieszko ] and his sons shrank in fear from the duel to be fought , [ Béla ] presented himself before them and through an interpreter spoke thus : ' If it is pleasing to you , Poles , and to the lord Duke , although I am of nobler birth than that pagan , yet I will fight for the advantage of your kingdom and for the honour of the Duke . ' This was pleasing both to the Pomeranians and to the Poles . When they met in combat , armed with lances , [ Béla ] is said to have struck the Pomeranian so manfully that he unseated him from his horse ; and the Pomeranian could not move from the spot where he had fallen , and [ Béla ] smote him with his sword . Then the Duke of the Pomeranians confessed himself at fault ; and the Pomeranians , seeing this , humbly submitted to the Duke of Poland and paid the accustomed tribute without murmuring . 
 King Mieszko II died in 1034 ; his son and heir , Casimir was forced to leave Poland . A period of anarchy followed , which lasted at least until 1039 when Casimir returned . According to Kristó and Makk , Béla was staying in Poland during this period ; he even may have administered the kingdom in the name of his absent brother @-@ in @-@ law . On the other hand , the Polish historian , Manteuffel writes that Béla and his two brothers , in contrast with the unanimous report of the Hungarian chronicles , arrived in Poland only with Casimir , after 1039 . It is beyond a doubt that Levente and Andrew departed from Poland in about 1038 , because — according to the Illuminated Chronicle — they did not want to " live the life of hangers @-@ on in the Duke of Poland 's court , regarded only as Béla 's brothers " . 
 = = = Duke in Hungary ( c . 1048 – 1060 ) = = = 
 Upon leaving Poland , Andrew and Levente settled in Kiev . They returned to Hungary after a rebellion which was dominated by pagans broke out against King Peter Orseolo in 1046 . The King was dethroned , and Andrew was proclaimed king . Levente died in the same year and Andrew , still childless , decided to invite Béla back to Hungary . 
 Having lost one brother , King Andreas sent to Poland to his other brother Bela , calling him with great love and saying : " Once we shared poverty and labour together , and now I ask you , most beloved brother , that you come to me without tarrying , so that we may be companions in joy and share in the good things of the kingdom , rejoicing in each other 's presence . For I have neither heir nor brother except you . You shall be my heir , and you shall succeed me in the kingdom . " Won by these words , Béla came to the King with all his family . When the King saw him , he rejoiced with a great joy , because he was fortified by his brother 's strength . Then the King and his brother Bela held a council and divided the kingdom into three parts , of which two remained under the proprietorship of the royal majesty or power and the third was put under the proprietorship of the Duke . This first division of the kingdom became the seed of discord and wars between the dukes and the kings of Hungary . 
 Urged by his brother , Béla returned in 1048 and received one @-@ third of the kingdom , with the title of duke . Béla 's ducatus or " duchy " encompassed large territories along the eastern and northern borders , including the regions of Nyitra ( Nitra , Slovakia ) and Bihar ( Biharia , Romania ) . He possessed a wide range of royal prerogatives , including coinage . The half @-@ denars minted for him bore the inscription <unk> DUX ( " Duke Béla " ) . According to Steinhübel , the mid @-@ 11th @-@ century timber and earth walls of the fortress of Nyitra were erected in Béla 's reign . 
 The two brothers closely collaborated in the subsequent years . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , they together worked out a military strategy against the Germans , who were frequently invading the kingdom in the early 1050s . Ferenc Makk writes that Béla 's epithets — the Champion or the Wisent — are connected to his fighting against the Germans . The chronicler emphasizes that Andrew and Béla " lived in a great tranquillity of peace " even after Andrew fathered a son , Solomon , in 1053 . Béla was one of the lords witnessing the deed of the foundation of the Tihany Abbey , a Benedictine monastery that his brother established in 1055 . 
 The two brothers ' good relationship deteriorated after King Andrew had the child Solomon crowned king in 1057 or 1058 . The coronation was the consequence of the peace negotiations with the Holy Roman Empire , because the Germans did not acquiesce in a marriage between Solomon and Judith — the sister of the young German monarch , Henry IV — until Solomon 's right to succeed his father was declared and publicly confirmed . Thereafter Andrew was determined to secure the throne for his son . He invited Béla to his manor in Tiszavárkony , where the King offered his brother a seemingly free choice between a crown and a sword ( which were the symbols of the royal and ducal power , respectively ) . However , he had ordered that Béla be murdered if he chose the crown . Having been informed of his brother 's secret plan by one of his own partisans in the royal court , Béla opted for the sword , but he departed for Poland after the meeting . 
 He returned to Hungary , in the autumn of 1060 , with Polish troops that Duke Boleslaus the Bold of Poland had provided . Around the same time , German reinforcements arrived in Hungary to assist Andrew against Béla . The ensuing civil war ended with the victory of Béla , who defeated his brother in two successive battles fought at the river Tisza and at Moson . The King was seriously injured and died soon afterward . His partisans took his son , the child Solomon , to Germany . 
 = = = Reign ( 1060 – 1063 ) = = = 
 Béla was crowned king in Székesfehérvár on 6 December 1060 . He ordered that " the wives and sons and all the property of all those who had followed " his nephew to Germany " should be protected and kept safe and sound " , which induced many of Solomon 's partisans to reconcile themselves to Béla 's rule and return to Hungary . He reformed the coinage and introduced " large coins of purest silver " into circulation . In order to stabilize the new currency , Béla maximized the prices and eliminated the black market . He also ordered that weekly markets should be held on Saturdays , instead of Sundays , in the kingdom . The historian Nora Berend says that the latter measure " may have adversely affected Jewish activities " , because Jews , who observed the Sabbath , could not work on Saturdays . 
 Béla decided to discuss his innovations with the representatives of the freemen , and " sent heralds throughout all Hungary to summon two elders with gift of speech from each village to a royal council " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . A great crowd of commoners gathered in Székesfehérvár in 1061 . They demanded the restoration of paganism and the murder of clergymen , but Béla collected his army and suppressed their uprising within three days . 
 Béla attempted to conclude a peace treaty with the Holy Roman Empire . For this purpose , shortly after his coronation , he released all German commanders who had assisted his brother during the civil war . However , the young German monarch 's advisors refused Béla 's proposals . In the summer of 1063 , an assembly of the German princes decided to launch a military expedition against Hungary to restore young Solomon to the throne . Béla was planning to abdicate in favor of his nephew if the latter restored his former ducatus , but he was seriously injured when " his throne broke beneath him " in his manor at Dömös . The King — who was " half @-@ dead " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle — was taken to the western borders of his kingdom , where he died at the creek <unk> on 11 September 1063 . Béla was buried in the Benedictine Szekszárd Abbey , which he had set up in 1061 . Following Béla 's death , his three sons — Géza , Ladislaus and Lampert — sought refuge in Poland , and Solomon ascended the throne . 
 = = Family = = 
 Béla married , in about 1033 , a daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland . According to Makk , her name was either <unk> or Adelheid . Their eldest children , Géza and Ladislaus — who became kings of Hungary in 1074 and 1077 , respectively — were born in Poland in the 1040s . Béla 's third son , Lampert , was born after Béla 's return to Hungary . 
 Lampert was followed by a daughter named Sophia , who was first married to Margrave Ulric I of Carniola , and later to Duke Magnus of Saxony . Her younger sister , Euphemia , became the wife of Duke Otto I of Olomouc . Béla 's third daughter , Helena , was the queen of King Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia . An unnamed daughter of Béla became the first wife of a Hungarian nobleman , Lampert of the Clan Hont @-@ Pázmány . According to the historian Martin <unk> , Béla also fathered a fifth daughter , Lanka , who was the wife of Prince Rostislav Vladimirovich of <unk> . 
 The following family tree presents Béla 's ancestry , his offspring , and some of his relatives mentioned in the article . 
 * A Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian lady . * * Györffy writes that she may have been a member of the Bulgarian Cometopuli dynasty . * * * Lanka is not mentioned as Béla I 's daughter by all specialists . 
 = Su Song = 
 Su Song ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Sòng ; courtesy name : <unk> <unk> ) ( 1020 – 1101 AD ) was a renowned Han Chinese polymath who was described as a scientist , mathematician , statesman , astronomer , cartographer , horologist , medical doctor , pharmacologist , mineralogist , zoologist , botanist , mechanical and architectural engineer , poet , antiquarian , and ambassador of the Song Dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . 
 Su Song was the engineer of a hydro @-@ mechanical astronomical clock tower in medieval Kaifeng , which employed the use of an early escapement mechanism . The escapement mechanism of Su 's clock tower had been invented by Buddhist monk Yi Xing and government official Liang <unk> in 725 AD to operate a water @-@ powered armillary sphere , although Su 's armillary sphere was the first to be provided with a mechanical clock drive . Su 's clock tower also featured the oldest known endless power @-@ transmitting chain drive , called the <unk> ti ( <unk> ) , or " celestial ladder " , as depicted in his horological treatise . The clock tower had 133 different clock jacks to indicate and sound the hours . Su Song 's treatise about the clock tower , Xinyi Xiangfayao ( <unk> ) , has survived since its written form in 1092 and official printed publication in 1094 . The book has been analyzed by many historians , such as Joseph Needham . The clock itself , however , was dismantled by the invading Jurchen army in AD 1127 , and although attempts were made to reassemble it , the tower was never successfully reinstated . 
 The Xinyi Xiangfayao was Su 's best @-@ known treatise , but the polymath compiled other works as well . He completed a large celestial atlas of several star maps , several terrestrial maps , as well as a treatise on pharmacology . The latter discussed related subjects on mineralogy , zoology , botany , and metallurgy . 
 European Jesuit visitors to China like Matteo Ricci and Nicolas Trigault briefly wrote about Chinese clocks with wheel drives , but others mistakenly believed that the Chinese had never advanced beyond the stage of the clepsydra , incense clock , and sundial . They thought that advanced mechanical clockworks were new to China and that these mechanisms were something valuable that Europeans could offer to the Chinese . Although not as prominent as in the Song period , contemporary Chinese texts of the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) described a relatively unbroken history of mechanical clocks in China , from the 13th century to the 16th . 
 = = Life and works = = 
 = = = Career as a scholar @-@ official = = = 
 Su Song was born in modern @-@ day Fujian , near medieval Quanzhou . Like a contemporary , Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) , Su Song was a polymath , a person whose expertise spans a significant number of different interests . It was written by his junior colleague and Hanlin scholar Ye <unk> ( 1077 – 1148 ) that in Su 's youth , he mastered the provincial exams and rose to the top of the examination list for writing the best essay on general principles and structure of the Chinese calendar . From an early age , his interests in astronomy and calendrical science led him onto a distinguished path as a state bureaucrat . In his spare time he was fond of writing poetry , which he used to praise the works of artists such as the painter Li <unk> ( 1049 – 1106 ) . He also was an antiquarian and collector of old artworks from previous dynasties . 
 In matters of administrative government , he had attained the rank of Ambassador and President of the Ministry of Personnel at the capital of Kaifeng , and was known also as an expert in administration and finance . After serving in the Ministry of Personnel , he became a Minister of Justice in 1086 . He was appointed as a distinguished editor for the Academy of Scholarly Worthies , where in 1063 he edited , redacted , commented on , and added a preface for the classic work Huainanzi of the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) . Eventually , Su rose to the post of Vice President of the Chancellery Secretariat . Among many honorable positions and titles conferred upon him , Su Song was also one of the ' Deputy Tutors of the Heir Apparent ' . At court , he chose to distance himself from the political rivalries of the Conservatives , led by Prime Minister Sima Guang ( 1019 – 1086 ) , and the Reformists , led by Prime Minister Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) ; although many of his associates were of the Conservative faction . In 1077 he was dispatched on a diplomatic mission to the Liao Dynasty of the Khitan people to the north , sharing ideas about calendrical science , as the Liao state had created its own calendar in 994 AD . In a finding that reportedly embarrassed the court , Su Song acknowledged to the emperor that the calendar of the Khitan people was in fact a bit more accurate than their own , resulting in the fining and punishment of officials in the Bureau of Astronomy and Calendar . Su was supposed to travel north to Liao and arrive promptly for a birthday celebration and feast on a day which coincided with the winter solstice of the Song calendar , but was actually a day behind the Liao calendar . Historian Liu Heping states that Emperor Zhezong of Song sponsored Su Song 's clocktower in 1086 in order to compete with the Liao for " scientific and national superiority . " In 1081 , the court instructed Su Song to compile into a book the diplomatic history of Song @-@ Liao relations , an elaborate task that , once complete , filled 200 volumes . With his extensive knowledge of cartography , Su Song was able to settle a heated border dispute between the Song and Liao dynasties . 
 = = = Astronomy = = = 
 Su Song also created a celestial atlas ( in five separate maps ) , which had the hour circles between the <unk> ( lunar mansions ) forming the astronomical meridians , with stars marked in an equidistant cylindrical projection on each side of the equator , and thus , was in accordance to their north polar distances . Furthermore , Su Song must have taken advantage of the astronomical findings of his political rival and contemporary astronomer Shen Kuo . This is so because Su Song 's fourth star map places the position of the pole star halfway between Tian shu ( − 350 degrees ) and the current Polaris ; this was the more accurate calculation ( by 3 degrees ) that Shen Kuo had made when he observed the pole star over a period of three months with his width @-@ improved sighting tube . There were many star maps written before Song 's book , but the greatest significance of these star maps by Su Song is , that they represent the oldest extant star maps in printed form . 
 = = = Pharmacology , botany , zoology , and mineralogy = = = 
 In 1070 , Su Song and a team of scholars compiled and edited the Bencao <unk> ( ' Illustrated Pharmacopoeia ' , original source material from 1058 – 1061 ) , which was a groundbreaking treatise on pharmaceutical botany , zoology , and mineralogy . In compiling information for pharmaceutical knowledge , Su Song worked with such notable scholars as Zhang Yuxi , Lin Yi , Zhang Dong , and many others . 
 This treatise documented a wide range of pharmaceutical practices , including the use of ephedrine as a drug . It includes valuable information on metallurgy and the steel and iron industries during 11th century China . He created a systematic approach to listing various different minerals and their use in medicinal concoctions , such as all the variously known forms of mica that could be used to cure ills through digestion . He wrote of the <unk> fracture of native cinnabar , signs of ore beds , and provided description on crystal form . Similar to the ore channels formed by circulation of ground water written of by the later German scientist Georgius Agricola , Su Song made similar statements concerning copper carbonate , as did the earlier <unk> Bencao of 970 with copper sulphate . Su 's book was also the first pharmaceutical treatise written in China to describe the flax , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> tomentosa ( crenata ) plants . According to Edward H. Schafer , Su accurately described the translucent quality of fine realgar , its origin from pods found in rocky river gorges , its matrix being pitted with holes and having a deep red , almost purple color , and that the mineral varied in sizes ranging from the size of a pea to a walnut . 
 Citing evidence from an ancient work by Zheng Xuan ( 127 – 200 ) , Su believed that physicians of the ancient Zhou Dynasty ( 1046 – 256 BC ) used realgar as a remedy for ulcers . As believed in Su 's day , the " five poisons " used by Zhou era physicians for this purpose were thought to be cinnabar , realgar , <unk> , alum , and magnetite . Su made systematic descriptions of animals and the environmental regions they could be found , such as different species of freshwater , marine , and shore crabs . For example , he noted that the freshwater crab species <unk> sinensis could be found in the Huai River running through Anhui , in waterways near the capital city , as well as reservoirs and marshes of Hebei . Su 's book was preserved and copied into the Bencao Gangmu of the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) physician and pharmacologist Li Shizhen ( 1518 – 1593 ) . 
 = = = <unk> and mechanical engineering = = = 
 Su Song compiled one of the greatest Chinese horological treatises of the Middle Ages , surrounding himself with an entourage of notable engineers and astronomers to assist in various projects . Xinyi Xiangfayao ( lit . " Essentials of a New Method for <unk> the Rotation of an Armillary Sphere and a Celestial Globe " ) , written in 1092 , was the final product of his life 's achievements in horology and clockwork . Fortunately , this book of Su 's that was handed down included 47 different illustrations of great detail of the mechanical workings for his astronomical clocktower . 
 Su Song 's greatest project was the 40 @-@ foot @-@ tall water @-@ powered astronomical clocktower constructed in Kaifeng , the wooden pilot model completed in 1088 , the bronze components cast by 1090 , while the wholly finished work was completed by 1094 during the reign of Emperor Zhezong of Song . The emperor had previously commissioned Han <unk> , Acting Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel , to head the project , but the leadership position was instead handed down to Su Song . The emperor ordered in 1086 for Su to reconstruct the hun yi , or " armillary clock " , for a new clock @-@ tower in the capital city . Su worked with the aid of Han Gong @-@ lian , who applied his extensive knowledge of mathematics to the construction of the clock @-@ tower . A small @-@ scale wooden model was first crafted by Su Song , testing its intricate parts before applying it to an actual full @-@ scale clock tower . In the end , the clock @-@ tower had many impressive features , such as the hydro @-@ mechanical , rotating armillary sphere crowning the top level and weighing some 10 to 20 tons , a bronze celestial globe located in the middle that was 4 @.@ 5 feet in diameter , mechanically @-@ timed and rotating mannequins dressed in miniature Chinese clothes that exited miniature opening doors to announce the time of day by presenting designated reading plaques , ringing bells and gongs , or beating drums , a sophisticated use of oblique gears and an escapement mechanism , as well as an exterior facade of a fanciful Chinese pagoda . Upon its completion , the tower was called the Shui Yun Yi Xiang Tai , or " Tower for the Water @-@ Powered Sphere and Globe " . Joseph Needham writes : 
 After the invention of the escapement in ~ AD 725 ( Tang Dynasty ) , there was a great flourishing of gear @-@ wheels in clockwork and <unk> , culminating in the bronze and iron of Su Song 's elaborate masterpiece in ~ AD 1088 . 
 Years after Su 's death , the capital city of Kaifeng was besieged and captured in 1127 by the Jurchens of the Manchuria @-@ based Jin Dynasty during the Jin – Song wars . The clock @-@ tower was dismantled piece by piece by the Jurchens , who carted its components back to their own capital in modern @-@ day Beijing . However , due to the complexity of the tower , they were unable to successfully piece it back together . The new Emperor Gaozong of Song instructed Su 's son , Su Xie , to construct a new astronomical clock @-@ tower in its place , and Su Xie set to work studying his father 's texts with a team of other experts . However , they were also unsuccessful in creating another clock tower , and Su Xie was convinced that Su Song had purposefully left out essential components in his written work and diagrams so that others would not steal his ideas . 
 As the sinologist historian Derk <unk> points out , Su Song 's astronomical clock did not lead to a new generation of mass @-@ produced clockworks throughout China since his work was largely a government @-@ sponsored endeavor for the use of astronomers and astrologers in the imperial court . Yet the mechanical legacy of Su Song did not end with his work . In about 1150 , the writer Xue <unk> noted that there were four types of clocks in his day , the basic <unk> , the incense clock , the sundial , and the clock with ' revolving and snapping springs ' ( ' gun tan ' ) . The rulers of the continuing Yuan Dynasty ( 1279 – 1368 AD ) had a vested interest in the advancement of mechanical clockworks . The astronomer Guo Shoujing helped restore the Beijing Ancient Observatory beginning in 1276 , where he crafted a water @-@ powered armillary sphere and clock with clock jacks being fully implemented and sounding the hours . Complex gearing for uniquely Chinese clockworks were continued in the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) , with new designs driven by the power of falling sand instead of water to provide motive power to the wheel drive , and some Ming clocks perhaps featured reduction gearing rather than the earlier escapement of Su Song . The earliest such design of a sand @-@ clock was made by Zhan <unk> around 1370 , which featured not only the scoop wheel of Su Song ' device , but also a new addition of a stationary dial face over which a pointer circulated , much like new European clocks of the same period . 
 = = Su Song 's escapement mechanism = = 
 In Su Song 's waterwheel <unk> device the action of the escapement 's arrest and release was achieved by gravity exerted periodically as the continuous flow of liquid filled containers of a limited size . In a single line of evolution , Su Song 's clock therefore united the concept of the clepsydra and the mechanical clock into one device run by mechanics and hydraulics . In his memorial , Su Song wrote about this concept : 
 According to your servant 's opinion there have been many systems and designs for astronomical instruments during past dynasties all differing from one another in minor respects . But the principle of the use of water @-@ power for the driving mechanism has always been the same . The heavens move without ceasing but so also does water flow ( and fall ) . Thus if the water is made to pour with perfect evenness , then the comparison of the rotary movements ( of the heavens and the machine ) will show no discrepancy or contradiction ; for the <unk> follows the unceasing . 
 In his writing , Su Song credited , as the predecessor of his working clock , the hydraulic @-@ powered armillary sphere of Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 AD ) , an earlier Chinese scientist . Su Song was also strongly influenced by the earlier armillary sphere created by Zhang Sixun ( 976 AD ) , who also employed the escapement mechanism and used liquid mercury instead of water in the waterwheel of his astronomical clock tower ( since liquid mercury would not freeze during winter and would not corrode and rust metal components over time ) . However , Su Song stated in his writing that after Zhang 's death , no one was able to replicate his device , much like his own . 
 The mechanical clockworks for Su Song 's astronomical tower featured a great driving @-@ wheel that was 11 feet in diameter , carrying 36 scoops , into each of which water poured at a uniform rate from the " constant @-@ level tank " ( Needham , Fig . 653 ) . The main driving shaft of iron , with its cylindrical necks supported on iron crescent @-@ shaped bearings , ended in a pinion which engaged a gear wheel at the lower end of the main vertical transmission shaft . 
 Joseph Needham gives a general description of the clock @-@ tower itself : 
 ( Su Song 's ) clockwork , driven by a water @-@ wheel , and fully enclosed within the tower , rotated an observational armillary sphere on the top platform and a celestial globe in the upper story . Its time @-@ announcing function was further fulfilled visually and audibly by the performances of numerous jacks mounted on the eight superimposed wheels of a time @-@ keeping shaft and appearing at windows in the pagoda @-@ like structure at the front of the tower . Within the building , some 40 ft. high , the driving @-@ wheel was provided with a special form of escapement , and the water was pumped back into the tanks periodically by manual means . The time @-@ <unk> must have included conversion gearing , since it gave ' unequal ' as well as equal time signals , and the sphere probably had this . Su Song 's treatise on the clock , the Hsin I <unk> Fa Yao , constitutes a classic of horological engineering . 
 That was figure Fig . 650 , while Fig . 656 displays the upper and lower <unk> with their tanks and the manual wheel for operating them . 
 Fig . 657 displays a rather miniature and scaled @-@ down pic for the basics of the escapement mechanism in an illustration ( from Su 's book ) , with Needham 's caption here in this quote : " The ' celestial balance ' or escapement mechanism of Su Song 's clockwork ( Xinyi Xiangfayao , ch . 3 , p . 18b ) " . The latter figure carefully labels : 
 a right upper lock 
 upper link 
 left upper lock 
 axle or pivot 
 long chain 
 upper counterweight 
 sump 
 checking fork of the lower balancing lever 
 coupling tongue 
 main ( i.e. lower ) counterweight . 
 Figure 658 @.@ displays a more intricate and most @-@ telling half @-@ page scale drawing of Su Song 's large escapement mechanism , labeling these individual parts as they interact with one another : 
 arrested spoke 
 left upper lock 
 scoop being filled by 
 water jet from constant @-@ level tank 
 small counterweight 
 checking fork tripped by a projection pin on the scoop , and forming the near end of 
 the lower balancing lever with 
 its lower counterweight 
 coupling tongue , connected by 
 the long chain with 
 the upper balancing lever , which has at its far end 
 the upper counterweight , and at its near end 
 a short length chain connecting it with the upper lock beneath it ; 
 right upper lock 
 = = The endless chain drive = = 
 The world 's oldest illustrated depiction of an endless power @-@ transmitting chain drive is from Su Song 's horological treatise . It was used in the clockworks for coupling the main drive shaft to the armillary sphere gearbox ( rotating three small pinions ) , as seen in Needham 's Fig . 410 and Fig . 652 . This belonged to the uppermost end of the main vertical transmission shaft , incorporating right angle gears and oblique gears connected by a short idling shaft . The toothed ring gear called the diurnal motion gear ring was fit around the shell of the armillary sphere along the declination parallel near the southern pole . Although the ancient Greek Philo of Byzantium ( 3rd century BC ) featured a sort of endless belt for his magazine arcuballista , which did not transmit continuous power , the influential source for Su Song 's chain drive is most likely the continuously @-@ driven chain pump known in China since the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) . From his horological treatise , Su Song states : 
 The chain drive ( lit. celestial ladder ) is 19 @.@ 5 ft long ( 5 @.@ 9 m ) . The system is as follows : an iron chain with its links joined together to form an endless circuit hangs down from the upper chain @-@ wheel which is concealed by the tortoise @-@ and @-@ cloud ( column supporting the armillary sphere centrally ) , and passes also round the lower chain @-@ wheel which is mounted on the main driving @-@ shaft . Whenever one link moves , it moves forward one tooth of the diurnal motion gear @-@ ring and rotates the Component of the Three Arrangers of Time , thus following the motion of the heavens . 
 In addition , the motion gear rings and the upper drive wheel both had 600 teeth , which by Su 's mathematical precision carefully calculated measured units of the day in a division of 1 / 600 . These gears , having 600 teeth , thus ensured the division of the day into measurements of 2 minutes and 24 seconds each . 
 = = Su Song 's armillary sphere = = 
 In Joseph Needham 's third volume of Science and Civilization in China , the drawing for Fig . 159 displays a drawing of Su Song 's armillary sphere ( as depicted in his 11th century treatise ) , complete with three ' nests ' or layers of mechanically @-@ rotated rings . It was the earlier Chinese astronomer Li Chun @-@ feng of the Tang Dynasty who in 633 AD created the first armillary sphere with three layers to calibrate multiple aspects of astronomical observation . Zhang 's armillary sphere has often been compared to that of the 13th century monarch Alfonso X of Castile in Islamic @-@ era Spain . The chief difference was that Alfonso 's instrument featured an arrangement for making measurements of the azimuth and altitude , which was present in the Arabic tradition , while Su Song 's armillary sphere was duly graduated . For the drawing of Su 's armillary sphere , the listing of components are : 
 The Outer <unk> circle 
 horizon circle 
 outer equator circle 
 The Middle <unk> <unk> circle 
 ecliptic circle 
 diurnal motion gear @-@ ring , connecting with the power @-@ drive 
 The Inner <unk> @-@ mounted declination ring or hour @-@ angle circle , with 
 sighting tube attached to it and strengthened by a 
 <unk> brace 
 Other <unk> column concealing the transmission shaft 
 supporting columns in the form of dragons 
 cross @-@ piece of the base , incorporating water @-@ levels 
 south polar pivot 
 north polar <unk> 
 = = Transmission of Su 's text and his legacy = = 
 When Su Song 's Xinyi Xiangfayao was written in 1092 and the horological monograph finalized and presented in 1094 , his work was published and widely printed in the north ( see woodblock printing and movable type of Bi Sheng ) . In the south , printing and circulation of his work was not widely distributed until Shi <unk> of Jiangsu had it printed there in 1172 . 
 When presenting his clocktower design to the Emperor Zhezong , Su Song equated the constant flow of water with the continuous movements of the heavens , the latter of which symbolized the unceasing power of the emperor . This appealed to emperor , who featured artwork representing the clocktower on vehicles of major imperial processions , as illustrated in the Illustration of the Imperial Grand Carriage Procession of 1053 . 
 The later Ming Dynasty / Qing Dynasty scholar Qian Zeng ( 1629 – 1699 ) held an old volume of Su 's work , which he faithfully reproduced in a newly printed edition . He took special care in avoiding any rewording or inconsistencies with the original text as well . Again , it was later reprinted by Zhang <unk> ( 1799 – 1844 ) . 
 Interestingly enough , Su Song 's treatise on astronomical clockwork was not the only one made in China during his day , as the Song Shi ( compiled in 1345 ) records the written treatise of the <unk> <unk> ( Wade – Giles : Shui Yun Hun Thien Chi Yao ; lit . Essentials of the [ Technique of ] making Astronomical Apparatus revolve by Water @-@ Power ) , written by Juan Taifa . However , this treatise no longer survives . 
 In the realm of modern research , the late British biochemist and historian of Chinese science Joseph Needham ( 1900 – 1995 ) ( known as Li <unk> in China ) did extensive research and analysis of Su Song 's texts and various achievements in his Science and Civilization in China book series . Joseph Needham also related many detailed passages from Su 's contemporary medieval Chinese sources on the life of Su and his achievements known in his day . In 1956 , John Christiansen reconstructed a model of Su Song 's clocktower in a famous drawing , which garnered attention in the West towards 11th @-@ century Chinese engineering . A miniature model of Su Song 's clock was reconstructed by John Cambridge and is now on display at the National Science Museum at South Kensington , London . In China , the clocktower was reconstructed to one @-@ fifth its actual scale by Wang Zhenduo , who worked for the Chinese Historical Museum in Beijing in the 1950s . 
 = Periyar E. V. Ramasamy = 
 Erode Venkata Ramasamy ( 17 September 1879 – 24 December 1973 ) , commonly known as Periyar also referred as E. V. R. or <unk> Periyar , was an Indian social activist , freedom fighter and politician who started the Self @-@ Respect Movement and Dravidar Kazhagam . 
 E.V. Ramasamy was born in Erode , Madras Presidency to a wealthy family of <unk> . At a young age , he witnessed numerous incidents of caste and gender discrimination . E.V. Ramasamy married when he was 19 , and had a daughter who lived for only 5 months . His first wife , Nagammai , died in 1933 . E.V. Ramasamy married for a second time in July 1948 . His second wife , Maniammai , continued E.V. Ramasamy 's social work after his death in 1973 , but his thoughts and ideas then were advocated by Dravidar Kazhagam . 
 E.V. Ramasamy joined the Indian National Congress in 1919 , but resigned in 1925 when he felt that the party was only serving the interests of the Brahmins . In 1924 , E.V. Ramasamy participated in a non @-@ violent agitation ( satyagraha ) in <unk> , Kerala . From 1929 to 1932 Ramasamy toured British Malaya , Europe , and Russia , which had an influence on him . In 1939 , E.V. Ramasamy became the head of the Justice Party , and in 1944 , he changed its name to Dravidar Kazhagam . The party later split and one group led by C. N. Annadurai formed the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) in 1949 . While continuing the Self @-@ Respect Movement , he advocated for an independent Dravida Nadu ( Dravidistan ) . 
 E.V. Ramasamy propagated the principles of rationalism , self @-@ respect , women ’ s rights and eradication of caste . He opposed the exploitation and marginalisation of the non @-@ Brahmin Dravidian people of South India and the imposition of what he considered Indo @-@ Aryan India . His work has greatly revolutionised the Tamil society and has significantly removed caste @-@ based discrimination . He is also responsible for bringing new changes to the Tamil alphabet . The citation awarded by the UNESCO described E.V. Ramasamy as " the prophet of the new age , the Socrates of South East Asia , father of social reform movement and arch enemy of ignorance , superstitions , meaningless customs and base manners . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Erode Venkata Ramasami was born on 17 September 1879 , in Erode , then a part of the Coimbatore district of the Madras Presidency . E.V. Ramasamy 's father , a rich businessman , was Venkatappa Naicker ( or Venkata ) , and his mother was Chinna <unk> , alias <unk> . He had one elder brother named Krishnaswamy and two sisters named Kannamma and <unk> . He later came to be known as " Periyar " meaning ' respected one ' or ' elder ' in Tamil . 
 In 1929 , E.V. Ramasamy announced the deletion of his caste surname Naicker ( <unk> Naicker ) from his name at the First Provincial Self @-@ Respect Conference of <unk> . He could speak three Dravidian languages : Mother tongue Kannada , Telugu and Tamil . His mother tongue was Kannada . Periyar attended school for five years after which he joined his father 's trade at the age of 12 . He used to listen to Tamil Vaishnavite gurus who gave discourses in his house enjoying his father 's hospitality . At a young age , he began questioning the apparent contradictions in the Hindu mythological stories . As Periyar grew , he felt that people used religion only as a mask to deceive innocent people and therefore took it as one of his duties in life to warn people against superstitions and priests . 
 E.V. Ramasamy 's father arranged for his wedding when he was nineteen . The bride , Nagammai , was only thirteen . Despite having an arranged marriage , Periyar and Nagammai were already in love with each other . Nagammai actively supported her husband in his later public activities and agitations . Two years after their marriage , a daughter was born to them . However , their daughter died when she was five months old . The couple had no more children . 
 = = = Kasi Pilgrimage Incident = = = 
 In 1904 , E.V. Ramasamy went on a pilgrimage to Kasi to visit the revered Siva temple of Kashi Vishwanath . Though regarded as one of the holiest sites of Hinduism , he witnessed immoral activities such as begging , and floating dead bodies . His frustrations extended to functional Hinduism in general when he experienced what he called Brahmanic exploitation . 
 However , one particular incident in Kasi had a profound impact on E.V. Ramasamy 's ideology and future work . At the worship site there were free meals offered to guests . To E.V. Ramasamy 's shock , he was refused meals at <unk> , which exclusively fed Brahmins . Due to extreme hunger , E.V. Ramasamy felt compelled to enter one of the eateries disguised as a Brahmin with a sacred thread on his bare chest , but was betrayed by his moustache . The gatekeeper at the temple concluded that E.V. Ramasamy was not a Brahmin , as Brahmins were not permitted by the Hindu shastras to have moustaches . He not only prevented Periyar 's entry but also pushed him rudely into the street . 
 As his hunger became intolerable , Periyar was forced to feed on leftovers from the streets . Around this time , he realised that the eatery which had refused him entry was built by a wealthy non @-@ Brahmin from South India . This discriminatory attitude dealt a blow to Periyar 's regard for Hinduism , for the events he had witnessed at Kasi were completely different from the picture of Kasi he had in mind , as a holy place which welcomed all . Ramasami was a theist until his visit to Kasi , after which his views changed and he became an atheist . 
 = = = Member of Congress Party ( 1919 – 1925 ) = = = 
 E.V. Ramasamy joined the Indian National Congress in 1919 after quitting his business and resigning from public posts . He held the chairmanship of Erode Municipality and wholeheartedly undertook constructive programs spreading the use of Khadi , picketing toddy shops , boycotting shops selling foreign cloth , and eradicating untouchability . In 1921 , Periyar courted imprisonment for picketing toddy shops in Erode . When his wife as well as his sister joined the agitation , it gained momentum , and the administration was forced to come to a compromise . He was again arrested during the Non @-@ Cooperation movement and the Temperance movement . In 1922 , <unk> was elected the President of the Madras Presidency Congress Committee during the Tirupur session , where he advocated strongly for reservation in government jobs and education . His attempts were defeated in the Congress party due to a strong presence of discrimination and indifference , which led to his leaving the party in 1925 . 
 = = = Vaikom Satyagraha ( 1924 – 1925 ) = = = 
 In Vaikom , a small town in Kerala state , then Travancore , there were strict laws of untouchability in and around the temple area . Dalits , also known as Harijans were not allowed into the close streets around and leading to the temple , let alone inside it . Anti @-@ caste feelings were growing and in 1924 Vaikom was chosen as a suitable place for an organised Satyagraha . Under his guidance a movement had already begun with the aim of giving all castes the right to enter the temples . Thus , agitations and demonstrations took place . On the fourteenth of April , Periyar and his wife Nagamma arrived in Vaikom . They were immediately arrested and imprisoned for participation . In spite of Gandhi 's objection to non @-@ <unk> and non @-@ Hindus taking part , Periyar and his followers continued to give support to the movement until it was withdrawn . He received the title Vaikom Veeran , given by his followers who participated in the Satyagraha . 
 The way in which the Vaikom Satyagraha events have been recorded provides a clue to the image of the respective organisers . In an article entitle Gandhi and Ambedkar , A Study in Leadership , Eleanor Zelliot relates the ' Vaikom Satyagraha ' , including Gandhi 's negotiations with the temple authorities in relation to the event . Furthermore , the editor of E.V. Ramasamy 's Thoughts states that Brahmins purposely suppressed news about E.V. Ramasamy 's participation . A leading Congress magazine , Young India , in its extensive reports on Vaikom never mentions E.V. Ramasamy . 
 = = = Self @-@ Respect Movement = = = 
 Periyar and his followers campaigned constantly to influence and pressure the government to take measures to remove social inequality , even while other nationalist forerunners focused on the struggle for political independence . The Self @-@ Respect Movement was described from the beginning as " dedicated to the goal of giving non @-@ Brahmins a sense of pride based on their Dravidian past " . 
 In 1952 , the Periyar Self @-@ Respect Movement Institution was registered with a list of objectives of the institution from which may be quoted as 
 for the diffusion of useful knowledge of political education ; to allow people to live a life of freedom from slavery to anything against reason and self respect ; to do away with needless customs , meaningless ceremonies , and blind superstitious beliefs in society ; to put an end to the present social system in which caste , religion , community and traditional occupations based on the accident of birth , have chained the mass of the people and created " superior " and " inferior " classes ... and to give people equal rights ; to completely eradicate untouchability and to establish a united society based on brother / sisterhood ; to give equal rights to women ; to prevent child marriages and marriages based on law favourable to one sect , to conduct and encourage love marriages , widow marriages , inter caste and inter @-@ religious marriages and to have the marriages registered under the Civil Law ; and to establish and maintain homes for orphans and widows and to run educational institutions . 
 Propagation of the philosophy of self respect became the full @-@ time activity of Periyar since 1925 . A Tamil weekly Kudi Arasu started in 1925 , while the English journal Revolt started in 1928 carried on the propaganda among the English educated people . The Self @-@ Respect Movement began to grow fast and received the sympathy of the heads of the Justice Party from the beginning . In May 1929 , a conference of Self @-@ Respect Volunteers was held at <unk> under the presidency of S. <unk> . K.V. <unk> took charge as the head of the volunteer band . Conferences followed in succession throughout the Tamil districts of the former Madras Presidency . A training school in Self @-@ Respect was opened at Erode , the home town of Periyar . The object was not just to introduce social reform but to bring about a social revolution to foster a new spirit and build a new society . 
 = = = International travel ( 1929 – 1932 ) = = = 
 Between 1929 and 1935 , under the strain of World Depression , political thinking worldwide received a jolt from the spread of international communism . Indian political parties , movements and considerable sections of leadership were also affected by inter @-@ continental ideologies . The Self @-@ Respect Movement also came under the influence of the leftist philosophies and institutions . E.V. Ramasamy , after establishing the Self @-@ Respect Movement as an independent institution , began to look for ways to strengthen it politically and socially . To accomplish this , he studied the history and politics of different countries , and personally observed these systems at work . 
 E.V. Ramasamy toured Malaya for a month , from December 1929 to January 1930 , to propagate the self @-@ respect philosophy . Embarking on his journey from Nagapattinam with his wife <unk> and his followers , E.V. Ramasamy was received by 50 @,@ 000 Tamil Malaysians in Penang . During the same month , he inaugurated the Tamils Conference , convened by the Tamils Reformatory Sangam in Ipoh , and then went to Singapore . In December 1931 he undertook a tour of Europe , accompanied by S. Ramanathan and Erode Ramu , to personally acquaint himself with their political systems , social movements , way of life , economic and social progress and administration of public bodies . He visited Egypt , Greece , Turkey , Russia , Germany , England , Spain , France and Portugal , staying in Russia for three months . On his return journey he halted at Ceylon and returned to India in November 1932 . 
 The tour shaped the political ideology of E.V. Ramasamy to achieve the social concept of Self @-@ Respect . The communist system obtained in Russia appealed to him as appropriately suited to deal with the social ills of the country . Thus , on socio @-@ economic issues Periyar was Marxist , but he did not advocate for abolishing private ownership . Immediately after his return , <unk> , E.V. Rama in alliance with the enthusiastic communist , M. <unk> Chettiar , began to work out a socio @-@ political scheme incorporating socialist and self @-@ respect ideals . This marked a crucial stage of development in the Self @-@ Respect Movement which got politicised and found its compatibility in Tamil Nadu . 
 = = = Opposition to Hindi = = = 
 In 1937 , when Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari became the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency , he introduced Hindi as a compulsory language of study in schools , thereby igniting a series of anti @-@ Hindi agitations . Tamil nationalists , the Justice Party under Sir A. T. <unk> , and E.V. Ramasamy organised anti @-@ Hindi protests in 1938 which ended with numerous arrests by the Rajaji government . 
 During the same year , the slogan " Tamil Nadu for Tamilians " was first raised by E.V. Ramasamy in protest against the introduction of Hindi in schools . He explained that the introduction of Hindi was a dangerous mechanism used by the Aryans to infiltrate Dravidian culture . He reasoned that the adoption of Hindi would make Tamils subordinate to the Hindi speaking North Indians . E.V. Ramasamy explained that Hindi would not only halt the progress of Tamil people , but would also completely destroy their culture and nullify the progressive ideas that had been successfully inculcated through Tamil in the recent decades . 
 Cutting across party lines , South Indian politicians rallied together in their opposition to Hindi . There were recurrent anti @-@ Hindi agitations in 1948 , 1952 and 1965 . 
 = = = As President of the Justice Party ( 1938 – 1944 ) = = = 
 A political party known as the South Indian Libertarian Federation ( commonly referred to as Justice Party ) was founded in 1916 , principally to oppose the economic and political power of the Brahmin groups . The party 's goal was to render social justice to the non @-@ Brahmin groups . To gain the support of the masses , non @-@ Brahmin politicians began propagating an ideology of equality among non @-@ Brahmin castes . Brahmanical priesthood and Sanskritic social class @-@ value hierarchy were blamed for the existence of inequalities among non @-@ Brahmin caste groups . 
 In 1937 , when the government required that Hindi be taught in the school system , E.V. Ramasamy organised opposition to this policy through the Justice Party . After 1937 , the Dravidian movement derived considerable support from the student community . In later years , opposition to Hindi played a big role in the politics of Tamil Nadu . The fear of the Hindi language had its origin in the conflict between Brahmins and non @-@ Brahmins . To the Tamils , acceptance of Hindi in the school system was a form of bondage . When the Justice Party weakened in the absence of mass support , E.V. Ramasamy took over the leadership of the party after being jailed for opposing Hindi in 1939 . Under his tutelage the party prospered , but the party 's conservative members , most of whom were rich and educated , withdrew from active participation . 
 = = = Dravidar Kazhagam ( 1944 – onwards ) = = = 
 = = = = Formation of the Dravidar Kazhagam = = = = 
 At a rally in 1944 , Periyar , in his capacity as the leader of the Justice Party , declared that the party would henceforth be known as the Dravidar Kazhagam , or " Dravidian Association " . However , a few who disagreed with Periyar started a splinter group , claiming to be the original Justice Party . This party was led by veteran Justice Party leader P. T. Rajan and survived until 1957 . 
 The Dravidar Kazhagam came to be well known among the urban communities and students . Villages were influenced by its message . Hindi , and ceremonies that had become associated with Brahmanical priesthood , were identified as alien symbols that should be eliminated from Tamil culture . Brahmins , who were regarded as the guardians of such symbols , came under verbal attack . From 1949 onwards , the Dravidar Kazhagam intensified social reformist work and put forward the fact that superstitions were the cause for the degeneration of Dravidians . The Dravidar Kazhagam vehemently fought for the abolition of untouchability amongst the Dalits . It also focused its attention on the liberation of women , women 's education , willing marriage , widow marriage , orphanages and mercy homes . 
 = = = = Split with Annadurai = = = = 
 In 1949 , E.V. Ramasamy 's chief lieutenant , Conjeevaram Natarajan Annadurai , established a separate association called the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) , or Dravidian Advancement Association . This was due to differences between the two , while Periyar advocated a separate independent Dravidian or Tamil state , Annadurai compromised with the Delhi government , at the same time claiming increased state independence . E.V. Ramasamy was convinced that individuals and movements that undertake the task of eradicating the social evils in the Indian sub @-@ continent have to pursue the goal with devotion and dedication without deviating from the path and with uncompromising zeal . Thus , if they contest elections aiming to assume political power , they would lose vigour and sense of purpose . But among his followers , there were those who had a different view , wanting to enter into politics and have a share in running the government . They were looking for an opportunity to part with E.V. Ramasamy . Thus , when E.V. Ramasamy married Maniammai on 9 July 1948 , they quit the Dravidar Kazhagam , stating that E.V. Ramasamy set a bad example by marrying a young woman that took his foster child in his old age – he was 70 and she 30 . Those who parted company with E.V. Ramasamy joined the DMK . Though the DMK split from the Dravidar Kazhagam , the organisation made efforts to carry on E.V. Ramasamy 's Self @-@ Respect Movement to villagers and urban students . The DMK advocated the thesis that the Tamil language was much richer than Sanskrit and Hindi in content , and thus was a key which opened the door to subjects to be learned . The Dravidar Kazhagam continued to counter Brahminism , Indo @-@ Aryan propaganda , and uphold the Dravidians ' right of self @-@ determination . 
 = = = = Later years = = = = 
 In 1956 , despite warnings from P. <unk> , the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee , Periyar organised a procession to the Marina to burn pictures of the Hindu God Rama . Periyar was subsequently arrested and confined to prison . 
 The activities of Periyar continued when he went to Bangalore in 1958 to participate in the All India Official Language Conference . There he stressed the need to retain English as the Union Official Language instead of Hindi . Five years later , Periyar travelled to North India to advocate the eradication of the caste system . Nearing Periyar 's last years , an award was given to him by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) , and it was presented to him by the Union Education Minister , <unk> Sen in Madras ( Chennai ) , on 27 June 1970 . In his last meeting at <unk> Nagar , Chennai on 19 December 1973 , Periyar declared a call for action to gain social equality and a dignified way of life . On 24 December 1973 , Periyar died at the age of 94 . 
 = = Principles and legacy = = 
 Periyar spent over fifty years giving speeches , propagating the realisation that everyone is an equal citizen and the differences on basis of caste and creeds were man @-@ made to keep the innocent and ignorant as underdogs in the society . Although Periyar 's speeches were targeted towards the illiterate and more mundane mass , scores of educated people were also swayed . Periyar viewed reasoning as a special tool . According to him , all were blessed with this tool , but very few used it . Thus Periyar used reasoning , with respect to subjects of social interest , in his presentations to his audiences . Communal differences in Tamil society were considered by many to be deep @-@ rooted features until Periyar came to the scene . Cho Ramaswamy remarked in India Today : + − 
 " Periyar was accepted and acclaimed as the leader by a significant section of the Tamil population in spite of all his contempt for Tamil and disdain for Tamils only because he was perceived to be a genuine individual , a rarity among those in public life . There was no shade of hypocrisy in him and he never attempted sophistry while propounding his social philosophy . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The bedrock of E.V. Ramasamy ’ s principles and the movements that he started was rationalism . He thought that an insignificant minority in society was exploiting the majority and trying to keep it in a subordinate position forever . He wanted the exploited to sit up and think about their position , and use their reason to realise that they were being exploited by a handful of people . If they started thinking , they would realise that they were human beings like the rest , that birth did not and should not endow superiority over others and that they must awaken themselves and do everything possible to improve their own lot . 
 Likewise , E.V. Ramasamy explained that wisdom lies in thinking and that the spear @-@ head of thinking is rationalism . On caste , he stated that no other living being harms or degrades its own class . But man , said to be a rational living being , does these evils . The differences , hatred , enmity , degradation , poverty , and wickedness , now prevalent in the society are due to lack of wisdom and rationalism and not due to God or the cruelty of time . E.V. Ramasamy had written in his books and magazines dozens of times of various occasions that the British rule is better than self @-@ rule 
 E.V. Ramasamy also blamed the capitalists for their control of machineries , creating difficulties for the workers . According to his philosophy , rationalism , which has to lead the way for peaceful life to all , had resulted in causing poverty and worries to the people because of dominating forces . He stated that there is no use of simply acquiring titles or amassing wealth if one has no self @-@ respect or scientific knowledge . An example he gave was the West sending messages to the planets , while the Tamil society in India were sending rice and cereals to their dead forefathers through the Brahmins . 
 In a message to the Brahmin community , Periyar stated , " in the name of god , religion , and <unk> you have duped us . We were the ruling people . Stop this life of cheating us from this year . Give room for rationalism and humanism " . He added that " any opposition not based on rationalism , science , or experience will one day or another , reveal the fraud , selfishness , lies and conspiracies " . 
 = = = Self @-@ respect = = = 
 Periyar 's philosophy of self @-@ respect was based on his image of an ideal world and a universally accepted one . His philosophy preaches that human actions should be based on rational thinking . Further , the outcome of the natural instinct of human beings is to examine every object and every action and even nature with a spirit of inquiry , and to refuse to submit to anything irrational as equivalent to slavery . Thus , the philosophy of self @-@ respect taught that human actions should be guided by reason , right and wrong should follow from rational thinking and conclusions drawn from reason should be respected under circumstances . Freedom means respect to thoughts and actions considered ' right ' by human beings on the basis of ' reason ' . There is not much difference between ' freedom ' and ' self @-@ respect ' . 
 Periyar 's foremost appeal to people was to develop self @-@ respect . He preached that the Brahmins had monopolised and cheated other communities for decades and deprived them of self @-@ respect . He stated that most Brahmins claimed to belong to a " superior " community with the reserved privilege of being in charge of temples and performing <unk> . He felt that they were trying to reassert their control over religion by using their superior caste status to claim the exclusive privilege to touch idols or enter the sanctum sanctorum . 
 = = = Women ’ s rights = = = 
 As a rationalist and ardent social reformer , Periyar advocated forcefully throughout his life that women should be given their legitimate position in society as the equals of men and that they should be given good education and have the right to property . He thought age and social customs was not a bar in marrying women . He was keen that women should realise their rights and be worthy citizens of their country . 
 Periyar fought against the orthodox traditions of marriage as suppression of women in Tamil Nadu and throughout the Indian sub @-@ continent . Though arranged marriages were meant to enable a couple to live together throughout life , it was manipulated to enslave women . Much worse was the practice of child marriages practised throughout India at the time . Periyar married Maniammai who is 40 years younger than him though . It was believed that it would be a sin to marry after puberty . Another practice , which is prevalent today , is the dowry system where the bride 's family is supposed to give the husband a huge payment for the bride . The purpose of this was to assist the newly wedded couple financially , but in many instances dowries were misused by bridegrooms . The outcome of this abuse turned to the exploitation of the bride 's parents wealth , and in certain circumstances , lead to dowry deaths . There have been hundreds of thousands of cases where wives have been murdered , mutilated , and burned alive because the father of the bride was unable to make the dowry payment to the husband . Periyar fiercely stood up against this abuse meted out against women . 
 Women in India also did not have rights to their families ' or husbands ' property . Periyar fought fiercely for this and also advocated for the women to have the right to separate or divorce their husbands under reasonable circumstances . While birth control remained taboo in society of Periyar 's time , he advocated for it not only for the health of women and population control , but for the liberation of women . 
 He criticised the hypocrisy of chastity for women and argued that it should also either belong to men , or not at all for both individuals . While fighting against this , Periyar advocated to get rid of the Devadasi system . In his view it was an example of a list of degradations of women attaching them to temples for the entertainment of others , and as temple prostitutes . As a further liberation of women , Periyar pushed for the right of women to have an education and to join the armed services and the police force . 
 According to biographer M.D. Gopalakrishnan , Periyar and his movement achieved a better status for women in Tamil society . Periyar held that in matters of education and employment there should be no difference between men and women . Gopalakrishnan states that Periyar 's influence in the State departments and even the Center made it possible for women to join police departments and the army . Periyar also spoke out against child marriage . 
 = = = Social reform and eradication of caste = = = 
 Periyar wanted thinking people to see their society as far from perfect and in urgent need of reform . He wanted the government , the political parties and social workers to identify the evils in society and boldly adopt measures to remove them . Periyar 's philosophy did not differentiate social and political service . According to him , the first duty of a government is to run the social organisation efficiently , and the philosophy of religion was to organise the social system . Periyar stated that while Christian and Islamic religions were fulfilling this role , the Hindu religion remained totally unsuitable for social progress . He argued that the government was not for the people , but , in a " topsy @-@ turvy " manner , the people were for the government . He attributed this situation to the state of the social system contrived for the advantage of a small group of people . 
 One of the areas of Periyar 's focus was on the upliftment of rural communities . In a booklet called Village Uplift , Periyar pleaded for rural reform . At that time rural India still formed the largest part of the Indian subcontinent , in spite of the ongoing process of urbanisation . Thus , the distinction between rural and urban had meant an economic and social degradation for rural inhabitants . Periyar wanted to eradicate the concept of " village " as a discrimination word among places , just as the concept of " outcast " among social groups . Periyar advocated for a location where neither the name nor the situation or its conditions imply differences among people . He further advocated for the modernisation of villages by providing public facilities such as schools , libraries , radio stations , roads , bus transport , and police stations . 
 Periyar felt that a small number of cunning people created caste distinctions to dominate over society , so he emphasised that individuals must first develop self @-@ respect and learn to analyse propositions rationally . According to Periyar , a self @-@ respecting rationalist would readily realise that caste system had been stifling self @-@ respect and therefore he or she would strive to get rid of this menace . 
 Periyar stated that the caste system in south India is , due to Indo @-@ Aryan influence , linked with the arrival of Brahmins from the north . Ancient Tamil Nadu ( part of <unk> ) had a different stratification of society in four or five regions ( <unk> ) , determined by natural surroundings and adequate means of living . Periyar also argued that birds , animals , and worms , which are considered to be devoid of rationalism do not create castes , or differences of high and low in their own species . But man , considered to be a rational being , was suffering from these because of religion and discrimination . 
 = = = Tamil language and writing = = = 
 Periyar claimed that Tamil , Telugu , Malayalam , and Kannada came from the same mother language of Old Tamil . He explained that the Tamil language is called by four different names since it is spoken in four different Dravidian states . Nevertheless , current understanding of Dravidian languages contains statements contradicting such claims . For example , the currently known classification of Dravidian languages provides the following distinct classes : Southern ( including Tamil – Kannada ( Malayalam ) and Tulu ) ; Central ( including Telugu – Kui and <unk> – <unk> ) ; and , Northern ( including <unk> – <unk> and <unk> ) . Additionally , statements on the presence of evidence for linking Dravidian languages and Indo @-@ European languages are available . 
 With relation to writing , Periyar stated that using the Tamil script about the arts , which are useful to the people in their life and foster knowledge , talent and courage , and propagating them among the masses , will enlighten the people . Further , he explained that it will enrich the language , and thus it can be regarded as a zeal for Tamil . Periyar also stated that if words of North Indian origin ( Sanskrit ) are removed from Telugu , Kannada , and Malayalam , only Tamil will be left . On the Brahmin usage of Tamil , he stated how the Tamil spoken by the <unk> and the Malayalee peoples was far better than the Tamil spoken by the Brahmins . Periyar believed that Tamil language will make the Dravidian people unite under the banner of Tamil culture , and that it will make the Kannadigas , <unk> and the Malayalees be vigilant . With regards to a Dravidian alliance under a common umbrella language , Periyar stated that " a time will come for unity . This will go on until there is an end to the North Indian domination . We shall reclaim an independent sovereign state for us " . 
 At the same time , Periyar was also known to have made controversial remarks on the Tamil language and people from time to time . On one occasion , he referred to the Tamil people as " barbarians " and the Tamil language as the " language of barbarians " . However , Anita Diehl explains that Periyar made these remarks on Tamil because it had no respective feminine verbal forms . 
 Periyar 's ideas on Tamil alphabet reforms and his reasons were for the following such as the vowel ' <unk> ' ( i ) , having a cursive and looped representation of the short form , ' <unk> ' ( I ) . In stone inscriptions from 400 or 500 years ago , many Tamil letters are found in other shapes . As a matter of necessity and advantage to cope with printing technology , Periyar thought that it was sensible to change a few letters , reduce the number of letters , and alter a few signs . He further explained that the older and the more divine a language and its letters were said to be , the more they needed reform . Because of changes brought about by means of modern transport and international contact , and happenings that have attracted words and products from many countries , foreign words and their pronunciations have been assimilated into Tamil quite easily . Just as a few compound characters have separate signs to indicate their length as in ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' ( <unk> : , <unk> : ) , Periyar argued why should not other compound characters like ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' ( <unk> , ki : , <unk> , ku : ) ( indicated integrally as of now ) , also have separate signs . Further , changing the shape of letters , creating new symbols and adding new letters and similarly , dropping those that are redundant , were quite essential according to Periyar . Thus , the glory and excellence of a language and its script depend on how easily they can be understood or learned and on nothing else " 
 = = = Thoughts on Thirukkural = = = 
 Periyar hailed the Thirukkural as a valuable scripture which contained many scientific and philosophical truths . He also praised the secular nature of the work . Periyar praised Thiruvalluvar for his description of God as a formless entity with only positive attributes . He also suggested that one who reads the Thirukkural will become a Self @-@ respecter , absorbing knowledge in politics , society , and economics . According to him , though certain items in this ancient book of ethics may not relate to today , it permitted such changes for modern society . 
 On caste , he believed that the Kural illustrates how Vedic laws of Manu were against the Sudras and other communities of the Dravidian race . On the other hand , Periyar opined that the ethics from the Kural was comparable to the Christian Bible . The Dravidar Kazhagam adopted the Thirukkural and advocated that Thiruvalluvar 's Kural alone was enough to educate the people of the country . One of Periyar 's quotes on the Thirukkural from Veeramani 's Collected Works of Periyar was " when Dravida Nadu ( Dravidistan ) was a victim to Indo @-@ Aryan deceit , Thirukkural was written by a great Dravidian Thiruvalluvar to free the Dravidians " . 
 = = = Self @-@ determination of Dravida Nadu = = = 
 The Dravidian @-@ Aryan conflict was believed to be a continuous historical phenomenon that started when the Aryans first set their foot in the Dravidian lands . Even a decade before the idea of separation appeared , Periyar stated that , " as long as Aryan religion , Indo @-@ Aryan domination , propagation of Aryan Vedas and Aryan " <unk> " existed , there was need for a " Dravidian Progressive Movement " and a " Self @-@ Respect Movement " . Periyar became very concerned about the growing north Indian domination over the south which appeared to him no different from foreign domination . He wanted to secure the fruits of labour of the Dravidians to the Dravidians , and lamented that fields such as political , economic , industrial , social , art , and spiritual were dominated by the north for the benefit of the north Indians . Thus , with the approach of independence from Britain , this fear that North India would take the place of Britain to dominate south India became more and more intense . 
 Periyar was clear about the concept of a separate nation , comprising Tamil areas , that is part of the then existing Madras Presidency with adjoining areas into a federation guaranteeing protection of minorities , including religious , linguistic , and cultural freedom of the people . A separatist conference was held in June 1940 at Kanchipuram when Periyar released the map of the proposed Dravida Nadu , but failed to get British approval . On the contrary , Periyar received sympathy and support from people such as Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar and Muhammad Ali Jinnah for his views on the Congress , and for his opposition to Hindi . They then decided to convene a movement to resist the Congress . 
 The concept of Dravida Nadu was later modified down to Tamil Nadu This led to a proposal of a union of the Tamil people of not only South India but including those of Ceylon as well . In 1953 , Periyar helped to preserve Madras as the capital of Tamil Nadu , which later was the name he substituted for the more general Dravida Nadu . In 1955 Periyar threatened to burn the national flag , but on Chief Minister Kamaraj 's pledge that Hindi should not be compulsory he postponed the action . In his speech of 1957 called <unk> Tamil Nadu En ? ( Why an independent Tamil Nadu ? ) , he criticised the Central Government of India inducing thousands of Tamilians to burn the constitution of India . The reason for this action was that Periyar held the Government responsible for maintaining the caste system . After stating reasons for separation and turning down opinions against it he closed his speech with a " war cry " to join and burn the map of India on 5 June . Periyar was sentenced to six months imprisonment for burning the Indian constitution . 
 Advocacy of such a nation became illegal when separatist demands were banned by law in 1957 . Regardless of these measures , a Dravida Nadu Separation Day was observed on 17 September 1960 resulting in numerous arrests . However , Periyar resumed his campaign in 1968 . He wrote an editorial on ' Tamil Nadu for Tamilians ' in which he stated , that by nationalism only Brahmins had prospered and nationalism had been developed to abolish the rights of Tamils . He advocated that there was need to establish a Tamil Nadu Freedom Organization and that it was necessary to work towards it . 
 = = = Anti @-@ Brahmanism vs. Anti @-@ Brahmin = = = 
 Periyar was a radical advocate of anti @-@ Brahmanism . Periyar 's ideology of anti @-@ Brahmanism is quite often confused as being anti @-@ Brahmin . Brahmanism is accepting social inequality based on birth . Even a non @-@ Brahmin who supports inequality based on caste was seen as a supporter of <unk> . Periyar called on both Brahmins and non @-@ Brahmins to shun <unk> . 
 In 1920 , when the Justice Party came to power , Brahmins occupied about 70 percent of the high level posts in government . After reservation was introduced by the Justice Party , it reversed this trend , allowing non @-@ Brahmins to rise in the government of the Madras Presidency . Periyar , through the Justice Party , advocated against the imbalance of the domination of Brahmins who constituted only 3 percent of the Population over Government jobs , judiciary and the Madras University . His Self @-@ Respect Movement espoused rationalism and atheism and the movement had currents of anti @-@ Brahminism . Furthermore , Periyar stated that : 
 " Our Dravidian movement does not exist against the Brahmins or the Banias ( a North Indian merchant caste ) . If anyone thinks so , I would only pity him . But we will not tolerate the ways in which Brahminism and the <unk> is degrading <unk> . Whatever support they may have from the government , neither myself nor my movement will be of cowardice " . 
 Periyar also criticised Subramanya Bharathi in the journal <unk> for portraying Mother Tamil as a sister of Sanskrit in his poems : 
 " They say Bharati is an immortal poet . … Even if a rat dies in an <unk> , they would declare it to be immortal . … of Tamilnadu praises him . Why should this be so ? Supposedly because he sang fulsome praises of Tamil and Tamilnadu . What else could he sing ? His own mother tongue , Sanskrit , has been dead for years . What other language did he know ? He cannot sing in Sanskrit . … He says Tamilnadu is the land of Aryas . " 
 = = = Comparisons with Gandhi = = = 
 In the Vaikom Satyagraha of 1924 , Periyar and Gandhi both cooperated and confronted each other in socio @-@ political action . Periyar and his followers emphasised the difference in point of view between Gandhi and himself on the social issues , such as fighting the Untouchability Laws and eradication of the caste system . 
 According to the booklet Gandhi and Periyar Periyar wrote in his paper Kudi Arasu , in 1925 , reporting on the fact that Gandhi was ousted from the <unk> , because he opposed resolutions for the maintaining of caste and Untouchability Laws which would spoil his efforts to bring about Hindu @-@ Muslim unity . From this Gandhi learned the need of pleasing the Brahmins if anything was to be achieved . 
 <unk> in his references to Gandhi used opportunities to present Gandhi as on principle serving the interests of the <unk> in 1927 , Periyar and Gandhi met at Bangalore to discuss this matter . The main difference between them came out when Periyar stood for the total eradication of Hinduism to which Gandhi objected saying that Hinduism is not fixed in doctrines but can be changed . In the Kudi Arasu , Periyar explained that : 
 " With all his good qualities , Gandhi did not bring the people forward from foolish and evil ways . His murderer was an educated man . Therefore nobody can say this is a time of high culture . If you eat poison you will die . If electricity hits the body you will die . If you oppose the Brahmin you will die . Gandhi did not advocate the eradication of <unk> Dharma structure but sees in it a task for the humanisation of society and social change possible within its structure . The consequence of this would be continued high @-@ caste leadership . Gandhi adapted Brahmins to social change without depriving them of their leadership " . 
 Thus , Gandhi did not advocate the eradication of the <unk> Dharma structure but saw in it a task for the humanisation of society and social change possible within its structure . The consequence of this would be continued high @-@ caste leadership . Gandhi accepted karma in the sense that " the Untouchables reap the reward of their karma , but was against discrimination against them using the revaluing term Harijans . As shown in the negotiations at Vaikom his methods of abolishing discrimination were : to stress on the orthodox inhumane treatment of Untouchables ; to secure voluntary lifting of the ban by changing the hearts of caste Hindus ; and to work within a Hindu framework of ideas . 
 On the Temple Entry issue Gandhi never advocated the opening of <unk> <unk> to Harijans in consequence of his Hindu belief . These sources which can be labelled " pro @-@ Periyar " with the exception of M. Mahar and D.S. Sharma , clearly show that Periyar and his followers emphasised that Periyar was the real fighter for the removal of Untouchability and the true uplift of <unk> , whereas Gandhi was not . This did not prevent Periyar from having faith in Gandhi on certain matters . 
 = = = Religion and atheism = = = 
 Periyar was generally regarded as a pragmatic propagandist who attacked the evils of religious influence on society , mainly what he regarded as Brahmin domination . At a young age , he felt that some people used religion only as a mask to deceive innocent people and considered it as his life 's mission to warn people against superstitions and priests . Anita Diehl explains that Periyar cannot be called an atheist philosopher . Periyar , however , qualified for the definition of what the term ' atheist ' implies in his address on philosophy . He repudiated the term as without real sense : " … the talk of the atheist should be considered thoughtless and erroneous . The thing I call god ... that makes all people equal and free , the god that does not stop free thinking and research , the god that does not ask for money , flattery and temples can certainly be an object of worship . For saying this much I have been called an atheist , a term that has no meaning " . EVR Periyar a born Hindu was vehemently opposed to Hinduism and Christianity . He did not criticize Islam . 
 Anita Diehl explains that Periyar was against incompatibility of faith with social equality and not religion itself . In a book on revolution published in 1961 , Periyar stated , " be of help to people . Do not use treachery or deceit . Speak the truth and do not cheat . That indeed is service to God " . 
 On Hinduism , Periyar believed that it was a religion with no distinctive sacred book ( <unk> gita ) , or origins , but to be an imaginary faith preaching the " superiority " of the Brahmins , the inferiority of the Shudras , and the untouchability of the Dalits ( <unk> ) . Maria Misra , a lecturer at Oxford University , compares him to the philosophes , by stating , " his contemptuous attitude to the baleful influence of Hinduism in Indian public life is strikingly akin to the anti @-@ Catholic diatribes of the enlightenment philosophes " . In 1955 , Periyar was arrested for his public agitation of burning the pictures of Rama at public places , as a symbolic protest against the Indo @-@ Aryan domination and degradation of the Dravidian leadership according to the Ramayana epic . Periyar also shoed the images of Krishna and Rama , stating that they were Aryan gods that considered the Dravidian Shudras to be " sons of prostitutes " . 
 Periyar openly suggested to those who were marginalised within the Hindu communities to consider converting to other faiths such as Islam , Christianity , or Buddhism . On Islam , he stated how it was good for abolishing the disgrace in human relationship , based on one of his speeches to railway employees at Tiruchirapalli in 1947 . Periyar also commended Islam for its belief in one invisible and formless God ; proclamation of equal rights for men and women ; and advocating of social unity . 
 At the rally in Tiruchi , Periyar said : 
 " Muslims are following the ancient philosophies of the Dravidians . The Arabic word for Dravidian religion is Islam . When Brahmanism was imposed in this country , it was Mohammad Nabi who opposed it , by instilling the Dravidian religion 's policies as Islam in the minds of the people " 
 Periyar viewed Christianity similar to the monotheistic faith of Islam . He explained that their faith says that there can be only one God which has no name or shape . Periyar took an interest in Rev. Martin Luther , where both he and his followers wanted to liken him and his role to that of the European reformer . Thus , Christian views such as that of Ram Mohan Roy 's The Precepts of Jesus has had at least an indirect influence on Periyar . 
 Apart from Islam and Christianity , Periyar also found in Buddhism a basis for his philosophy though he did not accept that religion . It was again an alternative in the search for self @-@ respect and the object was to get liberation from the discrimination of Hinduism . Through Periyar 's movement Temple Entry Acts of 1924 , 1931 , and up to 1950 were created for the non @-@ Brahmins . Another accomplishment took place during the 1970s when Tamil replaced Sanskrit as the Temple language in Tamil Nadu , while Dalits were finally eligible for priesthood . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 = = = = <unk> in the Justice Party = = = = 
 When B. Munuswamy Naidu became the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency in 1930 , he endorsed the inclusion of Brahmins in the Justice Party , saying : 
 So long as we exclude one community , we cannot as a political speak on behalf of or claim to represent all the people of our presidency . If , as we hope , provincial autonomy is given to the provinces as a result of the reforms that may be granted , it should be essential that our Federation should be in a position to claim to be a truly representative body of all communities . What objection can there be to admit such Brahmins as are willing to subscribe to the aims and objects of our Federation ? It may be that the Brahmins may not join even if the ban is removed . But surely our Federation will not thereafter be open to objection on the ground that it is an exclusive organisation . 
 Though certain members supported the resolution , a faction in the Justice Party known as the " Ginger Group " opposed the resolution and eventually voted it down . Periyar , who was then an observer in the Justice Party , criticised Munuswamy Naidu , saying : 
 At a time when non @-@ Brahmins in other parties were gradually coming over to the Justice Party , being fed up with the Brahmin 's methods and ways of dealing with political questions , it was nothing short of folly to think of admitting him into the ranks of the Justice Party . 
 This <unk> continued until 1932 when Munuswamy Naidu stepped down as the Chief Minister of Madras and the Raja of Bobbili became the chief minister . 
 = = Followers and influence = = 
 After the death of Periyar in 1973 , conferences were held throughout Tamil Nadu for a week in January 1974 . The same year Periyar 's wife , Maniyammai , the new head of the Dravidar Kazhagam , set fire to the effigies of ' Rama ' , ' Sita ' and ' Lakshmana ' at Periyar <unk> , Madras . This was in retaliation to the <unk> celebrations where effigies of ' Ravana ' , ' <unk> ' and ' Indrajit ' were burnt in New Delhi . For this act she was imprisoned . During the 1974 May Day meetings held at different places in Tamil Nadu , a resolution urging the Government to preserve 80 percent of jobs for Tamils was passed . Soon after this , a camp was held at Periyar Mansion in Tiruchirapalli to train young men and women to spread the ideals of the Dravidar Kazhagam in rural areas . 
 On Periyar 's birthday on 17 September 1974 , Periyar 's Rationalist Library and Research Library and Research Institute was opened by Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi . This library contained Periyar 's rationalist works , the manuscripts of Periyar and his recorded speeches . Also during the same year Periyar 's ancestral home in Erode , was dedicated as a commemoration building . On 20 February 1977 , the opening function of Periyar Building in Madras was held . At the meeting which the Managing Committee of the Dravidar Kazhagam held , there on that day , it was decided to support the candidates belonging to the Janata Party , the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) , and the Marxist Party during the General Elections . 
 On 16 March 1978 , Maniyammai died . The Managing Committee of the Dravidar Kazhagam elected K. Veeramani as General Secretary of the Dravidar Kazhagam on 17 March 1978 . From then on , the Periyar @-@ Maniyammai Educational and Charitable Society started the Periyar Centenary Women 's Polytechnic at Thanjavur on 21 September 1980 . On 8 May 1982 , the College for Correspondence Education was started under the auspices of the Periyar Rationalist Propaganda Organization . 
 Over the years , Periyar 's influence had an impact on Tamil <unk> political party heads such as C.N. Annadurai and M. Karunanidhi of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ' ( DMK ) , V. <unk> founder of the Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( MDMK ) , S. Ramadoss founder of the Pattali Makkal Katchi ( PMK ) , <unk> . <unk> , founder of the Dalit Panthers of India ( <unk> ) , and Dravidar Kazhagam 's K. Veeramani . Other political figures influenced by Periyar were former Congress minister K. Kamaraj , former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Mayawati . Periyar 's life and teachings have also influenced writers and poets such as Kavignar <unk> , and Bharathidasan including actors such as Kamal Hassan and Sathyaraj . Noted Tamil Comedian N. S. Krishnan was a close friend and follower of <unk> P. A. <unk> Nadar was a close confidant of Periyar and encouraged Nadars to be a part of the Self @-@ Respect Movement . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Sathyaraj and <unk> Sundar starred in a government @-@ sponsored film Periyar released in 2007 . Directed by Gnana <unk> , the film was screened in Malaysia on 1 May 2007 and was screened at the Goa International Film Festival in November that year . Sathyaraj reprised his role as Periyar in the film <unk> <unk> directed by <unk> <unk> which released in late 2010 . 
 = Moonraker ( novel ) = 
 Moonraker is the third novel by the British author Ian Fleming to feature his fictional British Secret Service agent James Bond . It was published by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1955 and featured a cover design conceived by Fleming . The plot is derived from a Fleming screenplay that was too short for a full novel so he added the bridge passage between Bond and the industrialist Hugo Drax . In the latter half of the novel , the premise of Bond seconded to Drax 's staff as the businessman builds the Moonraker , a prototype missile designed to defend England . Unknown to Bond , Drax is German , an ex @-@ Nazi now working for the Soviets ; his plan is to build the rocket , arm it with a nuclear warhead , and fire it at London . Uniquely for a Bond novel , Moonraker is set entirely in Britain , which raised comments from some readers , complaining about the lack of exotic locations . 
 Moonraker , like Fleming 's previous novels , was well received by critics . Moonraker plays on a number of 1950s fears , including attack by rockets ( following the V @-@ 2 strikes of the Second World War ) , Soviet communism , the re @-@ emergence of Nazism and the " threat from within " posed by both ideologies . Fleming examines Englishness , and the novel shows the virtues and strength of England . Adaptations include a broadcast on South African radio in 1956 starring Bob Holness and a 1958 Daily Express comic strip . The novel 's name was used in 1979 for the eleventh official film in the Eon Productions Bond series and the fourth to star Roger Moore as Bond ; the plot was significantly changed from the novel to include excursions into space . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British Secret Service agent James Bond is asked by his superior , M , to join him at M 's club , Blades . A club member , the multi @-@ millionaire businessman Sir Hugo Drax , is winning considerable money playing bridge , seemingly against the odds . M suspects Drax is cheating , and while claiming indifference , is concerned as to why a multi @-@ millionaire and national hero would cheat . Bond confirms Drax 's deception and manages to turn the tables — aided by a pack of stacked cards — and wins £ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 Drax is the product of a mysterious background , purportedly unknown even to himself . Presumed to have been a British Army soldier during the Second World War , he was badly injured and stricken with amnesia in the explosion of a bomb planted by a German saboteur at a British field headquarters . After extensive rehabilitation in an army hospital , he returned home to become a wealthy industrialist . After building his fortune and establishing himself in business and society , Drax started building the " Moonraker " , Britain 's first nuclear missile project , intended to defend Britain against its Cold War enemies . The Moonraker rocket was to be an upgraded V @-@ 2 rocket using liquid hydrogen and fluorine as propellants ; to withstand the ultra @-@ high combustion temperatures of its engine , it used columbite , in which Drax had a monopoly . Because the rocket 's engine could withstand high heat , the Moonraker was able to use these powerful fuels , greatly expanding its effective range . 
 After a Ministry of Supply security officer working at the project is shot dead , M assigns Bond to replace him and also to investigate what has been going on at the missile @-@ building base , located between Dover and Deal on the south coast of England . All the rocket scientists working on the project are German . At his post on the complex , Bond meets Gala Brand , a beautiful police Special Branch officer working undercover as Drax 's personal assistant . Bond also uncovers clues concerning his predecessor 's death , concluding that the man may have been killed for witnessing a submarine off the coast . 
 Drax 's henchman Krebs is caught by Bond snooping through his room . Later , an attempted assassination by triggering a landslide nearly kills Bond and Brand , as they swim beneath the Dover cliffs . Drax takes Brand to London , where she discovers the truth about the Moonraker by comparing her own launch trajectory figures with those in a notebook picked from Drax 's pocket . She is captured by Krebs , and finds herself captive in a secret radio homing station — intended to serve as a beacon for the missile 's guidance system — in the heart of London . While she is being taken back to the Moonraker facility by Drax , Bond gives chase , but is also captured by Drax and Krebs . 
 Drax tells Bond that he was never a British soldier and has never suffered from amnesia : he was Graf Hugo von der Drache , the German commander of a Skorzeny commando unit . He was the saboteur whose team had placed the car bomb at the army field headquarters , only to be injured himself in the detonation . The amnesia story was simply a cover he used while recovering in hospital , in order to avoid Allied retribution , although it would lead to a whole new British identity . Drax remains a dedicated Nazi , bent on revenge against England for the wartime defeat of his Fatherland and his prior history of social slights suffered as a youth growing up in an English boarding school before the war . He explains that he now means to destroy London with the missile he had constructed , by means of a Soviet @-@ supplied nuclear warhead that has been secretly fitted to the Moonraker . He also plans to play the stock market the day before to make a huge profit from the imminent disaster . 
 Brand and Bond are imprisoned where the blast from the Moonraker 's engines will incinerate them , to leave no trace of them once the Moonraker is launched . Before the firing , the couple escape . Brand gives Bond the proper coordinates to redirect the gyros and send the Moonraker into the sea . Having been in collaboration with Soviet Intelligence all along , Drax and his henchman attempt to escape by Russian submarine — only to be killed as the vessel flees through the waters onto which the Moonraker has been retargeted . After their debriefing at headquarters , Bond meets up with Brand , expecting her company — but they part ways after she reveals that she is engaged to a fellow Special Branch officer . 
 = = Background and writing history = = 
 In early 1953 the film producer Alexander Korda read a proof copy of Live and Let Die , and informed its author , Ian Fleming , that he was excited by the book , but that it would not make a good basis for a film . Fleming told the producer that his next book was to be an expansion of an idea for a screenplay , set in London and Kent , adding that the location would allow " for some wonderful film settings in the old metropolis idiom " . 
 Fleming undertook a significant amount of background research in preparation for writing Moonraker ; he asked his fellow correspondent on The Sunday Times , Anthony Terry , for information on the Second World War German resistance force — the Werewolves — and German V @-@ 2 rockets . The latter was a subject on which he wrote to the science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and the British Interplanetary Society . Fleming also visited the Wimpole Street psychiatrist Eric Strauss to discuss the traits of megalomaniacs ; Strauss lent him the book Men of Genius , which provided the link between megalomania and childhood thumb @-@ sucking . Fleming used this information to give Drax diastema , a common result of thumb @-@ sucking . According to his biographer Andrew Lycett , Fleming " wanted to make Moonraker his most ambitious and personal novel yet . " Fleming , a keen card player , was fascinated by the background to the 1890 royal baccarat scandal , and when in 1953 he met a woman who had been present at the game , he questioned her so intently that she burst into tears . 
 In January 1954 Fleming and his wife , Ann , travelled to their Goldeneye estate in Jamaica for their annual two @-@ month holiday . He had already written two Bond novels , Casino Royale , which had been published in April 1953 , and Live and Let Die , whose publication was imminent . He began writing Moonraker on his arrival in the Caribbean . He later wrote an article for Books and Bookmen magazine describing his approach to writing , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " By 24 February he had written over 30 @,@ 000 words , although he wrote to a friend that he felt like he was already parodying the two earlier Bond novels . Fleming 's own copy bears the following inscription , " This was written in January and February 1954 and published a year later . It is based on a film script I have had in my mind for many years . " He later said that the idea for the film had been too short for a full novel , and that he " had to more or less graft the first half of the book onto my film idea in order to bring it up to the necessary length " . 
 Fleming considered a number of titles for the story ; his first choice had been The Moonraker , until Noël Coward reminded him of a novel of the same name by F. Tennyson Jesse . Fleming then considered The Moonraker Secret , The Moonraker Plot , The Inhuman Element , Wide of the Mark , The Infernal Machine , Mondays are Hell and Out of the Clear Sky . George Wren Howard of Jonathan Cape suggested Bond & the Moonraker , The Moonraker Scare and The Moonraker Plan , while his friend , the writer William Plomer , suggested Hell is Here ; the final choice of Moonraker was a suggestion by Wren Howard . 
 Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Moonraker in 1953 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in May of that year . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 The locations draw from Fleming 's personal experiences . Moonraker is the only Bond novel that takes place solely in Britain , which gave Fleming the chance to write about the England he cherished , such as the Kent countryside , including the White Cliffs of Dover , and London clubland . Fleming owned a cottage in St Margaret 's at Cliffe , near Dover , and he went to great lengths to get the details of the area right , including lending his car to his stepson to time the journey from London to Deal for the car chase passage . Fleming used his experiences of London clubs for the background of the Blades scenes . As a clubman , he enjoyed membership of Boodle 's , White 's and the Portland Club , and a combination of <unk> and the Portland Club is thought to be the model for Blades ; the author Michael Dibdin found the scene in the club to be " surely one of the finest things that Ian Fleming ever did . " 
 The early chapters of the novel centre on Bond 's private life , with Fleming using his own lifestyle as a basis for Bond 's . Fleming used further aspects of his private life , such as his friends , as he had done in his previous novels : Hugo Drax was named after his brother @-@ in @-@ law Hugo Charteris and a navy acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett @-@ Ernle @-@ Erle @-@ Drax , while Fleming 's friend Duff Sutherland ( described as " a scruffy looking chap " ) was one of the bridge players at Blades . The name of the Scotland Yard superintendent , Ronnie Vallance , was made up from those of Ronald Howe , the actual assistant commissioner at the Yard , and of Vallance Lodge & Co . , Fleming 's accountants . Other elements of the plot came from Fleming 's knowledge of wartime operations carried out by T @-@ Force , a secret British Army unit formed to continue the work of the Fleming @-@ established 30 Assault Unit . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 According to the author Raymond Benson , Moonraker is a deeper and more introspective book than Fleming 's previous work , which allows the author to develop the characters further . As such , Bond " becomes something more than ... [ the ] cardboard figure " that he had been in the previous two novels . The start of the book concentrates on Bond at home and his daily routines , which Fleming describes as " Elastic office hours from around ten until six , ... evenings spent playing cards in the company of a few close friends , ... or making love , with rather cold passion , to one of three similarly disposed married women . " This lifestyle was largely modelled on Fleming 's own , which the journalist and writer Matthew Parker sees as showing " a sourness " in the author 's character . According to Chancellor , two of Bond 's other vices were also displayed in the book : his fondness for gambling — illegal except in private members clubs in 1955 — and excessive drink and drug taking , neither of which were frowned upon in post @-@ war upper class circles . In preparation for beating Drax at cards , Bond consumes a vodka martini , a carafe of vodka shared with M , two bottles of champagne and a brandy ; he also mixes a quantity of Benzedrine , an amphetamine , into a glass of the champagne . According to The Times journalist and historian Ben Macintyre , to Fleming the alcohol consumption " meant relaxation , ritual and reliability " . Benzedrine was regularly taken by troops during the war to remain awake and alert , and Fleming was an occasional consumer . 
 Drax is physically abnormal , as are many of Bond 's later adversaries . He has very broad shoulders , a large head and protruding teeth with diastema ; his face is badly scarred from a wartime explosion . According to the writers Kingsley Amis and Benson — both of whom subsequently wrote Bond novels — Drax is the most successful villain in the Bond canon . Amis considers this to be " because the most imagination and energy has gone into his portrayal . He lives in the real world ... [ and ] his physical presence fills Moonraker . The view is shared by Chancellor , who considers Drax " perhaps the most believable " of all Fleming 's villains . The cultural historian Jeremy Black writes that as with Le Chiffre and Mr Big — the villains of the first two Bond novels — Drax 's origins and war history are vital to an understanding of the character . Like several other antagonists in the Bond canon , Drax was German , reminding readers of a familiar threat in 1950s Britain . Because Drax is without a girlfriend or wife he is , according to the norms of Fleming and his works , abnormal in Bond 's world . 
 Benson considers Brand to be one of the weakest female roles in the Bond canon and " a throwback to the rather stiff characterization of Vesper Lynd " from Casino Royale . Brand 's lack of interest in Bond removes sexual tension from the novel ; she is unique in the canon for being the one woman that Bond does not seduce . The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett write that the perceived reserve shown by Brand to Bond was not due to frigidity , but to her engagement to a fellow police officer . 
 M is another character who is more fully realised than in the previous novels , and for the first time in the series he is shown outside a work setting at the Blades club . It is never explained how he received or could afford his membership of the club , which had a restricted membership of only 200 gentlemen , all of whom had to show £ 100 @,@ 000 in cash or gilt @-@ edged securities . Amis , in his study The James Bond Dossier , considers that on M 's salary his membership of the club would have been puzzling ; Amis points out that in the 1963 book On Her Majesty 's Secret Service it is revealed that M 's pay as head of the Secret Service is £ 6 @,@ 500 a year . 
 = = Style = = 
 Benson analysed Fleming 's writing style and identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic technique that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of each chapter to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson feels that the sweep in Moonraker was not as pronounced as Fleming 's previous works , largely due to the lack of action sequences in the novel . 
 According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th @-@ century British spy novels , in Moonraker Fleming uses a technique closer to the detective story than to the thriller genre . This manifests itself in Fleming placing clues to the plot line throughout the story , and leaving Drax 's unveiling of his plan until the later chapters . Black sees that the pace of the novel is set by the launch of the rocket ( there are four days between Bond 's briefing by M and the launch ) while Amis considers that the story to have a " rather hurried " ending . 
 Moonraker uses a literary device Fleming employs elsewhere , that of having a seemingly trivial incident between the main characters — the card game — that leads to the uncovering of a greater incident — the main plot involving the rocket . Dibdin sees gambling as the common link , thus the card game acts as an " introduction to the ensuing encounter ... for even higher stakes " . Savoye sees this concept of competition between Bond and villain as a " notion of game and the eternal fight between Order and Disorder " , common throughout the Bond stories . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Parker describes the novel as " a hymn to England " , and highlights Fleming 's description of the white cliffs of Dover and the heart of London as evidence . Even the German Krebs is moved by the sight of the Kent countryside in a country he hates . The novel places England — and particularly London and Kent — in the front line of the cold war , and the threat to the location further emphasises its importance . Bennett and Woollacott consider that Moonraker defines the strengths and virtues of England and Englishness as being the " quiet and orderly background of English institutions " , which are threatened by the disturbance Drax brings . 
 The literary critic Meir Sternberg considers the theme of English identity can be seen in the confrontation between Drax and Bond . Drax — whose real name Drache is German for dragon — is in opposition to Bond , who takes the role of Saint George in the conflict . 
 As with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die , Moonraker involves the idea of the " traitor within " . Drax , real name Graf Hugo von der Drache , is a " megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman " , while Krebs bears the same name as Hitler 's last Chief of Staff . Black sees that , in using a German as the novel 's main enemy , " Fleming ... exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s . Germans , in the wake of the Second World War , made another easy and obvious target for bad press . " Moonraker uses two of the foes feared by Fleming , the Nazis and the Soviets , with Drax being German and working for the Soviets ; in Moonraker the Soviets were hostile and provided not just the atomic bomb , but support and logistics to Drax . Moonraker played on fears of the audiences of the 1950s of rocket attacks from overseas , fears grounded in the use of the V @-@ 2 rocket by the Nazis during the Second World War . The story takes the threat one stage further , with a rocket based on English soil , aimed at London and " the end of British invulnerability " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Moonraker was published in the UK by Jonathan Cape in hardback format on 5 April 1955 with a cover designed by Kenneth Lewis , following Fleming 's suggestions of using a stylised flame motif ; the first impression was of 9 @,@ 900 copies . The US publication was by Macmillan on 20 September that year . In October 1956 Pan Books published a paperback version of the novel in the UK , which sold 43 @,@ 000 copies before the end of the year . In December that year the US paperback was published under the title Too Hot to Handle by <unk> . This edition was rewritten to Americanise the British idioms used , and Fleming provided a number of explanatory footnotes such as the value of English currency against the dollar . Since its initial publication the book has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Fleming 's friend — and neighbour in Jamaica — Noël Coward considered Moonraker to be the best thing Fleming had written to that point : " although as usual too far @-@ fetched , not quite so much so as the last two ... His observation is extraordinary and his talent for description vivid . " Fleming received numerous letters from readers complaining about the lack of exotic locations ; one of which protested " We want taking out of ourselves , not sitting on the beach in Dover . " 
 Julian Symons , writing in The Times Literary Supplement , found Moonraker " a disappointment " , and considered that " Fleming 's tendency ... to parody the form of the thriller , has taken charge in the second half of this story . " Maurice Richardson , in his review for The Observer , was more welcoming : " Do not miss this " , he urged , saying that " Mr. Fleming continues to be irresistibly readable , however incredible " . Hilary Corke , writing in The Listener , thought that " Fleming is one of the most accomplished of thriller @-@ writers " , and considered that Moonraker " is as mercilessly readable as all the rest " . Corke warned Fleming away from being over @-@ dramatic , declaring that " Mr Fleming is evidently far too accomplished to need to lean upon these blood @-@ and @-@ thunder devices : he could keep our hair on end for three hundred pages without spilling more blood than was allowed to Shylock . " The reviewer in The Scotsman considered that Fleming " administers stimuli with no mean hand ... ' Astonish me ! ' the addict may challenge : Mr Fleming can knock him sideways . " 
 John Metcalf for The Spectator thought the book " utterly disgraceful — and highly enjoyable ... without [ Moonraker ] no forthcoming railway journey should be undertaken " , although he also considered that it was " not one of Mr. Fleming 's best " . Anthony Boucher , writing in The New York Times , was equivocal , saying " I don 't know anyone who writes about gambling more vividly than Fleming and I only wish the other parts of his books lived up to their gambling sequences " . Richard Lister in the New Statesman thought that " Mr. Fleming is splendid ; he stops at nothing . " Writing for The Washington Post , Al Manola believed that the " British tradition of rich mystery writing , copious description and sturdy heroism all blend nicely " in Moonraker , providing what he considered was " probably the best action novel of the month " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The actor John Payne attempted to take up the option on the film rights to the book in 1955 , but nothing came of the attempt . The Rank Organisation also came to an agreement to make a film , but this likewise fell through . The novel was not one of Fleming 's stories acquired by Eon Productions in 1961 ; in 1969 the company acquired the rights and commissioned Gerry Anderson to produce and co @-@ write a screenplay . Anderson and Tony Barwick prepared a 70 @-@ page treatment that was never filmed , but some elements were similar to the final screenplay of The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 The first adaptation of Moonraker was for South African radio in 1956 , with Bob Holness providing the voice of Bond . According to The Independent , " listeners across the Union thrilled to Bob 's cultured tones as he defeated evil master criminals in search of world domination " . The novel was adapted as a comic strip that was published in the Daily Express newspaper and syndicated worldwide . The adaptation was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , and ran daily from 30 March to 8 August 1959 . Titan Books reprinted the strip in 2005 along with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die as a part of the Casino Royale anthology . 
 " Moonraker " was used as the title for the eleventh James Bond film , produced by Eon Productions and released in 1979 . Directed by Lewis Gilbert and produced by Albert R. Broccoli , the film features Roger Moore in his fourth appearance as Bond . The Nazi @-@ inspired element of Drax 's motivation in the novel was indirectly preserved with the " master race " theme of the film 's plot . Since the screenplay was original , Eon Productions and Glidrose Publications authorised the film 's writer , Christopher Wood , to produce his second novelization based on a film ; this was entitled James Bond and Moonraker . Elements of Moonraker were also used in the 2002 film Die Another Day , with a scene set in the Blades club . The actress Rosamund Pike , who plays Miranda Frost in the film , later said that her character was originally to have been named Gala Brand . 
 = Spooked ( The Office ) = 
 " Spooked " is the fifth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 157th episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 27 , 2011 . It was written by Carrie Kemper , sister of cast member Ellie Kemper , and directed by Randall Einhorn . The episode guest starred David Mazouz . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Erin Hannon ( Kemper ) works to make a spooky , non @-@ childish Halloween party with help from Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) becomes friends with Robert California 's ( James Spader ) son ( David Mazouz ) , and Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) debate the existence of ghosts . Meanwhile , Robert figures out everyone 's deepest fears and tries to culminate a ghost story . 
 " Spooked " received mixed reviews , although many critics complimented Ellie Kemper 's performance . According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Spooked " drew 5 @.@ 53 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode ranked as one of the lowest @-@ rated episodes of the series to air on Thursday and ranked third in its timeslot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Erin Hannon has been assigned to set up the Halloween party by Andy Bernard , who wants to live up to the expectations set by Robert ( James Spader ) . Robert arrives with his son Bert and remarks that the party is more tailored to kids than adults . In response , Andy asks Angela Martin and Phyllis Vance to take over and re @-@ tailor the party , much to Erin 's chagrin . Andy also tells her that he wishes to speak with her at the end of the day . Worried that he intends to fire her , she asks Gabe ( Zach Woods ) to help her make the party more " scary " and " sexy " , and he gives her a tape to show everyone . Gabe explains to the camera crew that the video is a Cinema of the Unsettling movie , an avant garde film genre defined by its disturbing images and absence of plot . Disgusted by the video , the office staff demand an explanation from Erin . In desperation , she shows them her idea for making the party more " sexy " : a card game with photos of genitalia . This only makes them more outraged , and Andy and Robert talk with Erin in his office regarding the incident . Erin admits her fears about their planned talk at the end of the day . Andy tells her what he wanted to talk to her about : he has reached a point in his romantic relationship where his girlfriend should be able to call him at the office , and that he wanted to clear this with Erin first since she handles all calls . Erin had not even known that he was dating someone , and is shocked to hear they have been out on 31 dates so far . Erin feels dejected and leaves . 
 Jim and Pam Halpert argue whether ghosts are real after she claims to have seen one at a pub where she used to work . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute dresses up as Sarah Kerrigan from StarCraft , but Toby Flenderson takes off his wings as they had knives on them and Dwight is not allowed to bring in weapons . Bert recognizes what his costume is supposed to be and the two bond over playing StarCraft all day , ignoring everyone else . Dwight also makes Bert pretend to fire Toby , for taking away his weapons , on the grounds that he is the CEO 's son . 
 Throughout the party , Robert coaxes each of the employees into revealing their deepest fears . Before leaving , he tells a horror story implementing all their fears as a way to convince them not to let fear control their lives . This inspires Jim and Pam to stop their argument and Erin to talk to Andy about her feelings . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by story editor Carrie Kemper , sister of cast member Ellie Kemper , her second written story for the series . It was directed by one of the The Office 's cinematographers , Randall Einhorn , his 15th directing credit for the series . The episode is the third Halloween themed episode of the series after season two 's " Halloween " and season seven 's " Costume Contest " . The episode also featured James Spader as Sabre CEO Robert California , who is currently set to appear in 15 episodes for the season . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include the rest of the office getting in the debate over whether ghosts exist , and Robert 's son Bert and Dwight talking about zombies , specifically characters from The Walking Dead . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode , Dwight dresses up as Sarah Kerrigan , a character from the video game series StarCraft . Later , Toby narrates a montage of previous costumes worn by Dwight including dressed as Freddy Krueger , Jigsaw , and Pinhead , the primary antagonists from the A Nightmare on Elm Street , Saw , and Hellraiser franchises , respectively . Angela is seen dressed in the same cat that she wore in the season two episode , " Halloween " . Jim , Kevin and Darryl are dressed up as professional basketball players Chris Bosh , Dwyane Wade and LeBron James , respectively . Ryan is dressed as Jesse Pinkman from the TV series Breaking Bad , wearing the character 's signature yellow hoodie and beanie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Spooked " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 53 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the United States , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a 15 % drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Garden Party " making it the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series that aired on Thursday . The episode ranked third in its timeslot beating Person of Interest , which received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 % share in the 18 — 49 demographic , and The Secret Circle , which received a 0 @.@ 9 rating / 2 % share . The episode , however , was beaten to number two by Grey 's Anatomy , which received a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 9 % share , and beaten to number one by the 2011 World Series , which received a 6 @.@ 5 rating / 18 % share . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics . National Post writer Barry Hertz wrote that while " it wasn ’ t as patience @-@ testing as last year ’ s outing [ ' Costume Contest ' ] , but it also wasn ’ t as gut @-@ busting and on @-@ the @-@ nose as its earlier incarnation [ " Halloween " ] . " He complimented the Erin and Andy plot , but called the Jim and Pam plot " boring " . Ellie Kemper 's performance received commendations from Hertz . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt criticized the episode for " just creating situations and seeing how the characters react to them , which is likely why the writers were willing to lazily rehash the stock ' office Halloween party ' setup that drives the narrative of ' Spooked ' . " Despite this , he wrote positively of Erin 's plot , Kemper 's performance , and James Spader 's scary speech at the end . However , McNutt was critical of the Dwight plot and the Jim and Pam plot writing that " I don ’ t care that Pam believes in ghosts and Jim doesn ’ t , I don ’ t care that Dwight gets a few scenes in which the cynical adult is softened by the presence of a precocious child . " He ultimately gave the episode a C + . New York writer Chris Blanche criticized the episode for its lack of heart . Television Without Pity gave the episode a C rating . Several critics considered the episode an improvement over the previous <unk> episode , " Costume Contest " . 
 = Primer ( film ) = 
 Primer is a 2004 American indie science fiction drama film about the accidental discovery of a means of time travel . The film was written , directed , produced , edited and scored by Shane Carruth , who also stars in the main role . 
 Primer is of note for its extremely low budget ( completed for $ 7 @,@ 000 ) , experimental plot structure , philosophical implications , and complex technical dialogue , which Carruth , a college graduate with a degree in mathematics and a former engineer , chose not to simplify for the sake of the audience . The film collected the Grand Jury Prize at the 2004 Sundance Film Festival , before securing a limited release in the United States , and has since gained a cult following . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two engineers – Aaron and Abe – supplement their day @-@ jobs with entrepreneurial tech projects , working out of Aaron 's garage . During one such research effort , involving electromagnetic reduction of objects ' weight , the two men accidentally discover an ' A @-@ to @-@ B ' time loop side @-@ effect ; objects left in the weight @-@ reducing field exhibit temporal anomalies , proceeding normally ( from time ' A , ' when the field was activated , to time ' B , ' when the field is powered off ) , then backwards ( from ' B ' back to ' A ' ) , in continuous A @-@ then @-@ B @-@ then @-@ A @-@ then @-@ B sequence , such that objects can leave the field in the present , or at some previous point . 
 Abe refines this proof @-@ of @-@ concept and builds a stable time @-@ apparatus ( " the box " ) , sized to accommodate a human subject . Abe uses this " box " to travel six hours into his own past — as part of this process , Original @-@ Abe sits incommunicado in a hotel room , so as not to interact or interfere with the outside world , after which Original @-@ Abe enters the " box , " waits inside the " box " for six hours ( thus going back in time six hours ) , and becomes Future @-@ Overlap @-@ Double @-@ Abe , who travels across town , explains the proceedings to Aaron , and brings Aaron back to the secure self @-@ storage facility housing the " box . " At the end of the overlap @-@ timespan , Original @-@ Abe no longer exists , having entered the " box , " rewound six hours , and become Future @-@ Overlap @-@ Double @-@ Abe for the remainder of time . 
 Abe and Aaron repeat Abe 's six @-@ hour experiment multiple times over multiple days , making profitable same @-@ day stock trades armed with foreknowledge of the market 's performance . The duo 's divergent personalities – Abe cautious and controlling , Aaron impulsive and meddlesome – put subtle strain on their collaboration and friendship . These tensions come to a head after a late @-@ night encounter with Thomas Granger ( father to Abe 's girlfriend Rachel ) , who appears inexplicably unshaven and exists in overlap with his original suburban self . Granger falls into a comatose state after being pursued by Aaron ; Aaron theorizes that , at some point in the future , Granger entered the " box " ( at an unknown time , for unknown reasons ) , with timeline @-@ altering consequences . Abe concludes that time travel is simply too dangerous , and uses a second apparatus ( his " failsafe box , " built before the experiment 's beginning and kept continuously running in a secret location ) , traveling back four days to prevent the experiment 's launch . 
 Cumulative competing interference wreaks havoc upon the timeline . Future @-@ Abe sedates Original @-@ Abe ( so he will never conduct the initial time travel experiment ) , and meets Original @-@ Aaron at a park bench ( so as to dissuade him ) , but finds that Future @-@ Aaron has gotten there first ( armed with pre @-@ recordings of the past conversations , and an unobtrusive earpiece ) , having brought a disassembled " third failsafe box " four days back with his own body . Future @-@ Abe faints at this revelation , overcome by shock and fatigue . 
 The two men briefly and tentatively reconcile . They jointly travel back in time , experiencing and reshaping an event where Abe 's girlfriend Rachel was nearly killed by a gun @-@ wielding party crasher . After many repetitions , Aaron , <unk> with knowledge of the party 's events , stops the gunman , becoming a local hero . Abe and Aaron ultimately part ways ; Aaron considers a new life in foreign countries where he can tamper more broadly for personal gain , while Abe states his intent to remain in town and dissuade / sabotage the original " box " experiment . Abe warns Aaron to leave and never return . 
 An epilogue sequence reveals that multiple " box @-@ aware " versions of Aaron are still alive and circulating – at least one Future @-@ Aaron has intermingled knowledge with Original @-@ Aaron ( thanks to discussions , voice @-@ recordings , and an unsuccessful physical altercation ) . As a result , two or more Aarons now inhabit the same timeline , sharing information of future events , in stark contrast to Abe , who goes to painstaking extremes to keep his Original @-@ Abe " pure " and unaware of the future . The film 's final scene depicts a fully aware Aaron , directing French @-@ speaking workers in the construction of what appears to be a warehouse @-@ sized " box . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Shane Carruth as Aaron 
 David Sullivan as Abe 
 Casey Gooden as Robert 
 Anand Upadhyaya as Phillip 
 Carrie Crawford as Kara 
 Samantha Thomson as Rachel Granger 
 Brandon Blagg as Will 
 Carruth cast himself as Aaron after having trouble finding actors who could " break ... the habit of filling each line with so much drama " . Most of the other actors are either friends or family members . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although one of the more fantastic elements of science fiction is central to the film , Carruth 's goal was to portray scientific discovery in a down @-@ to @-@ earth and realistic manner . He notes that many of the greatest breakthrough scientific discoveries in history have occurred by accident , in locations no more glamorous than Aaron 's garage . 
 Whether it involved the history of the number zero or the invention of the transistor , two things stood out to me . First is that the discovery that turns out to be the most valuable is usually dismissed as a side @-@ effect . Second is that prototypes almost never include neon lights and chrome . I wanted to see a story play out that was more in line with the way real innovation takes place than I had seen on film before . 
 Carruth has said he intended the central theme of the film to be the breakdown of Abe and Aaron 's relationship , as a result of their inability to cope with the power afforded them by this technological advancement : 
 First thing , I saw these guys as scientifically accomplished but ethically , morons . They never had any reasons before to have ethical questions . So when they 're hit with this device they 're blindsided by it . The first thing they do is make money with it . They 're not talking about the ethics of altering your former self . 
 = = Physics and science = = 
 Aaron and Abe start the film by attempting to create a device to somehow counter the effects of gravity . They have plans for such a device from another development team , but wish to improve on the viability of the design . Their main approach to achieve this is to discard the coolant bath for the required superconductors . They instead increase the transition temperature of the superconductor to " something more usable " . The time machine makes use of the property of superconductors called the Meissner effect , which " knock [ s ] out the interior magnetic field " . 
 Aaron and Abe require palladium to build their machine . This is the reason they take the catalytic converter containing a small amount of palladium from a car . 
 The principles of time travel in the film are inspired by Feynman diagrams . Carruth explained : " Richard Feynman has some interesting ideas about time . When you look at Feynman diagrams [ which map the interaction of elementary particles ] , there 's really no difference between watching an interaction happen forward and backward in time . " 
 = = Production = = 
 While writing the script , Carruth studied physics to help him make Abe and Aaron 's technical dialogue sound authentic . He took the unusual step of eschewing contrived exposition , and tried instead to portray the shorthand phrases and jargon used by working scientists . This philosophy carried over into production design . The time machine itself is a plain gray box , with a distinctive electronic " hum " created by overlaying the sounds of a mechanical grinder and a car engine , rather than by using a processed digital effect . Carruth also set the story in unglamorous industrial parks and suburban tract homes . 
 Carruth chose to deliberately obfuscate the film 's plot to mirror the complexity and confusion created by time travel . As he said in a 2004 interview : " This machine and Abe and Aaron 's experience are inherently complicated so it needed to be that way in order for the audience to be where Abe and Aaron are , which was always my hope . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place over five weeks , on the outskirts of Dallas , Texas . The film was produced on a budget of only USD $ 7 @,@ 000 , and a skeleton crew of five . Carruth acted as writer , director , producer , cinematographer , editor , and music composer . He also stars in the film as Aaron , and many of the other characters are played by his friends and family . The small budget required conservative use of the Super 16mm <unk> : the carefully limited number of takes resulted in an extremely low shooting ratio of 2 : 1 . Every shot in the film was meticulously storyboarded on 35mm stills . Carruth created a distinctive flat , overexposed look for the film by using fluorescent lighting , non @-@ neutral color temperatures , high @-@ speed film stock , and filters . 
 After shooting , Carruth took two years to fully post @-@ produce Primer . He has since said that this experience was so arduous that he almost abandoned the film on several occasions . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The entire film score was created by Carruth . On October 8 , 2004 , the Primer score was released on Amazon and iTunes . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Carruth secured a North American distribution deal with THINKFilm after the company 's head of theatrical distribution , Mark Urman , saw the film at the 2004 Sundance Film Festival . Although he and Carruth made a " handshake agreement " during the festival , Urman reported that the actual negotiation of the deal was the longest he had ever been involved with , in part due to Carruth 's specific demands over how much control over the film he would retain . The film went on to take $ 424 @,@ 760 at the box office . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Primer received broadly positive reviews in the mainstream press . The website Metacritic rated Primer at 68 out of 100 , while the similar site Rotten Tomatoes reported that 73 % of the critics that saw the film gave it positive reviews , and the site listed it as one of the best science fiction films " for the thinking man ( ... or woman ) " . 
 Many reviewers were impressed by the film 's originality . Dennis Lim of The Village Voice said that it was " the freshest thing the genre has seen since 2001 " , while in The New York Times , A. O. Scott wrote that Carruth had " the skill , the guile and the seriousness to turn a creaky philosophical gimmick into a dense and troubling moral puzzle " . Scott also enjoyed the film 's realistic depiction of scientists at work , saying that Carruth had an " impressive feel for the odd , quiet rhythms of small @-@ scale research and development " . 
 There was also praise for Carruth 's ability to maintain high production values on a minuscule budget , with Roger Ebert declaring : " The movie never looks cheap , because every shot looks as it must look . " Ty Burr of The Boston Globe commented that " aspects of Primer are so low @-@ rent as to evoke guffaws " , but added that " the homemade feel is part of the point " . 
 The film 's unusually complex plot and dense dialogue proved controversial . Esquire critic Mike D 'Angelo claimed that " anybody who claims he fully understands what 's going on in Primer after seeing it just once is either a savant or a liar " . Scott Tobias writes for The A.V. Club : " The banter is heavy on technical jargon and almost perversely short on exposition ; were it not for the presence of voiceover narration , the film would be close to incomprehensible . " For the Los Angeles Times , Carina Chocano writes : " <unk> for linear storytelling are bound to be frustrated by narrative threads that start promisingly , then just sort of fall off the spool " . Some reviewers were entirely put off by the film 's obfuscated narrative . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter complained that Primer " nearly gets lost in a miasma of technical jargon and scientific conjecture " . 
 " Primer is hopelessly confusing and grows more and more byzantine as it unravels , " Chuck Klosterman writes in an essay on time travel films five years later . " I 've watched it seven or eight times and I still don 't know what happened . " He nonetheless says it is " the finest movie about time travel I 've ever seen " because of its realism : 
 It 's not that the time machine ... seems more realistic ; it 's that the time travelers themselves seem more believable . They talk and act ( and think ) like the kind of people who might accidentally figure out how to move through time , which is why it 's the best depiction we have of the ethical quandaries that might result from such a discovery . 
 Ultimately , Klosterman says , the lesson of Primer regarding time travel is that " it 's too important to use only for money , but too dangerous to use for anything else " . 
 The film has been selected to be part of The A.V. Club 's New Cult Canon . 
 Donald Clarke , film critic with The Irish Times , included Primer at No. 20 on his list of the top twenty films of the decade ( 2000 – 2010 ) . 
 Science fiction author Greg Egan described it as " an ingenious , tautly constructed time @-@ travel story " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Grand Jury Prize , Sundance Film Festival in 2004 . 
 Alfred P. Sloan Prize for films dealing with science and technology , the 2004 Sundance Film Festival . 
 Best Writer / Director ( Shane Carruth ) at the Nantucket Film Festival in 2004 . 
 Best Feature at the London International Festival of Science Fiction in 2005 . 
 = Schiehallion experiment = 
 The Schiehallion experiment was an 18th @-@ century experiment to determine the mean density of the Earth . Funded by a grant from the Royal Society , it was conducted in the summer of 1774 around the Scottish mountain of Schiehallion , Perthshire . The experiment involved measuring the tiny deflection of a pendulum due to the gravitational attraction of a nearby mountain . Schiehallion was considered the ideal location after a search for candidate mountains , thanks to its isolation and almost symmetrical shape . One of the triggers for the experiment were anomalies noted during the survey of the Mason – Dixon Line . 
 The experiment had previously been considered , but rejected , by Isaac Newton as a practical demonstration of his theory of gravitation . However , a team of scientists , notably Nevil Maskelyne , the Astronomer Royal , was convinced that the effect would be detectable and undertook to conduct the experiment . The deflection angle depended on the relative densities and volumes of the Earth and the mountain : if the density and volume of Schiehallion could be ascertained , then so could the density of the Earth . Once this was known , then this would in turn yield approximate values for those of the other planets , their moons , and the Sun , previously known only in terms of their relative ratios . As an additional benefit , the concept of contour lines , devised to simplify the process of surveying the mountain , later became a standard technique in cartography . 
 = = Background = = 
 A pendulum hangs straight downwards in a symmetrical gravitational field . However , if a sufficiently large mass such as a mountain is nearby , its gravitational attraction should pull the pendulum 's plumb @-@ bob slightly out of true . The change in plumb @-@ line angle against a known object — such as a star — could be carefully measured on opposite sides of the mountain . If the mass of the mountain could be independently established from a determination of its volume and an estimate of the mean density of its rocks , then these values could be extrapolated to provide the mean density of the Earth , and by extension , its mass . 
 Isaac Newton had considered the effect in the Principia , but pessimistically thought that any real mountain would produce too small a deflection to measure . Gravitational effects , he wrote , were only discernible on the planetary scale . Newton 's pessimism was unfounded : although his calculations had suggested a deviation of less than 2 minutes of arc ( for an idealised three @-@ mile high mountain ) , this angle , though very slight , was within the theoretical capability of instruments of his day . 
 An experiment to test Newton 's idea would both provide supporting evidence for his law of universal gravitation , and estimates of the mass and density of the Earth . Since the masses of astronomical objects were known only in terms of relative ratios , the mass of the Earth would provide reasonable values to the other planets , their moons , and the Sun . The data were also capable of determining the value of Newton 's gravitational constant G , though this was not a goal of the experimenters ; references to a value for G would not appear in the scientific literature until almost a hundred years later . 
 = = Finding the mountain = = 
 = = = Chimborazo , 1738 = = = 
 A pair of French astronomers named Pierre Bouguer and Charles Marie de La Condamine were the first to attempt the experiment , conducting their measurements on the 6 @,@ 268 @-@ metre ( 20 @,@ 564 ft ) volcano Chimborazo in Ecuador in 1738 . Their expedition had left France for South America in 1735 to try to measure the meridian arc length of one degree of latitude near the equator , but they took advantage of the opportunity to attempt the deflection experiment . In December 1738 , under very difficult conditions of terrain and climate , they conducted a pair of measurements at altitudes of 4 @,@ 680 and 4 @,@ 340 m . Bouguer wrote in a 1749 paper that they had been able to detect a deflection of 8 seconds of arc , but he downplayed the significance of their results , suggesting that the experiment would be better carried out under easier conditions in France or England . He added that the experiment had at least proved that the Earth could not be a hollow shell , as some thinkers of the day , including Edmond Halley , had suggested . 
 = = = Schiehallion , 1774 = = = 
 That a further attempt should be made on the experiment was proposed to the Royal Society in 1772 by Nevil Maskelyne , Astronomer Royal . He suggested that the experiment would " do honour to the nation where it was made " and proposed Whernside in Yorkshire , or the Blencathra @-@ Skiddaw massif in Cumberland as suitable targets . The Royal Society formed the Committee of Attraction to consider the matter , appointing Maskelyne , Joseph Banks and Benjamin Franklin amongst its members . The Committee despatched the astronomer and surveyor Charles Mason to find a suitable mountain . 
 After a lengthy search over the summer of 1773 , Mason reported that the best candidate was Schiehallion ( then spelled <unk> ) , a 1 @,@ 083 @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 553 ft ) peak lying between Loch Tay and Loch Rannoch in the central Scottish Highlands . The mountain stood in isolation from any nearby hills , which would reduce their gravitational influence , and its symmetrical east – west ridge would simplify the calculations . Its steep northern and southern slopes would allow the experiment to be sited close to its centre of mass , maximising the deflection effect . 
 Mason however declined to conduct the work himself for the offered commission of one guinea per day . The task therefore fell to Maskelyne , for which he was granted a temporary leave of his duties as Astronomer Royal . He was aided in the task by mathematician and surveyor Charles Hutton and Reuben Burrow , a mathematician of the Royal Greenwich Observatory . A workforce of labourers was engaged to construct observatories for the astronomers , and assist in the surveying . The science team was particularly well @-@ equipped : its astronomical instruments included a 12 @-@ inch ( 30 cm ) brass quadrant from Cook 's 1769 transit of Venus expedition , a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) zenith sector , and a regulator ( precision pendulum clock ) for timing the astronomical observations . They also acquired a theodolite and Gunter 's chain for surveying the mountain , and a pair of barometers for measuring altitude . Generous funding for the experiment was available due to <unk> on the transit of Venus expedition , which had been turned over to the Society by the King . 
 = = Measurements = = 
 = = = Astronomical = = = 
 Observatories were constructed to the north and south of the mountain , plus a bothy to accommodate equipment and the scientists . Most of the workforce was however housed in rough canvas tents . Maskelyne 's astronomical measurements were the first to be conducted . It was necessary for him to determine the zenith distances with respect to the plumb line for a set of stars at the precise time that each passed due south . Weather conditions were frequently unfavourable due to mist and rain . However , from the south observatory , he was able to take 76 measurements on 34 stars in one direction , and then 93 observations on 39 stars in the other . From the north side , he then conducted a set of 68 observations on 32 stars and a set of 100 on 37 stars . By conducting sets of measurements with the plane of the zenith sector first facing east and then west , he successfully avoided any systematic errors arising from collimating the sector . 
 To determine the deflection due to the mountain , it was necessary to account for the curvature of the Earth : an observer moving north or south will see the local zenith shift by the same angle as any change in latitude . After accounting for observational effects such as precession , aberration of light and nutation , Maskelyne showed that the difference between the locally determined zenith for observers north and south of Schiehallion was 54 @.@ 6 arc seconds . Once the surveying team had provided a difference of 42 @.@ 94 ″ latitude between the two stations , he was able to subtract this , and after rounding to the accuracy of his observations , announce that the sum of the north and south deflections was 11 @.@ 6 ″ . 
 Maskelyne published his initial results in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in 1775 , using preliminary data on the mountain 's shape and hence the position of its center of gravity . This led him to expect a deflection of 20 @.@ 9 ″ if the mean densities of Schiehallion and the Earth were equal . Since the deflection was about half this , he was able to make a preliminary announcement that the mean density of the Earth was approximately double that of Schiehallion . A more accurate value would have to await completion of the surveying process . 
 Maskelyne took the opportunity to note that Schiehallion exhibited a gravitational attraction , and thus all mountains did ; and that Newton 's inverse square law of gravitation had been confirmed . An appreciative Royal Society presented Maskelyne with the 1775 Copley Medal ; the biographer Chalmers later noting that " If any doubts yet remained with respect to the truth of the Newtonian system , they were now totally removed " . 
 = = = Surveying = = = 
 The work of the surveying team was greatly hampered by the <unk> of the weather , and it took until 1776 to complete the task . To find the volume of the mountain , it was necessary to divide it into a set of vertical prisms and compute the volume of each . The triangulation task falling to Charles Hutton was considerable : the surveyors had obtained thousands of bearings to more than a thousand points around the mountain . Moreover , the vertices of his prisms did not always conveniently coincide with the surveyed heights . To make sense of all his data , he hit upon the idea of interpolating a series of lines at set intervals between his measure values , marking points of equal height . In doing so , not only could he easily determine the heights of his prisms , but from the swirl of the lines one could get an instant impression of the form of the terrain . Hutton had invented contour lines , in common use since for depicting cartographic relief . 
 Hutton had to compute the individual attractions due to each of the many prisms that formed his grid , a process which was as laborious as the survey itself . The task occupied his time for a further two years before he could present his results , which he did in a hundred @-@ page paper to the Royal Society in 1778 . He found that the attraction of the plumb @-@ bob to the Earth would be 9 @,@ 933 times that of the sum of its attractions to the mountain at the north and south stations , if the density of the Earth and Schiehallion had been the same . Since the actual deflection of 11 @.@ 6 ″ implied a ratio of 17 @,@ 804 : 1 after accounting for the effect of latitude on gravity , he was able to state that the Earth had a mean density of <formula> , or about <formula> that of the mountain . The lengthy process of surveying the mountain had not therefore greatly affected the outcome of Maskelyne 's calculations . Hutton took a density of 2 @,@ 500 kg · m − 3 for Schiehallion , and announced that the density of the Earth was <formula> of this , or 4 @,@ 500 kg · m − 3 . In comparison with the modern accepted figure of 5 @,@ 515 kg · m − 3 , the density of the Earth had been computed with an error of less than 20 % . 
 That the mean density of the Earth should so greatly exceed that of its surface rocks naturally meant that there must be more dense material lying deeper . Hutton correctly surmised that the core material was likely metallic , and might have a density of 10 @,@ 000 kg · m − 3 . He estimated this metallic portion to occupy some 65 % of the diameter of the Earth . With a value for the mean density of the Earth , Hutton was able to set some values to Jérôme Lalande 's planetary tables , which had previously only been able to express the densities of the major solar system objects in relative terms . 
 = = Repeat experiments = = 
 A more accurate measurement of the mean density of the Earth was made 24 years after Schiehallion , when in 1798 Henry Cavendish used an exquisitely sensitive torsion balance to measure the attraction between large masses of lead . Cavendish 's figure of 5 @,@ 448 ± 33 kg · m − 3 was only 1 @.@ 2 % from the currently accepted value of 5 @,@ 515 kg · m − 3 , and his result would not be significantly improved upon until 1895 by Charles Boys . The care with which Cavendish conducted the experiment and the accuracy of his result has led his name to since be associated with it . 
 John Playfair carried out a second survey of Schiehallion in 1811 ; on the basis of a rethink of its rock strata , he suggested a density of 4 @,@ 560 to 4 @,@ 870 kg · m − 3 , though the then elderly Hutton vigorously defended the original value in an 1821 paper to the Society . Playfair 's calculations had raised the density closer towards its modern value , but was still too low and significantly poorer than Cavendish 's computation of some years earlier . 
 The Schiehallion experiment was repeated in 1856 by Henry James , director @-@ general of the Ordnance Survey , who instead used the hill Arthur 's Seat in central Edinburgh . With the resources of the Ordnance Survey at his disposal , James extended his topographical survey to a 21 @-@ kilometre radius , taking him as far as the borders of Midlothian . He obtained a density of about 5 @,@ 300 kg · m − 3 . 
 An experiment in 2005 undertook a variation of the 1774 work : instead of computing local differences in the zenith , the experiment made a very accurate comparison of the period of a pendulum at the top and bottom of Schiehallion . The period of a pendulum is a function of g , the local gravitational acceleration . The pendulum is expected to run more slowly at altitude , but the mass of the mountain will act to reduce this difference . This experiment has the advantage of being considerably easier to conduct than the 1774 one , but to achieve the desired accuracy , it is necessary to measure the period of the pendulum to within one part in one million . This experiment yielded a value of the mass of the Earth of 8 @.@ 1 ± 2 @.@ 4 × 1024 kg , corresponding to a mean density of 7 @,@ 500 ± 1 @,@ 900 kg · m − 3 . 
 A modern re @-@ examination of the geophysical data was able to take account of factors the 1774 team could not . With the benefit of a 120 @-@ km radius digital elevation model , greatly improved knowledge of the geology of Schiehallion , and in particular a computer , a 2007 report produced a mean Earth density of 5 @,@ 480 ± 250 kg · m − 3 . When compared to the modern figure of 5 @,@ 515 kg · m − 3 , it stood as a testament to the accuracy of Maskelyne 's astronomical observations . 
 = = Mathematical procedure = = 
 Consider the force diagram to the right , in which the deflection has been greatly exaggerated . The analysis has been simplified by considering the attraction on only one side of the mountain . A plumb @-@ bob of mass m is situated a distance d from P , the centre of mass of a mountain of mass MM and density <unk> . It is deflected through a small angle θ due to its attraction F towards P and its weight W directed towards the Earth . The vector sum of W and F results in a tension T in the pendulum string . The Earth has a mass ME , radius <unk> and a density <unk> . 
 The two gravitational forces on the plumb @-@ bob are given by Newton 's law of gravitation : 
 <formula> 
 Where G is Newton 's gravitational constant . G and m can be eliminated by taking the ratio of F to W : 
 <formula> 
 Where VM and VE are the volumes of the mountain and the Earth . Under static equilibrium , the horizontal and vertical components of the string tension T can be related to the gravitational forces and the deflection angle θ : 
 <formula> 
 Substituting for T : 
 <formula> 
 Since VE , VM , d and <unk> are all known , and θ and d have been measured , then a value for the ratio <unk> : <unk> can be obtained : 
 <formula> 
 = Battle of Ban Me Thuot = 
 The Battle of Ban Me Thuot was a decisive battle of the Vietnam War which led to the complete destruction of South Vietnam 's II Corps Tactical Zone . The battle was part of a larger North Vietnamese military operation known as Campaign 275 to capture the Tay Nguyen region , known in the West as the Vietnamese Central Highlands . 
 In March 1975 the Vietnam People 's Army ( VPA ) 4th Corps staged a large @-@ scale offensive , known as Campaign 275 , with the aim of capturing the Central Highlands from the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) in order to kick @-@ start the first stage of the 1975 Spring Offensive . Within ten days , the North Vietnamese destroyed most South Vietnamese military formations in II Corps Tactical Zone , exposing the severe weaknesses of the South Vietnamese Army . For South Vietnam , the defeat at Ban Me Thuot and the disastrous evacuation from the Central Highlands came about as a result of two major mistakes . Firstly , in the days leading up to the assault on Ban Me Thuot , ARVN Major General Pham Van Phu repeatedly ignored intelligence which showed the presence of several North Vietnamese combat divisions around the district . Secondly , President Nguyen Van Thieu 's strategy to withdraw from the Central Highlands was poorly planned and implemented . 
 In the end , it was the ordinary South Vietnamese soldiers and their families who paid the ultimate price , as North Vietnamese artillery decimated the South Vietnamese military convoy on Route 7 . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the beginning of 1975 , members of the North Vietnamese Political Bureau paid close attention to the military situation in South Vietnam to plan for their next major offensive . On January 8 , two days after the Vietnam People ’ s Army 4th Corps had captured Phuoc Long on the northern edges of South Vietnam ’ s III Corps Tactical Zone , North Vietnamese leaders agreed to launch an all @-@ out military offensive , in order to end the war . Originally the North Vietnamese leaders expected the campaign would last two years , be completed in 1976 , and pave the way for final victory . Their key objectives were to bring military pressure closer to Saigon , annihilate as many South Vietnamese military units as possible , and create favourable conditions on the battlefield so that combat forces could be deployed from their current localities . 
 Following extensive discussions on the fighting ability of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam , the Political Bureau approved the General Staff ’ s plan , which had selected the Central Highlands as the main battlefield for the upcoming offensive . The Central Highlands campaign was codenamed ‘ Campaign 275 ’ and the goal was to capture the city of Ban Me Thuot . To achieve that objective , North Vietnamese General Văn Tiến Dũng placed great emphasis on the principles of massed force , secrecy , and surprise to draw South Vietnamese forces away from the main objective . For the element of surprise to be successful , North Vietnamese forces needed to launch strong diversionary attacks on Pleiku and Kon Tum , thereby leaving Ban Me Thuot completely exposed . Once the element of surprise had been achieved , the North Vietnamese would mass their forces on Ban Me Thuot , and prevent South Vietnamese reinforcements from retaking the city . 
