 L.F. Johnson included it in his Tragedies and Trials . 
 1950 , J. Winston Coleman published a history of the events . 
 1950 , Robert Penn Warren wrote a novel that was a " critique of romantic values " in World Enough and Time . 
 Richard Taylor 's play , Three Kentucky Tragedies , was based on this . 
 1992 John Hawkins created an outdoor drama on this subject , Wounded is the Wounding Heart , produced in Frankfort , Kentucky . 
 = Broder Knudtzon = 
 Broder <unk> Knudtzon ( 5 October 1788 – 20 March 1864 ) was a Norwegian merchant , politician and benefactor . Born into one of Trondheim 's wealthiest mercantile families , he travelled to England where he developed a great admiration of English language and literature . Despite his commercial background he was more drawn towards the fields of politics , culture and art . He nevertheless administrated his father 's family firm , acting as foreign correspondent with little interest in the everyday business . In England he befriended Lord Byron and came under the influence of the English national liberal movement . Prior to his death , he bequeathed his entire library and several artworks to the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Knudtzon was born in Trondheim in Sør @-@ Trøndelag ; he was the sixth and youngest child of Hans Carl Knudtzon ( 1751 – 1823 ) , a merchant and burgomaster , and Karen Knudtzon ( née Müller , 1752 – 1818 ) . Knudtzon 's father was of German origin and had moved to Norway to further his career as a merchant . His firm was flourishing financially , and the Knudtzon family became a rallying point for Trondheim 's artists and authors . Having spent his childhood in Trondheim , Broder Knudtzon moved to Flensburg , Germany in 1796 to live in the house of his father 's uncle . Upon his confirmation , Knudtzon travelled back to Trondheim where he was apprenticed to his father . He subsequently travelled around in France in search of a mercantile education ; in Paris he met the Danish poet and playwright Adam Oehlenschläger . After a brief visit to his sister in Nantes , he relocated to England , where he came in contact with poet Lord Byron and other leading figures in the national liberal movement . During his stay in England , he acquired a great fondness and knowledge of the English language , literature and culture . In a later trip to Italy he met the Danish @-@ Icelandic sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen , who made portrait busts of him and other persons in his family . 
 = = Mercantile and political engagement = = 
 In the spring of 1814 , Broder and his brother Jørgen assisted Carsten Anker in his endeavour to gain English supporters of an independent Norway . As a member of the Storting 's deputation to Sweden , Knudtzon travelled with his father to Stockholm in the autumn of the same year . On his return from Stockholm , he became foreign correspondent of his father 's firm Hans Knudtzon & Co , which he owned together with his brother Christian and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Lorentz Johannsen . He maintained that his own duties in the firm 's office were a displeasure , and was once quoted as saying : " Business I hate , and for reading there is not leisure " . 
 A supplementary member of the Storting , he met in the parliament once , acting as secretary for the constitution committee . During 1839 – 57 , he was a member of the supervisory board of Norges Bank . He became a member of the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters in 1821 , and was its secretary from 1825 to 1831 . Having a profound wish to spread erudition in Norway , he used his acquaintances in England to supply the society with enlightenment books and journals . Knudtzon eventually bequeathed his entire book collection and five of Thorvaldsen 's sculptures to the society , with the condition that they not move to Christiania . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Knudtzon died unmarried on 20 March 1864 in Trondheim . He was buried in Vår Frue Church , where he also had been christened . Prior to his death , he had burned all his letters and notes , including his correspondences with Lord Byron . Little remains therefore of his written production , aside from a few translations and periodical articles . A biographer once wrote of him : 
 Mr. Knudtzon is a banker of eminence at Trondheim . He resided some years in England ; hence , to the hospitable kindness of a native of the north and the acquirements of a literary man he unites the polish and refinement of an English gentleman . 
 = Spoo = 
 Spoo is a fictional food product that served as a running joke within the Babylon 5 science fiction television series . In the series ' fictional universe , spoo is made from worm @-@ like creatures of the same name and is generally regarded as the most delicious food in the galaxy ; the creature itself , however , is regarded with contempt by most species . Despite appearing only in a few episodes , spoo was embraced by fans and became part of the series ' extended mythology . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Use of the word " spoo " to denote a food item predates Babylon 5 , which began airing in 1993 . The show 's creator J. Michael Straczynski was a writer for the 1985 cartoon series She @-@ Ra Princess of Power . After a Babylon 5 fan recalled a possible spoo reference from that show , Straczynski replied , " Yeah , I slipped some spoo in there once . A couple of real cute ( as in wanna drop a truck on them cute ) elf @-@ types offer <unk> a bowl of Spoo . " In a 1995 interview , Straczynski referred to that scene as his favorite of the show . 
 Spoo appeared in the first episode of Babylon 5 , where it was briefly mentioned by the Narn Ambassador , G <unk> . Straczynski , who wrote the episode in question , was asked about spoo by fans on various internet message boards on which he frequently participated . At first , Straczynski 's responses were terse : " Spoo is . " In another early post , he explained how he created the word : " Spoo is Oops spelled backward . " He eventually noted that the taste of spoo is that of " Meat Jello . Served chilled . " 
 After years of speculation from Babylon 5 fans , Straczynski finally offered an extensive explanation of the origins and nature of spoo . He said spoo are tiny , pasty , mealworm @-@ like creatures that travel slowly in herds . Their main behavior is sighing , which " can reportedly induce unparalleled bouts of depression " in other creatures . They are raised on ranches and harvested through " whacking " . Spoo are regarded with contempt by most species in Babylon 5 ; they " are the only creatures of which the Interstellar Animal Rights Protection League says , simply , ' Kill ' em . ' " Despite this , they are " generally considered the most delicious food in all of known space " . 
 This near @-@ universal delight in the taste of spoo apparently doesn 't include human tastes . In the episode " A View from the Gallery " , neither of the two maintenance men , Mack and Bo , find spoo to their liking , despite the high price of the delicacy . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The Babylon 5 episodes in which spoo appears or is mentioned are " Midnight on the Firing Line " , " The Geometry of Shadows " , " Point of No Return " , " And the Rock Cried Out , No Hiding Place " , " A View from the Gallery " , " A Tragedy of Telepaths " , and " Meditations on the Abyss " . Spoo also appears in the " Over There " segment of the Lost Tales episode " Voices in the Dark " , where President Sheridan at one point jokes that the product is " Spoo : The other gray meat " . 
 Although mostly relegated to a background role , spoo was a key plot point in the season 5 episode " A Tragedy of Telepaths " . The fact that Narn prefer fresh spoo while the Centauri prefer it aged was the clue that G <unk> used to figure out that there was another Narn in the Centauri Royal Palace . Spoo is referenced in the Straczynski @-@ authored open gaming licensed Babylon 5 : The Roleplaying Game . 
 = = Real @-@ world references = = 
 In 1998 , <unk> UK published a Babylon 5 cookbook , officially licensed from Warner Bros. Presented as if written around the year 2260 , the time when most of the Babylon 5 series takes place , the book contains many recipes for the various foods mentioned and seen throughout the series . Included are recipes for Narn @-@ style spoo and Centauri @-@ style spoo , both using currently available ingredients , with sea scallops taking the place of spoo . Straczynski claims that while dining in a restaurant prior to the 1996 Hugo award ceremony , " a fan had the waiter bring over a tray of food , christened spoo " . 
 Spoo is spoofed in the first episode of the South Park parody Babylon Park , <unk> . 
 In 2008 , rap @-@ <unk> artist Luke Ski recorded and released a parody of the Beastie Boys song " No Sleep till Brooklyn " called " No Sleep Till Babylon " , which references spoo . A stanza attributed to the Babylon 5 character <unk> <unk> contains the lyrics : " Spoo . All I really want is Spoo . And in the morning it 's Spoo . Cause in the evening it 's Spoo . I like the way that it tastes . It 's blue meatballs in greyish paste ... " 
 = Dorset Ooser = 
 The Dorset Ooser ( / <unk> / ) is a wooden head that featured in the nineteenth @-@ century folk culture of Melbury Osmond , a village in the southwestern English county of Dorset . The head was hollow , thus perhaps serving as a mask , and included a humanoid face with horns , a beard , and a hinged jaw which allowed the mouth to open and close . Although sometimes used to scare people during practical jokes , its main recorded purpose was as part of a local variant of the charivari custom known as " <unk> riding " or " rough music " , in which it was used to humiliate those who were deemed to have behaved in an immoral manner . 
 The Dorset Ooser was first brought to public attention in 1891 , at which time it was under the ownership of the Cave family of Melbury Osmond 's Holt Farm . After traveling with Edward Cave to Somerset , the Ooser went missing around 1897 . Since then , various folklorists and historians have debated the origins of the head , which has possible connections to the horned costumes sometimes worn by participants in English Mummers plays . The folklorists Frederick Thomas Elworthy and H. S. L. Dewar believed that the head was a representation of the Devil and thus was designed to intimidate individuals into behaving according to the local community 's moral system . Conversely , the folklorist Margaret Murray suggested that it represented a pre @-@ Christian god of fertility whose worship survived in Dorset into the modern period , although more recent scholarship has been highly sceptical of this interpretation . The etymology of Ooser is also disputed , with various possibilities available . 
 In 1975 a replica of the original Ooser was produced by John Byfleet , which has since been on display at Dorset County Museum in Dorchester . This mask retains a place in Dorset folk culture , being removed from the museum for use in local Morris dancing processions held by the Wessex Morris Men on both St. George 's Day and May Day . The design of the Ooser has also inspired the production of copies which have been used as representations of the Horned God in the modern Pagan religion of Wicca in both the United Kingdom and United States . 
 = = Description and etymology = = 
 A wooden head , the Dorset Ooser had been cut from a single block of timber , with the exception of the lower jaw , which was movable and connected to the rest of the mask by leather hinges . The lower jaw could be moved by pulling on a string which passed through a hole in the upper jaw to connect to the lower . The mask also contained locks of hair on either side of its head , a beard on its chin , and a pair of bullock 's horns . Between the Ooser 's eyes was a rounded boss , the meaning of which is unknown . The Ooser was hollow , allowing an individual to place their own head within it , potentially permitting it to be worn as a mask whilst being supported on the shoulders ; however , there were no holes allowing for the wearer to see while wearing it in this way . The historian Ronald Hutton described the Ooser as " a terrifying horned mask with human face , staring eyes , beard , and gnashing teeth " . Similarly , the folklorist H. S. L. Dewar stated that " the expression of the eyes [ conveyed ] a really agonized spirit of hatred , terror , and despair " . 
 The term " Ooser " was pronounced with a short , quick s by villagers as Osser . It is unclear if the head itself was the Ooser , or whether it instead was designed as a depiction of an entity called the Ooser . Dewar suggested the possibility that it might have been connected to the term <unk> , used for the Devil in Layamon 's Brut , or to the seventeenth @-@ century Italian term <unk> , again used for the Devil . Alternately , he suggested that it might be a derivative of <unk> or <unk> , two old terms for a Mummer . Hutton instead proposed that Osser possibly derived from <unk> , a term used in the dialect around Wiltshire to refer to a pole upon which a horse 's skull with deer 's horns was affixed . This <unk> was recorded as having been paraded by youths in the Marlborough district until the 1830s , where it was used to mock neighbours whose partners were suspected of marital infidelity , the horns being a traditional sign of cuckoldry . Similar traditions have been recorded in Wiltshire and Somerset , where they can be traced back to at least the early seventeenth century . 
 = = History = = 
 The first public mention of the Dorset Ooser was in an 1891 edition of Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries , where it was the subject of an article by the journal 's editor , Charles Herbert May . The head was , at the time , in the possession of Thos Cave of Holt Farm in Melbury Osmond ; the editor noted that it had been owned by Cave 's family from " time out of mind " . Cave had stated that it had formerly been kept in an " old malt @-@ house " in the village , " where it was an object of terror to children who ventured to intrude upon the premises " . May noted that it was " possibly the only example now in existence , or at any rate from one of the very few which may still survive in the County " , adding that Cave was " willing to dispose of this mask to a lover of objects of antiquarian interest " . 
 At some point before 1897 , another member of the family , the doctor Edward Cave , left Holt Farm and moved to Crewkerne in Somerset , taking the Ooser with him . In 1897 , he relocated to Bath , leaving the Ooser with his family coachman ; when Edward Cave subsequently tried to recover the head , he was informed that it had been " disposed of " , with some suggestion that it had found its way to the United States . In 1935 , a folklore collector named S. A. Ramsden undertook enquiries into the fate of the head at the prompting of the Egyptologist and folklorist Margaret Murray . His enquiries led him to meet with Cave 's coachman , Lawrence , who – after Cave left Crewkerne – had subsequently served as the coachman for Cave 's replacement , a doctor by the name of Webber . Lawrence claimed that Cave left the head in his house in the village , where it was hung up in a loft and began to fall apart ; Lawrence recalled wearing it to frighten people during a parade around 1900 , at which time the hair was falling out . He claimed that the house was later pulled down , with the head probably still inside it , in order for a local post office to be constructed in its place . 
 = = = Usage and origins = = = 
 In Somerset and Dorset Notes and Queries , May noted that " no recollection of its ever being made use of is retained " , although thought that " it may plausibly be conjectured " that the Ooser was used in " village revels , and at similar times of rustic entertainment " . The following year , a Dorchester @-@ based individual , H. J. Moule , published a note in the same journal relating that their childhood nurse , who was from the village of Cerne Abbas , had talked about the head , and had referred to it as the " <unk> " . Moule added that it was " surely " used in Mummers plays performed at Christmas time . Dewar , after subsequent research , reported the recollections of K. G. Knight — a member of the Melbury Estate staff — that inhabitants of Melbury Osmond associated the head with a folk custom known as " <unk> Riding " or " Rough Music " . In this custom , an individual or individuals accused of " husband @-@ beating , scolding , sexual unfaithfulness or irregularity , and cuckoldry " were made to ride on a donkey or horse , facing the direction of the animal 's tail , while the assembled crowd made much noise by beating frying pans , kettles , bull 's horns , and bones . In Melbury Osmond , the Ooser was brought out into the crowd at such an occasion . Similar forms of " mob @-@ punishment " were recorded in parts of neighbouring Devon , where the act was termed " <unk> Riding " , " <unk> " , and " <unk> " . As he deemed it too heavy to be carried or worn by an individual , the historian of folklore Peter Robson later suggested that the Ooser might originally have been mounted in a carnival procession . 
 Dewar also recorded the villagers ' claims that the Ooser was brought to the door of a <unk> in order to scare the local children , and that it was also used to scare adults on some occasions . Knight came across the claim that it was once used to frighten a stable hand , who jumped through a window to escape it , and in doing so " so injured himself that his life was despaired of " . Dewar further drew comparisons with the horned masks sometimes worn during Mummers plays . He noted that in a case of a group of Christmas <unk> at <unk> , Gloucestershire , a man was " dressed in a sack , his head in a real bull 's face , head and horns complete " . Another case highlighted by Dewar was taken from an account provided by G. W. Greening of Dorchester , in which a member of the Bradstock Mummers was dressed as Beelzebub . Given these similarities , Dewar ultimately suggested that the Ooser was " likely enough an off @-@ shoot from the 14th century and later Mummers ' plays " . The antiquary Frederick Thomas Elworthy expressed the view that the Dorset Ooser was " the probable head " of a hobby horse ; however , in his in @-@ depth study of the hobby horse tradition in English folk culture , the folklorist E. C. Cawte articulated the opinion that , although both entailed dressing up in an animalistic costume , the Ooser had no clear connection with this tradition . 
 Elworthy suggested that the Ooser was a depiction of the Devil , an idea supported by Dewar , who believed that , as the Devil , its imagery was " intended to inspire terror in the minds of the foolish and the wicked " . Conversely , others have suggested that it is a depiction of a pre @-@ Christian god . In her 1931 book The God of the Witches , Margaret Murray connected the Ooser to her version of the witch @-@ cult hypothesis — the idea that the individuals persecuted in the Early Modern witch trials were adherents of a surviving pre @-@ Christian fertility religion — claiming that the mask was a cult item that reflected continuing worship of the cult 's Horned God . Murray 's hypothesis is now discredited . The historians Jeffrey B. Russell and Brooks Alexander have stated that " today , scholars are agreed that Murray was more than just wrong [ regarding the existence of the witch @-@ cult ] – she was completely and embarrassingly wrong on nearly all of her basic premises " . The Ooser 's pre @-@ Christian origin theory was echoed in the Reader 's Digest encyclopedia of British folklore , Folklore , Myths and Legends of Britain , where it was described as " the idol of a former god of fertility " . Although not believing that the Ooser was a specific depiction of a surviving pre @-@ Christian deity , Dewar suggested that the imagery of the Devil , and thus of the Ooser , was originally drawn from the pre @-@ Christian gods of " phallic or fertility worship " . 
 = = Contemporary usage and influence = = 
 In 1975 the local Morris dancer John Byfleet made a replica of the original Ooser , which he carved from a log using a penknife . This replica is on display at Dorset County Museum in Dorchester . It is taken from the museum twice a year , on May Day and St. George 's Day , when it is used by the Wessex Morris Men as part of their seasonal festivities . In 2005 , a journalist from The Guardian reported on a dawn ceremony performed by the troupe on May Day atop Giant Hill near Cerne Abbas . The ceremony involved one member carrying the Dorset Ooser replica atop his head , with other Morris men dancing around him ; after the rite they proceeded , still dancing , to a local pub , the Red Lion . In summer 2006 , the Wessex Morris Men took the replica to Melbury Osmond for the first time , where they performed a dance in a local street . 
 Murray 's interpretation of the Ooser was embraced by Doreen Valiente , an earlier practitioner of the modern Pagan religion of Wicca , who stated that the mask " is certainly connected with the Old Religion [ i.e. the witch @-@ cult ] , and that from a long way back " . The Gardnerian Wiccan Melissa <unk> suggested that the iconography of the Ooser was an influence on the design of the Head of Atho , a statue of the Wiccan Horned God created by Raymond Howard in mid @-@ 20th century England . Wiccans in the Minnesota area of the United States make use of a head with stag antlers that they term the Minnesota Ooser . Representing the religion 's Horned God , it is kept on an altar and brought out for use in Sabbat rituals . 
 = Ygnacio del Valle = 
 Ygnacio Ramón de Jesus del Valle ( July 1 , 1808 – 1880 ) was a rancher and landowner in the eastern Santa Clara River Valley , California , United States , as well as an alcalde of Los Angeles . His estate , Rancho Camulos , is registered as a National Historic Landmark . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Del Valle was born in Jalisco , Mexico . His father , Antonio del Valle , was a soldier in the Spanish army who came to California in 1819 and was <unk> ( administrator and / or foreman ) of Mission San Fernando Rey de España . Ygnacio joined the army as a cadet in 1825 at the Presidio of Santa Barbara . In 1828 he was promoted to second lieutenant and transferred to the Presidio of San Diego . In 1832 , his commander became involved in a power struggle with the commandant of the Presidio of Monterey , where Antonio served . Ygnacio 's side won the conflict on the battlefield , causing a rift between father and son , and they never spoke again . 
 Ygnacio then moved to the Monterey Presidio and was in charge of the secularization of Mission Santa Cruz and Mission San Francisco de Asís . He became a trusted officer , enough to be left in charge of the Presidio in José Figueroa 's absence . For his service to the Mexican Army , del Valle received the Rancho El Tejon land grant in 1843 . During this time , he married Maria de Los Angeles in 1842 , who died in childbirth five years later . 
 = = Ranchos = = 
 Antonio died in 1841 without leaving a will . On his deathbed , he decided he wanted to reconcile with his son and , in a letter , offered Ygnacio several properties , including the 48 @,@ 612 @-@ acre ( 197 km2 ) Rancho San Francisco land grant he had received . Unfortunately , he died before the letter was delivered to Ygnacio , but the son returned to the family homestead to administer the ranch anyway . Without a will specifying how the estate was to be divided , Jacoba Feliz , Antonio 's second wife who remarried after his death , filed a lawsuit to claim part of the land , which was the site the first recorded discovery of gold in California , sparking a minor gold rush in 1842 , six years before the more famous California Gold Rush . Eventually , the lawsuit was decided and the land was split , with Ygnacio receiving the 13 @,@ 599 @-@ acre ( 55 km2 ) Rancho Camulos . 
 However , del Valle did not live on this land initially , instead residing in the Olvera Street area of Los Angeles , where he was active in local politics . In the 1840s , he served on the junta ( the equivalent of a city council ) as a member and its secretary , as well as treasurer of civil government under Governor Pío Pico . In 1850 , he was elected alcalde of Los Angeles and served only a short time before the city was incorporated as an American city , but during his tenure he established the Los Angeles Rangers , an early law enforcement group . After California achieved statehood later that year , del Valle served in the California State Assembly for a short period . 
 He was elected to a one @-@ year term in the Los Angeles Common Council in 1852 @.@ and was elected again in May 1856 but resigned in December of that year . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 In 1852 , at the age of 44 , he married 15 @-@ year @-@ old Ysabel Varela . Del Valle remained on the City Council for five years , after which he devoted his time to improving Camulos . The del Valle family , including five children , finally moved to the rancho in 1861 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 However , the late 1850s and early 1860s were difficult for ranchers in Southern California . Severe flooding had caused great damage to many ranchos . Despite this , the Del Valle family , like many Californios , continued to live beyond its means . Del Valle had to pay off the debts of his stepmother , Jacoba Feliz , in return for which received part of her land inheritance . He had already sold off his Rancho Tejon to pay his own debts as well . The winter floods of 1861 @-@ 62 were followed by droughts which lasted for three years , which forced del Valle to sell off his remaining land . He was left with just 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 km ² ) of his Rancho Camulos , but the ranch survived these hard times and became a thriving operation , the source of the first commercially grown oranges in Ventura County . 
 Through 1870 , the del Valles had seven more children , although only five of the twelve would live to adulthood . One , <unk> , became the youngest @-@ ever president of the California State Senate at age 28 and was instrumental in the preservation of Mission San Fernando , as well as the movement to have the El Camino Real marked with bells . 
 Ygnacio del Valle died in 1880 and was buried on his rancho . Ysabel took over the running of rancho until 1900 , then moved back to Los Angeles . In 1905 , the ailing woman " refused to die " until she could be reunited with her long @-@ dead husband . His remains were exhumed and moved to Los Angeles . Soon after their arrival , Ysabel died , and she was buried in the same coffin as Ygnacio . Their remains lie at Calvary Cemetery . 
 = Mycena leptocephala = 
 Mycena leptocephala , commonly known as the nitrous bonnet , is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family . The mushrooms have conical grayish caps that reach up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter , and thin fragile stems up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long . The gills are gray and distantly spaced . The spores are elliptical , typically measure 7 – 10 by 4 – 6 μm , and are white in deposit . When viewed under a light microscope , the gills has abundant spindle @-@ shaped cystidia on the gill edges , but few on the gill faces . The mushroom is found in North America and Asia , where it grows singly or in groups on conifer needles , cones and sticks on the forest floor . It has a distinctive odor of bleach ; the edibility is unknown . Similar species include Mycena alcalina , M. austera , and M. brevipes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first called Agaricus <unk> by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1800 , and was transferred to the genus Mycena in 1876 by French mycologist Claude @-@ Casimir Gillet . Synonyms include Agaricus <unk> var. <unk> ( Fries , 1821 ) , Mycena <unk> var. <unk> ( J.E. Lange , 1914 ) , and Mycena <unk> ( Singer , 1936 ) . The latter was reduced to synonym in a 1980 publication by Dutch Mycena specialist Maas Geesteranus . 
 Mycena leptocephala is classified in the section Fragilipedes of the genus Mycena , along with other similar @-@ looking mushrooms , such as M. <unk> , M. austera , M. <unk> , and M. <unk> . Some of these have a nitrous smell similar to M. leptocephala . 
 The specific epithet leptocephala is derived from the Greek <unk> <unk> , " thin " and κεφαλη kephale , " head " , and refers to the delicate cap . The mushroom is commonly known as the " nitrous bonnet " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. leptocephala is 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter , and initially a fat conical shape with the margin pressed close to the stem . As the cap expands , it becomes broadly conic to convex , sometimes broadly bell @-@ shaped , and sometimes convex with a flaring margin . The cap surface has a whitish sheen because of its pruinose coating . The coating gradually sloughs off , leaving the surface smooth and moist . The cap shows radial grooves that outline the position of the gills underneath . Its color is initially dusky brownish @-@ gray to blackish ( after the pruinose coating has sloughed off ) , soon fading from dark to light gray and finally ashy @-@ gray . The flesh is thin and fragile , grayish , and has a slightly sour ( <unk> ) taste , and a weakly alkaline odor that strengthens in intensity if the flesh is crushed . The gills are narrow , equal in width throughout , ascending @-@ adnate ( the gills attach at much less than a right angle , appearing to curve upward toward stem ) and toothed . They are <unk> spaced , with 18 – 27 gills reaching the stem , and one or two tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem ) interspersed between them . The color of the gills is pallid or cinereous , with pallid and even edges . The stem is 4 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , 1 – 2 mm thick , equal in width throughout , hollow , and very fragile . It is usually bluish @-@ black initially ( darker than the cap ) but gradually turns sordid brownish @-@ gray , and finally fades to pallid or cinereous . The surface is densely white @-@ pruinose overall , but soon polished and translucent when the pruinose coating wears off . The stem base is nearly smooth to rather densely white @-@ strigose . The species has a distinctive bleach @-@ like odor . Its edibility is currently unknown . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are broadly ellipsoid , amyloid ( meaning they will adsorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , and measure 7 – 10 by 4 – 6 μm . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are usually four @-@ spored , although two- and three @-@ spored forms have been found on which the spores measure 11 – 14 by 6 – 6 @.@ 5 μm or 8 – 10 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm , respectively . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the face of a gill ) are scattered , rare or absent , 30 – 44 by 9 – 13 μm , variable in shape , fusoid @-@ ventricose to club @-@ shaped , with some having a forked apex . The pleurocystidia that are club @-@ shaped occasionally have two or three finger @-@ like prolongations . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are numerous , and similar in morphology to the pleurocystidia . The flesh of the gill is homogenous , composed of enlarged hyphae that stain vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . The flesh of the cap has a well @-@ differentiated pellicle , the cells of which bear numerous rodlike prolongations . The hypoderm ( a layer of tissue immediately below the pellicle ) is well @-@ formed , while the remaining tissue is floccose ; all but the pellicle are vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine stain . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The " stump fairy helmet " Mycena alcalina is a common species that is similar in appearance and odor to M. leptocephala . However , it grows on conifer wood and rarely on the ground . Microscopically , it has numerous cystidia on the gill edges . Although M. leptocephala usually has a weaker alkaline odor and a more fragile stem , the strength of the odor of M. alcalina is also quite variable , so differences in odor cannot be used as the sole distinguishing characteristic . M. austera , described from southern Norway in 1994 , differs from M. leptocephala by the lack of a nitrous odor , and differently shaped cheilocystidia and terminal cells of the cortical layer of the stem . Alexander H. Smith considers M. brevipes close to M. leptocephala , but the former mushroom has a short stem up to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) long , typically grows singly , and lacks an odor . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena leptocephala is a saprobic species , meaning it derives nutrients from the breakdown of organic matter . Fruit bodies are found growing scattered to gregarious on fallen sticks and on needle carpets under conifers , and are rather common during early summer and again in the autumn . Fruit bodies may be infected by the bonnet mold Spinellus fusiger . 
 In North America , the fungus is found in Canada ( British Columbia , Manitoba , Nova Scotia ) , to Washington and south to California and North Carolina . In South America , the mushroom has been collected in Venezuela . It also grows in the Archipelago of the Recherche , off the southern coast of Western Australia . In Europe , it is known from Britain , Finland , The Netherlands , Norway , and Spain It has also been found in various locations in Asia : the Vindhya Range of India ; the <unk> Forest Museum in the Korea National Arboretum ; and the alpine zone of Changbai Mountain Nature Reserve , Jilin Province , China . The fungus is also known from Arctic and Alpine regions such as Iceland , Greenland , and the Murmansk region . 
 = Fólkvangr = 
 In Norse mythology , Fólkvangr ( Old Norse " field of the host " or " people @-@ field " or " army @-@ field " ) is a meadow or field ruled over by the goddess Freyja where half of those that die in combat go upon death , while the other half go to the god Odin in Valhalla . Fólkvangr is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . According to the Prose Edda , within Fólkvangr is Freyja 's hall Sessrúmnir . Scholarly theories have been proposed about the implications of the location . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the poem Grímnismál collected in the Poetic Edda , Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) tells the young Agnar that Freyja <unk> seats to half of those that die in her hall Fólkvangr , while Odin receives the other half ( Fólkvangr is here anglicized to <unk> and <unk> ) : 
 In chapter 24 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , High tells Gangleri ( described as king Gylfi in disguise ) that Freyja is " the most glorious of the ásynjur " , that Freyja has a dwelling in the heavens called Fólkvangr , and that " whenever she rides to battle she gets half of the slain , and the other half Odin , as it says here : [ the stanza above from Grímnismál is then quoted ] " . High then continues with a description of Freyja 's hall Sessrúmnir . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Egils saga = = = 
 In Egils saga , when Egill Skallagrímsson refuses to eat , his daughter Þorgerðr ( here anglicized as " Thorgerd " ) says she will go without food and thus starve to death , and in doing so will meet the goddess Freyja : 
 Thorgerd replied in a loud voice , ' I have had no evening meal , nor will I do so until I join Freyja . I know no better course of action than my father 's . I do not want to live after my father and brother are <unk> 
 Britt @-@ Mari Näsström says that " as a receiver of the dead her [ Freyja 's ] abode is also open for women who have suffered a noble death . " Näsström cites the above passage from Egils saga as an example , and points to a potential additional connection in the saga Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks , where the queen hangs herself in the <unk> ( Old Norse " the Hall of the Dís " ) after discovering that her husband has betrayed both her father and brother . Näsström comments that " this Dís could hardly be anyone but Freyja herself , the natural leader of the collective female deities called dísir , and the place of the queen 's suicide seems thus to be connected with Freyja . " 
 = = = Implications = = = 
 John Lindow says that if the <unk> element of Fólkvangr is to be understood as " army " , then Fólkvangr appears as an alternative to Valhalla . Lindow adds that , like Odin , Freyja has an association with warriors in that she presides over the eternal combat of Hjaðningavíg . 
 Rudolf Simek theorizes that the name Fólkvangr is " surely not much older than Grímnismál itself " , and adds that the Gylfaginning description keeps close to the Grímnismál description , yet that the Gylfaginning descriptions adds that Sessrúmnir is located within Fólkvangr . According to Hilda Ellis Davidson , Valhalla " is well known because it plays so large a part in images of warfare and death , " yet the significance of other halls in Norse mythology such as Ýdalir , where the god Ullr dwells , and Freyja 's Fólkvangr have been lost . 
 Britt @-@ Mari Näsström places emphasis on that Gylfaginning relates that " whenever she rides into battle she takes half of the slain , " and interprets Fólkvangr as " the field of the Warriors . " Näsström comments that : 
 Freyja receives the slain heroes of the battlefield quite respectfully as Óðinn does . Her house is called <unk> , ' filled with many seats ' , and it probably fills the same function as <unk> , ' the hall of the slain ' , where the warriors eat and drink beer after the fighting . Still , we must ask why there are two heroic paradises in the Old Norse View of afterlife . It might possibly be a consequence of different forms of initiation of warriors , where one part seemed to have belonged to Óðinn and the other to Freyja . These examples indicate that Freyja was a war @-@ goddess , and she even appears as a valkyrie , literally ' the one who chooses the slain ' . 
 Siegfried Andres <unk> comments that " in her mythological role as the chooser of half the fallen warriors for her death realm Fólkvangr , the goddess Freyja , however , emerges as the mythological role model for the <unk> and the dísir . " 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Early in the 20th century , Karl Ernst <unk> developed the " Folkwang @-@ <unk> " or " Folkwang @-@ <unk> " , that art and life can be reconciled . Several cultural institutions bearing the name Folkwang ( the German spelling of Fólkvangr ) were founded on this concept . These institutions include the Museum Folkwang in Essen ( opened 1902 ) , the publishing house Folkwang @-@ Verlag ( founded 1919 ) , Folkwang Kammerorchester Essen ( founded 1958 ) , Folkwang @-@ <unk> in Essen ( founded 1974 ) , and Folkwang University of the Arts , focusing on music , theater , dance , design and academic studies . 
 = 1994 San Marino Grand Prix = 
 The 1994 San Marino Grand Prix ( formally the 14 ° Gran Premio di San Marino ) was a Formula One motor race held on 1 May 1994 at the Autodromo Enzo e Dino Ferrari , located in Imola , Italy . It was the third race of the 1994 Formula One season . 
 Tragic events at this race proved to be a major turning point in both the 1994 season , and in the development of Formula One itself , particularly with regard to safety . The race weekend was marked by the deaths of Austrian driver Roland Ratzenberger and of three @-@ time world champion Ayrton Senna in separate accidents . Other incidents saw driver Rubens Barrichello injured and several mechanics and spectators injured . In terms of driver fatalities , this was Formula One 's darkest weekend since two drivers were killed at the 1960 Belgian Grand Prix . 
 Michael Schumacher , driving for Benetton , won the race despite contact with Damon Hill ( who dropped to the back of the field and battled back to finish sixth ) . Nicola Larini , driving for Ferrari , scored the first points of his career when he achieved a podium finish in second position . Mika Häkkinen finished third in a McLaren . 
 The race led to an increased emphasis on safety in the sport as well as the reforming of the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association after a 12 @-@ year hiatus , and the changing of many track layouts and car designs . Since the race , numerous regulation changes have been made to slow Formula One cars down and new circuits incorporate large run @-@ off areas to slow cars before they collide with a wall . Senna was given a state funeral in his home town of São Paulo , Brazil , where around 500 @,@ 000 people lined the streets to watch the coffin pass . Italian prosecutors charged six people with manslaughter in connection with Senna 's death , all of whom were later acquitted . The case took more than 11 years to conclude due to an appeal and a retrial following the original verdict of not guilty . 
 As a result of increased standards in safety following this race , there was a 20 @-@ year gap between the deaths of Ratzenberger and Senna , and the crash of Jules Bianchi at the 2014 Japanese Grand Prix which led to his death the following year . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Heading into the third round of the season , Benetton driver Michael Schumacher was leading the World Drivers ' Championship with 20 points ; Jordan driver Rubens Barrichello was second on seven points , 13 points behind Schumacher . Behind Schumacher and Barrichello was Damon Hill in third place on six points , tied on points with Ferrari driver Gerhard Berger . Berger 's team @-@ mate Jean Alesi was fifth on four points . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Benetton were leading on 20 points and Ferrari were second on ten points , with Jordan third on seven points . 
 There were two driver changes heading into the race . JJ Lehto replaced Jos Verstappen at Benetton , the latter having replaced Lehto for the opening two races of the season due to an injury sustained by Lehto in pre @-@ season testing . Aguri Suzuki was replaced with Andrea de Cesaris at Jordan . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Drivers had two hours , split over two days , Friday and Saturday , to register the fastest possible time . The driver who could register the fastest time would start on pole position , giving them a headstart of eight metres over the second @-@ fastest driver , who started on the opposite side of the track . Third place would start eight metres behind the second @-@ fastest driver and on the side of the track where the first placed car is . This practice continues until twenty @-@ sixth place , and the twenty @-@ seventh and twenty @-@ eighth placed cars are not allowed to race . 
 = = = = Friday qualifying = = = = 
 On Friday , 29 April , during the first qualifying session to determine the starting order for the race , Rubens Barrichello , a driver for Jordan , hit a kerb at the Variante Bassa corner at 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , launching him into the air . He hit the top of the tyre barrier , and was knocked unconscious . His car rolled several times after landing before coming to rest upside down . Medical teams treated him at the crash site , and he was taken to the circuit 's medical centre before being transferred to Maggiore Hospital in Bologna by helicopter for routine tests and observation to be carried out . He returned to the race meeting the next day , although his broken nose and a plaster cast on his arm forced him to sit out the rest of the race weekend . Ten years after the incident , Damon Hill , who drove for the Williams @-@ Renault team at the time , described the feeling after the crash : " We all brushed ourselves off and carried on qualifying , reassured that our cars were tough as tanks and we could be shaken but not hurt . " 
 Despite a spin , Senna was the fastest driver at the end of Friday 's session with a time of 1 : 21 @.@ 548 , almost five @-@ tenths of a second faster than Schumacher and Berger . Senna 's teammate Damon Hill was seventh , having spun himself , over 1 @.@ 6 seconds behind Senna . 
 = = = = Saturday qualifying = = = = 
 Twenty minutes into the final qualifying session , Austrian driver Roland Ratzenberger failed to negotiate the Villeneuve <unk> in his Simtek ; he subsequently hit the opposing concrete barrier wall almost head @-@ on and was critically injured . Although the survival cell remained largely intact , the force of the impact inflicted a basal skull fracture . Ratzenberger , in his first season as a Formula One driver , had run over a kerb at the <unk> <unk> chicane on his previous lap , the impact of which is believed to have damaged his front wing . Rather than return to the pitlane , he continued on another fast lap . Travelling at 190 mph ( 306 km / h ) his car suffered a front wing failure leaving him unable to control it . 
 The session was stopped while doctors attended to Ratzenberger . After initially being taken by ambulance to the on @-@ circuit medical centre , he was airlifted to Maggiore Hospital in Bologna shortly after , the second driver to be admitted there during the weekend . The session was restarted approximately 25 minutes later , but several teams — including Williams and Benetton — took no further part . Later in hospital , it was announced that Ratzenberger had died as a result of his multiple injuries . His death marked the first Formula One race weekend fatality since the 1982 Canadian Grand Prix when Riccardo <unk> was killed . It had been eight years since Elio de Angelis died testing a Brabham car at the Circuit Paul Ricard . Professor Sid Watkins , then head of the Formula One on @-@ track medical team , recalled in his memoirs Ayrton Senna 's reaction to the news , stating that " Ayrton broke down and cried on my shoulder . " Watkins tried to persuade Senna not to race the following day , asking " What else do you need to do ? You have been world champion three times , you are obviously the quickest driver . Give it up and let 's go fishing . " Senna replied , " Sid , there are certain things over which we have no control . I cannot quit , I have to go on . " 
 Senna had qualified on pole position , having not set a lap time following Ratzenberger 's death . He was joined on the front row by Schumacher and Berger qualified in 3rd . Damon Hill was able to improve on his disastrous Friday session before the red flag , improving his time by one second and qualifying fourth as a result . A time posted by Ratzenberger before his fatal crash would have been sufficient for entry into the race starting from the 26th and final position on the grid ; Paul Belmondo and Barrichello did not qualify . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = = First start = = = = 
 The race took place in the afternoon from 14 : 00 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) , in dry and sunny weather . At the start of the race , J.J. Lehto stalled his Benetton on the grid . Pedro Lamy , starting from further back on the grid , had his view of the stationary Benetton blocked by other cars and hit the back of Lehto 's car , causing bodywork and tyres to fly into the air . Parts of the car went over the safety fencing designed to protect spectators at the startline causing minor injuries to nine people . Further back , Martin Brundle had a good start , overtaking two cars as well as Lehto , propelling him from thirteenth to tenth place . 
 The incident between Lehto and Lamy caused the safety car to be deployed , with all the remaining competitors holding position behind it while travelling at a reduced speed . During this period , as a result of travelling at slower speeds , tyre temperatures dropped . At the drivers ' briefing before the race , Senna , along with Gerhard Berger , had expressed concern that the safety car ( itself only reintroduced in Formula One in 1993 and only the third time used since then , the other occurrences being the 1993 Brazilian Grand Prix and the 1993 British Grand Prix ) did not go fast enough to keep tyre temperatures high . Senna was also worried by a procedure introduced at the 1994 Pacific Grand Prix , which was that the safety car would lead the grid on the formation lap , rather than letting the race leader choose the pace of the formation lap . The procedure was removed for this race . 
 Once the track was reported clear of debris , the safety car was withdrawn and the race restarted with a rolling start . Jonathan Palmer , commentating alongside Murray Walker for the BBC , remarked how quick Schumacher was , as his time in the warm @-@ up session on Sunday morning gave rise to speculation that he was going to make one pit stop and , therefore , race with a heavier car than Senna , who was planning to make two , as was conventional . Martin Brundle had told BBC presenter Steve Rider that McLaren were going to make two stops . On the second lap after the restart , with Ayrton Senna leading Michael Schumacher , Senna 's car left the road at the Tamburello corner , and after slowing from 190 mph ( 306 km / h ) to 131 mph ( 211 km / h ) , hit the concrete wall , with debris flying into the path of the other drivers . 
 At 14 : 17 local time , a red flag was shown to indicate the race was stopped and FIA race doctor Sid Watkins arrived at the scene to treat Senna . When a race is stopped under a red flag cars must slow down and make their way back to the pit lane or starting grid unless notified of a restart . This protects race marshals and medical staff at the crash scene , and allows easier access for medical cars to the incident . Approximately 10 minutes after Senna 's crash , the Larrousse team mistakenly allowed one of their drivers , Érik Comas , to leave the pits despite the circuit being closed under red flags . Marshals frantically waved him down as he approached the scene of the accident travelling at " pretty much full speed " . Eurosport commentator John Watson described the incident as " the most ridiculous thing I have ever seen at any time in my life " . Comas avoided hitting any of the people or cars that were on the circuit but after going over towards Senna 's accident scene , he was so distressed at what he saw that he withdrew from the race . 
 The pictures shown on the world feed ( supplied by host broadcaster RAI ) of Senna being treated were considered by the BBC ( the corporation responsible for broadcasting the San Marino Grand Prix to viewers in the United Kingdom ) to be too graphic , disturbing and upsetting for general viewing at the time ( around 13 : 20 GMT ) , and the BBC abandoned RAI 's world feed to focus on their own camera in the pit lane . BBC commentator Murray Walker has frequently talked about how upsetting it was to have to talk to viewers whilst attempting to avoid any and all mention of the distressing images shown on RAI . Referring to the number of times the incident was replayed on the world feed , Ferrari team principal Jean Todt stated that " even if you didn 't want to watch it , you could barely fail to " . Senna was lifted from the wrecked Williams , and after approximately fifteen minutes of on @-@ site medical attention , was airlifted directly to Maggiore Hospital in Bologna , becoming the third and final driver to be admitted there during the weekend . Medical teams continued to treat him during the flight . Thirty @-@ seven minutes after the crash , at 2 : 55 pm local time , the race was restarted . 
 = = = = Second start = = = = 
 Regulations meant that the original sixth lap would be deleted and the race would be restarted from the beginning of said lap . The first five laps would be added to the second part of the race and the overall result would be decided on aggregate . The race ran to a total of 58 laps , five from the first section and 53 from the second section . 
 On the second formation lap , Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen stalled his Sauber whilst attempting to leave the grid and was forced to start from the pitlane . The other cars started from the grid in the order they were at the point the race was stopped . Michael Schumacher had a poor start and Gerhard Berger took the lead on track ( but Schumacher still led the race overall due to the amount of time he was ahead of Berger before the race was stopped ) . Hill , from third , made contact attempting to overtake Schumacher at the Tosa corner , dropping Hill to the back of the field and was forced to make a pitstop in order to fit a new nose cone . Hill battled back to finish in sixth position . 
 A very fast Schumacher took the lead on track on lap 12 when Berger ran wide , before relinquishing the race lead overall to Berger when he made his first pitstop , confirming that his pace both before and after the red flag was down to him running a three @-@ stop strategy , therefore racing with a lighter car . Berger pitted at the end of lap 15 for his first of two scheduled stops , before retiring a lap later with handling problems . Häkkinen led his first ever laps of a Formula One World Championship race , before pitting at the end of lap 18 . Following the first series of pit stops , Schumacher resumed the race lead . 
 Schumacher 's extra pace as a result of his lighter fuel loads meant he was able to pull out enough of a gap to Häkkinen which enabled him to make an extra pit stop . Häkkinen 's pace was very slow , allowing Nicola Larini to leapfrog him when the second round of pit stops were made . 
 On lap 48 , Michele Alboreto came in for a pit stop , but as he left , the rear @-@ right wheel came loose from the Minardi as it left the pit lane , striking two Ferrari and two Lotus mechanics , who were left needing hospital treatment . 
 Towards the end of the race , all eyes were on the battle for third place , as Häkkinen 's pace was so slow that Karl Wendlinger was catching him in the Sauber , aiming to give Sauber their first podium finish . However , Häkkinen was able to resist Wendlinger 's challenge and finish in third place , with Wendlinger fourth . Ukyo Katayama finished fifth for Tyrrell and Hill was able to battle back to finish sixth , the last of the points @-@ scorers . 
 Michael Schumacher won the race ahead of Larini and Häkkinen , giving him a maximum 30 points after 3 rounds of the 1994 Formula One season . It was the only podium finish of Larini 's career , and the first of just two occasions when he scored world championship points . Karl Wendlinger rode back to the pits on Häkkinen 's McLaren after Wendlinger 's car broke down on the slowing @-@ down lap . At the podium ceremony , out of respect for Roland Ratzenberger , who had died the day before , no champagne was sprayed . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 In the press conference following the race , Schumacher said that he " couldn 't feel satisfied , couldn 't feel happy " with his win following the events that had occurred during the race weekend . Two hours and 20 minutes after Schumacher crossed the finish line , at 6 : 40 pm local time , Dr. Maria Teresa <unk> announced that Ayrton Senna had died . The official time of death was given , however , as 2 : 17 pm local time , meaning that Senna had been killed instantly . The autopsy recorded the cause of death as head injuries likely caused by an impact from a wheel and suspension . BBC Television commentator Murray Walker described it as " the blackest day for Grand Prix racing that I can remember " . 
 Later that day in the United States , word of Senna 's death reached Talladega , Alabama where NASCAR was running the Winston Select 500 at Talladega Superspeedway . ESPN , which televised the San Marino Grand Prix for the American audience , had race commentator Bob Jenkins relay word to the viewers during the race . During the <unk> festivities , race winner Dale Earnhardt ( who would meet a similar fate seven years later ) dedicated the victory to Senna . 
 On 3 May , the FIA called a meeting at the request of the Italian Automobile Club to review the events of the Weekend . Later on , the governing body announced new safety measures for the next round in Monaco which included the entry and exit of the pitlane to be controlled by a curve to force cars to run at a reduced speed , no team mechanic would be allowed onto the pit lane surface except for pit stops and a draw would be arranged to determine the order in which cars make pit stops and be limited to emergencies with cars not taking on new tyres or allowed to refuel . 
 Senna was given a state funeral in São Paulo , Brazil on 5 May 1994 . Approximately 500 @,@ 000 people lined the streets to watch the coffin pass . Senna 's rival Alain Prost was among the pallbearers . The majority of the Formula One community attended Senna 's funeral ; however the president of the sport 's governing body , the FIA , Max Mosley attended the funeral of Ratzenberger instead which took place on 7 May 1994 in Salzburg , Austria . Mosley said in a press conference ten years later , " I went to his funeral because everyone went to Senna 's . I thought it was important that somebody went to his . " 
 The 1994 Imola layout , which had been in place since 1981 , was never again used for a Formula One race . The circuit was heavily modified following the race , including a change at Tamburello — also the scene of major accidents for Gerhard Berger ( 1989 ) and Nelson Piquet ( 1987 ) — from a high speed corner to a much slower chicane . The FIA also changed the regulations governing Formula One car design , to the extent that the 1995 regulations required all teams to create completely new designs , as their 1994 cars could not be adapted to them . The concern raised at the drivers briefing the morning of the race , by Senna and Berger , would lead to the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association reforming at the following race , the 1994 Monaco Grand Prix . The GPDA , which was originally founded in 1961 , had previously disbanded in 1982 . The primary purpose of it reforming was to allow drivers to discuss safety issues with a view to improve standards following the incidents at Imola . The front two grid slots at the Monaco Grand Prix that year , which were painted with Brazilian and Austrian flags , were left clear in memory of the two drivers who had lost their lives , while both Williams and Simtek entered only one car each . Additionally , a minute of silence was observed before the race . 
 In October 1996 FIA set about researching a driver restraint system for head @-@ on impacts , in conjunction with McLaren and Mercedes @-@ Benz . Mercedes contacted the makers of the HANS ( Head and Neck Support ) device , with a view to adapting it for Formula One . The HANS device was first released in 1991 and was designed to restrain the head and neck in the event of an accident to avoid basal skull fracture , the injury which killed Ratzenberger . Initial tests proved successful , and at the 2000 San Marino Grand Prix the final report was released which concluded that the HANS should be recommended for use . Its use was made compulsory from the start of the 2003 season . 
 Senna was the last driver for twenty years to die in a Formula One accident , until the death of Jules Bianchi in 2015 from injuries sustained at the 2014 Japanese Grand Prix . However , three trackside marshals were killed during those years as a direct result of such crashes : Paolo Gislimberti at the 2000 Italian Grand Prix , Graham Beveridge at the 2001 Australian Grand Prix and Mark Robinson at the 2013 Canadian Grand Prix . 
 To date , this is the last time that an Italian driver scored a point for Ferrari . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Italian prosecutors brought legal proceedings against six people in connection with Senna 's death . They were Frank Williams , Patrick Head and Adrian Newey of Williams ; <unk> <unk> representing the owners of the Autodromo Enzo e Dino Ferrari ; Giorgio <unk> as the circuit director and Roland <unk> who was race director and sanctioned the circuit . The trial verdict was given on 16 December 1997 , clearing all six defendants of manslaughter charges . The cause of Senna 's accident was established by the court as the steering column breaking . The column had been cut and welded back together at Senna 's request in order for him to be more comfortable in the car . 
 Following the court 's decision , an appeal was lodged by the state prosecutor against Patrick Head and Adrian Newey . On 22 November 1999 , the appeal absolved Head and Newey of all charges , stating that no new evidence had come to light ( there was missing data from the black box recorder on Senna 's car due to damage , and 1 @.@ 6 seconds of video from the onboard camera of Senna 's car was unavailable because the broadcaster switched to another car 's camera just before the accident ) , and so under Article 530 of the Italian Penal Code , the accusation had to be declared as " non @-@ existent or the fact doesn 't subsist " . This appeal result was annulled in January 2003 , as the Court of Cassation believed that Article 530 was misinterpreted , and a retrial was ordered . On 27 May 2005 , Newey was acquitted of all charges while Head 's case was " timed out " under a statute of limitations . The Italian Court of Appeal , on 13 April 2007 , stated the following in the verdict numbered <unk> : " It has been determined that the accident was caused by a steering column failure . This failure was caused by badly designed and badly executed modifications . The responsibility of this falls on Patrick Head , culpable of omitted control " . Even being found responsible for Senna 's accident , Patrick Head was not arrested , as the verdict was delivered past the Italian statute of limitation for manslaughter . 
 = = Launch control controversy = = 
 Liverpool Data Research Associates ( LDRA ) were called in to investigate allegations of cheating using banned driving aids , such as traction control and launch control , both prohibited at the start of the year . The top three cars of Michael Schumacher , Nicola Larini and Mika Häkkinen were investigated and their teams were asked to surrender their systems ' source code to the company . Larini 's team , Ferrari , complied in light of allegations that they were cheating , but Schumacher and Häkkinen 's teams , Benetton and McLaren refused , claiming copyright reasons . After being fined $ 100 @,@ 000 by the FIA , both teams complied eight days after the race . LDRA discovered that McLaren were running a programme that permitted automatic <unk> but the car was declared legal . 
 = = = Benetton = = = 
 Benetton sent an alternative suggestion to the company on 10 May 1994 , accepted by LDRA five days later . Tests on the car were to be carried out on 28 June 1994 , but were cancelled . The tests eventually took place on 6 July 1994 . LDRA found the tests unsatisfactory . Benetton therefore complied with the original request , the source code , on 18 July 1994 . Analysis of the software found that it included launch control , a banned aid . Benetton stated that " it can only be switched on by <unk> of the code . " However LDRA found this to be untrue ; launch control could be switched on by connecting a computer to the gearbox control unit . Benetton conceded that this was possible but this " came as a surprise to them " . To switch the system on , the user is presented with a menu with 10 visible options . " Launch Control " was not visibly listed as an option , however , should the user scroll down to option 13 , launch control could be enabled . Benetton did not make any explanation . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 = Bun Cook = 
 Frederick Joseph " Bun " Cook ( September 18 , 1903 – March 19 , 1988 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey forward and coach . He was an Allan Cup champion with the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds in 1924 before embarking on a 13 year professional career . He played for the Saskatoon Crescents in the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) and the New York Rangers and Boston Bruins in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Cook was a member of two Stanley Cup championship teams with the Rangers , in 1928 and 1933 , playing on the " Bread Line " with his brother Bill and Frank Boucher . 
 Cook turned to coaching in 1937 and spent 19 years in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , with the Providence Reds for six seasons and the remainder with the Cleveland Barons . His 636 wins as a coach is the most in AHL history and he led his teams to the playoffs in all but one season . Cook was named an AHL All @-@ Star coach on six occasions , and led his teams to a record seven Calder Cup championships . He was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1995 and to the American Hockey League Hall of Fame in 2007 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frederick Joseph Cook was born September 18 , 1903 , in Kingston , Ontario . He was part of a large family , and the second of three brothers , following Bill and preceding Alexander ( " Bud " ) . Despite their eight @-@ year difference age , Bun frequently followed Bill to new teams and the pair spent most of their careers playing together . Bun joined Bill in playing senior hockey with the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds in 1921 , and while Bill had already left the team by that point , Bun was a member of the Greyhounds squad that won the Allan Cup in 1924 as senior champions of Canada . Following the championship , Bun turned professional by signing with the Saskatoon Crescents of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) for the 1924 – 25 season . Bill had already played two years in Saskatoon by that point and housed his younger brother during their shared tenure with the team . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Cook played two seasons in the Western League . He scored 17 goals in 28 games in 1924 – 25 and added eight more in 30 games the following season . The league had run into financial difficulty in its final seasons , and after 1926 , ceased operations . The Montreal Maroons intended to sign both Cook and his brother Bill to join their team for the 1926 – 27 NHL season . While the team 's manager waited in Montreal to meet the brothers , Conn Smythe , manager of the newly formed New York Rangers , travelled to Winnipeg to reach the pair first . Smythe signed both Cook brothers for $ 12 @,@ 000 . The brothers convinced Smythe to sign Frank Boucher , who also played in the WCHL , and the trio to form the " Bread Line " , one of the early NHL 's most prolific scoring lines . 
 The expansion Rangers made their debut on November 16 , 1926 . Cook assisted on the first goal in franchise history , scored by his brother , and which stood as the only marker in a 1 – 0 victory . During the season , Cook earned his nickname " Bun " from a journalist who claimed he was " quick as a bunny " on the ice . He finished the 1926 – 27 season with 23 points in 44 games then improved to 28 points in 1927 – 28 . Cook led the Rangers with 14 assists on the year . The Rangers finished second in the American Division that season and defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates and Boston Bruins to reach the 1928 Stanley Cup Final against the Maroons . The Bread Line scored every Rangers goal in the series . The second game was notable for having Rangers coach Lester Patrick play goal after regular goaltender Lorne Chabot was injured . New York won that game , 2 – 1 , and went on to capture the franchise 's first Stanley Cup championship . 
 Cook 's offence declined in 1928 – 29 as he recorded only 18 points . Attempting to defend their championship , the Rangers reached the 1929 Stanley Cup Final , but were defeated by the Montreal Canadiens . The 1929 – 30 season was statistically Cook 's best in professional hockey . He finished tenth in the NHL with 24 goals and totaled 43 points in 44 games . Following a 35 @-@ point season in 1930 – 31 , he was named to the inaugural NHL All @-@ Star Team as the second team left wing . Cook scored 34 points the following season . The Rangers won the American Division title and reached the 1932 Stanley Cup Final but lost the series to the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 With 22 goals in 1932 – 33 , Cook finished fourth in the NHL , while his 37 points were seventh best . The Rangers reached the 1933 Stanley Cup Final , and Cook had two opportunities to end the series in the deciding fourth game : He was unable to score on a breakaway late in regulation time , while he and Bill nearly teamed up to end the contest early in overtime . Bill ultimately scored the winning goal in a 1 – 0 victory as the Rangers won their second Stanley Cup championship . 
 Cook was a consistent scorer the following two seasons as he recorded 33 points in 1933 – 34 and 34 points in 1934 – 35 . However , he missed much of the 1935 – 36 season due to an arthritic condition . Believing he would not recover , the Rangers sold Cook to the Boston Bruins . The transaction broke up the Bread Line , which had been together for nine seasons . He appeared in 40 games for the Bruins in 1936 – 37 , his final NHL season , and recorded nine points . 
 In 531 career professional games , Cook scored 183 goals and 335 points . He was also an early innovator of the slapshot and of the drop pass . According to Cook : " I had a dream about the drop pass one night and at our next practice , I told Frank and Bill about it . They thought I was crazy , but they decided to humour me . By gosh , it worked ! I 'd cross over from left wing to centre as I moved in on defense . I 'd fake a shot and leave the puck behind and skate away from it , with Frank or Bill picking it up . We got a lot of goals off the crisscross and drop pass . " Ed Sullivan , then of the New York Graphic , praised Cook 's creativity : " When Bun Cook is hot , he is one of the most amazing players in hockey . At such moments , he attempts plays that stagger the imagination . " In 1995 , Cook was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame by the veterans committee . Often overshadowed by his linemates , he was the last member of the Bread Line to gain entry into the Hall , as he followed Bill ( 1952 ) and Frank Boucher ( 1958 ) . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After retiring from the NHL in 1937 , Cook turned to coaching and became the head coach of the Providence Reds in the International @-@ American Hockey League ( IAHL ; later the American Hockey League , AHL ) . He guided the Reds to a 25 – 16 – 7 record and a first place finish in the Eastern Division , as well as a Calder Cup championship after the Reds defeated the Syracuse Stars . Following the 1938 – 39 season , Cook was named to the IAHL / AHL All @-@ Star team for the first time of four consecutive seasons . In 1942 , Cook served as coach of the Eastern Division team at the first AHL All @-@ Star Game . He coached the Reds for six seasons , until 1942 – 43 . The Reds won three division titles and a second Calder Cup in 1940 . Occasionally pressed into playing duty , Cook also appeared in 37 games for the Reds over that time , and recorded what ultimately was his final professional goal , the game @-@ winner in a 3 – 2 victory over the New Haven Eagles on December 17 , 1942 . 
 Cook left Providence to become head coach of the Cleveland Barons in 1943 – 44 . The Barons won their division six times in Cook 's first nine seasons as coach . They reached the Calder Cup Final on six occasions in that time and won three championships : in 1944 – 45 , 1947 – 48 and 1950 – 51 . He was considered a favourite to become head coach of the Boston Bruins in 1950 , but never left Cleveland . In 1952 – 53 , Cook coached the Barons to both the regular season championship and the Calder Cup as the Barons defeated the Pittsburgh Hornets by a 1 – 0 score in overtime of the seventh , and deciding , game of the series . Cook coached the Barons to a repeat championship in 1953 – 54 , his seventh Calder Cup victory . With a record of 26 – 31 – 7 , 1955 – 56 season was the first in 13 seasons with the Barons that Cook coached the team to a losing record . Though the team reached the league championship series , the Barons opted to relieve Cook of his position as coach . 
 Cook spent one season coaching the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds of the Northern Ontario Hockey League , in 1956 – 57 , then spent three seasons with the Kingston Frontenacs of the Eastern Professional Hockey League until his retirement in 1961 . Cook retired as , and remains , the most successful coach in AHL history . His seven Calder Cups are four more than anyone else , and his 636 career wins is the most in league history . He was inducted into the American Hockey League Hall of Fame in 2007 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bill Cook was given a land grant following the First World War , and became a farmer on a half section of land near Lac Vert , Saskatchewan . Bun followed his elder brother to the prairie province and farmed an adjacent half section . Following his career in hockey , Cook ultimately returned to his hometown of Kingston where he died on March 19 , 1988 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 = = = Coaching career = = = 
 = Cyclone Fanele = 
 Cyclone Fanele was the first cyclone of tropical cyclone status to strike western Madagascar since Cyclone Fame one year prior . It formed on January 18 , 2009 in the Mozambique Channel , and rapidly organized as it remained nearly stationary . Fanele ultimately turned toward the southwest Madagascar coastline , reaching peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , according to the Réunion Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) . It weakened before moving ashore in Menabe Region southwest of Morondava , and rapidly weakened over land . Fanele briefly re @-@ intensified after reaching open waters , only to become an extratropical cyclone by January 23 . 
 The cyclone caused heavy damage near where it moved ashore and along its path , resulting in ten deaths . Fanele struck Madagascar just two days after Tropical Storm Eric brushed the northeastern portion of the country . The two storms affected over 50 @,@ 000 people , of which at least 4 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Fanele struck the country during a series of government protests , and consequentially relief efforts were hindered . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 For several days in the middle of January 2009 , a very weak low @-@ level circulation persisted in the Mozambique Channel , accompanied by intermittent and disorganized convection , or thunderstorms . By January 17 , an area of convection persisted about 510 kilometres ( 320 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Antananarivo , Madagascar . Early on January 18 ; the circulation rapidly consolidated and organized while the thunderstorms developed into tightly @-@ curved rainbands . Environmental conditions favored further development ; an anticyclone formed over the disturbance , an approaching trough provided favorable outflow , and the system benefited from both light wind shear and warm water temperatures . At 0600 UTC on the 18th , the Réunion Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) initiated advisories on Tropical Disturbance 07 , noting its intensification as it drifted southwestward . 
 Six hours after being declared a tropical disturbance , MFR upgraded it to tropical depression status , and the agency predicted the system would eventually reach peak winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) before moving ashore . Its track was expected to follow that of another tropical cyclone east of Madagascar , which would become Tropical Storm Eric . Late on January 18 , the system briefly became disorganized , only to re @-@ organize and attain tropical storm status on January 19 ; upon doing so , the Malagasy Weather Service named it Fanele . Around the same time , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began issuing advisories on the storm . The agency noted uncertainty in the future track of the storm , due to interaction with Tropical Storm Eric east of Madagascar , and Fanele was located within an area of weak steering currents . Tropical Storm Fanele quickly strengthened , developing an eye feature , and late on January 19 the JTWC estimated sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) ; the agency predicted further strengthening to peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Around that time , Fanele began rapid deepening under very favorable environmental conditions , and the MFR upgraded the storm to tropical cyclone status with winds of 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) . Upon attaining tropical cyclone status , the MFR forecast Fanele would intensify further to peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . 
 Early on January 20 , Cyclone Fanele began a northeast motion , tracking along the eastern periphery of a ridge located over Mozambique . Later it turned southeastward under the influence of another ridge further to the east . The thunderstorms organized further around the eye , and at 1200 UTC on January 20 the MFR estimated Fanele attained peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) about 180 km ( 110 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Morondava along the Madagascar coast . At the same time , its atmospheric pressure was estimated at 927 hPa ( mbar ) , and peak wind gusts were estimated at 261 km / h ( 162 mph ) . The JTWC also assessed peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . As it approached the coast , the cyclone became slightly less organized , with weaker convection and a less distinct eye ; the weakening was due to an eyewall replacement cycle . At around <unk> UTC on January 21 , Fanele made landfall on the western Madagascar coastline , to the southwest of Morondava . 
 Cyclone Fanele weakened quickly over land ; within four hours of moving ashore , its winds decreased to 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) , and its wind field expanded . The eye feature dissipated as the system weakened to tropical storm status , and increased wind shear contributed to further weakening . By January 22 , the poorly defined circulation moved over open waters , by which time its winds weakened to about 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . Upon reaching the ocean , convection began to reform near the circulation , and Fanele re @-@ attained tropical storm status . Cooler waters caused convection diminish near the center , which began the process of extratropical transition . Late on January 22 , the JTWC issued its last advisory on the storm . By January 23 , Fanele completed the transition into an extratropical storm as it accelerated toward the south @-@ southeast . It persisted as a distinct tropical cyclone until later that day . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Though the cyclone developed quickly , authorities were prepared for the storm ; earlier in the year , Madagascar 's National Office for Natural Disasters Preparedness implemented a plan for localized storm warning . Officials deployed warnings via radio to citizens in the path of Fanele , as well as to fishermen who were told to avoid leaving port . 
 Cyclone Fanele made landfall on western Madagascar in Menabe Region , where it destroyed many buildings , flooded large areas , and left thousands of people isolated . In the city of Morondava near the landfall location , the cyclone flooded 80 % of buildings and damaged about half of the houses , leaving 3 @,@ 000 people homeless . Throughout the region , the winds damaged 158 classrooms attended by 9 @,@ 000 children . Further inland , the cyclone damaged bridges and roads , leaving some areas isolated . The outer rainbands of the storm produced heavy rainfall in the northwest portion of the country , resulting in flooding that left about 250 people homeless in Sofia Region . The passages of Cyclones Eric and Fanele affected 54 @,@ 802 people , leaving 4 @,@ 102 without shelter . At least 28 @,@ 000 people were affected directly by Fanele , and the cyclone killed a total of ten people . The cyclone disrupted work to rebuild areas that were affected by Cyclone Ivan in February 2008 . 
 Cyclone Fanele struck the country during a series of government protests , and consequently the national government provided little response to the storm . Instead , United Nations ( UN ) agencies quickly provided relief to affected citizens . The World Food Programme prepared 87 metric tons ( MT ) of cereal and 13 MT of various types of pulses . Five United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) trucks arrived in <unk> on January 25 with various supplies . In the days after the storm , contaminated floodwaters resulted in cases of dysentery . To prevent the spread of disease , UNICEF provided vaccines , de @-@ <unk> tablets , and water cleaning devices . Within three days of the storm 's landfall , the agency also began distributing health kits and bed nets . As many schools were affected , UNICEF set up temporary classrooms in tents , while workers began fixing and cleaning the damaged buildings . Despite the quick response by the UN , thousands of people were left without aid . The Malagasy Red Cross deployed its volunteers to affected areas , although disrupted transportation services and the political situation hindered relief efforts . 
 = George Jones ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Marshal Sir George Jones , KBE , CB , DFC ( 18 October 1896 – 24 August 1992 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He rose from private soldier in World War I to air marshal in 1948 , and served as Chief of the Air Staff from 1942 to 1952 , the longest continuous tenure of any RAAF chief . Jones was a surprise appointee to the Air Force ’ s top role , and his achievements in the position were coloured by a divisive relationship during World War II with his nominal subordinate , the head of RAAF Command , Air Vice @-@ Marshal William Bostock . 
 During World War I , Jones saw action as an infantryman in the Gallipoli Campaign of 1915 , before transferring to the Australian Flying Corps a year later . Originally a mechanic , he undertook flying training in 1917 and was posted to a fighter squadron in France . He achieved seven victories to become an ace , and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . After a short spell in civilian life following World War I , he joined the newly formed RAAF in 1921 , and rose steadily through training and personnel commands prior to World War II . 
 Jones did not actively seek the position of Chief of the Air Staff before being appointed in 1942 , and his conflict with Bostock — with whom he had been friends for 20 years — was partly the result of a divided command structure , which neither man had any direct role in shaping . After World War II , Jones had overall responsibility for transforming what was then the world 's fourth largest air force into a peacetime service that was also able to meet overseas commitments in Malaya and Korea . Following his retirement from the RAAF , he continued to serve in the aircraft industry and later ran unsuccessfully for political office . He was knighted in 1953 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Jones was born on 18 October 1896 near Rushworth , a rural community in Victoria . The date appearing on his birth certificate was the day of registration , 22 November . His father , a miner , had died in an accident three months before the birth , leaving his family in poverty . The youngest of ten children , Jones was brought up in a strict Methodist household and for his entire life rarely touched alcohol . He attended Rushworth State School , and completed his education at the age of 14 with a Certificate of Merit . 
 Following his schooling , Jones took an apprenticeship as a carpenter before moving to Melbourne , where he became a motor mechanic . He worked in several garages before commencing a part @-@ time course in fitting and turning at the Working Men 's College of Melbourne . His college studies were curtailed by the outbreak of World War I , by which time he had accumulated three years part @-@ time military service , firstly in cadets and later in a militia unit , the 29th Light Horse Regiment . 
 = = World War I = = 
 In May 1915 Jones joined the Australian Imperial Force , embarking for Egypt in August with the 9th Light Horse Regiment . He landed at Gallipoli the following month and served there until the end of the campaign in December . His experiences at Gallipoli , especially witnessing the death by enemy fire of one of his friends , affected him deeply and he suffered from headaches and nightmares for years afterwards . After briefly transferring to the Imperial Camel Corps , Jones applied to join the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) in October 1916 , taking a drop in rank from corporal to private to do so . 
 Jones became an air mechanic in No. 1 Squadron AFC ( known as No. 67 Squadron Royal Flying Corps by the British ) , before being accepted for flying training in England . He gained his wings on 22 November 1917 and was posted to No. 4 Squadron AFC ( also known as No. 71 Squadron RFC ) as a second lieutenant in January the following year . Flying Sopwith Camels and Snipes on the Western Front , Jones finished the war a captain and an ace , with seven aerial victories from 150 patrols . He was badly injured by a bullet wound and petrol burns in combat with a German fighter in March 1918 , and did not return to his unit for three months . On 29 October 1918 he achieved two kills in one engagement , at Tournai , in what is frequently described as " one of the greatest air battles of the war " . Amid a confrontation involving over 75 Allied and German fighters , Jones led his patrol of three Snipes in a dive on ten Fokkers , destroying a brace of enemy aircraft in the attack . He was decorated with the Distinguished Flying Cross for displaying " the greatest daring and ability in aerial fighting " ; the award was promulgated in the London Gazette on 5 April 1919 . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 Jones remained with the Australian Flying Corps until June 1919 , as part of the British Occupation forces in Germany . After returning to Australia he worked as a turner in Melbourne . He married Muriel Cronan , a clerk who also played piano professionally , on 15 November 1919 . They had met prior to the war and kept in touch throughout Jones ' overseas postings . The couple 's first child , Ronald , arrived on 2 October 1920 . A second son , Ian , would be born on 26 June 1934 . Jones was described by family members as being a somewhat distant husband and father , dedicated to his career and rarely given to obvious displays of emotion . 
 Encouraged by a fellow No. 4 Squadron veteran , Harry Cobby , Jones applied to join the new Australian Air Force on 22 March 1921 ( the prefix " Royal " was added that August ) . His rank was flying officer , one below the equivalent of his AFC rank of captain . Another Australian pilot joining the fledgling Air Force was William ( Bill ) Bostock , a lieutenant in World War I. The pair became firm friends , Bostock acting as something of a mentor to the younger officer . Jones was promoted to flight lieutenant on 1 July 1923 . Nicknamed " Jonah " , he was also known as " Yellow Jones " in his early days with the RAAF , not through any perceived lack of moral fibre but as a result of the lingering effects on his skin of jaundice , contracted while a soldier at Gallipoli . 
 Posted to RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , Jones was put in charge of the Motor Transport Repair Section and made acting ( later permanent ) Officer Commanding Workshops . He was highly regarded for his technical and administrative ability but rated only " average " in command and dealing with personnel . In 1926 he took up flight instruction and within a year had been graded a 1A Flying Instructor . He was promoted to squadron leader on 31 March 1927 and given command of Flying Squadron at No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) . Jones spent two years in Britain from 1928 , attending the Royal Air Force Staff College , Andover , and graduating top of his class at the RAF 's Central Flying School . He later recalled of this posting , " The social life was new to me , as was the etiquette ... I learned as fast as I could , but I have no doubt that I unwittingly committed many a social blunder . " As the RAAF 's senior officer in the UK , Jones had expected to be invited to accompany the airship R101 on its maiden flight to India . Instead another Australian officer was nominated to make the trip , and Jones avoided the disaster which followed . 
 Returning to Australia in October 1930 , Jones was made Chief Flying Instructor at Point Cook and Officer Commanding No. 1 FTS . He became Director of Training at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , in November 1931 . On 2 April 1932 , he was taking off from Mascot , New South Wales , in a de Havilland Moth when he struck the perimeter fence and crashed , resulting in major damage to the aircraft and injuries to himself and his passenger . His performance in the early 1930s was highly regarded by his superiors , regularly being assessed as " above average " or " exceptional " . From late 1934 to early 1935 , he collaborated with the Director of Equipment , George Mackinolty , on an investigation into the state of aircraft production in Australia to highlight shortfalls in local defence in the face of possible future conflict with Japan . Though the report was reviewed enthusiastically by the Air Member for Personnel , Bill Anderson , it apparently went no further in the chain of command and thus was effectively ignored . In January 1936 , Jones was promoted to wing commander and appointed Director of Personnel Services . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Rise to Chief of the Air Staff = = = 
 Shortly after the outbreak of World War II , on 1 December 1939 , Jones was raised to temporary group captain . In March 1940 , he returned to the position of Director of Training and assumed responsibility for Australia 's part in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) , establishing many schools , acquiring hundreds of aircraft , and overseeing the training of thousands of airman . The RAAF 's Central Flying School was reformed in April 1940 to meet the vital requirement for additional flying instructors , whose numbers would grow from 16 in the first year of the war to 3 @,@ 600 by 1945 . His performance in this role led to Jones being promoted to acting air commodore on 21 February 1941 , and appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1942 New Year Honours for " diligence , devotion to duty and perseverance of outstanding merit " . 
 On 5 May 1942 , Jones was appointed Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , the RAAF 's senior position . He was considered an unlikely choice , a contemporary newspaper describing him as " the darkest of dark horses " . Jones was still only a substantive wing commander and acting air commodore when he succeeded to the role , leapfrogging several more senior officers including his friend Bill Bostock , now an air vice @-@ marshal and Deputy Chief of the Air Staff . Bostock , thought to be " among the Air Force 's best brains " at the time , was believed by himself ( and Jones ) to be the leading candidate for the position . The suggestion even arose that Jones ' selection was a mistake , based on the government 's reading of an organisation chart that implied he was the RAAF 's most senior officer after Bostock , when in fact he was ranked six places below . 
 Other potential appointees had included Air Marshal Richard Williams and Air Vice @-@ Marshal Peter Drummond . Williams , however , had been out of favour since his dismissal from the position of CAS in the wake of the Ellington Report criticising RAAF flying safety in 1939 , while Drummond was not released from his position as Deputy Air Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief RAF Middle East . Bostock was first choice of the incumbent CAS , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , but the latter 's ill @-@ concealed contempt for John Curtin 's Federal Labor government helped ensure that his preference was ignored . Although he admitted to being " stunned " by the decision , Jones himself had the ambition and a reasonable expectation of becoming CAS at some point in his career ; it simply happened " much sooner than I anticipated " . Jones had proved his organisational abilities directing EATS , and believed that this was a significant factor in his appointment . His working class origin has also been cited as contributing to his suitability to a Labor government . 
 = = = Divided command = = = 
 Passed over as CAS , Bostock subsequently became Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) RAAF Command , which placed him in charge of Australian air operations in the Pacific . Jones ' role , in contrast , was primarily administrative , that of " raising , training and maintaining " the service . Though the CAS was de jure head of the RAAF , Jones ' new rank of air vice @-@ marshal was the same as Bostock 's . In the words of Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " Jones was the head of his service , but he was neither unambiguously its senior officer , nor presiding over a unified command ... The system of divided command ... was not an ideal arrangement , but with men of goodwill it could have worked . Regrettably Bostock and Jones were not of that mind ... " 
 Friction between the two senior officers over the command structure rapidly deteriorated into a state of " complete obduracy " , and remained so until the end of the war . As a direct report to the USAAF 's Lieutenant @-@ General George Kenney , commander of Allied Air Forces in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , Bostock was able to ignore many directives from Jones , his nominal superior in the RAAF . The CAS nevertheless continued to assert his authority over Bostock 's supplies of manpower and equipment . 
 In March 1943 Jones proposed that he take over responsibility for air operations in defence of the Australian mainland but General Douglas MacArthur , Supreme Commander SWPA , refused to countenance it . The next month , with the support of the Australian Air Board , Jones tried to remove Bostock from RAAF Command and replace him with Air Commodore Joe Hewitt , AOC No. 9 Operational Group ( No. 9 OG ) . Bostock appealed to Kenney , who advised Jones that he was opposed to any such change of command and threatened to escalate the matter to the Australian government . MacArthur subsequently told Prime Minister Curtin that Hewitt " was not an adequate replacement " for Bostock , and the matter was dropped . Six months later Jones would sack Hewitt over morale issues in No. 9 OG raised during the offensive on Rabaul ; Kenney called Hewitt ’ s removal " bad news " . 
 Jones himself came under threat of transfer or subordination in April 1943 when the Federal government began moves to unite the Air Force 's command by creating an overarching Air Officer Commanding RAAF position that would have effectively replaced Jones as CAS and also been senior to Bostock . Air Marshal Drummond was again approached but once more the British Air Ministry refused to release him , having selected him for an Air Council post . Macarthur rejected two other RAF candidates , and the plan was held over . In the King 's Birthday Honours that June , Jones was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 By June 1944 the Jones – Bostock conflict and the anomalous division of administrative and operational responsibilities again led the Australian government to consider the appointment of a new commander senior to both officers . Air Marshal Sir Keith Park , the New Zealand @-@ born AOC of No. 11 Group RAF during the Battle of Britain , was sought for the position but negotiations were broken off when MacArthur advised that it was too late to make such a change and that the problem had now gone " quiet " . That it was far from over was apparent in a series of cables exchanged between the two air vice @-@ marshals in January 1945 . Jones sent a signal to Bostock complaining of the latter ’ s " insubordinate tone " and " repeated attempts to usurp authority of this Headquarters " . Bostock replied that as AOC RAAF Command he was " responsible to Commander , Allied Air Forces , and not , repeat not , subordinate to you " , and that he would " continue to take the strongest exception to your unwarranted and uninformed interference " . Despite such acrimony , the command structure remained unchanged for the rest of the war . 
 Responsible as CAS for building up Australia 's air combat assets , in 1943 Jones had given an assurance to the Australian government that he could maintain a force of 73 squadrons , despite Kenney 's prediction that even the RAAF 's then @-@ currently approved strength of 45 squadrons was beyond its capacity . In the event , by the end of the war Jones had expanded the RAAF to 70 squadrons in the Pacific and Europe , including several heavy bomber units . One of his most controversial decisions of the war was during the invasion of Tarakan in May 1945 when he grounded Australian B @-@ 24 Liberator squadrons scheduled to take part in the attack , due to their crews having exceeded their monthly quota of flying hours . Bostock was not consulted , and said that he would have thankfully " fallen through a crack in the boards on the deck " as he watched the attacking formations from a U.S. warship , minus the expected RAAF aircraft . Kenney sympathised with him ; he once commented in his diary that " Jones and Bostock ... fight each other harder than the Japs " . 
 = = = The " Morotai Mutiny " = = = 
 Towards the end of the war Jones intervened in the so @-@ called " Morotai Mutiny " , when senior pilots in the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) proffered their resignations rather than carry on attacking what they saw as unimportant targets . Jones personally interviewed all but one of the officers involved , later declaring , " I believed them all to be sincere in what they were stating and what they had attempted to do ... Yes , sincerely held beliefs , no matter how ill @-@ founded , coupled possibly with a rather exaggerated sense of national duty . " 
 Kenney also insisted on speaking to the pilots himself , overriding Jones ' protestations that it was an internal RAAF matter , and threatened to appear on behalf of the pilots should they be court @-@ martialled . Jones sacked the Air Officer Commanding No. 1 TAF , his former No. 4 Squadron comrade Harry Cobby , along with two of Cobby 's staff . In what may have been a reaction to Kenney 's threat , Jones insisted that the subsequent inquiry before Justice John Vincent Barry focus not only on the attempted resignations but on reports of alcohol trafficking on Morotai . While no action was taken against the pilots over the mutiny directly , two of the RAAF 's best @-@ known aces , Group Captain Clive Caldwell and Wing Commander Bobby Gibbes , were court @-@ martialled for their involvement in the alcohol racket and reduced in rank . Although Barry did not find it a significant factor , the Jones – Bostock conflict was also blamed for contributing to the poor morale that precipitated the " mutiny " . One of the other participants , Wing Commander Kenneth Ranger , told the inquiry : " I deplore the fighting and wrangling between them which is common knowledge throughout the Air Force . Every week there are instances of it . " 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = The " Interim Air Force " = = = 
 Along with Bostock , Jones represented the RAAF at the Japanese surrender aboard USS Missouri in September 1945 . With Jones ' concurrence , Bostock and other senior commanders were summarily retired in 1946 , in Bostock 's case for " inability to work in harmony with certain other high ranking RAAF officers " . The CAS oversaw planning for the demobilisation of thousands of RAAF personnel and the creation of a peacetime service , known as the " Interim Air Force " . When he was eventually promoted air marshal in 1948 the RAAF was made up of approximately 8 @,@ 000 staff , compared to 175 @,@ 000 — the world 's fourth largest air force — he had commanded in 1945 as air vice @-@ marshal . Believing that wastage was reaching a critical point , Jones proposed recruiting women into a new service to replace the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force that had been disbanded in September 1946 . Blocked initially by the Labor government of the day , it came into being in 1950 as the Women 's Royal Australian Air Force , following the election of Robert Menzies ' Liberal Party in December 1949 . 
 Concurrently with demobilisation , Jones shaped the RAAF 's " Plan D " , adopted in 1947 . It outlined the service ’ s post @-@ war organisation and requirements , which included 16 squadrons flying technologically advanced aircraft . This basic structure remained in place for the next 20 years . In 1949 , Jones visited the UK with a team of advisors and recommended the English Electric Canberra jet to replace the RAAF 's Avro Lincoln piston @-@ engined bombers . Entering service in 1953 , the Canberras ultimately equipped three Squadrons , operating with distinction in the Vietnam War and continuing to fly until 1982 . Other enduring types purchased under Jones ' tenure as CAS included the CAC Sabre , P @-@ 2 Neptune and CAC Winjeel . He still enjoyed flying and made an effort to pilot each new type as it entered service , including the de Havilland Vampire jet , but his irregular turns in the cockpit meant that his skills were generally found wanting . 
 = = = Overseas commitments and retirement from RAAF = = = 
 When Australia committed forces to the Malayan Emergency in April 1950 , Jones grouped the requisite RAAF assets under one overarching organisation , No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing , to ensure they would operate with some autonomy rather than be dispersed throughout other Allied services as had been the case in World War II , when Australian units and personnel based in Britain had been absorbed by the RAF . He also proposed that the officer commanding all Commonwealth air force units should be from the RAAF ; this was agreed by the British Air Ministry , and the position later gave valuable experience to two future Chiefs of the Air Staff , Air Vice @-@ Marshals Frederick Scherger and Val Hancock . Jones allocated No. 77 Squadron , then based in Japan as part of British Commonwealth Occupation Force , to the United Nations Command when the Korean War broke out . Prime Minister Menzies rang Jones at home on Saturday , 1 July 1950 , requesting a squadron and the unit went into action the following day . 
 Almost immediately that Menzies ' Liberal Party replaced the Chifley Labor government at the end of 1949 , it had begun to investigate possible replacements ( largely from the RAF ) for the incumbent CAS , eventually deciding on Air Marshal ( later Air Chief Marshal ) Sir Donald Hardman . Jones was informed of his retirement , which he claimed to have been expecting , in December 1951 . In a farewell speech at the Australia Club in Melbourne , attended by Menzies , Jones said that organising EATS and expanding the Air Force in the South West Pacific had been his greatest achievements . His official exit from RAAF was on 22 February 1952 . The Prime Minister sent him a letter thanking him for his " valuable contribution " , which would " long be remembered " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his departure from the Air Force in 1952 , Jones became Director of Coordination with the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation ( CAC ) and member of the board of Ansett Transport Industries . In the 1953 New Year Honours , he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his military service . He retired from the CAC directorship in 1957 but remained on the Ansett board until the early 1970s . Jones pursued a political career in parallel to his aviation industry work , unsuccessfully standing for Liberal Party pre @-@ selection in the seat of Flinders in 1952 . In 1958 , he left the Liberals in favour of the Labor Party , contesting the seat of Henty in 1961 . He switched parties as his views were too leftist for the Liberals , declaring " They got rather nasty with me and wouldn 't give me a fair go , so I resigned and joined the Labor Party " . He pursued an energetic campaign in Henty , but lost to his Liberal opponent by fewer than 3 @,@ 000 primary votes . 
 Jones also evinced an interest in unidentified flying objects , having first encountered unexplained aerial phenomena at Warrnambool , Victoria , in 1930 . He reported witnessing another UFO in October 1957 , but admitted that he was " loath to talk about it publicly lest people should think I was either an incompetent witness or getting a little screwy in the head " . In the mid @-@ 1960s he patronised the Commonwealth Aerial Phenomena Investigation Organisation and joined the Victorian UFO Research Society . Jones published his autobiography , From Private to Air Marshal , in 1988 . He was Australia 's last surviving World War I ace when he died in Melbourne on 24 August 1992 , at the age of 95 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Jones ' ten years as CAS constituted the longest continuous term of any RAAF chief . Despite his longevity in the position , he is still primarily known for two events early in his tenure , the surprise circumstance of his appointment , and his feud with Bill Bostock that lasted until the end of World War II . The conflict between its two senior officers has been labelled " disastrous " for the RAAF , one that " diminished its standing " in the eyes of its Allies . Jones claimed in his autobiography that he had never intrigued for the role of CAS and would have worked loyally for Bostock if the latter had been appointed . 
 Beyond these controversies , Jones significantly influenced the Air Force 's development during and after the war . He was honoured for his work running the Empire Air Training Scheme in 1940 – 42 and has received credit as CAS for building up the RAAF 's strength to 70 squadrons by 1945 . After the war he played a personal part in improving education within the service , including the establishment of RAAF College , along similar lines to Royal Military College , Duntroon , and the Royal Australian Naval College , as well as the RAAF Staff College . One of his last directions as CAS was the formation of RAAF Museum at Point Cook , where it is still based . 
 Jones encouraged local industry to design and build trainers for the RAAF and produce more sophisticated combat aircraft under licence from overseas manufacturers . This led to the Winjeel basic trainer and Australian industry co @-@ partnership in production of the CAC Sabre and Canberra jets ; such local participation has continued to figure in major RAAF aircraft acquisitions . 
 He refused to update the command structure of the Air Force from one based on region to one of function , something his successor , Air Marshal Hardman , would accomplish , and has been criticised for a systemic resistance to change . Jones was described in David Horner 's The Commanders as " a steady , sincere but colourless leader " , while Alan Stephens found him " a good and decent man , who had overcome considerable personal hardship in his youth to achieve exceptional professional success " but " neither an inspiring leader , nor a notable thinker " . Nevertheless , his Plan D for the RAAF 's post @-@ war organisation remained the service 's blueprint until the early 1970s . 
 = River Oaks , Houston = 
 River Oaks is a residential community located in the center of Houston , Texas , United States . Located within the 610 Loop and between Downtown and Uptown , the community spans 1 @,@ 100 acres ( 450 ha ) . Established in the 1920s by brothers William and Michael Hogg , the community became a well @-@ publicized national model for community planning . River Oaks is the wealthiest and most expensive community in Texas and among the top ten in the United States . Real estate values in the community range from $ 1 million to over $ 20 million . River Oaks was also named the most expensive neighborhood in Houston in 2013 . The community is home to River Oaks Country Club , which includes a golf course designed by architect Donald Ross . 
 = = History = = 
 William and Michael Hogg , the sons of former Texas Governor Jim Hogg , and attorney Hugh Potter established River Oaks in the 1920s . Potter obtained an option to purchase 200 acres ( 81 ha ) around the River Oaks Country Club in 1923 , and in the following year William Hogg established the Country Club Estates in order to support the development of the community . The two brothers promoted the sale of lots in the subdivision for $ 2 @,@ 200 apiece in 1928 . The brothers , along with sister Ima Hogg , oversaw the construction of Bayou Bend , a stately southern @-@ style home on the banks of Buffalo Bayou . 
 The development plans ensured that River Oaks 's parks and esplanades were planted with oaks , shrubs , azaleas and other flowers . Every detail of the development was planned to establish a well @-@ integrated community . Advertised as a " distinguished experiment in fine living , " River Oaks became a national model for community planning . River Oaks ' planning standards , residential architecture , and landscape design were publicized during the 1920s and 1930s in national newspapers , real estate media and design journals . Deed restrictions at the time restricted home prices to over $ 7 @,@ 000 and specified architectural styles , with a gentlemen 's agreement excluding blacks , Jews , and other minorities . Homes along Kirby Drive were restricted to American Colonial or English Tudor style architecture . 
 During the 1920s , River Oaks was so effectively organized , planned and restricted that it became the most expensive neighborhood in Houston . The City of Houston annexed the community in 1927 , adding 3 @,@ 465 acres ( 1 @,@ 402 ha ) of land to the city limits . Bus service to Downtown Houston opened during the same year . After World War II , as Houston experienced its greatest growth , River Oaks became a haven for the wealthy of the city . 
 River Oaks has been the subject matter of scholarly studies , primarily because its significant contributions to Houston 's history and development as an elite suburban community . The community was the site of the 1972 murder of Dr. John Hill ( later described in Thomas Thompson 's novel , Blood and Money ) . River Oaks was the home of Jeff Skilling before he began serving a 25 @-@ year prison sentence for his involvement in the Enron scandal . 
 The River Oaks Garden Club Forum of Civics , located in Upper Kirby , is listed in the National Register of Historic Places as the " Forum of Civics " on October 13 , 1988 . Formerly a county schoolhouse , the building is currently the administrative center for the River Oaks Garden Club . 
 In 2011 Bloomberg Businessweek ranked River Oaks as the seventh most expensive housing blocks in the United States . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Located within the 610 Loop and between Downtown and Uptown , River Oaks spans 1 @,@ 100 acres ( 450 ha ) . The community is located in a region bounded on the north by Buffalo Bayou , on the east by South Shepherd Drive , on the west by <unk> Road , and on the south by Westheimer Road . River Oaks is located northeast of Uptown , north of the Upper Kirby district , west of <unk> , and is near to the freeway system and many major thoroughfares such as Westheimer Road , Kirby Drive and San Felipe Street . 
 River Oaks Boulevard , a road that runs through the center of the community , is lined on both sides by mansions and estates located away from the street . The two square mile ( 5 @.@ 2 m2 ) area of the subdivision comprises approximately 1 @,@ 600 homes , mostly detached single family homes . In 1990 , the Houston Chronicle said that " [ t ] he grandest streets are probably River Oaks Boulevard and Lazy Lane . Some of the houses are monstrosities , but many show taste and grace and also have lovely gardens . " 
 = = Demographics = = 
 River Oaks is within the Houston Super Neighborhood # 23 Afton Oaks / River Oaks , a division of the City of Houston that includes River Oaks and some surrounding subdivisions . In 2000 the neighborhood had 14 @,@ 313 residents ; 12 @,@ 273 of them ( 85 @.@ 7 % ) were White , 1 @,@ 160 ( 8 @.@ 1 % ) were Hispanic , 390 ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) were Asian , 247 ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) were Black , 18 were Native American , 13 were Native Hawaiian , and 23 were Others . 189 people were of two or more races . 
 According to the United States census in 2000 , of the 12 @,@ 088 residents over 18 years of age , 10 @,@ 390 ( 86 @.@ 0 % ) were White , 945 ( 7 @.@ 8 % ) were Hispanic , 353 ( 2 @.@ 9 % ) were Asian , 205 ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) were Black , 17 were Native American , 8 were Native Hawaiian , and 22 were Other . 148 were of two or more races . 
 The neighborhood had 8 @,@ 169 housing units . Of the 7 @,@ 401 occupied units , 3 @,@ 573 were rental units and 3 @,@ 828 were owner units . The Super Neighborhood had 3 @,@ 518 families with a total of 9 @,@ 521 individuals . River Oaks Super Neighborhood had a lower average family size than the average City of Houston family size . The River Oaks average was 2 @.@ 7 , while the city average was 3 @.@ 4 . 
 River Oaks is one of the wealthiest communities in Texas and the United States . Residents are predominantly successful professionals , and real estate values range from $ 1 million to over $ 20 million . 
 = = Culture , parks , and recreation = = 
 Adjacent to the community is the River Oaks Shopping Center , Houston 's first shopping center . Constructed in 1927 and designed by architect Hugh Prather , the center , originally known as River Oaks Community Center , was one of the first automobile @-@ oriented retail centers in the United States . Its design , with arcs of retail space on either side of West Gray Avenue , was considered a model for future development . Portions of the historic shopping center were demolished in September 2007 to redevelop the site for a bookstore and parking garage . As of 2008 , Landmark Theatres operates the River Oaks Theatre , an " arthouse " theater , located in the center . The theater is the last historic movie theater in Houston that is still being used as it was originally designed . 
 River Oaks is home to the forty @-@ member River Oaks Chamber Orchestra . The orchestra is composed of musicians from around the United States and guest conductors from around the world . River Oaks Country Club , located within the community on the northern end of River Oaks Boulevard , is a country club that includes a golf facility that was designed by architect Donald Ross . Ross is considered to be one of the most significant golf course designers in the history of golfing . Opening in 1923 , the country club has hosted the River Oaks International Tennis Tournament since 1931 . The Houston <unk> Chamber of Commerce assists economic activity in River Oaks . The Houston Ballet headquarters , training facilities and pre @-@ professional school , the Ben Stevenson Academy , were located on West Gray near the River Oaks Shopping Center until 2012 . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 Several municipal parks serve River Oaks . River Oaks Park and the River Oaks Community Center , operated by the City of Houston , is one block west of Lamar High School . River Oaks Park includes a .25 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) off @-@ road trail located within the park 's boundaries , tennis courts , a playground , and a lighted sports ground . River Oaks Park includes the Pumpkin Carriage , intended to evoke Cinderella 's carriage . Around 2003 Friends of River Oaks Parks had restored the carriage . The Houston Business Journal said " Pumpkin Park provides outstanding resources for neighborhood children – a wonderful playground , community center and the Summer Enrichment Program offering youngsters sports activities and crafts classes . " 
 On June 24 , 1999 , the River Oaks Property Owners , Inc. entered an agreement with the City of Houston ; ROPO agreed to maintain and upgrade parks and esplanades in River Oaks . ROPO also has the right to spend its own funds to improve them . Municipal parks assisted by ROPO include Del Monte Park , Mary Elliot Park , Ella Lee Park , Homewood Park , Kirby Park , Rebecca Meyer Park , Olympia Park , Pine Valley Park , and Sleepy Hollow Park . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary and secondary schools = = = 
 The Houston Independent School District ( HISD ) operates the public schools serving River Oaks . The community is within Trustee District VII , represented by Harvin C. Moore as of 2009 . As of 2000 , almost 9 % of HISD property taxes originated from River Oaks residents . 
 The attendance boundaries of River Oaks Elementary School , Lanier Middle School , and Lamar High School include River Oaks . Lanier opened in 1926 , River Oaks Elementary opened in 1929 , and Lamar opened in 1937 . Laura Nathan @-@ Garner , author of the second edition of the Insiders ' Guide to Houston ( 2012 ) , wrote that " Many children in [ River Oaks ] attend [ Lamar ] " . 
 Prior to desegregation , River Oaks Elementary had around 800 children . After desegregation , many parents removed their children from River Oaks Elementary , and the school was far below capacity . In 1986 the neighborhood component of the school closed . At the time River Oaks had mainly older families . At the time the remaining families who did have children had the money to send their children to private school and preferred to do so . 
 Between 1986 and 1996 , River Oaks Elementary School only admitted magnet school students from other areas of the city . The community was divided between the attendance zones of Wilson Elementary School ( opened in 1925 ) , the now closed Will Rogers Elementary School ( opened in 1950 , closed in summer 2006 ) , and Poe Elementary School . By 1995 River Oaks Elementary became one of the most prestigious elementary schools in Houston and had a waiting list . By that year several new families had established themselves in River Oaks and many of them were interested in sending their children to public school . In 1995 , several River Oaks parents petitioned HISD to re @-@ establish the neighborhood program at River Oaks Elementary School which allows non @-@ magnet students residing in the school 's boundaries to attend . Some magnet parents opposed , believing that the River Oaks program would reduce racial diversity at the school . In 1996 , HISD added a neighborhood program to the school for grades Kindergarten through 2nd , with grades 3 through 5 phased in over a subsequent three @-@ year period . 
 Crockett Early Childhood Center is the closest public early childhood center to River Oaks , while Wilson Elementary School 's preschool program is the closest tuition @-@ based program . Only economically disadvantaged students , homeless students , students who are not proficient in English , or children of active @-@ duty members of the U.S. military or whose parent has been killed , injured , or missing in action while on active duty may be enrolled in tuition @-@ free HISD preschools . Students who are eligible for HISD 's preschools may attend any Early Childhood Center in Houston ISD for free . Students not eligible may enroll in tuition @-@ based HISD preschool programs . 
 Several independent ( private ) schools serve the community . Since the 1970s and by 1995 , most of the children in River Oaks were sent to private schools . Catholic schools , operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston @-@ Houston , include St. Thomas High School ( 9 – 12 , males only , north of River Oaks along the north edge of the Buffalo Bayou ) and St. Anne Catholic School ( K @-@ 8 , south of River Oaks at Shepherd and Westheimer ) . Other private schools in the area and private schools marketed to River Oaks families include St. John 's School ( K – 12 , in Upper Kirby ) , Annunciation Orthodox School ( K @-@ 8 , in the <unk> area ) , River Oaks Baptist School ( K @-@ 8 , in River Oaks ) , Episcopal High School ( 9 – 12 , Bellaire ) , The Kinkaid School in ( Piney Point Village ) . In 2006 St. Anne Catholic School received the Blue Ribbon Award . 
 = = = Colleges and universities = = = 
 River Oaks is within the Houston Community College System boundaries . The closest campuses are the Central Campus in Midtown and the West Loop Center . Four @-@ year universities and colleges in close proximity to River Oaks include University of St. Thomas in Montrose and Rice University in the Houston Museum District . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 The community is served by the Adele B. Looscan Branch of Houston Public Library . It opened in September 2007 . The former library , established in 1956 , closed on August 27 , 2005 and was demolished in February 2006 . 
 The previous Looscan branch had around 61 @,@ 000 visitors in the fiscal year 2005 . The original plans for Looscan called for the library to get a $ 5 @.@ 4 million renovation . An Upper Kirby group proposed a new site near the Upper Kirby YMCA . Around that period the group Friends of Neighborhood Libraries began raising funds . The replacement library , costing $ 6 @.@ 2 million , has twice the staff and two and one half times the size of the previous facility . Friends of Neighborhood Libraries raised one million dollars in four months , and around $ 2 @.@ 5 million in total to help fund the new library . The 21 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m2 ) library , designed by Jackson & Ryan Architects , houses over 60 @,@ 000 books and is the first city LEED @-@ certified facility . It includes a 120 @-@ seat multipurpose meeting room and a 14 @-@ seat private conference room . The library has several reading areas , including the Marsha Moody Children 's Reading Room , a teenager reading area , and a periodical reading area . The exterior was designed to match visual cues of buildings in the surrounding area , such as the River Oaks Baptist Church and School . The Emily Scott and Joseph Wood Evans Clock Tower , a part of the library 's exterior , includes a garden book archive and works of art . 
 = = = Gallery of schools = = = 
 = = Media = = 
 The Houston Chronicle is the area 's regional newspaper . On Thursdays , residents receive the Bellaire / West U / River Oaks / <unk> section , which covers events specific to these neighborhoods . The River Oaks Examiner and Village News are local newspapers distributed in the community . The River Oaks Buzz is a monthly magazine mailed free of charge to all residents . The River Oaks Buzz is about people , products and services in the community . 
 = = Government and infrastructure = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Houston Fire Department operates Station 3 at <unk> West Alabama at Cummins , near River Oaks . The fire station is in Fire District 28 . Station 3 moved to its current location in 1958 . The station underwent a renovation in 2003 and 2004 and re @-@ opened in the northern hemisphere spring of 2004 . The community is within the Houston Police Department 's Central Patrol Division , headquartered at 61 <unk> . River Oaks has one of the lowest crime rates in Houston . 
 The River Oaks Property Owners , Inc. offices are at <unk> San Felipe Road . The community operates its own private security force , River Oaks Patrol . The Texas Department of Public Safety classifies the force as a guard , alarm , and investigation company . The community is within Super Neighborhood # 23 and its recognized council was established on October 15 , 2001 . Each super neighborhood represents a group of civic clubs , places of worship , businesses , and other institutions and community interests . River Oaks is a part of the Houston City Council District G. 
 = = = County , state , and federal government = = = 
 River Oaks is within Harris County Precinct 4 . As of 2011 , R. Jack Cagle is the precinct 's County Commissioner . River Oaks is in Justice of the Peace / Constable Precinct One . As of 2012 Alan Rosen is the constable . 
 River Oaks is located in District 134 of the Texas House of Representatives and represented by Sarah Davis , a Republican . River Oaks is within District 13 of the Texas Senate and represented by Rodney Ellis , a Democrat . 
 The community is within Texas 's 7th congressional district . As of 2013 , the representative is John Culberson . The United States Post Office Service ( USPS ) operates the River Oaks Post Office at 1900 West Gray Street , supporting the zip codes <unk> and <unk> . The post office sits on a 109 @,@ 160 square feet ( 10 @,@ 141 m2 ) property with a gross building area of 18 @,@ 100 square feet ( 1 @,@ 680 m2 ) . In addition the Julius Melcher Post Office is near River Oaks . In January 2009 the USPS announced that it will put the River Oaks Post Office property up for sale . In October of that year the USPS announced that it , for now , will not sell the River Oaks and Melcher post offices . 
 Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County , Texas ( METRO ) operates bus services in River Oaks . Lines serving River Oaks include 3 Langley / West Gray , 18 Kirby Limited , 35 Fairview , 73 <unk> Crosstown , and 82 Westheimer . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Politicians and political parties conduct fundraising campaigns in River Oaks because it has " six desired qualities " including " allure , location , preening , location , Secret Service familiarity and location . " In both 2000 and 2004 , River Oaks residents gave $ 3 @.@ 9 million to political campaigns . In 2008 , they gave $ 3 @.@ 4 million to political campaigns through the middle of that year . River Oaks has been described as one of Houston 's " richest , most Republican neighborhoods " . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Jim Bath , businessman 
 John Connally , Governor of Texas 
 Clyde Drexler , professional basketball player 
 Dan Duncan , businessman 
 Carolyn Farb , philanthropist 
 Andrew Fastow and Lea Fastow , primary figure of the Enron scandal and his wife 
 Tilman J. Fertitta , businessman and reality TV star 
 Ima Hogg , philanthropist and art collector 
 Molly Ivins , journalist , author 
 Bob Lanier , former Mayor of Houston 
 Khalid bin <unk> , Saudi Arabian oil figure 
 John W. <unk> , Sr. 
 Robert <unk> , businessman and politician 
 Joel Osteen , pastor of Lakewood Church 
 Fayez <unk> , investor on the Forbes 500 
 Jeffrey Skilling , primary figure of the Enron scandal 
 Lynn Wyatt , socialite and philanthropist 
 Oscar Wyatt , oil baron 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Second Battle of Kehl ( 1796 ) = 
 The Second Battle of Kehl occurred on 18 September 1796 , when General Franz Petrasch 's Austrian and Imperial troops stormed the French @-@ held bridgehead over the Rhine river . The village of Kehl , which is now in the German state of Baden @-@ Württemberg , was then part of Baden @-@ Durlach . Across the river , Strasbourg , an Alsatian city , was a French Revolutionary stronghold . This battle was part of the Rhine Campaign of 1796 , in the French Revolutionary War of the First Coalition . 
 In the 1790s , the Rhine was wild , unpredictable , and difficult to cross . Its channels and tributaries created islands of trees and vegetation that were alternately submerged by floods or exposed during the dry seasons . A complex of bridges , gates , fortifications and barrage dams linked Kehl with Strasbourg . These had been constructed by the fortress architect Sébastien le <unk> de Vauban in the seventeenth century . The crossings had been contested before : in 1678 during the French @-@ Dutch war , in 1703 during the War of the Spanish Succession , in 1733 during the War of the Polish Succession , and earlier in Battle of Kehl , when the French crossed into the German states on 23 – 24 June . Critical to French success would be the army 's ability to cross the Rhine at will . The crossings at Hüningen , near the Swiss city of Basel , and at Kehl , offered access to most of southwestern Germany ; from there , French armies could sweep north , south , or east , depending on their military goal . 
 In late summer of 1796 , the Austrian force reacquired most of the territory lost to the French earlier in the summer . On 18 September 1796 , the Austrians temporarily acquired control of the tête @-@ du @-@ ponts ( bridgeheads ) joining Kehl and Strasbourg until a strong French counter @-@ attack forced them to retreat , leaving the French in control of the bridges but the Austrians in control of the territory surrounding them . The situation remained in status quo until late October . Control of the surrounding territory there prevented the French from crossing to safety in Strasbourg , and required the French commander , Jean Victor Marie Moreau , to withdraw toward Basel . Immediately after the Battle of Schliengen ( 24 October 1796 ) , while most of Moreau 's army retreated south to cross the Rhine at Hüningen , Count Baillet Latour moved his Austrian force to Kehl to begin a 100 @-@ day siege . 
 = = Background : general campaign of 1796 = = 
 The campaign of 1796 was part of the larger , broader French Revolutionary Wars in which republican France pitted itself against a fluid coalition of Prussians and Austrians and several other states of the Holy Roman Empire , the British , Sardinians , Dutch , and royalist French emigres . Although initially the republican French experienced several victories , the campaigns of 1793 through 1795 had been less successful . However , the Coalition partners had difficulty coordinating their war aims , and their own efforts also faltered . In 1794 and 1795 , French victories in northern Italy salvaged French enthusiasm for the war , and forced the Coalition to withdraw further into Central Europe . At the end of the Rhine Campaign of 1795 , the Habsburg Austrian Coalition and the French Republican called a truce between their forces that had been fighting in Germany . This agreement lasted until 20 May 1796 , when the Austrians announced that the truce would end on 31 May . 
 The Austrian Coalition 's Army of the Lower Rhine included 90 @,@ 000 troops . The 20 @,@ 000 @-@ man right wing , first under Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg , then Wilhelm von Wartensleben , stood on the east bank of the Rhine behind the Sieg River , observing the French bridgehead at Düsseldorf . The garrisons of Mainz Fortress and Ehrenbreitstein Fortress included 10 @,@ 000 more . The remainder of the Imperial and Coalition army , the 80 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army of the Upper Rhine , secured the west bank behind the Nahe River . Commanded by Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser , this force anchored its right wing in Kaiserslautern on the west bank while the left wing under Anton Sztáray , Michael von Fröhlich and Louis Joseph , Prince of Condé guarded the Rhine from Mannheim to Switzerland . The original Austrian strategy was to capture Trier and to use their position on the west bank to strike at each of the French armies in turn . After news arrived in Vienna of Napoleon Bonaparte 's successes , however , Wurmser was sent to Italy with 25 @,@ 000 reinforcements , and the Aulic Council gave Archduke Charles command over both Austrian armies and ordered him to hold his ground . 
 On the French side , the 80 @,@ 000 @-@ man Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse held the west bank of the Rhine down to the Nahe and then southwest to Sankt Wendel . On the army 's left flank , Jean Baptiste Kléber had 22 @,@ 000 troops in an entrenched camp at Düsseldorf . The right wing of the Army of the Rhine and Moselle was positioned behind the Rhine from Hüningen northward , centered along the Queich River near Landau , and its left wing extended west toward Saarbrücken . Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino led Moreau 's right wing at Hüningen , Louis Desaix commanded the center and Laurent Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr directed the left wing . Ferino 's wing consisted of three infantry and cavalry divisions under François Antoine Louis Bourcier and Henri François Delaborde . Desaix 's command included three divisions led by Michel de Beaupuy , Antoine Guillaume Delmas and Charles Antoine Xaintrailles . Saint @-@ Cyr 's wing had two divisions commanded by Guillaume Philibert Duhesme and Alexandre Camille Taponier . 
 The French plan called for a springtime ( April @-@ May @-@ June ) offensive during which the two armies would press against the flanks of the northern Coalition armies in the German states while a third army approached Vienna through Italy . Specifically , Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan 's army would push south from Düsseldorf , hopefully drawing troops and attention toward themselves , while Moreau 's army massed on the east side of the Rhine by Mannheim . According to plan , Jourdan 's army feinted toward Mannheim , and Charles repositioned his troops . Once this occurred , Moreau 's army endured a forced march south and attacked the bridgehead at Kehl , which was guarded by 7 @,@ 000 imperial troops — troops recruited that spring from the Swabian Circle polities , inexperienced and untrained — which held the bridgehead for several hours , but then retreated toward Rastatt . Moreau reinforced the bridgehead with his forward guard , and his troops poured into Baden unhindered . In the south , by Basel , Ferino 's column moved quickly across the river and advanced up the Rhine along the Swiss and German shoreline toward Lake Constance , spreading into the southern end of the Black Forest . Worried that his supply lines would be overextended or his army would be flanked , Charles began a retreat to the east . 
 At this point , in July , the jealousies and competition between the French generals came into play . Moreau could have joined up with Jourdan 's army in the north , but did not ; he proceeded eastward , pushing Charles into Bavaria , while Jourdan pushed eastward , pushing Wartensleben 's autonomous corps into the Ernestine duchies . On either side , the union of two armies — Wartensleben 's with Charles ' or Jourdan 's with Moreau 's — could have crushed their opposition . 
 In August , Wartensleben 's autonomous corps united with Charles ' imperial troops and turned the tide against the French . The defeat of Jourdan 's army at the battles of Amberg ( 24 August ) , Würzburg ( 3 September ) and 2nd Altenkirchen ( 16 – 19 September ) allowed Charles to move more troops to the south , and effectively removed Jourdan from the remainder of the campaign . 
 = = = Preliminary action at Bruchsal : September 1796 = = = 
 While Charles and Moreau jockeyed for position on the eastern slope of the Black Forest , Franz Petrasch engaged the French at Bruchsal . The troops there , commanded by Marc Amand Élisée Scherb , included the 68th Demi @-@ brigade and two squadrons of the 19th Dragoons ; they had remained behind after the Battle of Ettlingen to observe the garrisons of Mannheim and Philippsburg . Realizing that his command was too small to withstand a concerted attack by the stronger Austrians , Scherb withdrew toward Kehl to secure the Rhine crossing to Strasburg , since Moreau , now well into a retreat across the mountains , would need the crossing for a safe passage to France . 
 An initial Austrian attack on the French position at Bruchsal favored the French , who charged the Austrians with bayonets . Again , on 5 and 6 September , the Austrians spent most of the day skirmishing with the French at their advanced posts , masking their intention of circling around Bruchsal and marching south to secure the crossing to Strasbourg . General Scherb received intelligence of a contingent of infantry and cavalry marching against him and retired south . Scherb found the Austrians already in possession of <unk> , a village south of Bruchsal . After he tried to force his way through , the Austrians fell back to Weingarten at 49 ° 3 ′ 5 ″ N 8 ° 31 ′ 50 ″ E. Scherb found himself caught between detachments of Austrians by the Kinzig river and behind him . General Moreau deployed a demi @-@ brigade of infantry and a regiment of cavalry from his army in the Black Forest , with instructions to proceed by forced marches to Kehl , but General Petrasch , acting on his own intelligence , sent Konstantin d 'Aspré with two battalions to occupy Renchen , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Kehl . This effectively prevented Moreau 's reinforcements from reaching Kehl and locked Scherb in place . The undermanned garrison at Kehl was on its own . 
 = = = Kehl garrison status 16 – 17 September = = = 
 The Kehl garrison consisted of one battalion of the 24th Demi @-@ brigade and some detachments of the 104th under command of Balthazar Alexis Henri Schauenburg . This was too weak a force to defend a position of such importance , or to develop additional extensive works . Moreau reported that some of Scherb 's troops had arrived , but it is unclear which ones . Furthermore , the lack of cooperation from local peasant workers and the exhaustion of troops prevented the enhancements of the fortifications from proceeding with any speed . On the evening of 16 September , Petrasch and most of his column had arrived at <unk> , immediately by Kehl , with three battalions and two squadrons ; more troops were not far behind . By 17 September , a small corps of Austrians approached the outskirts of Kehl and vigorously attacked the French sentries there ; this was merely a prelude to the more significant action the following day . 
 = = Action of 18 September = = 
 Before the break of dawn on 18 September ( 03 : 45 ) , three Austrian columns attacked Kehl , while another kept Scherb pinned down by the Kinzig . The Austrian principal column , comprising the 38th Regiment , crossed the Kinzig river above the French position and proceeded toward the dykes of the Rhine above ( south of ) Kehl . This placed them between Scherb 's force and Kehl . Using the dykes as protection , and conducted by some peasants familiar with the fortifications , they advanced as far as the horn work on the Upper Rhine and entered a gorge which led them to the outskirts of Kehl . The second column of the 38th Regiment , under command of Major Busch , proceeded via the hamlet of <unk> toward Kehl , and obtained possession of the village itself , although not the bridge leading to Strasbourg . The third column , which included three companies of Serbians and a division of Hussars , executed a feint on the left bank of the river . One column of reserve , under the command of Franz <unk> , approached as far as the French earthworks on the banks of the Rhine to support the columns ahead of him ; another , which included a battalion of the 12th Regiment ( Manfredini ) , moved past the hamlet by <unk> at 48 ° 34 ′ 12 ″ N 7 ° 50 ′ 38 ″ E toward Kehl . 
 Quickly , the Austrians acquired control of all the earthworks of the town , the village itself , and the fortress ; their skirmishers reached one side of the abutment of an old bridge of palisades , and advanced to the other side , across the islands formed by branches of the Kinzig and the Rhine . There , almost within eye @-@ shot of the French sentinels , they halted ; there is some confusion about why they stopped . Possibly they mistook the abutment for the bridge itself , as Moreau seemed to think . Regardless , the troops there did not burn the bridge , but started plundering and drinking . The French cavalry tried to retire into Kehl via the Kinzig bridge , but the heavy Austrians fire destroyed most of them . 
 The French executed several attempts to retake the bridges . The 68th , under command of general Jean @-@ Baptiste de <unk> , was repulsed three times by the superior numbers of Austrians and the fearsome fire of case shot from four cannons that lined the principal road . Not until 19 : 00 did fortune favor the French , when Colonel d 'Aspré and two hundred men of the Regiment Ferdinand were captured within the fort itself . The next in command , a Major <unk> , was badly wounded , leaving no one in overall command of the 38th Regiment . The French general Schauenburg , who had gone to Strasbourg for troops , returned with some reinforcements , including part of the Strasbourg national guard , and led these troops over the pontoon bridges . They met at once an impetuous Austrian attack , but were sufficiently strong to recover . At 22 : 00 , the Austrians still held the redoubt and the houses at the edge of the village ; the arrival of a fresh battalion of the 12th Regiment led to a new attack , but it was repulsed . Ultimately , though , the Austrians had insufficient reserves to meet the fresh troops from Strasbourg . By 23 : 00 , the French had recovered all of the Strasbourg suburbs , the village of Kehl and all of the French earthen works . 
 According to Digby Smith and his sources , the Austrians lost 2 @,@ 000 men killed , missing and wounded , and the French : 1 @,@ 200 missing and captured . German sources report , though , that the Austrians lost 1 @,@ 500 men and 300 prisoners , and the French had 300 dead and 800 wounded . 
 = = Impact of September action = = 
 Despite the limited success of Petrasch 's action , the action had a broad impact on the movements of the main armies of Moreau and Archduke Charles , which still maneuvered to the east . Moreau 's army would <unk> through the Black Forest mountains , which lay to the east . By controlling the eastern access to the Kehl / Strasbourg crossing , Petrasch forced Moreau to march south ; any retreat into France would have to occur via the bridges at Hüningen , a longer march , not at Kehl and Strasbourg . The next contact between the main armies occurred on 19 October at Emmendingen in the Elz valley , which winds through the Black Forest . The section of the valley involved in the battle runs south @-@ west through the mountains from Elzach , through Bleibach and Waldkirch . Just to the south @-@ west of Waldkirch , the river emerges from the mountains and flows north @-@ west towards the Rhine , with the Black Forest to its right . This section of the river passes through Emmendingen before it reaches Riegel . Riegel sits in a narrow gap between the Black Forest and an isolated outcropping of volcanic hills known as the Kaiserstuhl . 
 The Austrian and French armies met again at Schliengen on 24 October . Moreau had arrayed his force in a semi @-@ circle on the heights , offering him a tactically superior position . Charles threw his army against both flanks ; the French left flank fought stubbornly , but gave way under the pressure of Condé 's emigre corps ; the right flank withstood a day @-@ long battering by Latour and Nauendorf , but eventually had to withdraw . The loss of access to the crossing at Kehl forced Moreau to withdraw south to Hüningen . 
 With a strong rear guard provided by Generals Abbatucci and Lariboisière , he abandoned his position the same night and retreated part of the 9 @.@ 7 miles ( 16 km ) to Hüningen . The right and left wings followed . By 3 November , he had reached Haltingen , where he organized his force to cross over the bridges into France . The Archduke then sent most of his army north to besiege Kehl . 
 = = Orders of battle = = 
 The following troops participated in the action at Kehl . 
 = = = French = = = 
 24th Demi @-@ brigade de Ligne ( one battalion ) 
 68th Demi @-@ brigade de Ligne ( three battalions ) 
 104th Demi @-@ brigade de Ligne ( remnants ) 
 19th Dragoon Regiment ( two squadrons ) 
 = = = Austrian = = = 
 Infantry Regiment Nr. 12 ( three battalions ) 
 Infantry Regiment Nr. 15 ( three battalions ) 
 Infantry Regiment Nr. 38 ( elements ) 
 = The Singles 1992 – 2003 = 
 The Singles 1992 – 2003 is a greatest hits album by American rock band No Doubt , released on November 14 , 2003 by Interscope Records . It features thirteen of the band 's singles from three studio albums — Tragic Kingdom ( 1995 ) , Return of Saturn ( 2000 ) , and Rock Steady ( 2001 ) — and the single " Trapped in a Box " from their 1992 self @-@ titled debut album . The album also included a cover of Talk Talk 's 1984 song " It 's My Life " , the only new song on the album and which was released as a single . It was released alongside the DVD Rock Steady Live , a video of a concert as part of the band 's Rock Steady tour in 2002 , and the box set Boom Box , which contained The Singles 1992 – 2003 , Everything in Time , The Videos 1992 – 2003 , and Live in the Tragic Kingdom . 
 No Doubt went into hiatus in April 2003 after the release of four singles from their fifth studio album , Rock Steady , allowing the four members to spend time with loved ones . This also allowed their lead singer , Gwen Stefani , to work on her solo music side project , under which she has released two albums , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. in November 2004 and The Sweet Escape in December 2006 . The band regrouped in September 2003 to record the lead single for the album , " It 's My Life " , with producer Nellee Hooper . Additionally , in May 2010 , the band regrouped again to start work on their latest record . 
 The album sold moderately well , being certified double platinum in the United States , United Kingdom and Canada , and platinum in Australia . It received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who praised the variety of music genres on the album . The album was re @-@ released on November 2 , 2010 under the title Icon , featuring different artwork . 
 = = Background = = 
 No Doubt released their fifth studio album , Rock Steady , in December 2001 and from it released four singles , " Hey Baby " , " Hella Good " , " Underneath It All " , and " Running " between 2001 and 2003 . The album was commercially successful , selling three million copies worldwide and being certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . In April 2003 , No Doubt went into hiatus to take a break to spend time with their families before starting to compile The Singles 1992 – 2003 , which would feature the band 's greatest hits from their previous albums . 
 The main reason to go into hiatus was that , in early 2003 , their lead singer Gwen Stefani started work on her 1980s @-@ inspired new wave / dance @-@ pop music side project , under which she has released two solo albums — Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on November 23 , 2004 and The Sweet Escape on December 5 , 2006 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The album was a compilation of thirteen commercially released singles by the band from their previous studio albums , Tragic Kingdom , Return of Saturn , and Rock Steady , as well as the independently released single " Trapped in a Box " from No Doubt 's self @-@ titled debut album , and a brand @-@ new cover version of " It 's My Life " . However , The Singles did not include " Happy Now ? " and " Hey You ! " , two singles from Tragic Kingdom , neither of which were commercially successful , or " Squeal " and " Doghouse " from The Beacon Street Collection , which were both independently released . " Girls Get the Bass in the Back " , a remix of " Hey Baby " , and a live acoustic version of " Underneath It All " were included as bonus tracks on international pressings of the album . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Being a greatest hits album and containing only one new song , recording The Singles 1992 – 2003 took very little time compared with the band 's studio albums . Production started in September 2003 with the recording of a cover version of Talk Talk 's song " It 's My Life " , produced by Nellee Hooper . The accompanying music video for the song was filmed by director David LaChapelle at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . Stefani insisted that just because no songwriting was involved in the production of the album did not mean no effort would be needed : the band had to decide which of their songs to include and which to leave out . Two months later on November 25 , the album was released along with the B @-@ side , rarity , and remix collection Everything in Time and box set Boom Box . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The only single from The Singles 1992 – 2003 was a cover of the song " It 's My Life " , originally released in 1984 by the synthpop band Talk Talk . Because the band were taking a break while lead singer Stefani recorded her solo debut album Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , they decided to do a cover version to avoid having to write a new song . The band listened to hundreds of songs and narrowed it down to " It 's My Life " and the song " Don 't Change " , released in 1982 by Australian new wave band INXS . No Doubt had doubts on recording a cover and contemplated writing new material , but decided on " It 's My Life " after rehearsing the song with producer Nellee Hooper , referring to it as a " feel @-@ good " song . Stefani stated : 
 We thought [ choosing a song to cover ] was going to be so easy , because that was the idea — ' Let 's just do something that 's fun and easy , why do we also have to , like , torture ourselves . ' We went and listened to hundreds of songs , hundreds , and imagine trying to pick one , between the four of us ? Oh my God , it was ridiculous . 
 " It 's My Life " later became one of the band 's biggest hits , being certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association and gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The song was nominated for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 47th Grammy Awards , but lost out to Los Lonely Boys ' " Heaven " . Stuart Price ( also known as Jacques Lu Cont ) , the song 's programmer , created the Thin White Duke mix of " It 's My Life " , which won the award for Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Singles 1992 – 2003 was generally well received by music critics . Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody described the album as " a real joy for anyone who has a taste for Gwen Stefani 's yearning vocals and her band 's uncanny ability to mix ska , teen pop and hip @-@ hop . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the album a " stellar collection " , concluding that it is " the kind of compilation that satisfies fans of all stripes and converts skeptics . It 's the greatest @-@ hits package that [ No Doubt ] deserve [ s ] . " Anthony Thornton of NME stated , " Despite being an album packed with as much drama as the band themselves have suffered , it 'll be the pop anthems you come back for and fortunately there 's enough here to keep even the soap addicts happy . " Sara McDonnell of musicOMH wrote that the album 's music had " sheer diversity " due to the band 's " pick ' n mix approach to musical styles " . The high points were " Gwen Stefani 's lyrics , which deal principally with coming to terms with her own femininity " and " the band 's collaborations with various hip producers " , such as The Neptunes , Nellee Hooper and Sly and Robbie ; and the low points were the album 's " hotch @-@ potch feel " , " random <unk> " and the " forays into reggae " . Ruth Mitchell of the BBC Music viewed the album as a typical Christmas album that was " unlikely to stand out from the crowd " and " too long , [ getting ] tiresome about half way through " , although complimenting " Just a Girl " , " Hey Baby " and " Underneath It All " . However , she also expressed disappointment at the placement of " Don 't Speak " , " the foursome 's most glorious pop moment " , at the end of the album . The Rolling Stone Album Guide later gave the album four stars out of five . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The Singles 1992 – 2003 debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 253 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on July 21 , 2004 , and has sold 2 @.@ 2 million copies in the United States . In Canada , the album was certified double platinum on June 13 , 2005 by the Canadian Recording Industry Association , denoting sales of over 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , the album was certified gold in 2003 and platinum in 2004 by the Australian Recording Industry Association , signalling sales of over 35 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 units , respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 ^ b signifies an executive producer 
 ^ c signifies a remixer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Singles 1992 – 2003 . 
 No Doubt 
 Gwen Stefani – vocals 
 Tom Dumont – additional engineering , programming ( tracks 3 , 10 ) , guitar , keyboards 
 Tony Kanal – additional engineering , programming ( tracks 3 , 10 ) , saxophone ( track 8 ) , bass , keyboards 
 Adrian Young – drums , percussion 
 No Doubt – production ( tracks 2 , 3 , 6 – 8 , 10 , 15 , 16 ) 
 Additional personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Statue of Liberty = 
 The Statue of Liberty ( Liberty Enlightening the World ; French : La Liberté <unk> le monde ) is a colossal neoclassical sculpture on Liberty Island in New York Harbor in New York City , in the United States . The copper statue , designed by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi , a French sculptor , was built by Gustave Eiffel and dedicated on October 28 , 1886 . It was a gift to the United States from the people of France . The statue is of a robed female figure representing Libertas , the Roman goddess , who bears a torch and a tabula <unk> ( a tablet evoking the law ) upon which is inscribed the date of the American Declaration of Independence , July 4 , 1776 . A broken chain lies at her feet . The statue is an icon of freedom and of the United States , and was a welcoming sight to immigrants arriving from abroad . 
 Bartholdi was inspired by French law professor and politician Édouard René de Laboulaye , who is said to have commented in 1865 that any monument raised to American independence would properly be a joint project of the French and American peoples . He may have been minded to honor the Union victory in the American Civil War and the end of slavery . Due to the post @-@ war instability in France , work on the statue did not commence until the early 1870s . In 1875 , Laboulaye proposed that the French finance the statue and the Americans provide the site and build the pedestal . Bartholdi completed the head and the torch @-@ bearing arm before the statue was fully designed , and these pieces were exhibited for publicity at international expositions . 
 The torch @-@ bearing arm was displayed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876 , and in Madison Square Park in Manhattan from 1876 to 1882 . Fundraising proved difficult , especially for the Americans , and by 1885 work on the pedestal was threatened due to lack of funds . Publisher Joseph Pulitzer of the New York World started a drive for donations to complete the project that attracted more than 120 @,@ 000 contributors , most of whom gave less than a dollar . The statue was constructed in France , shipped overseas in crates , and assembled on the completed pedestal on what was then called Bedloe 's Island . The statue 's completion was marked by New York 's first ticker @-@ tape parade and a dedication ceremony presided over by President Grover Cleveland . 
 The statue was administered by the United States Lighthouse Board until 1901 and then by the Department of War ; since 1933 it has been maintained by the National Park Service . The statue was closed for renovation for much of 1938 . In the early 1980s , it was found to have deteriorated to such an extent that a major restoration was required . While the statue was closed from 1984 to 1986 , the torch and a large part of the internal structure were replaced . After the September 11 attacks in 2001 , it was closed for reasons of safety and security ; the pedestal reopened in 2004 and the statue in 2009 , with limits on the number of visitors allowed to ascend to the crown . The statue , including the pedestal and base , was closed for a year until October 28 , 2012 , so that a secondary staircase and other safety features could be installed ; Liberty Island remained open . However , one day after the reopening , Liberty Island closed due to the effects of Hurricane Sandy in New York ; the statue and island opened again on July 4 , 2013 . Public access to the balcony surrounding the torch has been barred for safety reasons since 1916 . 
 = = Design and construction process = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 According to the National Park Service , the idea for the Statue of Liberty was first proposed by Édouard René de Laboulaye the president of the French Anti @-@ Slavery Society and a prominent and important political thinker of his time . The project is traced to a conversation between Édouard René de Laboulaye , a staunch abolitionist and Frédéric Bartholdi , a sculptor in mid @-@ 1865 . In after @-@ dinner conversation at his home near Versailles , Laboulaye , an ardent supporter of the Union in the American Civil War , is supposed to have said : " If a monument should rise in the United States , as a memorial to their independence , I should think it only natural if it were built by united effort — a common work of both our nations . " The National Park Service , in a 2000 report , however , deemed this a legend traced to an 1885 fundraising pamphlet , and that the statue was most likely conceived in 1870 . In another essay on their website , the Park Service suggested that Laboulaye was minded to honor the Union victory and its consequences , " With the abolition of slavery and the Union 's victory in the Civil War in 1865 , Laboulaye 's wishes of freedom and democracy were turning into a reality in the United States . In order to honor these achievements , Laboulaye proposed that a gift be built for the United States on behalf of France . Laboulaye hoped that by calling attention to the recent achievements of the United States , the French people would be inspired to call for their own democracy in the face of a repressive monarchy . " 
 According to sculptor Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi , who later recounted the story , Laboulaye 's comment was not intended as a proposal , but it inspired Bartholdi . Given the repressive nature of the regime of Napoleon III , Bartholdi took no immediate action on the idea except to discuss it with Laboulaye . Bartholdi was in any event busy with other possible projects ; in the late 1860s , he approached Isma 'il Pasha , Khedive of Egypt , with a plan to build a huge lighthouse in the form of an ancient Egyptian female fellah or peasant , robed and holding a torch aloft , at the northern entrance to the Suez Canal in Port Said . Sketches and models were made of the proposed work , though it was never erected . There was a classical precedent for the Suez proposal , the Colossus of Rhodes : an ancient bronze statue of the Greek god of the sun , Helios . This statue is believed to have been over 100 feet ( 30 m ) high , and it similarly stood at a harbor entrance and carried a light to guide ships . 
 Any large project was further delayed by the Franco @-@ Prussian War , in which Bartholdi served as a major of militia . In the war , Napoleon III was captured and deposed . Bartholdi 's home province of Alsace was lost to the Prussians , and a more liberal republic was installed in France . As Bartholdi had been planning a trip to the United States , he and Laboulaye decided the time was right to discuss the idea with influential Americans . In June 1871 , Bartholdi crossed the Atlantic , with letters of introduction signed by Laboulaye . 
 Arriving at New York Harbor , Bartholdi focused on Bedloe 's Island as a site for the statue , struck by the fact that vessels arriving in New York had to sail past it . He was delighted to learn that the island was owned by the United States government — it had been ceded by the New York State Legislature in 1800 for harbor defense . It was thus , as he put it in a letter to Laboulaye : " land common to all the states . " As well as meeting many influential New Yorkers , Bartholdi visited President Ulysses S. Grant , who assured him that it would not be difficult to obtain the site for the statue . Bartholdi crossed the United States twice by rail , and met many Americans who he thought would be sympathetic to the project . But he remained concerned that popular opinion on both sides of the Atlantic was insufficiently supportive of the proposal , and he and Laboulaye decided to wait before mounting a public campaign . 
 Bartholdi had made a first model of his concept in 1870 . The son of a friend of Bartholdi 's , American artist John <unk> , later maintained that Bartholdi made the first sketches for the statue during his U.S. visit at La Farge 's Rhode Island studio . Bartholdi continued to develop the concept following his return to France . He also worked on a number of sculptures designed to bolster French patriotism after the defeat by the Prussians . One of these was the Lion of Belfort , a monumental sculpture carved in sandstone below the fortress of Belfort , which during the war had resisted a Prussian siege for over three months . The defiant lion , 73 feet ( 22 m ) long and half that in height , displays an emotional quality characteristic of Romanticism , which Bartholdi would later bring to the Statue of Liberty . 
 = = = Design , style , and symbolism = = = 
 Bartholdi and Laboulaye considered how best to express the idea of American liberty . In early American history , two female figures were frequently used as cultural symbols of the nation . One of these symbols , the personified Columbia , was seen as an embodiment of the United States in the manner that Britannia was identified with the United Kingdom and Marianne came to represent France . Columbia had supplanted the earlier figure of an Indian princess , which had come to be regarded as uncivilized and derogatory toward Americans . The other significant female icon in American culture was a representation of Liberty , derived from Libertas , the goddess of freedom widely worshipped in ancient Rome , especially among emancipated slaves . A Liberty figure adorned most American coins of the time , and representations of Liberty appeared in popular and civic art , including Thomas Crawford 's Statue of Freedom ( 1863 ) atop the dome of the United States Capitol Building . 
 Artists of the 18th and 19th centuries striving to evoke republican ideals commonly used representations of Libertas as an allegorical symbol . A figure of Liberty was also depicted on the Great Seal of France . However , Bartholdi and Laboulaye avoided an image of revolutionary liberty such as that depicted in Eugène Delacroix 's famed Liberty Leading the People ( 1830 ) . In this painting , which commemorates France 's Revolution of 1830 , a half @-@ clothed Liberty leads an armed mob over the bodies of the fallen . Laboulaye had no sympathy for revolution , and so Bartholdi 's figure would be fully dressed in flowing robes . Instead of the impression of violence in the Delacroix work , Bartholdi wished to give the statue a peaceful appearance and chose a torch , representing progress , for the figure to hold . 
 Crawford 's statue was designed in the early 1850s . It was originally to be crowned with a pileus , the cap given to emancipated slaves in ancient Rome . Secretary of War Jefferson Davis , a Southerner who would later serve as President of the Confederate States of America , was concerned that the pileus would be taken as an abolitionist symbol . He ordered that it be changed to a helmet . Delacroix 's figure wears a pileus , and Bartholdi at first considered placing one on his figure as well . Instead , he used a diadem , or crown , to top its head . In so doing , he avoided a reference to Marianne , who invariably wears a pileus . The seven rays form a halo or aureole . They evoke the sun , the seven seas , and the seven continents , and represent another means , besides the torch , whereby Liberty enlightens the world . 
 Bartholdi 's early models were all similar in concept : a female figure in neoclassical style representing liberty , wearing a stola and <unk> ( gown and cloak , common in depictions of Roman goddesses ) and holding a torch aloft . According to popular accounts , the face was modeled after that of Charlotte <unk> Bartholdi , the sculptor 's mother , but Regis Huber , the curator of the Bartholdi Museum is on record as saying that this , as well as other similar speculations , have no basis in fact . He designed the figure with a strong , uncomplicated silhouette , which would be set off well by its dramatic harbor placement and allow passengers on vessels entering New York Bay to experience a changing perspective on the statue as they proceeded toward Manhattan . He gave it bold classical contours and applied simplified modeling , reflecting the huge scale of the project and its solemn purpose . Bartholdi wrote of his technique : 
 The surfaces should be broad and simple , defined by a bold and clear design , accentuated in the important places . The enlargement of the details or their multiplicity is to be feared . By exaggerating the forms , in order to render them more clearly visible , or by enriching them with details , we would destroy the proportion of the work . Finally , the model , like the design , should have a summarized character , such as one would give to a rapid sketch . Only it is necessary that this character should be the product of volition and study , and that the artist , concentrating his knowledge , should find the form and the line in its greatest simplicity . 
 Bartholdi made alterations in the design as the project evolved . Bartholdi considered having Liberty hold a broken chain , but decided this would be too divisive in the days after the Civil War . The erected statue does rise over a broken chain , half @-@ hidden by her robes and difficult to see from the ground . Bartholdi was initially uncertain of what to place in Liberty 's left hand ; he settled on a tabula <unk> , a keystone @-@ shaped tablet used to evoke the concept of law . Though Bartholdi greatly admired the United States Constitution , he chose to inscribe " JULY IV <unk> " on the tablet , thus associating the date of the country 's Declaration of Independence with the concept of liberty . 
 Bartholdi interested his friend and mentor , architect Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc , in the project . As chief engineer , Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc designed a brick pier within the statue , to which the skin would be anchored . After consultations with the metalwork foundry Gaget , Gauthier & Co . , Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc chose the metal which would be used for the skin , copper sheets , and the method used to shape it , repoussé , in which the sheets were heated and then struck with wooden hammers . An advantage of this choice was that the entire statue would be light for its volume , as the copper need be only 0 @.@ 094 inches ( 2 @.@ 4 mm ) thick . Bartholdi had decided on a height of just over 151 feet ( 46 m ) for the statue , double that of Italy 's <unk> and the German statue of Arminius , both made with the same method . 
 = = = Announcement and early work = = = 
 By 1875 , France was enjoying improved political stability and a recovering postwar economy . Growing interest in the upcoming Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia led Laboulaye to decide it was time to seek public support . In September 1875 , he announced the project and the formation of the Franco @-@ American Union as its fundraising arm . With the announcement , the statue was given a name , Liberty Enlightening the World . The French would finance the statue ; Americans would be expected to pay for the pedestal . The announcement provoked a generally favorable reaction in France , though many Frenchmen resented the United States for not coming to their aid during the war with Prussia . French monarchists opposed the statue , if for no other reason than it was proposed by the liberal Laboulaye , who had recently been elected a senator for life . Laboulaye arranged events designed to appeal to the rich and powerful , including a special performance at the Paris Opera on April 25 , 1876 , that featured a new cantata by composer Charles Gounod . The piece was titled La Liberté <unk> le monde , the French version of the statue 's announced name . 
 Despite its initial focus on the elites , the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society . Schoolchildren and ordinary citizens gave , as did 181 French municipalities . Laboulaye 's political allies supported the call , as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War . Less <unk> , contributions came from those who hoped for American support in the French attempt to build the Panama Canal . The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in <unk> , Norway , though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples . According to Cara Sutherland in her book on the statue for the Museum of the City of New York , 90 @,@ 800 kilos ( 200 @,@ 000 pounds ) was needed to build the statue , and the French copper industrialist Eugène <unk> donated 58 @,@ 100 kilos ( 128 @,@ 000 pounds ) of copper . Historian Yasmin Khan , in her 2010 book about the statue , states that the firm of <unk> Frères , copper merchants , donated copper valued at 64 @,@ 000 francs ( about $ 16 @,@ 000 at the time or the equivalent of US $ 356 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . 
 Although plans for the statue had not been finalized , Bartholdi moved forward with fabrication of the right arm , bearing the torch , and the head . Work began at the Gaget , Gauthier & Co. workshop . In May 1876 , Bartholdi traveled to the United States as a member of a French delegation to the Centennial Exhibition , and arranged for a huge painting of the statue to be shown in New York as part of the Centennial festivities . The arm did not arrive in Philadelphia until August ; because of its late arrival , it was not listed in the exhibition catalogue , and while some reports correctly identified the work , others called it the " Colossal Arm " or " Bartholdi Electric Light " . The exhibition grounds contained a number of monumental artworks to compete for fairgoers ' interest , including an outsized fountain designed by Bartholdi . Nevertheless , the arm proved popular in the exhibition 's waning days , and visitors would climb up to the balcony of the torch to view the fairgrounds . After the exhibition closed , the arm was transported to New York , where it remained on display in Madison Square Park for several years before it was returned to France to join the rest of the statue . 
 During his second trip to the United States , Bartholdi addressed a number of groups about the project , and urged the formation of American committees of the Franco @-@ American Union . Committees to raise money to pay for the foundation and pedestal were formed in New York , Boston , and Philadelphia . The New York group eventually took on most of the responsibility for American fundraising and is often referred to as the " American Committee " . One of its members was 19 @-@ year @-@ old Theodore Roosevelt , the future governor of New York and president of the United States . On March 3 , 1877 , on his final full day in office , President Grant signed a joint resolution that authorized the President to accept the statue when it was presented by France and to select a site for it . President Rutherford B. Hayes , who took office the following day , selected the Bedloe 's Island site that Bartholdi had proposed . 
 = = = Construction in France = = = 
 On his return to Paris in 1877 , Bartholdi concentrated on completing the head , which was exhibited at the 1878 Paris World 's Fair . Fundraising continued , with models of the statue put on sale . Tickets to view the construction activity at the Gaget , Gauthier & Co. workshop were also offered . The French government authorized a lottery ; among the prizes were valuable silver plate and a terracotta model of the statue . By the end of 1879 , about 250 @,@ 000 francs had been raised . 
 The head and arm had been built with assistance from Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc , who fell ill in 1879 . He soon died , leaving no indication of how he intended to transition from the copper skin to his proposed masonry pier . The following year , Bartholdi was able to obtain the services of the innovative designer and builder Gustave Eiffel . Eiffel and his structural engineer , Maurice Koechlin , decided to abandon the pier and instead build an iron truss tower . Eiffel opted not to use a completely rigid structure , which would force stresses to accumulate in the skin and lead eventually to cracking . A secondary skeleton was attached to the center pylon , then , to enable the statue to move slightly in the winds of New York Harbor and as the metal expanded on hot summer days , he loosely connected the support structure to the skin using flat iron bars which culminated in a mesh of metal straps , known as " saddles " , that were riveted to the skin , providing firm support . In a labor @-@ intensive process , each saddle had to be crafted individually . To prevent galvanic corrosion between the copper skin and the iron support structure , Eiffel insulated the skin with asbestos impregnated with shellac . 
 Eiffel 's design made the statue one of the earliest examples of curtain wall construction , in which the exterior of the structure is not load bearing , but is instead supported by an interior framework . He included two interior spiral staircases , to make it easier for visitors to reach the observation point in the crown . Access to an observation platform surrounding the torch was also provided , but the narrowness of the arm allowed for only a single ladder , 40 feet ( 12 m ) long . As the pylon tower arose , Eiffel and Bartholdi coordinated their work carefully so that completed segments of skin would fit exactly on the support structure . The components of the pylon tower were built in the Eiffel factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois @-@ Perret . 
 The change in structural material from masonry to iron allowed Bartholdi to change his plans for the statue 's assembly . He had originally expected to assemble the skin on @-@ site as the masonry pier was built ; instead he decided to build the statue in France and have it disassembled and transported to the United States for reassembly in place on Bedloe 's Island . 
 In a symbolic act , the first rivet placed into the skin , fixing a copper plate onto the statue 's big toe , was driven by United States Ambassador to France Levi P. Morton . The skin was not , however , crafted in exact sequence from low to high ; work proceeded on a number of segments simultaneously in a manner often confusing to visitors . Some work was performed by contractors — one of the fingers was made to Bartholdi 's exacting specifications by a <unk> in the southern French town of Montauban . By 1882 , the statue was complete up to the waist , an event <unk> celebrated by inviting reporters to lunch on a platform built within the statue . Laboulaye died in 1883 . He was succeeded as chairman of the French committee by Ferdinand de Lesseps , builder of the Suez Canal . The completed statue was formally presented to Ambassador Morton at a ceremony in Paris on July 4 , 1884 , and de Lesseps announced that the French government had agreed to pay for its transport to New York . The statue remained intact in Paris pending sufficient progress on the pedestal ; by January 1885 , this had occurred and the statue was disassembled and crated for its ocean voyage . 
 The committees in the United States faced great difficulties in obtaining funds for the construction of the pedestal . The Panic of 1873 had led to an economic depression that persisted through much of the decade . The Liberty statue project was not the only such undertaking that had difficulty raising money : construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years ; it would ultimately take over three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half decades to complete . There was criticism both of Bartholdi 's statue and of the fact that the gift required Americans to foot the bill for the pedestal . In the years following the Civil War , most Americans preferred realistic artworks depicting heroes and events from the nation 's history , rather than allegorical works like the Liberty statue . There was also a feeling that Americans should design American public works — the selection of Italian @-@ born Constantino <unk> to decorate the Capitol had provoked intense criticism , even though he was a naturalized U.S. citizen . Harper 's Weekly declared its wish that " M. Bartholdi and our French cousins had ' gone the whole figure ' while they were about it , and given us statue and pedestal at once . " The New York Times stated that " no true patriot can countenance any such expenditures for bronze females in the present state of our finances . " Faced with these criticisms , the American committees took little action for several years . 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The foundation of Bartholdi 's statue was to be laid inside Fort Wood , a disused army base on Bedloe 's Island constructed between 1807 and 1811 . Since 1823 , it had rarely been used , though during the Civil War , it had served as a recruiting station . The fortifications of the structure were in the shape of an eleven @-@ point star . The statue 's foundation and pedestal were aligned so that it would face southeast , greeting ships entering the harbor from the Atlantic Ocean . In 1881 , the New York committee commissioned Richard Morris Hunt to design the pedestal . Within months , Hunt submitted a detailed plan , indicating that he expected construction to take about nine months . He proposed a pedestal 114 feet ( 35 m ) in height ; faced with money problems , the committee reduced that to 89 feet ( 27 m ) . 
 Hunt 's pedestal design contains elements of classical architecture , including Doric portals , as well as some elements influenced by Aztec architecture . The large mass is fragmented with architectural detail , in order to focus attention on the statue . In form , it is a truncated pyramid , 62 feet ( 19 m ) square at the base and 39 @.@ 4 feet ( 12 @.@ 0 m ) at the top . The four sides are identical in appearance . Above the door on each side , there are ten disks upon which Bartholdi proposed to place the coats of arms of the states ( between 1876 and 1889 , there were 38 U.S. states ) , although this was not done . Above that , a balcony was placed on each side , framed by pillars . Bartholdi placed an observation platform near the top of the pedestal , above which the statue itself rises . According to author Louis Auchincloss , the pedestal " <unk> evokes the power of an ancient Europe over which rises the dominating figure of the Statue of Liberty " . The committee hired former army General Charles Pomeroy Stone to oversee the construction work . Construction on the 15 @-@ foot @-@ deep ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) foundation began in 1883 , and the pedestal 's cornerstone was laid in 1884 . In Hunt 's original conception , the pedestal was to have been made of solid granite . Financial concerns again forced him to revise his plans ; the final design called for poured concrete walls , up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) thick , faced with granite blocks . This Stony Creek granite came from the Beattie Quarry in Branford , Connecticut . The concrete mass was the largest poured to that time . 
 Norwegian immigrant civil engineer Joachim Goschen Giæver designed the structural framework for the Statue of Liberty . His work involved design computations , detailed fabrication and construction drawings , and oversight of construction . In completing his engineering for the statue 's frame , Giæver worked from drawings and sketches produced by Gustave Eiffel . 
 = = = = Fundraising = = = = 
 Fundraising for the statue had begun in 1882 . The committee organized a large number of money @-@ raising events . As part of one such effort , an auction of art and manuscripts , poet Emma Lazarus was asked to donate an original work . She initially declined , stating she could not write a poem about a statue . At the time , she was also involved in aiding refugees to New York who had fled anti @-@ Semitic pogroms in eastern Europe . These refugees were forced to live in conditions that the wealthy Lazarus had never experienced . She saw a way to express her empathy for these refugees in terms of the statue . The resulting sonnet , " The New Colossus " , including the iconic lines " Give me your tired , your poor / Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free " , is uniquely identified with the Statue of Liberty and is inscribed on a plaque in the museum in its base . 
 Even with these efforts , fundraising lagged . Grover Cleveland , the governor of New York , vetoed a bill to provide $ 50 @,@ 000 for the statue project in 1884 . An attempt the next year to have Congress provide $ 100 @,@ 000 , sufficient to complete the project , also failed . The New York committee , with only $ 3 @,@ 000 in the bank , suspended work on the pedestal . With the project in jeopardy , groups from other American cities , including Boston and Philadelphia , offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it . 
 Joseph Pulitzer , publisher of the New York World , a New York newspaper , announced a drive to raise $ 100 @,@ 000 — the equivalent of $ 2 @.@ 3 million today . Pulitzer pledged to print the name of every contributor , no matter how small the amount given . The drive captured the imagination of New Yorkers , especially when Pulitzer began publishing the notes he received from contributors . " A young girl alone in the world " donated " 60 cents , the result of self denial . " One donor gave " five cents as a poor office boy 's mite toward the Pedestal Fund . " A group of children sent a dollar as " the money we saved to go to the circus with . " Another dollar was given by a " lonely and very aged woman . " Residents of a home for alcoholics in New York 's rival city of Brooklyn — the cities would not merge until 1898 — donated $ 15 ; other drinkers helped out through donation boxes in bars and saloons . A kindergarten class in Davenport , Iowa , mailed the World a gift of $ 1 @.@ 35 . As the donations flooded in , the committee resumed work on the pedestal . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 On June 17 , 1885 , the French steamer Isère , laden with the Statue of Liberty , reached the New York port safely . New Yorkers displayed their new @-@ found enthusiasm for the statue , as the French vessel arrived with the crates holding the disassembled statue on board . Two hundred thousand people lined the docks and hundreds of boats put to sea to welcome the Isère . After five months of daily calls to donate to the statue fund , on August 11 , 1885 , the World announced that $ 102 @,@ 000 had been raised from 120 @,@ 000 donors , and that 80 percent of the total had been received in sums of less than one dollar . 
 Even with the success of the fund drive , the pedestal was not completed until April 1886 . Immediately thereafter , reassembly of the statue began . Eiffel 's iron framework was anchored to steel I @-@ beams within the concrete pedestal and assembled . Once this was done , the sections of skin were carefully attached . Due to the width of the pedestal , it was not possible to erect scaffolding , and workers dangled from ropes while installing the skin sections . Nevertheless , no one died during the construction . Bartholdi had planned to put floodlights on the torch 's balcony to illuminate it ; a week before the dedication , the Army Corps of Engineers vetoed the proposal , fearing that ships ' pilots passing the statue would be blinded . Instead , Bartholdi cut portholes in the torch — which was covered with gold leaf — and placed the lights inside them . A power plant was installed on the island to light the torch and for other electrical needs . After the skin was completed , renowned landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted , co @-@ designer of New York 's Central Park and Brooklyn 's Prospect Park , supervised a cleanup of Bedloe 's Island in anticipation of the dedication . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 A ceremony of dedication was held on the afternoon of October 28 , 1886 . President Grover Cleveland , the former New York governor , presided over the event . On the morning of the dedication , a parade was held in New York City ; estimates of the number of people who watched it ranged from several hundred thousand to a million . President Cleveland headed the procession , then stood in the reviewing stand to see bands and marchers from across America . General Stone was the grand marshal of the parade . The route began at Madison Square , once the venue for the arm , and proceeded to Battery Park at the southern tip of Manhattan by way of Fifth Avenue and Broadway , with a slight detour so the parade could pass in front of the World building on Park Row . As the parade passed the New York Stock Exchange , traders threw ticker tape from the windows , beginning the New York tradition of the ticker @-@ tape parade . 
 A nautical parade began at 12 : 45 p.m. , and President Cleveland embarked on a yacht that took him across the harbor to Bedloe 's Island for the dedication . De Lesseps made the first speech , on behalf of the French committee , followed by the chairman of the New York committee , Senator William M. Evarts . A French flag draped across the statue 's face was to be lowered to unveil the statue at the close of Evarts 's speech , but Bartholdi mistook a pause as the conclusion and let the flag fall prematurely . The ensuing cheers put an end to Evarts 's address . President Cleveland spoke next , stating that the statue 's " stream of light shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man 's oppression until Liberty enlightens the world " . Bartholdi , observed near the dais , was called upon to speak , but he refused . Orator Chauncey M. Depew concluded the speechmaking with a lengthy address . 
 No members of the general public were permitted on the island during the ceremonies , which were reserved entirely for dignitaries . The only females granted access were Bartholdi 's wife and de Lesseps 's granddaughter ; officials stated that they feared women might be injured in the crush of people . The restriction offended area suffragists , who chartered a boat and got as close as they could to the island . The group 's leaders made speeches applauding the embodiment of Liberty as a woman and advocating women 's right to vote . A scheduled fireworks display was postponed until November 1 because of poor weather . 
 Shortly after the dedication , The Cleveland Gazette , an African American newspaper , suggested that the statue 's torch not be lit until the United States became a free nation " in reality " : 
 " Liberty enlightening the world , " indeed ! The expression makes us sick . This government is a howling farce . It can not or rather does not protect its citizens within its own borders . Shove the Bartholdi statue , torch and all , into the ocean until the " liberty " of this country is such as to make it possible for an inoffensive and industrious colored man to earn a respectable living for himself and family , without being ku @-@ <unk> , perhaps murdered , his daughter and wife outraged , and his property destroyed . The idea of the " liberty " of this country " enlightening the world , " or even Patagonia , is ridiculous in the extreme . 
 = = After dedication = = 
 = = = Lighthouse Board and War Department ( 1886 – 1933 ) = = = 
 When the torch was illuminated on the evening of the statue 's dedication , it produced only a faint gleam , barely visible from Manhattan . The World characterized it as " more like a <unk> than a beacon . " Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light , but this proved too expensive . The United States Lighthouse Board took over the Statue of Liberty in 1887 and pledged to install equipment to enhance the torch 's effect ; in spite of its efforts , the statue remained virtually invisible at night . When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893 , he made additional suggestions , all of which proved ineffective . He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue , allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel 's design . In 1901 , President Theodore Roosevelt , once a member of the New York committee , ordered the statue 's transfer to the War Department , as it had proved useless as a lighthouse . A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe 's Island until 1923 , after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction . 
 The statue rapidly became a landmark . Many immigrants who entered through New York saw it as a welcoming sight . Oral histories of immigrants record their feelings of exhilaration on first viewing the Statue of Liberty . One immigrant who arrived from Greece recalled , 
 I saw the Statue of Liberty . And I said to myself , " Lady , you 're such a beautiful ! [ sic ] You opened your arms and you get all the foreigners here . Give me a chance to prove that I am worth it , to do something , to be someone in America . " And always that statue was on my mind . 
 Originally , the statue was a dull copper color , but shortly after 1900 a green patina , also called verdigris , caused by the oxidation of the copper skin , began to spread . As early as 1902 it was mentioned in the press ; by 1906 it had entirely covered the statue . Believing that the patina was evidence of corrosion , Congress authorized $ 62 @,@ 800 for various repairs , and to paint the statue both inside and out . There was considerable public protest against the proposed exterior painting . The Army Corps of Engineers studied the patina for any ill effects to the statue and concluded that it protected the skin , " softened the outlines of the Statue and made it beautiful . " The statue was painted only on the inside . The Corps of Engineers also installed an elevator to take visitors from the base to the top of the pedestal . 
 On July 30 , 1916 , during World War I , German saboteurs set off a disastrous explosion on the Black Tom peninsula in Jersey City , New Jersey , in what is now part of Liberty State Park , close to Bedloe 's Island . <unk> of dynamite and other explosives that were being sent to Britain and France for their war efforts were detonated , and seven people were killed . The statue sustained minor damage , mostly to the torch @-@ bearing right arm , and was closed for ten days . The cost to repair the statue and buildings on the island was about $ 100 @,@ 000 . The narrow ascent to the torch was closed for public safety reasons , and it has remained closed ever since . 
 That same year , Ralph Pulitzer , who had succeeded his father Joseph as publisher of the World , began a drive to raise $ 30 @,@ 000 for an exterior lighting system to illuminate the statue at night . He claimed over 80 @,@ 000 contributors but failed to reach the goal . The difference was quietly made up by a gift from a wealthy donor — a fact that was not revealed until 1936 . An underwater power cable brought electricity from the mainland and floodlights were placed along the walls of Fort Wood . Gutzon Borglum , who later sculpted Mount Rushmore , redesigned the torch , replacing much of the original copper with stained glass . On December 2 , 1916 , President Woodrow Wilson pressed the telegraph key that turned on the lights , successfully illuminating the statue . 
 After the United States entered World War I in 1917 , images of the statue were heavily used in both recruitment posters and the Liberty Bond drives that urged American citizens to support the war financially . This impressed upon the public the war 's stated purpose — to secure liberty — and served as a reminder that embattled France had given the United States the statue . 
 In 1924 , President Calvin Coolidge used his authority under the Antiquities Act to declare the statue a National Monument . The only successful suicide in the statue 's history occurred five years later , when a man climbed out of one of the windows in the crown and jumped to his death , glancing off the statue 's breast and landing on the base . 
 = = = Early National Park Service years ( 1933 – 1982 ) = = = 
 In 1933 , President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the statue transferred to the National Park Service ( NPS ) . In 1937 , the NPS gained jurisdiction over the rest of Bedloe 's Island . With the Army 's departure , the NPS began to transform the island into a park . The Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) demolished most of the old buildings , regraded and reseeded the eastern end of the island , and built granite steps for a new public entrance to the statue from its rear . The WPA also carried out restoration work within the statue , temporarily removing the rays from the statue 's halo so their rusted supports could be replaced . <unk> cast @-@ iron steps in the pedestal were replaced with new ones made of reinforced concrete ; the upper parts of the stairways within the statue were replaced , as well . Copper sheathing was installed to prevent further damage from rainwater that had been seeping into the pedestal . The statue was closed to the public from May until December 1938 . 
 During World War II , the statue remained open to visitors , although it was not illuminated at night due to wartime blackouts . It was lit briefly on December 31 , 1943 , and on D @-@ Day , June 6 , 1944 , when its lights flashed " dot @-@ dot @-@ dot @-@ dash " , the Morse code for V , for victory . New , powerful lighting was installed in 1944 – 1945 , and beginning on V @-@ E Day , the statue was once again illuminated after sunset . The lighting was for only a few hours each evening , and it was not until 1957 that the statue was illuminated every night , all night . In 1946 , the interior of the statue within reach of visitors was coated with a special plastic so that graffiti could be washed away . 
 In 1956 , an Act of Congress officially renamed Bedloe 's Island as Liberty Island , a change advocated by Bartholdi generations earlier . The act also mentioned the efforts to found an American Museum of Immigration on the island , which backers took as federal approval of the project , though the government was slow to grant funds for it . Nearby Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by proclamation of President Lyndon Johnson in 1965 . In 1972 , the immigration museum , in the statue 's base , was finally opened in a ceremony led by President Richard Nixon . The museum 's backers never provided it with an endowment to secure its future and it closed in 1991 after the opening of an immigration museum on Ellis Island . 
 Beginning December 26 , 1971 , 15 anti @-@ Vietnam War veterans occupied the statue , flying a US flag upside down from her crown . They left December 28 following a Federal Court order . The statue was also several times taken over briefly by demonstrators publicizing causes such as Puerto Rican independence , opposition to abortion , and opposition to US intervention in Grenada . Demonstrations with the permission of the Park Service included a Gay Pride Parade rally and the annual Captive Baltic Nations rally . 
 A powerful new lighting system was installed in advance of the American Bicentennial in 1976 . The statue was the focal point for Operation Sail , a regatta of tall ships from all over the world that entered New York Harbor on July 4 , 1976 , and sailed around Liberty Island . The day concluded with a spectacular display of fireworks near the statue . 
 = = = Renovation and rededication ( 1982 – 2000 ) = = = 
 The statue was examined in great detail by French and American engineers as part of the planning for its centennial in 1986 . In 1982 , it was announced that the statue was in need of considerable restoration . Careful study had revealed that the right arm had been improperly attached to the main structure . It was swaying more and more when strong winds blew and there was a significant risk of structural failure . In addition , the head had been installed 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) off center , and one of the rays was wearing a hole in the right arm when the statue moved in the wind . The armature structure was badly corroded , and about two percent of the exterior plates needed to be replaced . Although problems with the armature had been recognized as early as 1936 , when cast iron replacements for some of the bars had been installed , much of the corrosion had been hidden by layers of paint applied over the years . 
 In May 1982 , President Ronald Reagan announced the formation of the Statue of Liberty – Ellis Island Centennial Commission , led by Chrysler Corporation chair Lee Iacocca , to raise the funds needed to complete the work . Through its fundraising arm , the Statue of Liberty – Ellis Island Foundation , Inc . , the group raised more than $ 350 million in donations . The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign . A 1983 promotion advertised that for each purchase made with an American Express card , the company would contribute one cent to the renovation of the statue . The campaign generated contributions of $ 1 @.@ 7 million to the restoration project . 
 In 1984 , the statue was closed to the public for the duration of the renovation . Workers erected the world 's largest free @-@ standing scaffold , which obscured the statue from view . Liquid nitrogen was used to remove layers of paint that had been applied to the interior of the copper skin over decades , leaving two layers of coal tar , originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion . Blasting with baking soda powder removed the tar without further damaging the copper . The restorers ' work was hampered by the asbestos @-@ based substance that Bartholdi had used — ineffectively , as inspections showed — to prevent galvanic corrosion . Workers within the statue had to wear protective gear , dubbed " moon suits " , with self @-@ contained breathing circuits . Larger holes in the copper skin were repaired , and new copper was added where necessary . The replacement skin was taken from a copper rooftop at Bell Labs , which had a patina that closely resembled the statue 's ; in exchange , the laboratory was provided some of the old copper skin for testing . The torch , found to have been leaking water since the 1916 alterations , was replaced with an exact replica of Bartholdi 's unaltered torch . Consideration was given to replacing the arm and shoulder ; the National Park Service insisted that they be repaired instead . The original torch was removed and replaced in 1986 with the current one , whose flame is covered in 24 @-@ carat gold . The torch reflects the sun 's rays in daytime and lighted by floodlights at night . 
 The entire puddled iron armature designed by Gustave Eiffel was replaced . Low @-@ carbon corrosion @-@ resistant stainless steel bars that now hold the staples next to the skin are made of <unk> , an alloy that bends slightly and returns to its original shape as the statue moves . To prevent the ray and arm making contact , the ray was realigned by several degrees . The lighting was again replaced — night @-@ time illumination subsequently came from metal @-@ halide lamps that send beams of light to particular parts of the pedestal or statue , showing off various details . Access to the pedestal , which had been through a nondescript entrance built in the 1960s , was renovated to create a wide opening framed by a set of monumental bronze doors with designs symbolic of the renovation . A modern elevator was installed , allowing handicapped access to the observation area of the pedestal . An emergency elevator was installed within the statue , reaching up to the level of the shoulder . 
 July 3 – 6 , 1986 , was designated " Liberty Weekend " , marking the centennial of the statue and its reopening . President Reagan presided over the rededication , with French President François Mitterrand in attendance . July 4 saw a reprise of Operation Sail , and the statue was reopened to the public on July 5 . In Reagan 's dedication speech , he stated , " We are the keepers of the flame of liberty ; we hold it high for the world to see . " 
 = = = <unk> and reopening ( 2001 – present ) = = = 
 Following the September 11 attacks , the statue and Liberty Island were immediately closed to the public . The island reopened at the end of 2001 , while the pedestal and statue remained off @-@ limits . The pedestal reopened in August 2004 , but the National Park Service announced that visitors could not safely be given access to the statue due to the difficulty of evacuation in an emergency . The Park Service adhered to that position through the remainder of the Bush administration . New York Congressman Anthony Weiner made the statue 's reopening a personal crusade . On May 17 , 2009 , President Barack Obama 's Secretary of the Interior , Ken Salazar , announced that as a " special gift " to America , the statue would be reopened to the public as of July 4 , but that only a limited number of people would be permitted to ascend to the crown each day . 
 The statue , including the pedestal and base , closed on October 29 , 2011 for installation of new elevators and staircases and to bring other facilities , such as restrooms , up to code . The statue was closed to the public until October 28 , 2012 . A day after the reopening , the statue closed again due to Hurricane Sandy . Although the storm did not harm the statue , it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty Island and Ellis Island , severely damaging the dock used by the ferries bearing visitors to the statue . On November 8 , 2012 , a Park Service spokesperson announced that both islands would remain closed for an indefinite period for repairs to be done . Due to lack of electricity on Liberty Island , a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night . The superintendent of Statue of Liberty National Monument , David <unk> , whose home on the island was severely damaged , stated that it would be " optimistically ... months " before the island was reopened to the public . The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4 , 2013 . Ellis Island remained closed for repairs for several more months but reopened in late October 2013 . For part of October 2013 , Liberty Island was closed to the public due to the United States federal government shutdown of 2013 , along with other federally funded museums , parks , monuments , construction projects and buildings . 
 = = Access and attributes = = 
 = = = Location and tourism = = = 
 The statue is situated in Upper New York Bay on Liberty Island south of Ellis Island , which together comprise the Statue of Liberty National Monument . Both islands were ceded by New York to the federal government in 1800 . As agreed in an 1834 compact between New York and New Jersey that set the state border at the bay 's midpoint , the original islands remain New York territory despite their location on the New Jersey side of the state line . Liberty Island is one of the islands that are part of the borough of Manhattan in New York . Land created by reclamation added to the 2 @.@ 3 acres ( 0 @.@ 93 ha ) original island at Ellis Island is New Jersey territory . 
 No charge is made for entrance to the national monument , but there is a cost for the ferry service that all visitors must use , as private boats may not dock at the island . A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities , replacing Circle Line , which had operated the service since 1953 . The ferries , which depart from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and Battery Park in Lower Manhattan , also stop at Ellis Island when it is open to the public , making a combined trip possible . All ferry riders are subject to security screening , similar to airport procedures , prior to boarding . Visitors intending to enter the statue 's base and pedestal must obtain a complimentary museum / pedestal ticket along with their ferry ticket . Those wishing to climb the staircase within the statue to the crown purchase a special ticket , which may be reserved up to a year in advance . A total of 240 people per day are permitted to ascend : ten per group , three groups per hour . Climbers may bring only medication and cameras — lockers are provided for other items — and must undergo a second security screening . 
 = = = Inscriptions , plaques , and dedications = = = 
 There are several plaques and dedicatory tablets on or near the Statue of Liberty . 
 A plaque on the copper just under the figure in front declares that it is a colossal statue representing Liberty , designed by Bartholdi and built by the Paris firm of Gaget , Gauthier et Cie ( Cie is the French abbreviation analogous to Co . ) . 
 A presentation tablet , also bearing Bartholdi 's name , declares the statue is a gift from the people of the Republic of France that honors " the Alliance of the two Nations in achieving the Independence of the United States of America and attests their abiding friendship . " 
 A tablet placed by the New York committee commemorates the fundraising done to build the pedestal . 
 The cornerstone bears a plaque placed by the Freemasons . 
 In 1903 , a bronze tablet that bears the text of Emma Lazarus 's sonnet , " The New Colossus " ( 1883 ) , was presented by friends of the poet . Until the 1986 renovation , it was mounted inside the pedestal ; today it resides in the Statue of Liberty Museum , in the base . 
 " The New Colossus " tablet is accompanied by a tablet given by the Emma Lazarus Commemorative Committee in 1977 , celebrating the poet 's life . 
 A group of statues stands at the western end of the island , honoring those closely associated with the Statue of Liberty . Two Americans — Pulitzer and Lazarus — and three Frenchmen — Bartholdi , Eiffel , and Laboulaye — are depicted . They are the work of Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner . 
 = = UNESCO World Heritage Site = = 
 In 1984 , the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site . The UNESCO " Statement of Significance " describes the statue as a " masterpiece of the human spirit " that " endures as a highly potent symbol — inspiring contemplation , debate and protest — of ideals such as liberty , peace , human rights , abolition of slavery , democracy and opportunity . " 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 = = Depictions = = 
 Hundreds of replicas of the Statue of Liberty are displayed worldwide . A smaller version of the statue , one @-@ fourth the height of the original , was given by the American community in Paris to that city . It now stands on the Île aux <unk> , facing west toward her larger sister . A replica 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) tall stood atop the Liberty Warehouse on West 64th Street in Manhattan for many years ; it now resides at the Brooklyn Museum . In a patriotic tribute , the Boy Scouts of America , as part of their Strengthen the Arm of Liberty campaign in 1949 – 1952 , donated about two hundred replicas of the statue , made of stamped copper and 100 inches ( 2 @,@ 500 mm ) in height , to states and municipalities across the United States . Though not a true replica , the statue known as the Goddess of Democracy temporarily erected during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 was similarly inspired by French democratic traditions — the sculptors took care to avoid a direct imitation of the Statue of Liberty . Among other recreations of New York City structures , a replica of the statue is part of the exterior of the New York @-@ New York Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas . 
 As an American icon , the Statue of Liberty has been depicted on the country 's coinage and stamps . It appeared on commemorative coins issued to mark its 1986 centennial , and on New York 's 2001 entry in the state quarters series . An image of the statue was chosen for the American Eagle platinum bullion coins in 1997 , and it was placed on the reverse , or tails , side of the Presidential Dollar series of circulating coins . Two images of the statue 's torch appear on the current ten @-@ dollar bill . The statue 's intended photographic depiction on a 2010 forever stamp proved instead to be of the replica at the Las Vegas casino . 
 Depictions of the statue have been used by many regional institutions . Between 1986 and 2000 , New York State issued license plates featuring the statue . The Women 's National Basketball Association 's New York Liberty use both the statue 's name and its image in their logo , in which the torch 's flame doubles as a basketball . The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League depicted the statue 's head on their third jersey , beginning in 1997 . The National Collegiate Athletic Association 's 1996 Men 's Basketball Final Four , played at New Jersey 's Meadowlands Sports Complex , featured the statue in its logo . The Libertarian Party of the United States uses the statue in its emblem . 
 The statue is a frequent subject in popular culture . In music , it has been evoked to indicate support for American policies , as in Toby Keith 's song " Courtesy of the Red , White and Blue ( The Angry American ) " , and in opposition , appearing on the cover of the Dead Kennedys ' album Bedtime for Democracy , which protested the Reagan administration . In film , the torch is the setting for the climax of director Alfred Hitchcock 's 1942 movie Saboteur . The statue makes one of its most famous cinematic appearances in the 1968 picture Planet of the Apes , in which it is seen half @-@ buried in sand . It is knocked over in the science @-@ fiction film Independence Day and in Cloverfield the head is ripped off . In Jack Finney 's time @-@ travel novel Time and Again , the right arm of the statue , on display in the early 1880s in Madison Square Park , plays a crucial role . Robert <unk> , consulting editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction , wondered in 1979 @,@ 
 Where would science fiction be without the Statue of Liberty ? For decades it has towered or crumbled above the wastelands of deserted [ E ] <unk> — giants have uprooted it , aliens have found it curious ... the symbol of Liberty , of optimism , has become a symbol of science fiction 's pessimistic view of the future . " 
 = The Philaletheis Society = 
 The Philaletheis Society ( often shortened to Philaletheis or just Phil and originally founded as The <unk> Society ) is a student theatre group at Vassar College in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York , and the school 's oldest student organization . Founded in December 1865 , Phil began as a college literary society and its first leader was college president John Howard Raymond . Control of the organization was swiftly handed to the students and the group split into three chapters , each with a distinct focus . The group maintained its literary focus until the 1890s , by which point dramatic productions had taken over in popularity . The tradition of producing four and later three plays per year continued into the mid @-@ twentieth century , but in 1958 , the organization disbanded due to lack of interest . It was revived in 1975 , first as an arm of student government and then as an independent student organization . 
 The group is run by an executive board that selects which plays to produce each year based on the proposals received from student @-@ directors . Auditions are open to all Vassar students but those interested in directing must have previously completed a directing workshop through the organization . 
 = = History = = 
 According to alumna Maria Dickinson McGraw , the creation of a college literary society at Vassar College in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York , was proposed by students during the first week of the school 's first year . Later that year , on December 2 , 1865 , the <unk> Society was founded , becoming the first student group at Vassar . It was organized and helmed by John Howard Raymond , president of the college . While Raymond was the organization 's first leader , students in the organization quickly saw fit to transition to self @-@ governance ; Raymond " was not re @-@ elected . " The Society 's first student president was M. L. Dickinson , who also served as one of the several editors of the inaugural edition of <unk> , the precursor the Vassar 's weekly newspaper , The Miscellany News . Named for the term <unk> , meaning " truth @-@ loving " , the Society was split into three distinct chapters , each with a specialized focus . The Alpha arm of the organization focused on literary works , the Beta chapter did dramatic exercises , and the Delta chapter was involved with musical pursuits . Later , it added a fourth chapter . Until the alumnae gymnasium — later Ely Hall — was built , the organization was headquartered in the Society Room on the second floor of the school 's <unk> and Riding Academy . 
 The Society 's first public meeting occurred in June 1866 , with invitations sent to Vassar students reading " The pleasure of your company is invited to a literary entertainment . " The event included music , prayer , and the <unk> of original poems , songs , essays , and a drama piece . Further meetings happened in December , at which point a scene from Henry VIII was produced , and again the following June , at which point Vassar students recited nine of William Shakespeare 's <unk> for female characters . By 1871 , the Society was sizable , consisting of 127 members . It retained its original literary focus through the 1890s . 
 The college 's 50th anniversary fell in 1915 ; by this point , the society had transitioned its focus exclusively to dramatic arts . In 1890 , when someone discovered that the term <unk> was not proper Greek , the group changed its name to the more correct Philaletheis Society or Phil for short . While the group had originally performed four shows per year , by 1915 it was down to three plays annually including one outdoors that was usually a Shakespeare show , and indoor productions of contemporary dramas , comedies , and older works such as The Critic and She Stoops to Conquer . The year 1908 saw the abolishment of the chapters and their plays , which had ostensibly come to serve as a proving ground for undiscovered Vassar women who wanted to take part in the larger productions sponsored by the entire Philaletheis organization . The chapters ' plays were prepared in just one week each leading to the criticism that their presentations were " hasty and patchy " , and the establishment of competitive auditions for the main Phil plays rendered obsolete the model of chapter plays as proving grounds for new actresses . The group had produced 147 full shows by this time . A song in a <unk> tempo , " Hail to thee , Philaletheis ! " , was published in 1908 . 
 Philaletheis had its offices in the 1913 Students ' Building for many years . The tradition of putting on three plays each year continued through the 1940s , including presenting the third and final play outdoors . In 1950 , Philaletheis was identified by the Miscellany News as one of the " Big Five " organizations , a quintet of student groups " which include [ d ] nearly every extra @-@ curricular activity which [ took ] place on campus " . Each student became a member of each of the Big Five organizations upon their matriculation to the college . In 1958 , however , the group 's focus had shifted and it now stood primarily as an organization through which freshmen could try out theatre arts before moving on to the drama department for more serious dramatic work . Later that year , Philaletheis disbanded due to insufficient interest from students . 
 = = = Reboot = = = 
 In 1975 , a group of students interested in extracurricular theatre revived the Philaletheis Society after a 17 @-@ year absence . Citing an interest in producing shows without being involved in the college 's drama department ( a requirement for involvement at the time ) , the rebooted Phil 's first performance was Agatha Christie 's The Mousetrap . The next year , the Student Government Association ( SGA ) took over the organization , merging it with its extant Drama Funds Committee to create " the sole producing agent of independent student theatre on the Vassar campus " . By the 1980s , Phil split from student government while retaining its funding from the latter . 
 The group was struggling to find space to rehearse and perform by 1989 . The Students ' Building where Philaletheis had once performed had been transformed into the All Campus Dining Center and the old performance space was neither replaced nor replicated elsewhere on campus . To <unk> this , in 1993 and 1994 , Vassar invested in the renovation of one of its disused buildings , a former functioning coal bin , into the Coal Bin Theater to be used by Philaletheis and the other student theatre and comedy groups that had been created by this time . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Early in the Society 's history , when its focus was still primarily literary , membership was considered by a committee for three days and then voted upon . By 1908 , that model had been abandoned in favor of an open system in which any student who paid an annual fee could be part of the group . At that time , Philaletheis was governed by a six @-@ member board consisting of a president and vice @-@ president ( both seniors ) , secretary , treasurer , and props manager ( juniors ) , and an assistant props manager ( a sophomore ) . In 1951 , the board was vastly expanded to include managers of scenery , lights , sound , makeup , publicity , and a number of other fields . 
 The rebooted 1975 version of Philaletheis , as a committee of the SGA , was governed by the SGA 's president . Membership was by application for all positions . Once the organization split from student government , it was run by a seven @-@ member board and accepted proposals for shows , ranging from musicals to one @-@ act plays . Recently , the Society has accepted proposals for shows at the beginning of every semester , then the production board has voted on which shows to produce . Each production then holds its own auditions for actors , with no experience required . Directors seeking to produce a full @-@ length show must first direct a shorter directing workshop , usually a scene running 15 minutes or shorter . Directing workshops occur twice a year , early in fall and spring semesters . For the 2015 fiscal year , the group 's budget was $ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Cited = = = 
 Farkas , Brian ( 2009 ) . Covering The Campus : A History Of The Miscellany News At Vassar College . Bloomington , IN : iUniverse . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Gurney , Vivian ( 1915 ) . " Philaletheis " . In Mallon , Mary ; et al . Vassar 1865 – 1915 , from the Undergraduate Point of View : Fiftieth Anniversary Number . Poughkeepsie , NY : The Vassar Miscellany . 
 Horowitz , Helen Lefkowitz ( 1985 ) . Alma Mater : Design and Experience in the Women 's Colleges from Their Nineteenth @-@ century Beginnings to the 1930s ( 2 ed . ) . Amherst , MA : University of Massachusetts Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 869 @-@ 8 . 
 Seeley , Isaac Casper ( 1871 ) . Manual of College Literary Societies , with Statistical Table . Kalamazoo , MI : Chaplin & <unk> Bro 's Book and Job Printers . 
 The Students ' Association of Vassar College ( 1908 ) . The New Vassar College Songbook . New York City : Hinds , Noble & Eldredge . 
 Taylor , James Monroe ; Haight , Elizabeth Hazelton ( 1915 ) . Vassar . New York City : Oxford University Press . 
 Van Lengen , Karen ; Reilly , Lisa ( 2004 ) . The Campus Guide : Vassar College . New York City : Princeton Architectural Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 56898 @-@ 349 @-@ 2 . 
 Wood , Frances Ann ( 1909 ) . Earliest Years at Vassar : Personal Recollections . Poughkeepsie , NY : The Vassar College Press . 
 = 1986 Jamaica floods = 
 The 1986 Jamaica floods killed 50 people in the country , comparable to flooding that occurred in June 1979 . The floods originated as a stationary front on May 24 that produced rainfall across much of the central Caribbean Sea for two weeks . Rainfall totals in Jamaica reached 635 mm ( 25 @.@ 0 in ) at Norman Manley International Airport . The flooding left heavy agriculture damage totaling $ 22 @.@ 5 million , and 40 @,@ 000 residents per day received meals after the event . Roads and bridges were damaged across the country , and one damaged bridge resulted in eight deaths after a bus crashed . The floods left 2 @,@ 000 Jamaicans homeless . 
 Elsewhere , the floods were the worst in Haiti in decades . There , a swollen river destroyed several homes in Les Cayes , and there were 21 deaths nationwide . In neighboring Dominican Republic , flooding isolated several towns and caused mudslides that killed 12 people . In Cuba , flooding was worst in the easternmost four provinces , and there were five deaths . The overall system spawned a subtropical cyclone on June 5 that later became Tropical Storm Andrew . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Beginning on May 24 , a stationary front persisted across the central Caribbean Sea . It dropped torrential rainfall across Jamaica , totaling 275 mm ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) in Saint Andrew Parish , and 635 mm ( 25 @.@ 0 in ) at Norman Manley International Airport . There were reports as high as 1 @,@ 270 mm ( 50 in ) in the southern portion of the country . The high rainfall caused rivers to flow faster than usual , and the Yallahs River reported a peak discharge of 453 m ³ / s . Flooding also affected Hispaniola and eastern Cuba . In Haiti , the floods were reported as the worst in decades . The system gradually moved to the north through the Greater Antilles , developing into a subtropical cyclone on June 5 . It eventually became Tropical Storm Andrew before dissipating on June 8 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The high rainfall caused island @-@ wide flooding in Jamaica , as well as widespread landslides . Along the coast , freshwater flooding decreased salt @-@ levels , lowered ocean temperatures , and caused a significant increase of phytoplankton . By two weeks after the floods subsided , phytoplankton levels returned to normal . Significant agricultural damage occurred due to the flooding . Over 17 @,@ 600 acres ( 7 @,@ 100 ha ) of crop fields were damaged , and many livestock and fish died . Damage was heaviest in Clarendon Parish , and the nationwide crop damage was estimated at $ 22 @.@ 5 million . Water systems were damaged in eight of the fourteen Parishes of Jamaica , leaving 100 @,@ 000 people without water . More than 300 roads were damaged or blocked , and 15 bridges were damaged . Four people were killed after being buried by a landslide . A collapsed bridge in May Pen , located southwest of Kingston , was washed out by the Rio Minho , killing eight people in a bus . Nationwide , 14 hospitals and 16 other health facilities were severely damaged , and many government offices had roof damage . Damage to utilities was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 65 million . The floods left 2 @,@ 000 people homeless , many of whom stayed in shelters , and there were 50 deaths . The flooding was described as similar to the deadly floods in June 1979 . 
 Flooding was also reported in Hispaniola and eastern Cuba . In Cuba , a state of alert was declared for Santiago de Cuba , Guantanamo , Granma , and <unk> provinces , and 7 @,@ 500 people were evacuated . Heavy rainfall caused landslides and isolated several towns after roads and rails were blocked . Some areas lost power or telephone services . Five people were killed in Cuba , four of whom from drowning and one from electrocution . In nearby Haiti , flooding was worst in Les Cayes , where the Ravine River destroyed many homes and left 1 @,@ 300 homeless . Throughout the country , flooding severely damaged crops and wrecked bridges and roads . There were 21 deaths in the Les Cayes area . In the Dominican Republic , there were 12 deaths around Santo Domingo after mudslides buried people . Four towns were isolated after rivers exceeded their banks , forcing hundreds of people to evacuate . Overall , the system caused 94 deaths and $ 25 million in damage . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the floods subsided , the government of Jamaica appealed to the international community for assistance . Local workers cleared roads , and about 1 @,@ 100 people assisted in various relief efforts . The Jamaican Red Cross provided about 40 @,@ 000 meals each day to residents who lost food during the floods . <unk> damaged roads and bridges cost about $ 4 @.@ 3 million . For at least one day , all schools and most businesses on the island were closed . 
 In the weeks following the floods , the Pan American Health Organization provided $ 10 @,@ 000 worth of water supply units and a group of six workers , and offices within the United Nations provided $ 55 @,@ 000 worth of contributions . The government of Barbados provided five units to assist in vector control , and the United States donated $ 25 @,@ 000 in aid . The European Economic Community donated about $ 376 @,@ 300 in assistance . The government of Canada provided $ 142 @,@ 490 worth of aid , and the government of West Germany donated $ 21 @,@ 740 . The British Red Cross and the United Kingdom government collectively donated $ 302 @,@ 850 to the country , mostly for 3 helicopters to transport relief and medical teams . The California Air National Guard flew three trips of supplies , including 2 @,@ 000 cots , to Jamaica . 
 = Schmerber v. California = 
 Schmerber v. California , 384 U.S. 757 ( 1966 ) , was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified the application of the Fourth Amendment 's protection against warrantless searches and the Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination for searches that intrude into the human body . Until Schmerber , the Supreme Court had not yet clarified whether state police officers must procure a search warrant before taking blood samples from criminal suspects . Likewise , the Court had not yet clarified whether blood evidence taken against the wishes of a criminal suspect may be used against that suspect in the course of a criminal prosecution . 
 In a 5 – 4 opinion , the Court held that forced extraction and analysis of a blood sample is not compelled testimony ; therefore , it does not violate the Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . The Court also held that intrusions into the human body ordinarily require a search warrant . However , the Court ruled that the involuntary , warrantless blood sample taken in this case was justified under the Fourth Amendment 's exigent circumstances exception because evidence of blood alcohol would be destroyed by the body 's natural metabolic processes if the officers were to wait for a warrant . In 2013 , the Supreme Court clarified in Missouri v. McNeely that the natural metabolism of alcohol in the bloodstream is not a per se exigency that would always justify warrantless blood tests of individuals suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol . 
 In the years following the Court 's decision in Schmerber , many legal scholars feared the ruling would be used to limit civil liberties . Other scholars , including Nita A. <unk> , Benjamin Holley , and John G. New , have suggested courts may use the ruling in Schmerber to justify the use of mind reading devices against criminal suspects . Because the Court 's ruling in Schmerber prohibited the use of warrantless blood tests in most circumstances , some commentators argue that the decision was responsible for the proliferation of <unk> to test for alcohol and urine analyses to test for controlled substances in criminal investigations . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = <unk> searches of the human body = = = 
 In the 1950s , the Supreme Court of the United States issued two key rulings clarifying the constitutionality of physical intrusions into the human body by police and other government agents . In Rochin v. California , police officers broke into the home of an individual suspected of selling narcotics and observed him place several small objects into his mouth . Officers were unable to force his mouth open , so they transported him to a local hospital where his stomach was pumped against his will . A unanimous Supreme Court held the involuntary stomach pump was an unlawful violation of substantive due process because it " shocked the conscience " , and was so " brutal " and " offensive " that it did not comport with traditional ideas of fair play and decency . In 1957 , the Court held in Breithaupt v. Abram that involuntary blood samples " taken by a skilled technician " neither " shocked the conscience " nor violated substantive due process . In Breithaupt , police took a blood sample from a patient suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol while he lay unconscious in a hospital . The Court held that the blood samples were justified , in part , because " modern community living requires modern scientific methods of crime detection . " Additionally , the Court mentioned in dicta that involuntary blood samples may violate the constitution if officers do not provide " every proper medical precaution " to the accused . 
 = = = Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule = = = 
 Until the twentieth century , courts would admit evidence at trial even if it was seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment . Although the Supreme Court developed an exclusionary rule for federal cases in Weeks v. United States and Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States , the Court held in 1949 that the exclusionary rule did not apply to the states . In Rochin , the Court held that evidence obtained in a manner that " shocks the conscience " must be excluded in criminal prosecutions but the court declined to incorporate a broad exclusionary rule for all Fourth Amendment violations . By the middle of the twentieth century , many state courts had crafted their own exclusionary rules . In 1955 , the California Supreme Court ruled in People v. Cahan that the Fourth Amendment 's exclusionary rule applied in California because it was necessary to deter constitutional violations by law enforcement . In 1961 , the Supreme Court of the United States relied upon Cahan to hold in Mapp v. Ohio that the exclusionary rule was incorporated to the states . 
 = = = Arrest and prosecution = = = 
 On the night of November 12 , 1964 , Armando Schmerber and a passenger were driving home after drinking at a tavern and bowling alley in the San Fernando Valley region of Los Angeles , California when their car skidded off the road and struck a tree . Schmerber and his companion were injured in the crash and taken to a hospital for treatment . When investigating police officers arrived at the hospital , they asked Schmerber to submit a sample of his blood , but Schmerber refused . Although they did not possess a search warrant , officers instructed attending physicians to take a blood sample from Schmerber . The blood sample indicated that Schmerber was intoxicated , and he was placed under arrest . The blood sample was ultimately admitted into evidence at trial , and Schmerber was convicted for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors . Schmerber objected to the admissibility of the blood sample , claiming that the police violated his rights to due process , his privilege against self @-@ incrimination , his right to counsel , and his right not to be subjected to unreasonable searches and seizures . The Appellate Department of the California Superior Court rejected Schmerber 's arguments , and the California District Court of Appeal declined to review his case . 
 = = = Arguments before the Court = = = 
 Schmerber submitted an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States , which granted certiorari on January 17 , 1966 . In his brief , Schmerber argued , inter alia , that the warrantless blood test violated his Fourth Amendment right to be free from unlawful searches and seizures , as well as his Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . The Los Angeles City Attorney 's office represented the State of California on appeal . In their brief , the City Attorney argued that the blood test did not violate the Fourth Amendment because the seizure was conducted incident to a lawful arrest . The City Attorney also argued that admitting the sample into evidence did not violate Schmerber 's Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination because blood is not testimonial evidence under the Fifth Amendment . Oral arguments were held on April 25 , 1966 , and the Court issued its opinion on June 20 , 1966 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 In his majority opinion , Justice William J. Brennan , Jr. held that Schmerber 's constitutional rights were not violated when police took his blood without his consent . Relying upon the Court 's holding in Breithaupt v. Abram , he concluded that the police did not violate Schmerber 's Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination because the extraction and chemical analysis of the blood sample did not involve " even a shadow of testimonial compulsion . " Likewise , Justice Brennan held that the officers did not violate Schmerber 's Fourth Amendment right against unreasonable seizures . Justice Brennan wrote that absent exigent circumstances , searches that involve intrusions into the human body require a search warrant . Here , the search was not justified as a search incident to arrest because weapons and contraband are not ordinarily concealed beneath the skin . However , the involuntary blood draw was justified under the Fourth Amendment 's exigent circumstances exception because if the officers had waited to receive a search warrant , evidence of intoxication would have been lost through the body 's natural metabolism of alcohol in the bloodstream . He wrote that the responding officer " might reasonably have believed that he was confronted with an emergency , " where evidence would be destroyed if he waited to receive a warrant . Additionally , Justice Brennan cautioned that the Court 's ruling was limited " only to the facts of the present record " and that " minor intrusions into an individual 's body under stringently limited conditions in no way indicates that it permits more substantial intrusions , or intrusions under other conditions . " 
 = = = Justice Harlan 's concurrence = = = 
 In his concurring opinion , Justice John Marshall Harlan II agreed that the involuntary blood sample did not implicate involuntary testimonial compulsion , but wrote separately to emphasize his opinion that the case before the Court " in no way implicates the Fifth Amendment . " Additionally , Justice Harlan cited to his dissent in Miranda v. Arizona where he argued against a broad expansion of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . Justice Harlan disagreed with the Court 's ruling in Miranda and even stated that the case " represents poor constitutional law and entails harmful consequences for the country at large . " 
 = = = Dissenting opinions = = = 
 All four dissenting Justices wrote separate dissenting opinions in Schmerber . Chief Justice Earl Warren reiterated his dissenting opinion in Breithaupt v. Abram , where he argued that involuntary blood samples violate substantive due process . Justice Hugo Black authored an impassioned dissent in which he argued that the officers violated Schmerber 's privilege against self @-@ incrimination . He wrote , " [ b ] <unk> with the Framers that these constitutional safeguards broadly construed by independent tribunals of justice provide our best hope for keeping our people free from governmental oppression , I deeply regret the Court 's holding . " Justice William O. Douglas also reiterated his dissent in Breithaupt v. Abram , but added that physical invasions into the human body violate the right to privacy enumerated in Griswold v. Connecticut and that " [ n ] o clearer invasion of this right of privacy can be imagined than forcible bloodletting of the kind involved here . " Finally , Justice Abe Fortas wrote that the involuntary blood sample was an act of violence that violated substantive due process and that states may not resort to acts of violence when prosecuting crimes . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 In the 1970s and 1980s , the Supreme Court revisited questions about the constitutionality of involuntary bodily intrusions in several key cases . In 1973 , the Court ruled in Cupp v. Murphy that the police were permitted to extract a tissue sample from underneath a suspect ’ s fingernails to recover " evanescent " physical evidence . The suspect in Cupp was suspected of strangling his wife and voluntarily went to a police station to answer questions . Officers noticed bloodstains under the suspect ’ s fingernails and detained him , but did not place him under arrest . Against the suspect ’ s wishes , the police scraped out a tissue sample from under his fingernails to retrieve the evidence . The biological material found under the suspect ’ s fingernails was later found to have come from the victim . Citing Schmerber , the Court held that this warrantless search was justified under the exigent circumstances exemption of the Fourth Amendment because the search was necessary to preserve the “ highly evanescent evidence ” under the defendant ’ s fingernails . 
 Twelve years later , the Court again revisited the topic of involuntary bodily intrusions in Winston v. Lee , where the Court held that the State of Virginia could not force an individual to undergo surgery to extract a bullet that may be evidence of a crime . The Court applied its previous holding in Schmerber to conclude that the surgery would constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment and that a crucial factor for evaluating any bodily intrusion " is the extent to which the procedure may threaten the safety or health of the individual . " Writing for the Court 's majority , Chief Justice Warren E. Burger concluded that forcing a patient to undergo major surgery intrudes too far upon individual privacy rights and that surgical intrusions " can only be characterized as severe . " 
 In 1989 , the Court ruled in Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives ’ Association that warrantless blood tests of railroad employees were reasonable under the Fourth Amendment . The Court reaffirmed that the “ compelled <unk> [ n ] into the body for blood to be analyzed for alcohol content ” is a search under the Fourth Amendment , but that warrantless blood tests of railroad employees were necessary to " prevent accidents and casualties in railroad operations that result from impairment of employees by alcohol or drugs . ” The Court also concluded that when individuals “ participate in an industry that is regulated pervasively to ensure safety , ” these individuals “ have a reduced expectation of privacy . ” Because these employees had a " diminished expectation of privacy , " the warrantless blood tests were permissible . Justice Thurgood Marshall and Justice Brennan wrote a dissenting opinion in which they argued that this case was distinguishable from Schmerber because " no such exigency prevents railroad officials from securing a warrant before chemically testing the samples they obtain . " 
 = = = South Dakota v. Neville and self @-@ incrimination = = = 
 After the Court issued its decision in Schmerber , a split of authority emerged in lower courts with regard to whether the Fifth Amendment 's privilege against self @-@ incrimination prohibited the use of a suspect 's refusal to submit to a blood test as evidence of guilt . The United States Supreme Court resolved this split in authority in South Dakota v. Neville , where the Court held that prosecutors could use a suspect 's refusal to submit to a blood test as evidence of guilt , and the introduction of this evidence at trial does not violate the suspect 's Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . Writing for the Court 's majority , Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor concluded that " the state did not directly compel respondent to refuse the test " and that a " simple blood @-@ alcohol test is so safe , painless , and commonplace " a suspect would not feel coerced to refuse the test . Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion , joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall , in which he argued that the Court in Schmerber intended to adopt a broad and liberal interpretation of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . 
 = = = Missouri v. McNeely and the exigent circumstances exception = = = 
 Over time , a split of authority grew among lower courts with regard to whether the Fourth Amendment 's exigent circumstances exception allowed officers to always conduct warrantless blood tests on individuals suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol because evidence of alcohol was being destroyed by the body 's natural metabolic processes . States that recognized this per se exigency argued that " [ o ] nce police arrest a suspect for drunk driving , each passing minute eliminates probative evidence of the crime . " In 2012 , the Court granted review in Missouri v. McNeely to resolve this question . In a 5 – 4 opinion , the Court rejected the theory that the natural dissipation of blood alcohol constituted a per se exigency . Instead , the court affirmed the basic principle from Schmerber that absent " an emergency that <unk> [ s ] acting without a warrant , " police may not conduct warrantless blood testing on suspects . Consequently , exigency in drunk driving cases " must be determined case by case based on the totality of the circumstances . " 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Scholars have described Schmerber v. California as a landmark case and a " watershed moment " in the history of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence . Likewise , John D. Castiglione described the case as " seminal for its place in the annals of Fifth Amendment jurisprudence . " Constitutional law scholar Akhil Reed Amar identified Schmerber as a turning point in the Fifth Amendment 's " distinction between words and physical evidence . " Anne Marie Schubert has also argued that Schmerber served as the genesis for a long line of Supreme Court cases ordering the compelled production of physical evidence . Because Schmerber foreclosed the use of warrantless blood tests in most circumstances , some scholars , including John A. Scanlan , argue that the Court 's ruling was responsible for the proliferation of <unk> to test for alcohol and urine analysis to test for controlled substances in criminal investigations . 
 = = = Immediate reaction = = = 
 Soon after the Court 's ruling , analysts predicted that the effects of the case would be " far @-@ reaching . " Some analysts feared the ruling would be used to justify " other intrusive searches . " Other commentators also observed that the Court 's holding in Schmerber seemed to " reverse direction " from the court 's decision in Miranda v. Arizona one week earlier , where the Court enlarged protections against the police for criminal suspects . However , in his assessment of Schmerber , Charles L. Berry praised the decision as a " successful effort to find a practical solution to the problem of the drinking motorist . " Additionally , many law journals also offered commentary of the case 's significance . For example , a November 1966 article in the Harvard Law Review opined that Justice Brennan 's majority opinion was " a good exposition of his view of the interrelationship between the fourth and fifth amendments , " and a February 1967 article in the Texas Law Review argued that Schmerber " exemplifies the proposition that the fifth amendment is not absolute . " 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Some legal scholars have criticized the Court 's ruling in Schmerber for infringing too far upon civil liberty and privacy . E. John Wherry , Jr . , former Dean of the University of Orlando School of Law , wrote that " [ b ] <unk> following Schmerber as authorization for all non @-@ consensual blood seizure for forensic purposes is , in this day and age , an outrage . " Writing for the Notre Dame Law Review , Blake A. Bailey , Elaine M. Martin , and Jeffrey M. Thompson observed that although the Court limited the holding in Schmerber to the facts of the case , prior to Winston v. Lee , many lower courts relied upon the ruling to order criminal defendants to undergo surgery to remove bullets that may have been evidence of a crime . Other scholars have expressed concern that the Court 's decision to exclude physical evidence from protections against self @-@ incrimination may one day lead to the use of mind reading devices when prosecuting criminal suspects . For example , the Harvard Law Review suggested that the Court 's decision may be used to justify monitoring brain waves . Additionally , in an article in the journal Developments in Mental Health Law , Benjamin Holley suggested that " <unk> lie detection " could be used in criminal prosecutions , as long as a suspect 's words are not " linked with the physical manifestations sought to be introduced at trial . " Likewise , in an article in the Journal of Legal Medicine , John G. New suggested that non @-@ testimonial evidence gathered from electroencephalography or magnetic resonance imaging may be admissible to demonstrate a suspect 's thoughts . 
 = Cholmondeley Castle = 
 Cholmondeley Castle ( / <unk> / CHUM @-@ lee ) is a country house in the civil parish of Cholmondeley , Cheshire , England . Together with its adjacent formal gardens it is surrounded by parkland . The site of the house has been a seat of the Cholmondeley family since the 12th century . The present house replaced a timber @-@ framed hall nearby . It was built at the start of the 19th century for George Cholmondeley , 1st Marquess of Cholmondeley , who designed most of it himself in the form of a battlemented castle . After the death of the Marquess , the house was extended to designs by Robert Smirke to produce the building in its present form . The house is designated by English Heritage as a Grade II * listed building . 
 The first formal garden was designed in the 17th century by George London . Following neglect in the 18th century , the garden was re @-@ ordered by William Emes , who also created the landscape park . During the 20th century the garden was further developed under the care of Lavinia , widow of the late 6th Marquess . The park and gardens are listed at Grade II in the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . In the park and gardens are a number of other listed buildings . The most important of these is St Nicholas ' Chapel , which dates back to the 13th century , contains much 17th @-@ century furniture , and is listed in the National Heritage List for England at Grade I. Standing across the main drive is a wrought iron screen and gateway made by Robert Bakewell in 1722 for the Old Hall , and moved here in the early 19th century ; this is listed at Grade II * . The buildings listed at Grade II include the altered remains of the Old Hall , five of the lodges in and around the estate , and a variety of structures in the gardens . 
 During the Second World War , the house and grounds were used for a variety of military purposes , including acting as a hospital . Until her death in November 2015 , the house was occupied by Lavinia , Marchioness of Cholmondeley , mother of the present Marquess of Cholmondeley , who lives in the other family seat , Houghton Hall in Norfolk . The house is not open to the public , but the park and gardens are open during the summer season . A variety of events are organised in the grounds , and one of the lodges can be used as a holiday cottage . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old Hall = = = 
 The site of the house has been a family seat of the Cholmondeley family since the 12th century . In the 16th century the house was a timber @-@ framed hall standing on a moated platform . The house and its separate chapel were damaged by the Parliamentarians the following century , during the English Civil War , and were subsequently repaired by Robert Cholmondeley , 1st Earl of Leinster . In 1701 Hugh Cholmondeley , 1st Earl of Cholmondeley commissioned William Smith of Warwick to encase the house with brick and to add features such as giant columns and balustraded parapets with urns and statues . By 1712 the earl had lost patience with Smith and asked John Vanbrugh to prepare a new design , but it was never executed . In 1722 wrought iron gates and railings made by Robert Bakewell were used to enclose the forecourt of the house . During the 18th century the house became neglected . In 1770 it was inherited by George Cholmondeley , the 4th Earl of Cholmondeley , who decided to replace it with a new building and demolished most of the Old Hall . 
 = = = Present house = = = 
 Building of the new house in the style of a castle began in 1801 . It was designed mainly by the Earl in collaboration with the architect William Turner of Whitchurch . The design was symmetrical ; the entrance front facing west and consisting of two castellated blocks , between which was a single @-@ storey loggia . Behind the loggia was the full @-@ height entrance hall . Facing the park on the east side of the house were the three main state rooms . This phase of building the house was completed in 1805 . Much of the construction material was recycled from the old house , including bricks , glass , windows , woodwork and chimneypieces . Bakewell 's railings , without the gates , were moved to form a screen on the main drive . In 1817 George Cholmondeley ( now the 1st Marquess ) started a series of enlargements to the house , beginning with a new dining room . Two years later a family wing with a tall rectangular tower was added to the south of the house ; both of these additions were designed by the Marquess . They were followed by the addition of two octagonal angle turrets . The Marquess died in 1828 , and soon after that Robert Smirke was commissioned to make further additions and alterations . The main addition was a round tower on the southeast corner of the family wing . Smirke also brought forward the central tower of the east front by adding a canted bay , giving the house its present appearance . This work was completed in 1829 . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In common with many other country estates and stately homes , special roles were allocated to Cholmondeley during the Second World War . Between July and October 1940 the grounds were the home of troops serving the Czechoslovak government @-@ in @-@ exile . Later they were used in the preparations for Operation Anthropoid , an assassination attempt on Reinhard Heydrich . Cholmondeley was also used as a Royal Navy Auxiliary Hospital , which treated serving men suffering from nervous breakdowns . 
 The house was designated a Grade II * listed building on 10 June 1952 . The current Marquess , David Cholmondeley , 7th Marquess , does not live at Cholmondeley but at the other family seat , Houghton Hall in Norfolk . As of 2014 Cholmondeley Castle is occupied by his mother , Lavinia . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The house is constructed in sandstone with roofs of slate and lead . It is mainly in two storeys with a basement , and has towers rising to a greater height . The entire building has a battlemented parapet . The entrance front faces west and consists of two three @-@ storey wings in three bays with a single @-@ storey three @-@ bay loggia between them . The windows in the lateral blocks have Gothic @-@ style arches and contain Y @-@ tracery . In the loggia the windows each have two lights under almost circular heads . Above and behind the loggia the upper storeys of the entrance hall also contain Y @-@ tracery . On the right side of the entrance front is a square five @-@ storey tower , which is linked to an octagonal turret containing arrow slits . The garden front , facing east , has octagonal corner turrets between which is a large canted bay window which rises up to form a half @-@ tower . The section to the left of this faces south , and is in two storeys with three bays . It contains French windows , and windows with trefoil heads containing Y @-@ tracery . There is then a two @-@ storey two @-@ bay section , and finally Smirke 's service wing with its large round tower containing arrow slits . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The loggia leads into the double @-@ height entrance hall . This has blind arcades on the side walls . Opposite the entrance is an open arcade leading to a north @-@ south passage , Beyond this is the ante @-@ room with its large canted bay window . This room has a simple dentil cornice . To the north of it is the dining room , with a marble mantlepiece , a cornice decorated with gilded flowers and leaves and , in the ceiling , rosettes and a large central rose with a chandelier . To the south of the ante @-@ room is the drawing room . Here the cornice is decorated with arrows pointing downward , and there is a central rose with a chandelier . Leading from the drawing room is the staircase hall , with an open @-@ well staircase . The hall is top @-@ lit from a timber lantern . The stairs are in black marble , the wrought iron balustrade on the stairs and landing was made by Robert Bakewell and moved from the Old Hall , and the handrail is in rosewood . To the south of the staircase hall is the nursery suite and the library . The Bird Room , between the staircase and the drawing room , contains a collection of <unk> . The arrangement of rooms and corridors in the upper rooms is complex . The kitchens and domestic offices are in the basement . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 = = = Chapel = = = 
 The Grade I listed chapel originated as a timber @-@ framed structure in the 13th century . It was encased in brick and extended in 1717 , and further additions were made in 1829 and 1840 . It has a slate roof , and is in a cruciform plan . Much of its furniture dates from the 17th century . The Cholmondeley family pew is at the west end , in an elevated position . 
 = = = Gardens and park = = = 
 The first formal gardens were established in the 17th century by Hugh Cholmondeley , 1st Earl of Cholmondeley . These were in the French style , containing canals and <unk> . The gardens were designed by George London , and included gates and railings by Jean Tijou , and statues by Jan van Nost . Following neglect in the 18th century , the 4th Earl employed William Emes to re @-@ model the garden . Emes converted the formal garden into a landscape park , planting large numbers of trees and creating lakes . Further development of the gardens was carried out by John Webb , a student of Emes , who probably designed the terrace immediately around the house . Since the middle of the 20th century the gardens have been under the care of Lavinia , the widow of the late 6th Marquess , who has tidied and improved them , and added new features . 
 The house is surrounded by a terrace to the south of which are three interlinked gardens : the Silver Garden , the Lily Pool Garden , and an area containing a swimming pool . Beyond are lawns , groups of specimen tress and shrubs , gravelled paths , and a walled garden . A major feature is the Temple Garden , which contains an irregular pool within which are two small islands . On one of the islands is a structure in the form of a temple . At the west end of the garden is a rotunda . To the northwest of the Temple Garden is the Rose Garden . Beyond the gardens is a park , which is mainly grassland with some trees . Features in the park include a ha @-@ ha and two lakes , Chapel Mere and Deer Park Mere . Since 10 June 1985 the gardens and park have been listed at Grade II in the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . The area covered by the designation amounts to about 240 ha . 
 = = Listed buildings = = 
 In addition to the house being listed at Grade II * and the chapel at Grade I , there are other listed structures associated with the house . Richard Bakewell 's screen , standing across the main drive is listed at Grade II * . All the other listed buildings are designated at Grade II . Five are associated with the Temple Garden : the temple itself , the rotunda , the bridge over the pond , with its parapets consisting of stone dolphins , a sculpture in lead by van Nost depicting three cherubs , and the gated entrance , possibly by Jean Tijou . The north and south gates of the chapel enclosure , made by Bakewell in 1722 and installed in 1829 , are both listed . Five of the lodges associated with the castle , three of them within the grounds , are listed : Dee Park Lodge , on the southeast approach to the castle ; Park House Lodge , on the north approach ; and Somerset Lodge , a gatehouse on the east approach , designed by S. S. Teulon . The other two are at the entrances to the grounds : Nantwich Lodge , at the original south entrance , and Beeston Lodge , a lodge and gateway at the east approach . The other listed buildings are the reduced and altered remains of the Old Hall , The Mews , adapted from the former stables , Park House , and Scotch Farm , developed from the original stables . A bridge on the east approach to the house is also listed . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The house is not open to visitors , but during the summer season the gardens can be visited . Available facilities include tea rooms , picnic and play areas , and a nature trail . Visitors can see a variety of farm animals in the stables and paddocks . During the summer season a programme of events is organised , including an annual Pageant of Power . Somerset Lodge is available for use as a holiday cottage . 
 = Bad ( album ) = 
 Bad is the seventh studio album by American singer Michael Jackson . It is his third studio album released through Epic Records . It was released on August 31 , 1987 , nearly five years after Jackson 's previous studio album , Thriller . As of 2012 Bad itself has sold between 30 and 45 million copies worldwide , was certified 9 times Platinum in the United States alone , and has been cited as one of the 30 best @-@ selling albums of all time . The album produced a record five Billboard Hot 100 number one singles , the first of two albums to do so , the second being Katy Perry 's 2010 album Teenage Dream . 
 Bad was recorded during the first half of 1987 . The lyrical themes on the record relate to media bias , paranoia , racial profiling , romance , self @-@ improvement and world peace . The album is widely regarded as having cemented Jackson 's status as one of the most successful artists of the 1980s , as well as enhancing his solo career and being one of the best musical projects of his career . Nine of the eleven songs on Bad were released as singles ; one was a promotional single and another was released outside of the United States and Canada . Five of the singles hit number one in the United States , while a sixth charted within the top ten , and a seventh charted within the top twenty on the Hot 100 . Bad peaked at number one in thirteen countries and charted within the top twenty in other territories . The only songs on the album which were not released as a single were " Speed Demon " and " Just Good Friends " , the latter being the only song on the album to also not have a music video accompanying it . 
 Bad saw Jackson exercise even more artistic freedom than he did with his two previous Epic releases ( Off the Wall and Thriller ) . On Bad , Jackson composed nine of the album 's eleven tracks and received co @-@ producer credit for the entire album . The album continued Jackson 's commercial success in the late 1980s and garnered six Grammy Award nominations , winning two . Aside from commercial success , the album also received critical acclaim from contemporary critics . Bad was ranked number 43 in the 100 Greatest Albums of All Time of the MTV Generation in 2009 by VH1 and number 202 in Rolling Stone magazine 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The album marked the final collaboration between Jackson and producer Quincy Jones . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jackson 's previous albums , Off the Wall and Thriller , were critically and commercially successful , eventually selling over 20 million and 65 million units worldwide , respectively . Jackson 's aim for Bad was that it would sell 100 million copies . 
 The first studio album Jackson released in almost five years since the release of Thriller , Bad was the third , and final , musical collaboration between Jackson and Quincy Jones . It was produced by Jones , with co @-@ production credit given to Jackson . Jackson began recording demos for the anticipated follow @-@ up to Thriller a few months after the 1984 Victory Tour with the Jacksons and throughout 1985 while preparing for Disney 's 4D film experience Captain EO , which featured an early pre @-@ album extended cut of " Another Part of Me . " Album development for Bad began in November 1986 and recording took place between January 5 , 1987 and July 9 , 1987 , at Westlake Audio , where a special wooden stage was built to allow Jackson to dance while recording . 
 Jackson wrote a reported sixty songs for the new album and recorded thirty , wanting to use them all on a three @-@ disc set . Jones had suggested that the album be cut down to a ten @-@ track single LP . When the album was released on CD , a bonus 11th track , " Leave Me Alone " , was included . It was later released as a single . Later reissues of the LP also include this song . Jackson was credited for writing nine out of eleven of the songs on the album . Other writing credits included Terry Britten and Graham Lyle for " Just Good Friends " and Siedah Garrett and Glen Ballard for " Man in the Mirror " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album 's song lyrics relate to romance and paranoia , the latter being a recurring theme in Jackson 's albums . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic noted that Bad moved Jackson " deeper into hard rock , deeper into schmaltzy adult contemporary , deeper into hard dance – essentially taking each portion of Thriller to an extreme , while increasing the quotient of immaculate <unk> . " 
 " Bad " was originally intended as a duet between Jackson and musician Prince . Other artists that were supposed to be featured on the album included Diana Ross , Whitney Houston , Aretha Franklin and Barbra Streisand , but none of those collaborations ended up happening . The song was viewed as a <unk> " Hit the Road , Jack " progression with lyrics that pertain to ' boasting ' . " Dirty Diana " was viewed by AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine as " misogynistic " and its lyrics , describing a sexual predator , do not aim for the " darkness " of " Billie Jean " , instead sounding equally intrigued by and apprehensive of a sexual challenge , while having the opportunity to accept or resist it . " Leave Me Alone " was described as being a " paranoid anthem " . " Man in the Mirror " was seen as Jackson going " a step further " and offering " a straightforward homily of personal commitment " , which can be seen in the lyrics , " I 'm starting with the man in the mirror / I 'm asking him to change his ways / And no message could have been any clearer / If you wanna make the world a better place / Take a look at yourself and then make a change . " The lyrics to " Speed Demon " are about driving fast . 
 " Liberian Girl " ' s lyrics were viewed as " glistening " with " gratitude " for the " existence of a loved one " . " Smooth Criminal " ' s recalled " the popcorn @-@ chomping manner " of " Thriller " . The track was thought of as an example of " Jackson 's free @-@ form language " that keeps people " aware that we are on the edge of several realities : the film , the dream it inspires , the waking world it illuminates " . The music in " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , a duet with Siedah Garrett , consisted mainly of finger snaps and timpani . " Just Good Friends " , a duet with Stevie Wonder , was viewed by critics as sounding good at the beginning of the song , ending with a " chin @-@ bobbing cheerfulness " . " The Way You Make Me Feel " ' s music consisted of blues harmonies . The lyrics of " Another Part of Me " deal with being united , as " we " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Bad was released on August 31 , 1987 . By September 26 , it had debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , remaining there for the next six consecutive weeks . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified Bad nine times platinum for having shipped nine million copies in the United States alone . Though Jackson furthered his stance as a global pop superstar , in the United States Bad failed to match the sales of Thriller , causing some in the media to label the album a " disappointment " in comparison . 
 Internationally , Bad was commercially successful . In the United Kingdom , the album sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in its first five days of release , and as of 2008 is certified 13 × platinum , for sales of 3 @.@ 9 million , making it Jackson 's second biggest @-@ selling album in the United Kingdom . Bad peaked at number one in 25 countries including Austria , Canada , Japan , New Zealand , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . The album also charted at number thirteen in Mexico and at number twenty two in Portugal . Bad has received various certifications worldwide . It was certified 7 × platinum for the shipment of over 700 @,@ 000 units in Canada by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . In Europe , the 2001 reissue was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for the sales of one million units . The album was also certified platinum by the IFPI for the shipment of over 20 @,@ 000 units in Hong Kong . Globally , Bad is Jackson 's overall second best @-@ selling album , behind Thriller , with a reported sales between 30 and 45 million units as of 2012 . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 By the time Bad was released , Thriller had already sold millions , raising expectations for the new album . A commemorative special on Jackson 's life , The Magic Returns , was aired on CBS around the time of the release of Bad . At the end of the documentary , the channel debuted the video of the title song from the album , " Bad " , which was directed by Martin Scorsese and featured then up @-@ and @-@ coming actor Wesley Snipes . The marketing strategy , mastered by Frank DiLeo among others , also included Jackson producing another mini @-@ movie around the time of the Bad World Tour . That film , Moonwalker , included performances of songs from Bad , including " Speed Demon " , " Leave Me Alone " , " Man in the Mirror " and " Smooth Criminal " , the latter two released as sole videos at the end of the film . Jackson 's tour for Bad was a major financial success , grossing $ 125 million by the conclusion . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The lead single " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " became the first of five of the album 's singles to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song reached number one on September 19 , 1987 . It also charted on Billboard 's R & B / Hip Hop Songs chart and the Adult Contemporary chart , peaking at number one and number two respectively . Internationally , the song also peaked at number one , in three territories , United Kingdom , for two weeks , four weeks in the Netherlands and seven weeks in Norway . The album 's second single , " Bad " , peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 on October 16 , 1987 . The song charted within the top ten internationally . " The Way You Make Me Feel " became the album 's third consecutive single to peak at number one on Billboard 's Hot 100 . The song primarily charted within the top ten and twenty internationally . " Man in the Mirror " then charted at number one on Billboard 's Hot 100 in March 1988 and charted at number four , eight and ten in New Zealand , Australia and Austria . On July 2 , 1988 , " Dirty Diana " became the fifth consecutive , and final , single to peak at number one on the Hot 100 . It was successful internationally , charting within the top ten in several countries . 
 " Another Part of Me " charted at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 , while topping the Billboard R & B / Hip Hop Songs chart . Internationally , it was a mid success compared to its previous singles , peaking at number five , fourteen and thirty two in the Netherlands , New Zealand and France . " Smooth Criminal " became the sixth top ten single on the Billboard Hot 100 , and saw similar success internationally , charting within the top ten in five territories . Released outside the United States and Canada , " Leave Me Alone " topped the Irish charts , as well as peaking within the top ten in five other countries . The album 's last official single was " Liberian Girl " , which did not chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , but was generally successful internationally , charting mainly within the top twenty . 
 The singles success of Bad was extremely successful in the UK , where seven of the singles from the album all reached the UK top ten by 2009 ( six initially , until " Man in the Mirror " jumped from position 21 to 2 in 2009 ) , just like Dangerous achieved in 1991 – 1993 . This was a record for any studio album in the UK until Calvin Harris broke this in 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bad was generally well received although some critics noted that Bad did not measure up to Thriller 's success . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine stated that Jackson " approached " Bad much the same way he approached Thriller , which was to " take the basic formula of the predecessor , expand it slightly , and move it outward . " He gave the album four and a half out of five stars , commenting that while the album " rebounds with songs that prove mechanical can be tolerable if delivered with hooks and panache , " it still made Bad feel like an artifact of its time instead a piece of music that transcends it . " Davitt Sigerson of Rolling Stone stated that " even without a milestone recording like " Billie Jean " , Bad is still a better record than Thriller . " Sigerson commented that " filler " songs in Bad such as " Speed Demon " , " Dirty Diana " and " Liberian Girl " made Bad " richer , sexier and better than Thriller 's forgettables . " 
 Music critic Robert Christgau gave Bad a " B + " grade , remarking the " closest thing to genius " is the album 's song " Leave Me Alone , " and that the record " damn near wrecks perfectly good dancin ' and singin ' with subtext . " He also viewed Bad as " the strongest and most consistent black pop album in years " . Jon Pareles of the New York Times described Bad as being a " gleaming , high @-@ tech dance record that 's just a little eccentric at the edges " . Pareles also noted that Bad " sounds up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ minute " , and that the album also has a " concocted synthesizer @-@ driven arrangements " that are " clear " and can " carry a solid kick . " Richard Cromelin of the Los Angeles Times called Bad " a fair @-@ to @-@ strong array of soul and rock blends " , commenting that the record was " not bad " and was more " reminiscent of Off the Wall 's uniform strength than Thriller 's peaks and valleys . " Cromelin felt that it would be " disappointing " if this album 's " creative level " is where Jackson wants to stay . In a positive contemporary review , journalist Joseph Vogel posits that " On Bad , Jackson 's music is largely about creating moods , visceral emotions , and fantastical scenarios .... [ with ] each song work [ ing ] as a dream capsule , inviting the listener into a vivid new sound , story , space . " He then goes on to credit Bad as " a compelling , phantasmagorical album , which a handful of critics recognized from the beginning . " Richard Harrington of the Washington Post commented on the expectations of Bad to Thriller that " splashy though its prime @-@ time introduction may be , the album begs to be judged by its music , not by its sales figures . " Harrington felt that while the album could not live up to post @-@ Thriller expectations , it would be " considerably fairer to compare " Bad with Off the Wall . His overall opinion on Bad was that it was " a very good record " that is " immaculately produced and with some scintillating vocal performances from Jackson " . Edna Gundersen of USA Today described Bad as being Jackson 's " most polished effort to date , " that is " calculated but not sterile . " Thom Duffy of the Orlando Sentinel noted that some of the album 's material " draws on even older musical roots " . British writer Colin Larkin provided a more negative review of Bad , commenting : " In musical terms , Bad certainly broke no fresh ground ; appealing though its soft funk confections were , they lacked substance , and represented only a cosmetic advance over his two earlier albums with [ Quincy Jones ] . " 
 Bad was the recipient of six Grammy Award nominations , winning two . In 1988 , it was nominated for Album of the Year , Best Pop Vocal Performance – Male , Best R & B Vocal Performance – Male and Record of the Year for " Man in the Mirror " the following year . Bad won Best Engineered Recording – Non Classical in 1988 and Best Music Video – Short Form for " Leave Me Alone " in 1990 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bad made history as being the first album to have five of its singles peak at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 consecutively , as " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , " Bad " , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , " Man in the Mirror " and " Dirty Diana " all charted at number one on the music chart . To date , only one other album has achieved this milestone : Teenage Dream by Katy Perry , in 2010 . The record has still not been surpassed . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV , noted that " following the twin cannons that were Off the Wall and Thriller wouldn 't be an easy task for most , but Jackson 's follow @-@ up , 1987 's Bad , was formidable by all accounts . " Rodriguez commented that the album was " wrongfully dismissed by critics because it wasn 't the sales blockbuster that Thriller was " and that during the Bad era , Jackson 's vocal hiccups and stammered " <unk> " would become staples in his music that were " heightening and highlighting the emotion of his lyrics . " Rolling Stone commented that " the best way to view " Bad was not as " the sequel to Thriller . In 2009 , VH1 said of the album : 
 Understandably , the expectations for the album were ridiculously high , and grew even higher after Jackson planned duets with the likes of Prince ( on the title track ) and Whitney Houston ( and Aretha Franklin and Barbra Streisand ) . None of those collaborations ended up happening , but they only increased the hype for the album . Bad was a deeply personal project for Jackson – he wrote nine of the 11 songs – one that saw him gain further independence and debut a harder @-@ edged look and sound . 
 In 2009 , Jim Farber of the Daily News wrote that Bad " streamlined the quirks " of Jackson 's two previous albums to " create his most smooth work of pop to date . " A writer for The Daily Telegraph commented that while Bad was another worldwide commercial success , the album " inevitably failed to match the success of Thriller despite Jackson 's massive and grueling world tour " . In 2009 , a writer for the Miami Herald reflected back on the anticipation for Bad , describing the album 's release as being the " most hotly anticipated album in history " . That same year , Stephen M. Silverman , a writer for People magazine , viewed Bad as being " when some slippage " in Jackson 's " popularity began to show " . 
 In February 2012 , it was announced by the Official UK Charts Company that Bad was the ninth best @-@ selling album in British history with sales of 3 @.@ 96 million units , charting behind Thriller . Bad , along with other studio albums released by Jackson , is among the best @-@ selling albums of all @-@ time . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 202 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . It was also included in the book titled 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . In 2009 , VH1 listed Bad at number 43 on their list of " 100 Greatest Albums of All Time of the MTV Generation " . In 2012 , Slant Magazine listed the album at number 48 on its list of " Best Albums of the 1980s " . 
 The album 's songs have been covered and parodied by multiple recording artists since its release in the late 1980s . Notable cover versions include Alien Ant Farm 's cover of " Smooth Criminal " and <unk> 's cover of " The Way You Make Me Feel " . Notable parody versions include " Weird Al " Yankovic , who had previously recorded a parody of Jackson 's song " Beat It " . Yankovic parodied " Bad " , titling his version " Fat " in 1988 ; the song won a Grammy Award the same year for Best Concept Music Video . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Bad 25 = = 
 It was announced on May 3 , 2012 , that the Estate of Michael Jackson and Epic Records would be releasing a 25th anniversary album of Bad . The album was named Bad 25 and was released on September 18 , 2012 . Since the release of Bad 25 , there has been a discontinuation of the special edition of Bad . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs produced by Quincy Jones and co @-@ produced by Michael Jackson . 
 Notes 
 Re @-@ issues of Bad feature a number of changes when compared to the original 1987 release : 
 " Bad " – The original mix was replaced with the 7 " single mix . The most notable difference is the lack of horns in all the choruses except for the last two . Horns are also missing from the second and third pre @-@ choruses . The rhythm guitar during the choruses is also turned up along with the hi @-@ hats . 
 " The Way You Make Me Feel " – The full @-@ length remix used for the single with louder vocals and ad libs added to the end replaced the original album mix . 
 " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " omits Michael Jackson 's spoken intro . 
 " Dirty Diana " is replaced with the single edit of the song . 
 " Smooth Criminal " went through two changes on the album . It was remixed to make the kick drum heavier and the bass synth fatter . The quick @-@ sequenced synclavier behind the bass has been rendered mono as well . The first version of this mix left the breathing intact , but was later removed after some time . 
 " Leave Me Alone " wasn 't included on the original vinyl nor cassette releases but was included on the CD release and now is included in all releases . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel as listed in the album 's liner notes are : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Erwin Arnada = 
 Erwin Arnada ( born 17 October 1963 ) is an Indonesian journalist and filmmaker . Born to a devout Muslim family in Jakarta , Arnada became interested in journalism in 1984 , and , after a time as a photographer , he interned at the weekly Editor . Beginning in 1990 he took editorial roles in various print media , including the controversial tabloid Monitor . Arnada entered cinema in 2000 , producing several films for <unk> . 
 After establishing Playboy Indonesia in 2006 Arnada became the center of controversy , as Islamic groups such as the Islamic Defenders Front protested the magazine as indecent – despite it not featuring any nudity . After an extended series of trials Arnada was convicted by the Supreme Court of Indonesia and sentenced to two years in prison , beginning in October 2010 . He was released the following June , when the court reversed its decision . In 2012 Arnada was nominated for a Citra Award for Best Director for his film Rumah di Seribu Ombak , based on a novel he had written in prison . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Erwin Arnada was born on 17 October 1963 to Amin Ismail , a Minangkabau trader and part @-@ time journalist , and his wife . The family owned several shops in Jakarta , including one in Blok M and another in Tanah Abang . Beginning when he was in junior high school Arnada helped the family with the shops , using his free time to read . Arnada was raised in a Muslim family and has remained a devout Muslim . 
 Arnada attended the University of Indonesia , working towards a degree in Russian literature . He became interested in journalism through photography . After viewing Roger Spottiswoode 's 1983 film Under Fire , which followed an American photojournalist covering the Nicaraguan Revolution , Arnada applied to be a photographer for the daily newspaper Kompas . After his application was refused , in 1986 Arnada found work with the Jakarta @-@ based football team <unk> Jakarta . 
