 = = Journalism = = 
 Beginning in 1989 Arnada began an internship with the weekly Editor . He used the position as a learning experience . Arnada served as an editor of the Jakarta @-@ based tabloid Monitor between 1990 and 1991 . The publication was shut down after it published a controversial poll of readers ' most respected figures ; the poll showed the Islamic prophet Muhammad at number 10 , below the <unk> singer <unk> Irama . 
 By the mid @-@ 1990s Arnada had begun working for Bintang Indonesia , owned by the <unk> family . He left the newspaper in 1999 as he considered the publication to devote too little space to music . He established Bintang <unk> that year , but by 2002 it had been shut down . During this time he worked extensively with MTV Indonesia and various start @-@ ups . 
 After the closing of Bintang <unk> , Arnada began working with Indonesian <unk> Rizal Mantovani , Jose <unk> and Dimas <unk> to establish the production company <unk> . The company 's first production was Jelangkung in 2001 ; Arnada first received credit for <unk> Jelangkung in 2002 , which he wrote and produced . He worked on a further six films with the company between 2003 and 2007 . 
 = = Playboy Indonesia = = 
 Arnada began plans to establish Playboy Indonesia , an Indonesian version of the American men 's magazine Playboy , as a challenge . He considered the magazine more than " pornography " , describing it as home to " edgy and award @-@ winning journalism pieces " which he wanted to bring to Indonesia . Arnada entered discussions with Christie Hefner , then head of Playboy Enterprises , in November 2005 . He received permission to publish an Indonesian edition the next January . The first issue was launched in April 2006 and did not feature any nudity or focus on sexuality . Instead , the models were fully clothed ; the issue also included an interview with author Pramoedya Ananta Toer . Later articles continued to deal with literature , as well as human rights and politics . 
 The magazine was , however , highly controversial . Before publication Muslim groups had expressed opposition . After publication began the Playboy Indonesia offices were attacked , as were various printers . In one instance the Islamic Defenders Front attacked the Playboy Indonesia offices in South Jakarta , leading to the building being evacuated . By May 2006 the continuous protests had left the magazine without an office . The bad publicity led advertisers to abandon the magazine . Ultimately the magazine was shut down after releasing ten issues , having moved to the predominantly Hindu island Bali since its second issue , in June 2006 . 
 For his role in Playboy Indonesia 's publication Arnada came under investigation . Investigators cited his publication of " pornographic " materials , illegal in Indonesia , as evidence of criminal indecency . On trial in April 2007 , the South Jakarta District Court rejected this claim ; an appeal at the Jakarta High Court affirmed this decision . After two years of appeals by prosecutors , the case reached the Supreme Court of Indonesia . The Supreme Court ruled against Arnada and sentenced him to two years in prison . In October 2010 Arnada was imprisoned in <unk> Penitentiary Institution in Jakarta . He used this time to write three novels : Rumah di Seribu Ombak ( House of the Thousand Waves ) , Midnite di Negeri Nonsense ( Midnight in the Land of Nonsense ) , and Rabbit Versus Goliath . 
 Arnada was released in June 2011 , after the Supreme Court agreed with his defense that a journalist 's professional acts should be tried under the Press Code and not Criminal Code . Numerous commentators , including Arnada , described it as a victory for the country 's freedom of press . However , responding to calls that he was a hero , Arnada stated " I ’ m not a hero , nor a victim . I ’ m just another version of history " ; he considered his experience less drastic than that of journalists elsewhere in the country . In a 2013 interview Arnada stated that his incarceration had " muted his ' insane ambitions ' " ; Arnada 's friends stated that he had been deeply changed by the term . 
 = = Post @-@ imprisonment = = 
 Arnada released his novel Rumah di Seribu Ombak in early 2012 ; it had been written while he was in prison . Set in <unk> , Bali , the novel followed the friendship of two young boys from different cultural backgrounds . He adapted the novel later that year , serving as director and producer . The film was a critical success and nominated for nine Citra Awards at the 2012 Indonesian Film Festival , including Citra Award for Best Director for Arnada . It won four , including Best Editing and Best Screenplay ; Arnada lost the Best Director award to <unk> <unk> of Tanah <unk> ... <unk> ( Land of Heaven ... They Say ) . 
 As of 2013 Arnada is married to <unk> <unk> Arnada . The couple live in Bali . Arnada has expressed interest in continuing his career as a novelist , ignoring journalism as it offers " nothing new , nothing different . " A movie based on his life is planned by Playboy Enterprises ' Alta Loma Entertainment . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As of 2013 Arnada has been involved with nine feature films , mostly as producer . 
 <unk> Jelangkung ( 2002 ) – executive producer , story 
 30 Hari Mencari Cinta ( 2003 ) – producer , 
 Catatan Akhir Sekolah ( 2004 ) – producer 
 Cinta Silver ( 2004 ) – producer , story 
 Alexandria ( 2005 ) – producer , story 
 Jelangkung 3 ( 2007 ) – producer , screenwriter 
 Jakarta Undercover ( 2007 ) – producer , story 
 Asmara Dua Diana ( 2009 ) – producer 
 Rumah di Seribu Ombak ( 2012 ) – director , producer , story 
 = Henry Petre = 
 Henry Aloysius Petre , DSO , MC ( 12 June 1884 – 24 April 1962 ) was an English solicitor who became Australia 's first military aviator and a founding member of the Australian Flying Corps , predecessor of the Royal Australian Air Force . Born in Essex , he forsook his early legal career to pursue an interest in aviation , building his own aeroplane and gaining employment as a designer and pilot . In 1912 , he answered the Australian Defence Department 's call for pilots to form an aviation school , and was commissioned a lieutenant in the Australian Military Forces . The following year , he chose the site of the country 's first air base at Point Cook , Victoria , and established its inaugural training institution , the Central Flying School , with Eric Harrison . 
 Shortly after the outbreak of World War I , Petre was appointed commander of the Mesopotamian Half Flight , the first unit of the newly formed Australian Flying Corps to see active service . He led the Half Flight through the Battles of Es Sinn and Ctesiphon , and the Siege of Kut . His actions in the Middle East earned him the Distinguished Service Order , the Military Cross , and four mentions in despatches . Transferring to the Royal Air Force as a major in 1918 , he commanded No. 75 Squadron before retiring from the military the following year . Petre resumed his legal practice in England , and continued to fly recreationally before his death in 1962 , aged seventy @-@ seven . He was married to racing driver Kay Petre . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born on 12 June 1884 at <unk> , Essex , Petre ( pronounced " Peter " ) was the son of Sebastian Henry Petre and his wife Catharine . He was schooled at Mount St Mary 's College , Chesterfield , before following his father into law and becoming a solicitor in 1905 . Inspired by Louis Blériot 's pioneering cross @-@ channel flight in July 1909 , Petre gave up his legal practice , borrowed £ 250 and proceeded to build his own aeroplane , with design assistance from his brother Edward , an architect . Having spent six months on its construction , Petre crashed the machine on its maiden flight . <unk> and <unk> , he borrowed a further £ 25 , took flying lessons at Brooklands Airfield in Surrey , and obtained Royal Aero Club Aviator 's Certificate No. 128 on 12 September 1911 . He became an instructor at Brooklands ' Deperdussin School , and later its chief , prior to taking up employment as a designer and pilot with Handley Page Limited in 1912 . Characterised by official RAAF historian Douglas Gillison as " quiet and academic by nature " , and coming from a long line of Catholic clergy , Petre was nicknamed " Peter the Monk " . On Christmas Eve 1912 , Edward Petre , who was known as " Peter the Painter " , was killed in an accident at Marske @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea , Yorkshire , while attempting to fly from Brooklands to Edinburgh . 
 In December 1911 , the Australian Defence Department had advertised in the United Kingdom for " two competent mechanists and aviators " to establish a flying corps and school . From among fifty applications , Petre was chosen and commissioned as a lieutenant in the Australian Military Forces , his appointment on 6 August 1912 making him the nation 's first military pilot . The other appointee , Eric Harrison , joined him later that year . Petre arrived in Australia in January 1913 , his first task being to choose a site for the proposed Central Flying School ( CFS ) , which he was to command . After travelling hundreds of kilometres on his motorcycle , and rejecting the government 's preferred location near the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in Canberra , he selected 297 hectares ( 730 acres ) at Point Cook , Victoria , to become , as George Odgers described it , the " birthplace of Australian military aviation " . 
 Unlike the alternative site near Duntroon , Point Cook was flat , close to the coast and not , in Petre 's own words , " isolated in the bush " . He and Harrison established CFS over the following year with four mechanics , three other staff , and five aircraft including two Deperdussin monoplanes , two Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 biplanes , and a Bristol Boxkite for initial training . Harrison made the unit 's first flight in the Boxkite on Sunday , 1 March 1914 , while Petre , taking off in a Deperdussin later that day , registered its first accident when he crashed after snaring his tailplane in telephone wires . Its coterie of personnel by now being referred to as the Australian Flying Corps , CFS commenced its first flying course on 17 August , two weeks after the outbreak of World War I. The four students included Captain Thomas White and Lieutenants Richard Williams , George Merz , and David <unk> ; Harrison was responsible for initial training and Petre for advanced instruction . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On 8 February 1915 , the Australian government received a request from the British Government of India for aerial assistance in the campaign against the Turks in Mesopotamia . Aircrew and supporting personnel for half a flight only were available so the unit , the AFC 's first to see active service , became known as the Mesopotamian Half Flight . Promoted to captain , Petre was appointed the Half Flight 's commanding officer and embarked for Basra via Bombay on 14 April , later to be joined by fellow pilots White , Merz and Lieutenant William Treloar , along with thirty @-@ seven ground staff . In Mesopotamia , Petre was required to lead the AFC contingent in reconnaissance and sabotage missions , and had to deal with unreliable machines , hazardous terrain , and the threat of incarceration or death at the hands of hostile tribesmen . He took part in operations in the Amara area from 31 May to 4 June , for which he was mentioned in despatches . The obsolete aircraft supplied by the Indian Government , two Maurice Farman <unk> and a Maurice Farman Longhorn , were only capable of top speeds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , while the desert wind ( known as the <unk> ) could reach 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) , meaning that the aircraft often made no headway or were simply blown backwards . In July , the Half Flight 's equipment was augmented by two Caudron <unk> aircraft , a marginal improvement on the Farmans , but still prone to mechanical failure . Later that month , one of the Caudrons was forced to land in enemy territory . Its crew , Merz and a New Zealander , were never seen again ; they were later reported killed by Arabs after a running gun battle over several miles . 
 On 24 August , the Half Flight was augmented by four Martinsyde <unk> and redesignated No. 30 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) . The squadron moved into Kut following the city 's capture by the Allies during the Battle of Es Sinn in September ; for his part in the operation , Petre was again mentioned in despatches . Over the following two months , however , both Treloar and White were captured and became prisoners of war , leaving Petre as the only pilot remaining from the original Half Flight . Around the time of the Battle of Ctesiphon in November , he devised an implement shaped like a small garden rake that allowed him to accurately measure ground distances from the air in order to better map the desert terrain . During the Siege of Kut between December 1915 and April 1916 , he flew a series of missions using crude parachutes to airdrop grain supplies ( and a millstone for grinding ) , medical supplies and equipment to the town 's entrapped garrison , which included nine of his AFC mechanics . 
 Petre was awarded the Military Cross on 14 January 1916 , and was mentioned in despatches twice more over the course of the year . In May 1916 he contracted typhoid and was sent to India for recuperation . He transferred out of No. 30 Squadron in December , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order the same month . In February 1917 , he was posted to France with No. 15 Squadron RFC , a reconnaissance unit operating <unk> Two months later his youngest brother John , a squadron commander in the Royal Naval Air Service and a Distinguished Service Cross recipient , was killed in a flying accident . Petre subsequently returned to England and took charge of No. 5 Squadron AFC ( also known as No. 29 Squadron RFC ) , a training unit for Australian fighter pilots , particularly those destined for Palestine . He had hoped to command No. 1 Squadron AFC in Palestine but received an adverse report concerning his leadership abilities , and the position went to Richard Williams . Petre was discharged from the AFC as a major on 31 January 1918 , to take a commission with the RFC . In April that year , he transferred to the newly formed Royal Air Force , establishing and commanding No. 75 ( Home Defence ) Squadron . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Petre retired from the RAF on 15 September 1919 , and resumed practice as a solicitor in London . He married Kathleen Defries , a Canadian , in 1929 . Petre introduced Kathleen to racing cars and , as Kay Petre , she became one of Britain 's leading female drivers of the 1930s . Henry Petre maintained his interest in aviation for the rest of his life , taking up competitive gliding and , more than thirty years after his first flight in 1911 , still delighted in " taking an Auster for a spin " . In 1951 , he received the Royal Aero Club 's Silver Medal for his long record of active flying . He visited Australia for the first time in forty @-@ five years in 1961 , and was photographed sitting in the cockpit of the same Deperdussin — by then an exhibit at RAAF Museum — that he had flown at Point Cook in 1914 . Having retired from his legal practice in 1958 , Henry Petre died in London on 24 April 1962 , and was survived by Kay , who died in 1991 . 
 In a retrospective on the RAAF in November 1939 , Flight magazine described Henry Petre and Eric Harrison as " the fathers of military aviation in Australia " . Though Harrison , through his longer association with Australian service flying as a founding member of the Royal Australian Air Force in 1921 and his career up until the end of World War II , was generally regarded as the " Father of the RAAF " until Air Marshal Richard Williams assumed that mantle , Douglas Gillison considered Petre " equally entitled " to such an accolade . In his volume on the Air Force for The Australian Centenary History of Defence in 2001 , Alan Stephens noted that Petre made " the greater contribution to the establishment of Point Cook and the Central Flying School " , concluding that " perhaps any judgement would not only be moot but also gratuitous , as by circumstance and achievement both men properly belong in the pantheon of the RAAF " . 
 = Wonder Boy in Monster Land = 
 Wonder Boy in Monster Land , known by its original arcade release as Wonder Boy : Monster Land ( <unk> , <unk> Bōi Monsutā Rando ) , is an action role @-@ playing platform video game developed by Westone Bit Entertainment and released by Sega for arcade cabinets in 1987 and for the Master System in 1988 , with a number of other home computer and console ports following . The game is the sequel to the 1986 game Wonder Boy and takes place eleven years after the events in the previous game . After enjoying over a decade of peace on Wonder Land following the defeat of the evil King by Tom @-@ Tom , later bestowed the title " Wonder Boy " , a fire @-@ breathing dragon called the MEKA dragon appeared ; he and his minions conquered Wonder Land , turning it into " Monster Land " . The people , helpless due to their lack of fighting skill , call for Wonder Boy , now a teenager , to destroy the monsters and defeat the MEKA dragon . Players control Wonder Boy through twelve linear levels as he makes his way through Monster Land to find and defeat the MEKA dragon . Players earn gold by defeating enemies and buy weapons , armor , footwear , magic , and other items to help along the way . 
 The arcade version of Wonder Boy in Monster Land amassed moderate sales , and the Master System version received overall positive reviews in all aspects and has been highly regarded as one of the better titles in the Master System library . Reviews praised the game for its colorful graphics , smooth controls , gameplay , and replay value . Other ports received mixed reception : criticisms included very slow multi @-@ load times on the home computer versions , sub @-@ quality sound , and reduced gameplay area size . A later port to the Nintendo Virtual Console drew additional praise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of Wonder Boy in Monster Land follows the events in its predecessor , Wonder Boy . The game 's main protagonist is a young boy named Bock Lee <unk> , in which his friends call him " Tom @-@ Tom " . In Wonder Boy Tom @-@ Tom 's girlfriend Tanya was kidnapped by the " evil King " and was taken to his woodland kingdom ; Tom @-@ Tom set out to the kingdom , defeated the evil King , and saved Tanya . Word spread throughout Wonder Land about Tom @-@ Tom 's quest , and people bestowed upon him the title of " Wonder Boy " . 
 Following the evil King 's defeat , peace reigned over Wonder Land for eleven years . Then , one day , a fire @-@ breathing dragon called the " MEKA dragon " appeared and terrorized the land . The people , helpless and not skilled in fighting , were defeated by him and his minions ; they quickly took over the land , and Wonder Land became known as " Monster Land " . The people send out for Wonder Boy , now a teenager , as Wonder Land 's only chance to defeat the monsters and demons who inhabited the land and to defeat the MEKA dragon . The deposed Mayor gives Wonder Boy a sword and a life potion and sets him on his way . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Wonder Boy in Monster Land , players control Wonder Boy as he destroys the monsters in Monster Land and defeats the MEKA dragon . When the player begins the game , Wonder Boy starts out in the City of Wonder Land without any items or gold , but to give him a chance , at the beginning of the game , the city 's mayor gives him a sword and a revival potion and sets him off on his own . The game is divided into twelve levels , and each of them has its own unique features , items , monsters , and secrets . These levels include towns , valleys , deserts , islands , and castles . Players use the D @-@ pad to move Wonder Boy on the main screen , to enter doors by pressing upward , and to use Magic Weapons by pressing downward . The D @-@ pad is also used to select between various items when in a shop . Players also have two buttons : one which makes Wonder Boy attack with his sword and buy items in the shop ; and one which makes Wonder Boy jump and skip through storylines . 
 Wonder Boy has a life meter which consists of a series of red hearts ; he starts the game with five red hearts . Whenever he sustains damage those hearts turn black . When all the hearts turn black , Wonder Boy dies , and the game ends . Players score points whenever Wonder Boy defeats enemies and collects certain treasures , and at certain point intervals Wonder Boy receives an additional life heart . Players earn gold throughout the game in order to purchase weapons , magic weapons , and other items in shops and rooms . Gold is obtained from enemies , while some are hidden in odd places such as trees and clouds . The game has an " Hourglass Timer " on the top of the screen ; whenever the Hourglass Timer runs out , Wonder Boy loses some life . The Hourglass Timer can be refilled by collecting hourglasses or by visiting hospitals or taverns . In the ZX Spectrum version of the game , a candle represents the timer . 
 In the Master System version of the game , pressing one of the buttons takes players to the Status Screen which primarily shows what items they currently have . Other information displayed in the Status Screen include types and strengths of weapons and armor equipped ; gold ; life remaining ; special items collected ; and types of " Magic Weapons " collected and their quantities . Magic Weapons include bombs that roll on the ground , fireballs that fly through the air , small tornadoes that run on the ground and attack enemies , and " thunder flash " which damage all enemies on the screen . In the game 's other versions , all gameplay information are displayed on the left and top edges of the screen ; there is no need to access a separate screen . 
 Throughout the game , the player must investigate the surroundings through finding and entering doors . These doors contain shops where players can buy equipment , rooms which provide additional information needed in the quest , traps which contain powerful enemies , and exits to the next level which can be opened after finding a key . Some of the doors in the game are hidden and can only be found through by trial and error . At the beginning of the game , shops are visible and are clearly marked with the appropriate signs . Later on in the game , as Wonder Boy gets closer to the MEKA Dragon , the shop doors become unmarked while others are traps set by the level 's bosses ; near the end of the game , many of the shops are invisible and contain more powerful weapons . There are four types of shops throughout the game : boot shops allow the player to buy boots which make Wonder Boy jump higher and run faster , armor shops contain armor which makes Wonder Boy incur less damage from enemy attacks , shield shops contain shields which allow him to repel fire from enemies , and magical shops allow players to purchase Magic Weapons . There are also various rooms in the game which the player can enter and receive additional assistance in the quest : taverns where players can buy drinks and receive information from the bartender , Fortune Teller rooms where players may receive information about future events , and hospitals which allow players to refill their life meter and Hourglass Timer for a small price . Other rooms contain a boss in which the player must defeat to get the key to the next level , to earn additional gold , or to upgrade to a more powerful sword . 
 There are many items and treasures located throughout the game . Many of these treasures are obtained by defeating enemies and include the following : gold ; golden water jugs , necklaces , scales of justice , harps , mirrors , and crowns which increase the player 's score ; hourglasses which refill the Hourglass Timer ; hearts which refill the life meter ; gauntlets which temporarily double Wonder Boy 's attack power ; helmets which temporarily provide additional protection from enemy attacks ; Wing Boots which allow Wonder Boy to fly over obstacles ; Revival Potions ; and magic mantles which make Wonder Boy temporarily invisible . Other special items hidden in the game which the player must find include letters , the flute , various charms , the bell , and the ruby . 
 = = Development = = 
 Wonder Boy in Monster Land was created by <unk> Nishizawa and <unk> Ishizuka , two of the three members of a newly found company called Escape . After the release of the first Wonder Boy game , they rebranded the company as " Westone " : the first letter in Nishizawa 's name means " west " , while the first on Ishizuka 's name means " stone " . Nishizawa , originally an arcade game developer , was trying to take advantage of the quickly emerging role @-@ playing video game genre , with games such as The Black Onyx , Wizardry , and Dragon Quest . He tried to create a game that fused together arcade and RPG elements . The jungle backdrop was overhauled and replaced with a medieval one with castles and caves . As with RPGs , he intended for the player to start with no items or strength , and for players to buy items , spells , health , and better equipment . Later in the game 's development , Shinichi Sakamoto came on board to compose its soundtrack ; in an overview of the series by IGN , they said that the music " was a sigh of relief for those still haunted by the repetitive loops of the arcade original " , adding that it contributed to the RPG style and that would establish the standard for all future Wonder Boy games in the series . 
 The game would be published by Sega in 1987 and released for the arcade . It ran on a Sega System 2 board . It was based on a Z80 processor that runs at 4 MHz , with audio provided by two SN76489 ( also known as <unk> ) chips that run at 4 MHz each . It used raster standard graphics and monaural sound . Upon its release for the arcades in Japan in 1987 , Wonder Boy : Monster Land had slow sales , but it would eventually pick up to become a decent seller . Sega ported the game to its Master System console in 1988 , where in Japan it was titled Super Wonder Boy : Monster World . It was also ported by Activision for the Amiga , Atari ST , Commodore 64 , Amstrad CPC , and ZX Spectrum in 1989 . The Activision @-@ published version bore the title of Super Wonder Boy in Monster Land on their packaging artwork . Hudson Soft released a version of the game titled Super Adventure Island for mobile phones on June 8 , 2005 ( 2005 @-@ 06 @-@ 08 ) . The Master System version was released for the Wii 's Virtual Console service in Japan on December 14 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 12 @-@ 14 ) , in Europe on January 23 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 01 @-@ 23 ) , and in North America on January 26 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 01 @-@ 26 ) . Sega release the arcade version for the Virtual Console , PlayStation Network , Xbox Live Arcade ( along with The Revenge of Shinobi , Alex Kidd in Miracle World , the Arcade port of Super Hang @-@ On , Monster World IV , and Wonder Boy in Monster World ) as part of its third Sega Vintage Collection package in May 2012 . 
 = = Ports and remakes = = 
 Wonder Boy in Monster Land was released by Sega for the arcades in 1987 and for the Master System in 1988 ; Activision released the game for the Amiga , Commodore 64 , Amstrad CPC , ZX Spectrum , and Atari ST in 1989 , these version were developed by Images Software in the UK ( now called Climax Studios ) . In Japan , the original arcade game was titled Wonder Boy : Monster Land ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Bōi Monsutā Rando ) , while the later Sega Mark III home version was titled Super Wonder Boy : Monster World ( <unk> <unk> ) . In Europe , Activision 's home computer versions were titled Super Wonder Boy in Monster Land on their packaging cover ( although all the versions , except the CPC version , omit the word " Super " from the in @-@ game title ) . 
 The game has been cloned , hacked and re @-@ marketed a number of times over the years with varying degrees of legality . Jaleco released a modified port of the game to the Famicom , changing the graphics and character sprites so that it resembled the Chinese novel Journey to the West . They titled the game <unk> World , changed its protagonist to Sun Wukong , and changed the setting to Ancient China ; they released the game on November 11 , 1988 ( 1988 @-@ 11 @-@ 11 ) . This game would have a sequel called <unk> World 2 in Japan and Whomp ' Em in North America . Similarly , Hudson Soft ported a version of Wonder Boy : Monster Land titled Bikkuriman World , where they changed the graphics and characters to those from the Bikkuriman anime franchise . They released the game for the PC Engine on October 30 , 1987 ( 1987 @-@ 10 @-@ 30 ) . Tectoy , Sega 's distributor in Brazil , used the game 's license and code to produce Mônica no Castelo do Dragão for the Master System in 1989 . Here , the characters were replaced with known figures from the Brazilian comic book series Monica 's Gang ( Turma da Mônica ) , and Monica was re @-@ cast as the game 's main character . The game is considered the only legal remake of any game in the Wonder Boy series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Master System version of the game was reviewed in the June 1988 issue of Computer and Video Games , which gave it an overall score of 9 out of 10 . It described the game as a " total mix of arcade , strategy and adventure " with " role playing elements " such as " interaction with other characters and the ability to develop your character " . It further stated that the " graphics rate as some of the best seen to date on a Sega game " and the " playability is supreme " , concluding that it pushes its game design " to new horizons , all of which makes for longterm playability and interest " . It was also reviewed in the April 1989 issue of Dragon by Hartley , Patricia , and Kirk Lesser in " The Role of Computers " column . The reviewers called it " a good game with a bad name " , considered the game play superb , and concluded that the game " is one of SEGA 's classic products " . They stated that the arcade , strategy and role @-@ playing action elements combine to make it " a truly original and enjoyable game " and that Sega has " done an excellent job " overall , giving the game 4 ½ out of 5 stars . Allgame also gave the game 4 ½ out of 5 stars , with reviewer Jonathan <unk> describing it as " one of the best games I have ever played on the Master System " . IGN in 2009 described the Virtual Console release as an " interesting platformer / RPG hybrid " game . 
 The ZX Spectrum version of Wonder Boy in Monster Land received preview coverage in Your Sinclair magazine . They praised the new additions made to the game that separated it from Wonder Boy ; they called the game " a good arcade adventure with a smattering of strategy thrown in " . The magazine reviewed the game four months later . The reviewer noted the diverse level designs and many " surprises " the player will encounter , and they praised the game 's learning curve , saying that it " is well thought out and you really feel as if you made some progress before you die " . It was criticized for its long multi @-@ load times on the ZX Spectrum , its jumping mechanics in which the character " floats around " , and the graphics which was not as good as its predecessor . The reviewer called Wonder Boy in Monster Land " a souped @-@ up version of Wonderboy , which improves much on the original theory but at a slight cost to gameplay " . Reviewers from UK @-@ based magazine The Games Machine called it " probably the best conversion you could expect on the Spectrum " . Crash magazine praised the ZX Spectrum version of the game for its detailed sprites and smooth movements , playability , and combat system . The reviewer further commended the game for the differences that set it apart from the original Wonder Boy game , citing the cartoon @-@ like feel and the vast arrays of enemies and items ; just as in Your Sinclair , it was criticized for its slow multi @-@ loading . Overall , the reviewer said the game is " great fun for the experienced games player or the person just starting out in the Spectrum world " . Sinclair User magazine praised its gameplay , citing the ability to stab enemies with a sword , to collect gold and items left behind , and to go into shops and pubs and buy equipment . Further praise went to the colorful and detailed graphics and animations , though they said they tend not to perform well in more complex background settings . Spanish magazine MicroHobby said that the ZX Spectrum version brought nothing new from its arcade counterpart , but the execution was good ; they lauded the game 's graphics and its challenging and addictive gameplay , but they criticized it for its lack of originality . 
 The Commodore 64 and Atari ST versions of Wonder Boy in Monster Land also received similar praise from gaming magazines . The Games Machine praised the Atari ST version but criticized the Commodore 64 version . The reviewers said the former " is not only playable , but the graphics are the nearest to the arcade machine you 're going to get " ; however , they said the graphics in the latter , while colorful , were too block @-@ like and ruined its overall presentation . Reviewers from Zzap ! 64 criticized the Commodore 64 version , saying that this version is only slightly better and more playable than the Amiga version . Moreover , they said this version also suffered from repetitive gameplay and " inefficient multi @-@ load " , though an improvement from the Amiga version . Zero gave a fair assessment of the Atari ST version , appreciating the " cutesy " and cartoon @-@ like graphics and addicting gameplay , which the reviewer said is " very easy to get into and very hard to put down " ; they criticized the game 's lack of any save features , saying that some of the gameplay gets repetitive after a while . Swedish magazine Datormagazin acclaimed the Commodore 64 version in most aspects . They lauded its graphics for being simplistic but clean , but they noted that they were not sensational . They criticized the game for its music , which they said can become annoying after a while , and for its lack of save points . Overall , they gave a positive review , saying that it " is a perfect example of how to make a game that is fairly simple to play but still is fairly advanced " . 
 The Amiga version of Wonder Boy in Monster Land received mixed responses , but most reviews were negative . CU Amiga magazine expressed disappointment over the major change in the gameplay and the protagonist himself from the game 's predecessor . The review also criticized sharply the game 's poor graphics and character sprites , saying that " many of the characters are short and stumpy " , that the background resembles that of Boulder Dash , and that Wonder Boy " is as wide as he is tall " . Other criticisms included substandard screen scrolling , terrible gameplay due to the game 's slowness , and that the actual gameplay area has been drastically reduced in size to include gameplay statistics such as the life meter and score displays . IGN heavily criticized the Amiga version 20 years after its release , saying how Wonder Boy was depicted as " a diaper @-@ clad baby " . Amiga Format similarly gave the game poor ratings , including the small gameplay area as a result of displaying the other statistics , sound that is substandard to the Amiga computer 's expectations , the lack of a " high score " feature , and limited continues ( as opposed to the arcade version which had unlimited continues ) . The reviewer said that " the game hasn 't been programmed to make use of any of the Amiga 's features " and that it " is another in the sadly increasing number of games that has simply been ported over from the first conversion , so that none of the features that make Amiga games stand out are included " . Zzap ! 64 complained about the version 's " <unk> " sound and the very slow multi @-@ load times , saying that the player may spend more time waiting for the game to load levels than play it . It also noted the lack of detail and variety in the graphics which did not make up for the slow multi @-@ load times ; the reviewer said that the enemies looked " about as dangerous as a dead tortoise " . Other reviews from computer magazines gave the Amiga version of the game more positive reviews . Amiga User International praised the game 's graphics , which they said were translated from the arcade version near @-@ perfectly . It also appreciated the game 's cartoon @-@ style graphics , which said befits the game well . However , the review noticed that the game 's code came from the Atari ST version , which , as noted in the other reviews , resulted in choppy scrolling and a shrunken gameplay area : something which the Amiga could do " perfectly smoothly with one hand tied behind its back " . The review also criticized its slow multi @-@ load times and high retail price . German magazine Amiga Joker liked the game 's " candy @-@ like graphics " and gameplay style , which they said compared to the title The Great <unk> Sisters . However , the reviewers criticized it for its choppy scrolling and sound , of which they said " David Whittaker has already produced much better sound " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Wonder Boy in Monster Land received additional coverage years after its release . A 2004 review from Honest Gamers highly lauded its gameplay , challenge , and sound . It noted that while the game starts easy , the difficulty increases at a decent rate and involves good general gameplay skills that serve to add to the gameplay value . The reviewer praised the sound for being simple yet very effective , saying that it " is the ultimate compliment to pay a video game score " and comparing it to other Master System titles such as Alex Kidd . A 2008 IGN feature listed the game as one of " The 7 Master System Games You Need " ; the reviewer said the game " is one of the finest adventures in a long series of [ Wonder Boy ] games " , praising its brightly colored graphics and character sprites , and its sound . IGN had its sequel , Wonder Boy III : The Dragon 's Trap , at No. 8 on their list , just missing also being featured . 
 The game received further reviews and general praise upon its release to the Virtual Console in 2009 . Website Nintendo Life praised the game 's controls for being smooth and responsive , especially for such an old game . The review appreciated its graphics , especially in its sharpness and usage of color ; it further lauded the game 's upbeat sound that complements the game nicely , the varied level designs and gameplay elements such as the need to answer questions from some bosses , and its overall execution . It said that the game is one of the better Master System titles that still plays good today . IGN called Wonder Boy in Monster Land one of the best games on the Master System , mainly because of its unique balance of platforming and RPG elements , which the reviewer calls " a winning formula " . It said that the game is an improvement over its Adventure Island @-@ like predecessor , replacing the " fruit gauge " with an hourglass timer while retaining other elements such as finding invisible items and discovering secret areas . The review mentioned that the game should appeal to fans from the days of 8 @-@ bit and the Master System . 
 Allgame gave positive reviews of the game . It said that game includes everything from hidden items , simplistic gameplay , fun and replay value , and basic but good @-@ looking graphics . Defunct Games called Wonder Boy in Monster Land the most challenging game in the Wonder Boy series , noting the lack of passwords or continues in the Master System version , the relatively few chances to earn extra lives , and a time limit . The review said that the ability to earn gold and upgrade equipment which are laid out in the status screen tremendously adds to the replay value . It praised the responsive , though sometimes not precise , controls and the tight hit detection . Moreover , it said that the graphics were colorful and that it complemented the music and its simplistic sound effects well . Overall , the review said that the game is recommended for Master System and platforming fans alike . 
 = John of Tynemouth ( canon lawyer ) = 
 John of Tynemouth ( died 1221 ) was a medieval English clergyman and canon lawyer . He was among the first teachers of canon law at what later became Oxford University , where he was by 1188 . By the late 1190s John had joined the household of the Archbishop of Canterbury , Hubert Walter . Besides his position in the household , he also held a number of ecclesiastical positions , which earned him a substantial income . After Walter 's death , John continued to serve as a lawyer as well as hold clerical offices . He died in 1221 and a number of his writings survive . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 The first mention of John occurs in 1188 when he was teaching at Oxford . This record notes that he witnessed a legal case decided by delegated judges for the Bishop of Lincoln . Along with a few other instructors , including Simon of Southwell , Honorius of Kent , and possibly Nicholas de Aquila , John was among the first securely attested legal teachers at Oxford . While at Oxford he lectured on the Decretum Gratiani and was one of the teachers of Thomas of Marlborough , later writer of the Chronicon Abbatiae de Evesham , or Chronicle of the Abbey of Evesham . It is not quite clear when John taught Thomas , but Thomas attests in his Chronicon that John was one of Thomas ' teachers . Nothing else is known of John 's early life or where he studied law , but presumably like other early English canon lawyers , he studied somewhere on the Continent before returning to England to teach or practice . It is possible that he served as a canon of Lincoln Cathedral during the 1190s , but this is not securely attested . By the late 1190s , John was a member of the household of Hubert Walter , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Besides Walter , another of his patrons was Walter de Coutances , the Archbishop of Rouen . 
 In 1203 John was employed in pleading at Rome on the Hubert Walter 's behalf in a case against Gerald of Wales . While returning from Rome , John was captured and held for ransom . He informed his captors that Gerald would also be passing by , thus ensuring Gerald 's capture . Gerald 's revenge was to inform the kidnappers that John 's income was over 100 marks a year , which meant that the kidnappers required a large ransom before releasing John . John was eventually rescued by John <unk> , a fellow Englishman and former Archbishop of Lyon . 
 John held the rectorship of Upminster , Essex , by 1204 . By 25 June 1206 , John was holding the prebend of Langford Ecclesia in the Diocese of Lincoln and it is unclear when he relinquished this position . Sometime between 1210 and 1212 he became Archdeacon of Oxford in the Diocese of Lincoln , perhaps during 1211 . His predecessor in office was the chronicler Walter Map . 
 In 1203 the medieval chronicler Thomas of Marlborough , who was a monk of Evesham Abbey , pleaded a case for Evesham before Hubert Walter and later , in his chronicle , he noted that John , Simon of Southwell , and Honorius of Kent , by now all canon lawyers in the archbishop 's household , sided with the abbey . He also described the three men as magistri mei in <unk> ( roughly , " my school teachers " ) . Surviving evidence shows that Simon and John frequently found themselves on opposing sides of cases , which suggests a rivalry between the two over their expositions of canon law . 
 During the papal interdict on England during King John 's reign , John of Tynemouth remained in England . He also served as a papal judge @-@ delegate on several occasions . He died in 1221 , between 25 March and August . This date of death is only recorded in a medieval work , the Annals of Dunstable , often felt to be the work of another canonist , Richard de Mores . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Some of John 's writings , dealing with canon law , still survive . They show him to have been steeped in canon law and quite knowledgeable . In his writings , he often cited earlier <unk> or theologians as well as contemporary writers . A number of the glosses on a late @-@ twelfth @-@ century copy of Gratian 's Decretum are ascribed to John . These take the form of notes from his lectures that were later added to the margins of copies of the Decretum . This combined work is now at Gonville and Caius College at Cambridge University , catalogued as manuscript ( MS ) 283 / 676 . Another set of student notes from his lectures , this time entitled Quaestiones , survives as part of British Library MS Royal <unk> This work includes lectures notes not only from John 's classes , but from Simon and Nicholas ' as well . He also was addressed as magister , testifying to his learning . 
 = Lobster ( magazine ) = 
 Lobster is a magazine that is interested primarily in the influence of intelligence and security services on politics and world trade , what it calls " deep politics " or " parapolitics " . It combines the examination of conspiracy theories and contemporary history . Lobster is edited and published in the United Kingdom and has appeared twice a year for 32 years , at first in 16 @-@ page A5 format , then as an A4 magazine . Operating on a shoestring , its distinguished contributors include academics and others . Since 2009 it is distributed as a free downloadable PDF document . 
 According to the Hull Daily Mail , Lobster ' investigates government conspiracies , state espionage and the secret service . ' In 1986 the magazine scooped mainstream media by uncovering the secret Clockwork Orange operation , implicated in trying to destabilise the British government . Colin Wallace , a former British Army Intelligence Corps officer in Northern Ireland , described how he had been instructed to smear leading UK politicians . Questions were asked in the House of Commons and an extended scandal ensued . 
 The current curator of the CIA Historical Intelligence Collection , Hayden B. Peake , notes that the editors of Lobster see it as " member of the international brotherhood of parapolitics mags , " the other members being <unk> ( Cologne , Germany ) , Intelligence Newsletter ( Paris , France ) , and Covert Action Information Bulletin ( USA ) , and is " distinctive in its depth of coverage , its detailed documentation , and the absence of the rhetoric " . 
 In 1989 , Lobster published names of 1 @,@ 500 citizens said to be working in intelligence . The magazine was denounced in the House of Commons . The editors replied that all published details could be found in local libraries . The magazine has also carried detailed analysis of " fringe " subjects such as UFOs and remote viewing . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 In 1982 , an American newsletter about the Kennedy assassination , Echoes of Conspiracy , put Robin Ramsay and Stephen Dorril in touch with each other because of their common interest in the JFK assassination story . A few months later , they decided to launch a magazine , and in September 1983 , they published 150 copies of The Lobster priced at 50p . Ramsay later described himself and his associate : " Dorril is a <unk> @-@ anarchist , with Situationist tendencies ; and Ramsay is a premature anti @-@ Militant member of the soft old left of the Labour Party " . 
 The inaugural issue stated its aims as " a journal / newsletter about intelligence , parapolitics , state structures and so forth [ .. ] there is no copyright on the material in The Lobster [ .. ] we hope to break even at the present price of 50p , but we may not [ .. ] should appear 6 times a year " . From Issue 5 onwards , the cover dropped the definite article and became just " Lobster " . 
 Publishing frequency Lobster dropped to four issues in 1984 and three issues in 1986 and 1987 , before settling down as a bi @-@ annual from 1988 . The Lobster logo ( see illustration ) , first appeared in issue 20 in November 1990 and was designed by Clive <unk> . 
 = = = Format and costs = = = 
 The first 8 issues of Lobster are A5 paper size ( 148 × <unk> ) format , growing to A4 ( 210 × <unk> ) from Issue 9 in September 1985 . The magazine was originally typewritten , reduced on a photocopier , pasted @-@ up and printed on a <unk> off @-@ set litho duplicating machine . Around issue 17 , the magazine was type @-@ set on an Amstrad PCW using <unk> and from Lobster 27 , on an <unk> with Claris Works . Lobster Issue 57 ( Summer 2009 ) was the last hard copy issue . Issue 58 ( Winter 2009 / 2010 ) was the first available without charge . The magazine is published from Ramsay 's home in Hull . 
 Lobster is published not @-@ for @-@ profit . The Independent on Sunday quoted Ramsay that the magazine " .. always broke even , as I would put the price up if it started losing money . The readers paid whatever I asked " , which the newspaper commented " Sounds a fine business model " . Robert McCrum in The Guardian quotes Ramsay as boasting that Lobster is " the only left @-@ wing journal to pay for itself " . 
 = = = The Dorril / Ramsay split = = = 
 In March 1993 , The Independent newspaper noted that the founders of Lobster had fallen out , and that " The break between the two men began in December when Ramsay told Dorril he was removing his name from the Lobster masthead and would run the twice @-@ yearly magazine alone . " The London Evening Standard reported that Ramsay had told his readers that Dorril also planned to produce a magazine called Lobster . After producing Lobster Issue 25 , they each produced their own version of Lobster Issue 26 . Dorril recalls a different version of events . Dorril 's website indicates that his Lobster Issue 31 ( October 1996 ) was the last published . Alternative media expert and Professor of Media and Culture at Edinburgh Napier University , Chris Atton , notes that Dorril 's Lobster concentrates on the activities of the British and US security services , while Robin Ramsay 's Lobster casts its net wider to encompass histories of fascism , the JFK assassination , the Lockerbie bombing and the military 's medical experiments on service personnel . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The name of the magazine , " Lobster " , has attracted multiple interpretations . Dorril recalls that " We wanted the magazine to sound not pompous , and as a teenager , he would invent names for punk rock groups . ' Lobster ' was just one of his favourites . " Ramsay recalls that " The name " Lobster " was Steve Dorril 's choice . I couldn 't think of an alternative and I didn 't think the name mattered . As far as I know it had no connotations for Dorril ; indeed as I remembered it , the absence of connotations was part of is appeal . " 
 = = Controversy = = 
 = = = Operation Clockwork Orange , Colin Wallace and Fred Holroyd = = = 
 Lobster published the first account of the Colin Wallace affair , also known as Operation Clockwork Orange , about the plot by disaffected members of Britain 's Security Service , MI5 , to destabilise the Harold Wilson Labour Government , and to smear politicians such as former Tory prime minister Edward Heath . The editors of Lobster described the revelations as Britain 's Watergate and the biggest story since World War Two . The <unk> were subsequently confirmed by former MI5 officer Peter Wright in his book <unk> . 
 = = = = Political fallout = = = = 
 In late 1986 , questions were asked in the UK Parliament concerning the matters in Lobster . Then Labour Party Member of Parliament for Hull North , Kevin McNamara , brought up the issue in the House of Commons , asking the Prime Minister , Margaret Thatcher , to refer the matter to the Security Commission , and asking then Attorney @-@ General and Conservative MP Michael Havers , to ask the Director of Public Prosecutions to investigate allegations published in Lobster and prosecute Colin Wallace for revealing details of secret service operations against Her Majesty 's Government . Both declined . Two weeks later , Labour MP Tam Dalyell asked the Prime Minister why she would not refer the matter to the Security Commission , but she said that she had nothing more to add . 
 = = = Who 's Who of the British Secret State = = = 
 In 1989 , British journalist Richard Norton @-@ Taylor reported in The Guardian newspaper , that Lobster was planning to publish " a list of the names and brief biographical details of more than 1 @,@ 500 past and present officials involved , according to the publishers , in covert activities " . A year later the article appeared in Lobster Issue 19 , and another appeared 18 months later . Although The Guardian noted that the Government was considering making the publication of such names a criminal offence , then Lobster co @-@ editor Stephen Dorril noted that " All the names and details .. have been compiled by research in their local libraries or have already appeared in published books . ' No inside knowledge or breach of official secrets was needed ' " 10 years later , Ramsay was quoted in the Hull Daily Mail , that " At the time it was a way of sticking two fingers up at the Government " . 
 = = = = House of Commons criticism = = = = 
 Subsequently , Lobster was denounced in the British Parliament . Then Conservative Party Member of Parliament for Wycombe , Ray Whitney , criticised the publication of the names in the House of Commons on 21 December 1988 in a debate on a proposed Official Secrets Bill , when he commented that : 
 " A small obscure magazine published , I think , in Hull and called , would hon . Members believe , Lobster makes a practice of publishing names of gentlemen who are alleged to be members of the security services . That creates danger and I am sure that my right hon . Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup shares my deep apprehension about that sort of practice being allowed to continue . " 
 In his book , Politics and Paranoia , Ramsay criticised Whitney 's role as the head of the Foreign Office 's Information Research Department which Ramsay described as the " State 's official , anti @-@ left <unk> @-@ war outfit " , and had omitted to tell the Commons before denouncing him . 
 = = Contributors = = 
 In addition to co @-@ founders Robin Ramsay and Stephen Dorril , contributors have included : 
 Dan Atkinson , a British journalist and author 
 William Blum , American author and historian 
 Mike Carlson , broadcaster and writer for The Guardian and the Independent 
 Colin Challen , the Member of Parliament for Morley and Rothwell from 2001 until 2010 
 Kevin Coogan , American investigative journalist 
 Alex Cox , a film @-@ maker 
 Richard Cummings , an author , playwright , theorist and critic 
 Mark Curtis , investigative journalist and author 
 Anthony Frewin , writer and assistant to Stanley Kubrick 
 Robert Henderson , British writer 
 Jim <unk> , author of Decadence , Spooks , and Secret Agenda 
 John <unk> , author and professor of History at Bath Spa University 
 David Osler , a British author and journalist 
 Greg Palast , author and a freelance journalist 
 Jan <unk> <unk> , Professor of Global Studies and Sociology at the University of California , Santa Barbara 
 Dave Renton , historian and political activist 
 Paul Rogers , Professor of Peace Studies at the University of Bradford 
 Peter Dale Scott , a former English professor at the University of California , Berkeley , and a former diplomat 
 Michael John Smith , convicted of espionage 
 Giles Scott @-@ Smith , Professor of Diplomatic History of Atlantic Cooperation at Leiden University . 
 Kenn Thomas , conspiracy theorist , writer , editor & publisher of <unk> Press 
 = = Themed and special issues = = 
 Lobster has published a couple of themed or special issues , including : 
 = = Regular sections = = 
 A number of regular sections have appeared in Lobster over the years : 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1998 , the Hull Daily Mail described the magazine as " a tiny but influential fringe political journal " . In 2001 , the magazine Red Pepper wrote that Lobster " .. succeeds on the quality of its writing ... articles are well researched ... human , passionate and honest ... " , the Fortean Times ( who also syndicated a regular Lobster column by Ramsay ) wrote that it was " ... immensely engrossing reading , ... an essential purchase for anyone interested in the machinations of the secret state " , Green Anarchist magazine wrote that Lobster is " ... an invaluable resource , and deserves to be widely read and much studied " , and Direct Action magazine described it as " a good read ... very revealing and worth it , just for the pub talk " . 
 Journalist Robert McCrum in The Guardian describes Lobster as " .. a left @-@ wing journal that offers succour to conspiracy theorists [ .. ] a brave , bright beacon , a Quixotic piece of typically English amateurism that keeps the professionals on their toes " . The Independent newspaper has described it as a " delightful and worthwhile publications , more footnote than story , that [ .. ] delivers a comprehensive picture of a clandestine world which the Establishment would prefer remained secret " . 
 Trade Magazine PRWeek describes Lobster as a " Hull @-@ based intelligence magazine and conspiracy theorists ' bible " , and the Conspiracy Encyclopedia described it as " the most influential publication in the <unk> underground " . Irish historical writer , Tim Pat Coogan , in discussing a TV programme about Captain Fred Holroyd in relation to the Collin Wallace affair , noted that " some of the best writing on the Holroyd case is contained in smaller journals published contemporaneously , notably Lobster , Private Eye , and , in particular [ Duncan ] Campbell 's own series [ .. ] in the Statesman " . 
 Professor of Media and Culture at Edinburgh Napier University , Chris Atton , notes that a reference at the end of an article in Lobster led to the founding of the activist librarians ' group Information for Social Change . CIA curator , Hayden B. Peake notes that a British journalist described " much of its content its impenetrable " , but that it was also intriguing . 
 = Park Grill = 
 The Park Grill is the only full @-@ service restaurant included in the multibillion @-@ dollar Millennium Park project in Chicago , Illinois . Its outdoor seating area is the largest al fresco dining area in Chicago . It has placed among the leaders in citywide best @-@ of competitions for best burger and is widely praised for its views . 
 The exclusive location , the lucrative contract terms , the investor list , and a close personal relationship between a managing partner of the restaurant and the Chicago Park District 's project manager led to a formal ethics investigation , court litigation , and extensive press coverage , and ranked among the most prominent scandals of the administration of Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley in 2005 . The more than 80 investors include some of Daley 's friends and neighbors . One of the most financially successful restaurants in Chicago , the Park Grill remains exempt from property taxes after a multi @-@ year litigation which reached the Illinois Supreme Court . 
 = = Location and views = = 
 The Park Grill is located on North Michigan Avenue in Chicago in the Historic Michigan Boulevard District . Cloud Gate , a public sculpture , is located on AT & T Plaza on the roof of the Park Grill . 
 During the summer months , the restaurant 's outdoor seating area becomes the largest al fresco dining area in Chicago . During the winter months , the restaurant 's outdoor seating area becomes the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink , and diners in the 300 @-@ seat The Park Grill overlooks the ice skating rink through floor @-@ to @-@ ceiling windows . 
 = = History = = 
 In late 2001 , Matthew A. O 'Malley and James Horan proposed Park Grill and Park Cafe to " provide both white @-@ tablecloth meals and picnic @-@ hamper fare for visitors in Millennium Park " . In 2003 , the Chicago Park District awarded a 20 @-@ year contract to run the Park Grill to a partnership , including several of Mayor Richard M. Daley 's friends and neighbors . 
 = = = Background of managing partners = = = 
 The current managing partners of the Park Grill are O 'Malley and Horan . O 'Malley , who once worked for the U.S. Representative Dan <unk> , runs the re @-@ purposed firehouse , Chicago Firehouse Restaurant , which is located around the corner from the home of Mayor Richard M. Daley , who has been a steady customer . The son of Alderman Edward Vrdolyak has also been a business partner with O 'Malley . Matthew O 'Malley and his brother Paul were picked to run the Clock Tower Cafe at the Sydney <unk> Golf Course in Lincoln Park on the Chicago lakefront . James Horan is a restaurant owner and caterer . He is president of Blue Plate Catering , which runs a cafe at Gallery 37 , an after @-@ school program created and fostered by Mayor Daley 's wife , Maggie Daley . 
 = = = Background of investors = = = 
 O 'Malley obtained commitments from over 80 prospective Park Grill investors , including some of Mayor Daley 's friends and neighbors . Each share of the restaurant cost investors $ 200 @,@ 000 . Among the investors are Daley 's friend Fred Barbara , a nephew of the late Chicago Alderman Fred Roti . Barbara has ties to the Hired Truck Program scandal and the blue bag recycling controversy . Other investors include relatives of Daley 's political adviser Timothy Degnan , two neighbors of the mayor , Ray Chin , an O 'Hare Airport contractor , and Rick Simon , a controversial figure who runs a janitorial business and sits on the board of the Chicago Convention and Tourism Bureau . Also among the investors was Daley 's cousin Theresa E. Mintle , then the Chicago Transit Authority ’ s director of governmental affairs and former congressman Morgan F. Murphy , who has had business dealings with convicted labor union official John Serpico . Among the vendors for Park Grill was an architectural metal company owned by the son of then Chicago Alderman Burton Natarus ( 42nd ) . 
 = = = Contract award process = = = 
 O 'Malley 's and two other groups submitted proposals to run the restaurant in September 2001 . The Park Grill group 's proposal was twice as long as the other two but , technically , promised the Park District the lowest revenues . By the end of the year , O 'Malley 's team had been selected to run the restaurant , souvenir and concession stands , and a cafe in the new Millennium Park . 
 The Park Grill contract was signed February 11 , 2003 . The contract requires that Park Grill to pay a percent of net sales and an additional fee of $ 275 @,@ 000 per year , but the latter was not due until the Park Grill recouped half its build @-@ out costs . As part of its deal , the Park District pays for water , gas , and garbage collection at Park Grill . The garbage pickup costs taxpayers about $ 245 @,@ 000 annually . 
 = = = Park District project manager 's relationship with contractor = = = 
 The Park District team , including an outside consultant , spent 18 months negotiating a contract with O 'Malley 's group . During that time , Laura Foxgrover , a top official in the Park District department directly overseeing the deal , gave birth to O 'Malley 's child . Prior to working for the Park District , Foxgrover had been an employee of O 'Malley as director of operations at the Chicago Firehouse Restaurant . Foxgrover held the title " senior project manager " at the Park District at an annual salary of $ 94 @,@ 000 . In May 2002 , Foxgrover wrote a memo <unk> herself from negotiations , without saying why , and never told her superiors she was carrying O 'Malley 's child . The girl was born in September , 2002 . 
 Foxgrover remained involved in the Millennium Park restaurant after she recused herself from contract negotiations in May , 2002 . In October 2003 , Foxgrover spoke in favor of the restaurant getting a liquor license before a Chicago City Council committee while O 'Malley owed Foxgrover at least $ 5 @,@ 000 . On the same day , Foxgrover worked to get O 'Malley 's Clock Tower Cafe a liquor license . In one July 2003 e @-@ mail , Foxgrover , then the acting director of park services , said that if O 'Malley 's contractor had any questions for the Park District , she will be the point person . In August 2003 , Horan sent out an e @-@ mail mentioning a discussion Horan had with Foxgrover , in which Horan asked Foxgrover if the Park District would waive a form of insurance on the restaurant 's construction . A provision in the Park Grill contract allows the restaurant to arrange a series of summer concerts on the Millennium Park ice @-@ skating rink , drawing crowds that bolster food and drink sales . In summer 2004 , O 'Malley and his partners asked Clear Channel @-@ owned <unk> Radio to conduct the concerts . In February 2005 , Foxgrover led a five @-@ member Park District committee that chose Clear Channel over JAM Productions to operate the new concert venue at Northerly Island on the former site of Meigs Field . 
 Foxgrover was the subject of an ethics investigation . An ethics officer for the Chicago Board of Ethics concluded that Foxgrover did not violate the district 's ethics ordinance and should be allowed to keep her $ 90 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ year job as the Park District 's director of development . By 2008 , Foxgrover had left the Park District to work for O 'Malley 's restaurant management company . 
 = = = Exemption from property tax = = = 
 On March 16 , 2005 , Cook County Assessor , James Houlihan 's office sent Horan and O 'Malley a letter notifying Park Grill that it was being assessed at $ 502 @,@ 550 and that it would be sent a bill in the fall for 2004 property taxes . On August 5 , 2005 , Horan and O 'Malley filed a lawsuit against the assessor , asking that a judge prohibit the county from imposing property taxes . The owners asserted that their contract to run Park Grill was a property tax exempt concessionaire agreement and not a taxable lease . The state 's attorney 's office , which defended the assessor in the case , said " our position is that the Park Grill is a leaseholder and as a leaseholder they are subject to taxes . " In 2009 , an appellate court affirmed the circuit court 's finding that the agreement to run Park Grill was not a lease but a license . In December , 2010 the Illinois Supreme Court with a 4 @-@ 3 vote affirmed the lower court decisions maintaining the Park Grill ’ s " agreement with the Park District created an <unk> license as opposed to a taxable lease " to do business . 
 = = = Daley administration response = = = 
 Mayor Richard M. Daley criticized the Park Grill deal , blaming Chicago 's Corporation Counsel Mara Georges , saying that lawyers for the city and the Chicago Park District erred and that the city wanted to renegotiate the pact . " Lawyers do make mistakes , " Daley said . " That 's what it was . ... It 's embarrassing to them . Yes it is - the corporation counsel and the Park District counsel . " Chicago Park District Superintendent Tim Mitchell said the Park District also wanted to renegotiate the contract . In a February 9 , 2005 letter to O 'Malley and Horan , Georges warned that the concession agreement " does not authorize your occupation of the Park Grill facilities " because the city owns the land , and City Hall should have been party to the original agreement when it was not . On February 11 , 2005 , Daley asked state lawmakers to impose tougher penalties for defrauding tax payers , and was questioned by reporters about why the Park Grill had not paid any property taxes and gets free gas , water and garbage pick @-@ up . Erma Tranter , president of the Friends of the Parks watchdog group , speaking at a Park District Board of Commissioners meeting , questioned why the Park Grill contract had yet to be renegotiated 11 months after Mayor Daley vowed to do so . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times dubbed the Park Grill the " Clout Cafe " and included the contract award process in a year @-@ end review of 2005 Daley administration scandals . 
 = = = Profitability = = = 
 The grand opening was set for November 24 , 2003 . In its first year of operation , Park Grill paid $ 162 @,@ 656 @.@ 72 in rent . The 2004 / 2005 Zagat Survey named the restaurant among the five " Top Newcomers " to Chicago . The Park Grill began making money for its investors in 2006 , its third year of operation , when investors split $ 527 @,@ 250 in profits . In 2008 , the Park Grill was named one of the top 100 highest @-@ grossing independent restaurants in the U.S. , serving approximately 300 @,@ 000 meals and grossing approximately US $ 12 million in sales , making it the seventh largest independent restaurant in terms of sales in Chicago in 2007 , according to Restaurants & Institutions magazine . The Park Grill remains exempt from property taxes , and the contract has not been renegotiated . 
 = = = Emanuel administration response = = = 
 Daley announced he would not seek a seventh term , and in the final months of Daley 's last term , the owners of the Park Grill , including O 'Malley and Barbara were reported as interested in selling . Daley 's successor , Mayor Rahm Emanuel appointed Theresa E. Mintle , one of the Park Grill investors , as his $ 174 @,@ 996 @-@ a @-@ year chief of staff . Three days after Emanuel took office and Mintle started work as his top aide , Mintle transferred her financial stake in the restaurant to her husband . 
 On December 1 , 2011 , the Emanuel administration sued the Park Grill operating company , and the Chicago Park District , asking a judge to end the generous 2003 concession agreement with the Chicago Park District . The city wants the Park Grill operator , which is trying to sell the restaurant , to pay more for the privilege of operating at the park . On December 15 , 2011 the Park Grill operators filed a counter suit against the City and Park District . In June , 2013 O ’ Malley and Foxgrover were married by Illinois Supreme Court Justice Anne M. Burke . By October , 2013 the City had paid more than $ 749 @,@ 000 and the Park District more than $ 585 @,@ 000 in legal fees . Deposed in August , 2013 in the lawsuit , Daley responded " I don 't recall " 139 times . “ In the Park Grill situation , city taxpayers were taken advantage of . They did not get a fair pricing for that property , ” Emanuel said . Chicago Sun @-@ Times columnist Mark Brown summarized " the Park Grill story " as 
 Guy meets girl . Guy owns a restaurant . Girl handles valuable Park District restaurant concession . Guy and girl make a baby together . Guy gets concession deal . Mayor knows nothing . Nothing ! But a bunch of his pals invest in what city lawyers later call a “ sweetheart deal . ” 
 On September 24 , 2015 , the court ruled in favor of the Park Grill , rejecting the Emanuel administration ’ s claims that the contract was invalid . 
 = = Menu = = 
 The menu is traditional American food with international influences . <unk> describes the cuisine as New American . Bernard <unk> , formerly of Chicago restaurants Marche and mk , is the executive chef . The Park Cafe , adjacent to the Park Grill , offers takeout food such as salads and sandwiches . 
 = = Critical reviews = = 
 The restaurant is notable for its views , its location , and its cuisine , especially its hamburgers . Zagat lists Park Grill as one of the " choice outdoor spots in town . " New City Chicago magazine named it one of the top 100 essential restaurants in the city , urging , " Ignore the scandal over sweetheart deals with the city for a moment and consider this : Park Grill sits in the hottest spot in the city today , if not in America . " In the 2006 / 07 and 2008 / 09 editions , <unk> respondents ranked it among the best of Chicago in the " Outdoors " and " Views " categories and lauded its fireplace . 
 Park Grill hamburgers achieved high citywide rankings in several publications , including best burgers in Time Out Chicago ( 2005 ) , Chicago Magazine ( 2008 ) and Citysearch ( 2008 ) . 
 The Unofficial Guide to Chicago points out the " spectacular view of the Chicago skyline , fronted by the ice rink at Millennium Park . " Fodor 's Chicago 2010 says " Location trumps service at Park Grill , where a seat on the patio in summer , in full view of Millennium Park , is among the best in the city . Sadly , the <unk> lapses ... " The National Geographic 's website 's Chicago Walking Tour : Millennium and Grant Parks recommends the Park Grill as it " allows you to admire the surrounding architecture passively . " The restaurant was noted as one of the " 99 Best of Chicago , " named as one of three under the category of " Best Restaurants with a View " in Night + Day Chicago . The location , " under ' the bean ' or next to a swarm of ice skaters , all convenient to the Loop , " was cited by Crain 's Chicago Business as a reason for including Park Grill as one of Chicago 's best restaurants for business dining in 2010 . 
 = Clinton Engineer Works = 
 The Clinton Engineer Works ( CEW ) was the name of the Manhattan Project 's production installation during World War II that produced the enriched uranium used in the bombing of Hiroshima in August 1945 , as well as the first examples of reactor produced plutonium . It consisted of production facilities arranged at three major sites , various utilities including a power plant , and the town of Oak Ridge . It was in the eastern part of the state of Tennessee , about 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of Knoxville , and was named after the town of Clinton , Tennessee , eight miles ( 13 km ) to the north . The production facilities were mainly in Roane County although the northern part of the site was in Anderson County . The Manhattan District Engineer , Kenneth Nichols , moved the Manhattan District headquarters from Manhattan to Oak Ridge in August 1943 . 
 Construction workers were housed in a community known as Happy Valley . Built by the Army in 1943 , this temporary community housed 15 @,@ 000 people . The township of Oak Ridge was established to house the production staff . The operating force peaked at 50 @,@ 000 workers just after the end of the war . The construction labor force peaked at 75 @,@ 000 and the combined employment peak was 80 @,@ 000 . The town was developed by the federal government as a segregated community ; black residents lived only in an area known as Gamble Valley , in government @-@ built " hutments " ( one @-@ room shacks ) on the south side of what is now Tuskegee Drive . 
 = = Site selection = = 
 In 1942 , the Manhattan Project was attempting to construct the first atomic bombs . This would require production facilities , and by June 1942 the project had reached the stage where their construction could be contemplated . On 25 June 1942 , the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) S @-@ 1 Executive Committee deliberated on where they should be located . Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer recommended that the different manufacturing facilities be built at the same site in order to simplify security and construction . Such a site would require a substantial tract of land to accommodate both the facilities and housing for the thousands of workers . The plutonium processing plant needed to be two to four miles ( 3 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the site boundary and any other installation in case radioactive fission products escaped . While security and safety concerns suggested a remote site , it still needed to be near sources of labor , and accessible by road and rail transportation . A mild climate that allowed construction to proceed throughout the year was desirable . Terrain separated by ridges would reduce the impact of accidental explosions , but they could not be so steep as to complicate construction . The substratum needed to be firm enough to provide good foundations , but not so rocky that it would hinder excavation work . It was estimated that the proposed plants would need access to 150 @,@ 000 KW of electricity and 370 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 l ; 310 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water per minute . A War Department policy held that as a rule munitions facilities should not be located west of the Sierra or Cascade Ranges , east of the Appalachian Mountains , or within 200 miles ( 320 km ) of the Canadian or Mexican borders . 
 Several sites were considered in the Tennessee Valley , two in the Chicago area , one near the Shasta Dam in California , and some in Washington , where the Hanford site was eventually established . An OSRD team had selected the Knoxville , Tennessee , area in April 1942 , and in May Arthur Compton , the director of the Metallurgical Laboratory had met with Gordon R. Clapp , the General Manager of the Tennessee Valley Authority ( TVA ) . The Chief Engineer of the Manhattan District ( MED ) , Colonel James C. Marshall , asked Colonel Leslie R. Groves , Jr. to undertake a study within the Army 's Office of the Chief of Engineers . After receiving assurances that the TVA could supply the required quantity of electric power if given priority for procuring some needed equipment , Groves also concluded that the Knoxville area was suitable . The only voice of dissent at the 25 June meeting was Ernest O. Lawrence , who wanted the electromagnetic separation plant located much nearer to his Radiation Laboratory in California . The Shasta Dam area remained under consideration for the electromagnetic plant until September , by which time Lawrence had dropped his objection . 
 On 1 July , Marshall and his deputy , Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Nichols , surveyed sites in the Knoxville area with representatives of the TVA and Stone & Webster , the designated construction contractor . No perfectly suitable site was found , and Marshall even ordered another survey of the Spokane , Washington , area . At the time , the proposed nuclear reactor , gas centrifuge and gaseous diffusion technologies were still in the research stage , and the design of the plant was a long way off . The schedules , which called for construction work on the nuclear reactor to commence by 1 October 1942 , the electromagnetic plant by 1 November , the centrifugal plant by 1 January 1943 and the gaseous diffusion plant by 1 March 1943 , were quite unrealistic . While work could not commence on the plants , a start could be made on the housing and administrative buildings . Stone & Webster therefore drew up a detailed report on the most promising site , about 12 miles ( 19 km ) west of Knoxville . Stephane <unk> later wrote that : 
 This portion of the quiet rural area was called Black Oak Ridge and was the northernmost of five principal <unk> and pine @-@ covered ridges around the meandering Clinch River . It was a verdant , beautiful countryside with rolling hills covered with dogwood and full of partridge and deer . To the east were the Great Smoky Mountains , to the west the peaks of the Cumberland Mountains . 
 The site was located in Roane County and Anderson County , and lay roughly halfway between the two county seats of Kingston and Clinton . Its greatest drawback was that a major road , Tennessee State Route 61 , ran through it . Stone & Webster considered the possibility of re @-@ routing the road . The Ohio River Division ( ORD ) of the Corps of Engineers estimated that it would cost $ 4 @.@ 25 million to purchase the entire 83 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 34 @,@ 000 ha ) site . 
 Groves became the director of the Manhattan Project on 23 September , with the rank of brigadier general . That afternoon , he took a train to Knoxville , where he met with Marshall . After touring the site , Groves concluded that the site " was an even better choice than I had anticipated . " He called Colonel John J. O 'Brien of the Corps of Engineers ' Real Estate Branch , and told him to proceed with acquiring the land . The site was initially known as the Kingston Demolition Range . It officially became the Clinton Engineer Works ( CEW ) in January 1943 . It was given the codename of Site X. After the township was established in mid @-@ 1943 , the name Oak Ridge was chosen from employee suggestions . It met with the Manhattan District 's approval because " its rural connotation held outside curiosity to a minimum . " Oak Ridge then became the site 's postal address , but the site itself was not officially renamed Oak Ridge until 1947 . 
 = = Land acquisition = = 
 Although War Department policy maintained that land should be acquired by direct purchase , as time was short , it was decided to proceed immediately with condemnation . This allowed access to the site for construction crews , provided faster compensation to the owners , and expedited the handling of property with defective titles . On 28 September 1942 , the ORD Real Estate Branch opened a project office in Harriman with a staff of 54 surveyors , appraisers , lawyers and office workers . The ORD Real Estate Branch was quite busy at this time , as it was also acquiring land for the Dale Hollow Reservoir , so some staff were borrowed from the Federal Land Bank and the TVA . The next day , Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson authorized the acquisition of 56 @,@ 000 acres ( 23 @,@ 000 ha ) at an estimated cost of $ 3 @.@ 5 million . At the request of the ORD Real Estate Branch attorneys , the District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee issued an order of possession on 6 October , effective the next day . Recognizing the hardship that it would cause to the landowners , it restricted immediate exclusive possession to properties " essential to full and complete development of the project " . 
 Over 1 @,@ 000 families lived on the site on farms or in the hamlets of Elza , <unk> , and Scarboro . The first that most heard about the acquisition was when a representative from the ORD showed up to inform them that their land was being acquired . Some returned home from work one day to find an eviction notice nailed to their door or to a tree in the yard . Most were given six weeks to leave , but some were given just two . The government took possession of 13 tracts for immediate construction work on 20 November 1942 . By May 1943 , 742 declarations had been filed covering 53 @,@ 334 acres ( 21 @,@ 584 ha ) . Most residents were told to prepare to leave between 1 December 1942 and 15 January 1943 . In cases where this would cause undue hardship , the MED allowed residents to stay beyond this date . For some it was the third time that they had been evicted by the government , having previously been evicted for the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in the 1920s and the TVA 's Norris Dam in the 1930s . Many expected that , like the TVA , the Army would provide assistance to help them relocate ; but unlike the TVA , the Army had no mission to improve the area or the lot of the local people , and no funds for the purpose . Tires were in short supply in wartime America , and moving vehicles were hard to find . Some residents had to leave behind possessions that they were unable to take with them . 
 A delegation of landowners presented the ORD Real Estate Branch with a petition protesting the acquisition of their property on 23 November 1942 , and that night over 200 landowners held a meeting where they agreed to hire lawyers and appraisers to challenge the Federal government . Local newspapers and politicians were sympathetic to their cause . By the end of May 1943 , agreements were reached covering 416 tracts totaling 21 @,@ 742 acres ( 8 @,@ 799 ha ) , but some landowners rejected the government 's offers . The ORD Real Estate Branch invoked a procedure under Tennessee law that allowed for a jury of five citizens appointed by the Federal District Court to review the compensation offered . They handled five cases in which they proposed higher values than those of the ORD appraisers , but the landowners rejected them as well , so the Army discontinued the use of this method . In response to rising public criticism , O 'Brien commissioned a review by the Department of Agriculture . It found that the appraisals had been fair and just , and that farmers had overestimated the size and productivity of their land . 
 The landowners turned to their local Congressman , John Jennings , Jr . On 1 February 1943 , Jennings introduced a resolution in the House of Representatives calling for a committee to investigate the values offered to the landowners . He also complained to Patterson about how buildings and facilities were being demolished by the MED . On 9 July 1943 , Andrew J. May , the chairman of the House Committee on Military Affairs , appointed an investigating subcommittee chaired by Clifford Davis , who selected Dewey Short and John Sparkman as its other members . Public hearings were held in Clinton on 11 August 1943 , and in Kingston the following day . The Committee report , presented in December 1943 , made a number of specific recommendations concerning the Corps of Engineers ' land acquisition process , but neither Congress nor the War Department moved to provide any additional compensation for the landowners . 
 In July 1943 , Groves prepared to issue Public Proclamation No. 2 , declaring the site a military exclusion area . He asked Marshall to present it to the Governor of Tennessee , Prentice Cooper . Marshall , in turn , delegated the task to the area engineer , Major Thomas T. Crenshaw , who sent a junior officer , Captain George B. Leonard . Cooper was unimpressed . He told Leonard that he had not been informed about the purpose of the CEW , and that the Army had kicked the farmers off their land and had not compensated the counties for the roads and bridges , which would now be closed . In his opinion it was " an experiment in socialism " , a New Deal project being undertaken in the name of the war effort . Instead of reading the proclamation , he tore it up and threw it in the waste paper basket . Marshall went to Nashville to apologize to Cooper , who refused to talk to him . Nichols , who succeeded Marshall as chief engineer of the Manhattan District , met Cooper on 31 July 1943 , and offered compensation in the form of Federal financing for road improvements . Cooper accepted an offer from Nichols to visit the CEW , which he did on 3 November 1943 . 
 Nichols and Cooper came to an agreement about the Solway Bridge . Although it was in Knox County , Anderson County had contributed $ 27 @,@ 000 towards its construction . It was still paying off the bonds , but now the bridge was usable only by CEW workers . Nichols negotiated a deal in which Knox County was paid $ 25 @,@ 000 annually for the bridge , of which $ 6 @,@ 000 was to be used to maintain the access road . Judge Thomas L. Seeber then threatened to close the Edgemoor Bridge unless Anderson County was similarly compensated . An agreement was reached under which Anderson County received $ 10 @,@ 000 for the bridge and $ 200 per month . Knox County did not keep its side of the bargain to maintain the road , which was torn up by heavy traffic and became impassable after torrential rains in 1944 . The Army was forced to spend $ 5 @,@ 000 per month on road works in Knox County . 
 Additional parcels of land were acquired during 1943 and 1944 for access roads , a railway spur , and for security purposes , bringing the total to about 58 @,@ 900 acres ( 23 @,@ 800 ha ) . The Harriman office closed on 10 June 1944 , but reopened on 1 September 1944 to deal with the additional parcels . The last acquisition was not complete until 1 March 1945 . The final cost of the land acquired was around $ 2 @.@ 6 million , about $ 47 an acre . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 = = = X @-@ 10 graphite reactor = = = 
 On 2 February 1943 , DuPont began construction of the plutonium semiworks , on an isolated 112 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) site in the Bethel Valley about 10 miles ( 16 km ) southwest of Oak Ridge . Intended as a pilot plant for the larger production facilities at the Hanford Site , it included the air @-@ cooled graphite @-@ moderated X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor . There was also a chemical separation plant , research laboratories , waste storage area , training facility for Hanford staff , and administrative and support facilities that included a laundry , cafeteria , first aid center and fire station . Because of the subsequent decision to construct water @-@ cooled reactors at Hanford , only the chemical separation plant operated as a true pilot . The facility was known as the Clinton Laboratories , and was operated by the University of Chicago as part of the Metallurgical Laboratory project . 
 The X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor was the world 's second artificial nuclear reactor after Enrico Fermi 's Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , and was the first reactor designed and built for continuous operation . It consisted of a huge block , 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) long on each side , of nuclear graphite cubes , weighing around 1 @,@ 500 short tons ( 1 @,@ 400 t ) , surrounded by seven feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of high @-@ density concrete as a radiation shield . There were 36 horizontal rows of 35 holes . Behind each was a metal channel into which uranium fuel slugs could be inserted . The cooling system was driven by three large electric fans . 
 Construction work on the reactor had to wait until DuPont had completed the design . Excavation commenced on 27 April 1943 . A large pocket of soft clay was soon discovered , necessitating additional foundations . Further delays occurred due to wartime difficulties in procuring building materials . There was also an acute shortage of common and skilled labor : the contractor had only three @-@ quarters of the required workforce , and less after high turnover and absenteeism , mainly the result of poor accommodations and difficulties in commuting . The township of Oak Ridge was still under construction , and barracks were built to house workers . Special arrangements with individual workers increased their morale and reduced turnover . Finally , there was unusually heavy rainfall , with 9 @.@ 3 inches ( 240 mm ) falling in July 1943 , more than twice the average of 4 @.@ 3 inches ( 110 mm ) . 
 Some 700 short tons ( 640 t ) of graphite blocks were purchased from National Carbon . The construction crews began stacking it in September 1943 . Cast uranium billets came from Metal Hydrides , Mallinckrodt and other suppliers . These were extruded into cylindrical slugs , and canned by Alcoa , which started production on 14 June 1943 . General Electric and the Metallurgical Laboratory developed a new welding technique . The new equipment was installed in the production line at Alcoa in October 1943 . Supervised by Compton , Martin D. Whitaker and Fermi , the reactor went critical on 4 November 1943 with about 30 short tons ( 27 t ) of uranium . A week later the load was increased to 36 short tons ( 33 t ) , raising its power generation to 500 kW , and by the end of the month the first 500 mg of plutonium was created . Modifications over time raised the power to 4 @,@ 000 kW in July 1944 . 
 Construction commenced on the pilot separation plant before a chemical process for separating plutonium from uranium had been selected . Not until May 1943 would DuPont managers decide to use the Bismuth @-@ phosphate process . The plant consisted of six cells , separated from each other and the control room by thick concrete walls . The equipment was operated from the control room by remote control . Construction work was completed on 26 November 1943 , but the plant could not operate until the reactor started producing irradiated uranium slugs . The first batch was received on 20 December 1943 , allowing the first plutonium to be produced in early 1944 . By February , the reactor was irradiating a ton of uranium every three days . Over the next five months , the efficiency of the separation process was improved , with the percentage of plutonium recovered increasing from 40 to 90 percent . X @-@ 10 operated as a plutonium production plant until January 1945 , when it was turned over to research activities . By this time , 299 batches of irradiated slugs had been processed . 
 In September 1942 , Compton asked Whitaker to form a skeleton operating staff for X @-@ 10 . Whitaker became director of the Clinton Laboratories . The first permanent operating staff arrived at X @-@ 10 from the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago in April 1944 , by which time DuPont began transferring its technicians to the site . They were augmented by one hundred technicians in uniform from the Army 's Special Engineer Detachment . By March 1944 , there were some 1 @,@ 500 people working at X @-@ 10 . 
 A radioisotope building , a steam plant , and other structures were added in April 1946 to support the laboratory 's peacetime educational and research missions . All work was completed by December 1946 , adding another $ 1 @,@ 009 @,@ 000 to the cost of construction at X @-@ 10 , and bringing the total cost to $ 13 @,@ 041 @,@ 000 . Operational costs added another $ 22 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Y @-@ 12 electromagnetic separation plant = = = 
 Electromagnetic isotope separation was developed by Lawrence at the University of California Radiation Laboratory . This method employed devices known as calutrons , a hybrid of the standard laboratory mass spectrometer and cyclotron . The name was derived from the words " California " , " university " and " cyclotron " . In the electromagnetic separation process , a magnetic field deflected charged uranium particles according to mass . The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient . Compared with a gaseous diffusion plant or a nuclear reactor , an electromagnetic separation plant would consume more scarce materials , require more manpower to operate , and cost more to build . Nonetheless , the process was approved because it was based on proven technology and therefore represented less risk . Moreover , it could be built in stages , and rapidly reach industrial capacity . 
 Responsibility for the design and construction of the electromagnetic separation plant , which came to be called Y @-@ 12 , was assigned to Stone & Webster by the S @-@ 1 Committee in June 1942 . The design called for five first @-@ stage processing units , known as Alpha racetracks , and two units for final processing , known as Beta racetracks . In September 1943 Groves authorized construction of four more racetracks , known as Alpha II . Construction began in February 1943 . 
 When the plant was started up for testing on schedule in November , the 14 @-@ ton vacuum tanks crept out of alignment because of the power of the magnets and had to be fastened more securely . A more serious problem arose when the magnetic coils started shorting out . In December Groves ordered a magnet broken open , and handfuls of rust were found inside . Groves then ordered the racetracks to be torn down and the magnets sent back to the factory to be cleaned . A pickling plant was established on @-@ site to clean the pipes and fittings . The second Alpha I was not operational until the end of January 1944 , the first Beta and first and third Alpha I 's came online in March , and the fourth Alpha I became operational in April . The four Alpha II racetracks were completed between July and October 1944 . 
 Tennessee Eastman was hired to manage Y @-@ 12 on the usual cost plus fixed fee basis , with a fee of $ 22 @,@ 500 per month plus $ 7 @,@ 500 per racetrack for the first seven racetracks and $ 4 @,@ 000 per additional racetrack . The calutrons were initially operated by scientists from Berkeley to remove bugs and achieve a reasonable operating rate . They were then turned over to trained Tennessee Eastman operators who had only a high school education . Nichols compared unit production data , and pointed out to Lawrence that the young " hillbilly " girl operators were outperforming his PhDs . They agreed to a production race and Lawrence lost , a morale boost for the Tennessee Eastman workers and supervisors . The girls were " trained like soldiers not to reason why " , while " the scientists could not refrain from time @-@ consuming investigation of the cause of even minor fluctuations of the dials . " 
 Y @-@ 12 initially enriched the uranium @-@ 235 content to between 13 and 15 percent , and shipped the first few hundred grams of this to the Manhattan Project 's weapons design laboratory , the Los Alamos Laboratory , in March 1944 . Only 1 part in 5 @,@ 825 of the uranium feed emerged as final product . Much of the rest was splattered over equipment in the process . Strenuous recovery efforts helped raise production to 10 percent of the uranium @-@ 235 feed by January 1945 . In February the Alpha racetracks began receiving slightly enriched ( 1 @.@ 4 percent ) feed from the new S @-@ 50 thermal diffusion plant . The next month it received enhanced ( 5 percent ) feed from the K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion plant . By August K @-@ 25 was producing uranium sufficiently enriched to feed directly into the Beta tracks . 
 The Alpha tracks began to suspend operations on 4 September 1945 , and ceased operation completely on 22 September . The last two Beta tracks went into full operation in November and December 1945 , processing feed from K @-@ 25 and the new K @-@ 27 . By May 1946 , studies suggested that the gaseous plants could fully enrich the uranium by themselves without accidentally creating a critical mass . After a trial showed this was the case , Groves ordered all but one Beta track at Y @-@ 12 shut down in December 1946 . Y @-@ 12 remained in use for nuclear weapons processing and materials storage . A production facility for the hydrogen bomb used in Operation Castle in 1954 was hastily installed in 1952 . 
 = = = K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion plant = = = 
 The most promising but also the most challenging method of isotope separation was gaseous diffusion . Graham 's law states that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular mass , so in a box containing a semi @-@ permeable membrane and a mixture of two gases , the lighter molecules will pass out of the container more rapidly than the heavier molecules . The gas leaving the container is somewhat enriched in the lighter molecules , while the residual gas is somewhat depleted . The idea was that such boxes could be formed into a cascade of pumps and membranes , with each successive stage containing a slightly more enriched mixture . Research into the process was carried out at Columbia University by a group that included Harold Urey , Karl P. Cohen and John R. Dunning . 
 In November 1942 the Military Policy Committee approved the construction of a 600 @-@ stage gaseous diffusion plant . On 14 December , M. W. Kellogg accepted an offer to construct the plant , which was codenamed K @-@ 25 . A cost plus fixed fee contract was negotiated , eventually totaling $ 2 @.@ 5 million . A separate corporate entity called Kellex was created for the project , headed by Percival C. Keith , one of Kellogg 's vice presidents . The process faced formidable technical difficulties . The highly corrosive gas uranium hexafluoride had to be used , as no substitute could be found , and the motors and pumps would have to be vacuum tight and enclosed in inert gas . The biggest problem was the design of the barrier , which would have to be strong , porous and resistant to corrosion by uranium hexafluoride . The best choice for this seemed to be nickel . Edward Adler and Edward Norris created a mesh barrier from electroplated nickel . A six @-@ stage pilot plant was built at Columbia to test the process , but the Norris @-@ Adler prototype proved to be too brittle . A rival barrier was developed from powdered nickel by Kellex , the Bell Telephone Laboratories and the Bakelite Corporation . In January 1944 , Groves ordered the Kellex barrier into production . 
 Kellex 's design for K @-@ 25 called for a four @-@ story U @-@ shaped structure 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) long containing 54 contiguous buildings . These were divided into nine sections . Within these were cells of six stages . The cells could be operated independently , or consecutively within a section . Similarly , the sections could be operated separately or as part of a single cascade . A survey party began construction by marking out the 500 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 km2 ) site in May 1943 . Work on the main building began in October 1943 , and the six @-@ stage pilot plant was ready for operation on 17 April 1944 . In 1945 Groves canceled the upper stages of the plant , directing Kellex to instead design and build a 540 @-@ stage side feed unit , which became known as K @-@ 27 . Kellex transferred the last unit to the operating contractor , Union Carbide and Carbon , on 11 September 1945 . The total cost , including the K @-@ 27 plant completed after the war , came to $ 480 million . 
 The production plant commenced operation in February 1945 , and as cascade after cascade came online , the quality of the product increased . By April 1945 , K @-@ 25 had attained a 1 @.@ 1 percent enrichment and the output of the S @-@ 50 thermal diffusion plant began being used as feed . Some product produced the next month reached nearly 7 percent enrichment . In August , the last of the 2 @,@ 892 stages commenced operation . K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 27 achieved their full potential in the early postwar period , when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants . Uranium was enriched by the K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion process until 1985 ; the plants were then decommissioned and decontaminated . A 235 MW coal @-@ fired power station was included for reliability and to provide variable frequency , although most electric power came from the TVA . 
 = = = S @-@ 50 liquid thermal diffusion plant = = = 
 The thermal diffusion process was based on Sydney Chapman and David Enskog 's theory , which explained that when a mixed gas passes through a temperature gradient , the heavier one tends to concentrate at the cold end and the lighter one at the warm end . Since hot gases tend to rise and cool ones tend to fall , this can be used as a means of isotope separation . This process was first demonstrated by H. Clusius and G. Dickel in Germany in 1938 . It was developed by US Navy scientists , but was not one of the enrichment technologies initially selected for use in the Manhattan Project . This was primarily due to doubts about its technical feasibility , but the inter @-@ service rivalry between the Army and Navy also played a part . 
 The Naval Research Laboratory continued the research under Philip Abelson 's direction , but there was little contact with the Manhattan Project until April 1944 , when Captain William S. Parsons , the naval officer who was in charge of ordnance development at Los Alamos , brought Robert Oppenheimer , the director there , news of encouraging progress in the Navy 's experiments on thermal diffusion . Oppenheimer wrote to Groves suggesting that the output of a thermal diffusion plant could be fed into Y @-@ 12 . Groves set up a committee consisting of Warren K. Lewis , Eger Murphree and Richard Tolman to investigate the idea , and they estimated that a thermal diffusion plant costing $ 3 @.@ 5 million could enrich 110 pounds ( 50 kg ) of uranium per week to nearly 0 @.@ 9 percent uranium @-@ 235 . Groves approved its construction on 24 June 1944 . 
 Groves contracted with the H. K. Ferguson Company of Cleveland , Ohio , to build the thermal diffusion plant , which was designated S @-@ 50 . Groves ' advisers , Karl Cohen and W. I. Thompson from Standard Oil , estimated that it would take six months to build . Groves gave Ferguson just four . Plans called for the installation of 2 @,@ 142 forty @-@ eight @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 15 m ) diffusion columns arranged in 21 racks . Inside each column were three concentric tubes . Steam , obtained from the nearby K @-@ 25 powerhouse at a pressure of 100 pounds per square inch ( 690 kPa ) and temperature of 545 ° F ( 285 ° C ) , flowed downward through the innermost 1 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 32 mm ) nickel pipe , while water at 155 ° F ( 68 ° C ) flowed upward through the outermost iron pipe . Isotope separation occurred in the uranium hexafluoride gas between the nickel and copper pipes . 
 Work commenced on 9 July 1944 , and S @-@ 50 began partial operation in September . Ferguson operated the plant through a subsidiary known as Fercleve . The plant produced just 10 @.@ 5 pounds ( 4 @.@ 8 kg ) of 0 @.@ 852 percent uranium @-@ 235 in October . Leaks limited production and forced shutdowns over the next few months , but in June 1945 it produced 12 @,@ 730 pounds ( 5 @,@ 770 kg ) . By March 1945 , all 21 production racks were operating . Initially the output of S @-@ 50 was fed into Y @-@ 12 , but starting in March 1945 all three enrichment processes were run in series . S @-@ 50 became the first stage , enriching from 0 @.@ 71 percent to 0 @.@ 89 percent . This material was fed into the gaseous diffusion process in the K @-@ 25 plant , which produced a product enriched to about 23 percent . This was , in turn , fed into Y @-@ 12 . 
 In early September Nichols appointed a production control committee , headed by Major A. V. ( Pete ) Peterson . Peterson 's staff tried various combinations , using mechanical calculating machines , and decided that the S @-@ 50 production should be fed to K @-@ 25 rather than Y @-@ 12 , which was done in April 1945 . The charts also showed that the proposed top stages for K @-@ 25 should be abandoned , as should Lawrence 's recommendation to add more alpha stages to the Y @-@ 12 plant . Groves accepted their proposal to add more base units to the K @-@ 27 gaseous @-@ diffusion plant and one more beta stage track for Y @-@ 12 . These additions were estimated to cost $ 100 million , with completion in February 1946 . Soon after Japan surrendered in August 1945 , Peterson recommended that S @-@ 50 be shut down . The Manhattan District ordered this on 4 September 1945 . The last uranium hexafluoride was sent to K @-@ 25 , and the plant had ceased operation by 9 September 1945 . S @-@ 50 was completely demolished in 1946 . 
 = = = Electric power = = = 
 Despite protests from TVA that it was unnecessary , the Manhattan District built a coal @-@ fired power plant at K @-@ 25 with eight 25 @,@ 000 KW generators . Steam generated from the K @-@ 25 power plant was subsequently used by S @-@ 50 . Additional power lines were laid from the TVA hydroelectric plants at Norris Dam and Watts Bar Dam , and the Clinton Engineer Works was given its own electrical substations at K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 27 . By 1945 , power sources were capable of supplying Oak Ridge with up to 310 @,@ 000 KW , of which 200 @,@ 000 KW was earmarked for Y @-@ 12 , 80 @,@ 000 KW for K @-@ 25 , 23 @,@ 000 KW for the township , 6 @,@ 000 KW for S @-@ 50 and 1 @,@ 000 KW for X @-@ 10 . Peak demand occurred in August 1945 , when all the facilities were running . The peak load was 298 @,@ 800 KW on 1 September 1945 . 
 = = Township = = 
 Planning for a " Government village " to house the workers at the Clinton Engineer Works began in June 1942 . Because the site was remote , it was believed more convenient and secure for the workers to live on the site . The gentle slopes of Black Oak Ridge , from which the new town of Oak Ridge got its name , were selected as a suitable location . Brigadier General Lucius D. Clay , the deputy chief of staff of the United States Army Services of Supply , reminded Marshall of a wartime limit of $ 7 @,@ 500 per capita for individual quarters , but Groves , Nichols and Marshall saw no prospect that the kind of workers they needed would be willing to live in substandard accommodations . The first plan , submitted by Stone & Webster on 26 October 1942 , was for a residential community of 13 @,@ 000 people . 
 As Stone & Webster began work on the production facilities , it became clear that building the township as well would be beyond its capacity . The Army therefore engaged the architectural and engineering firm Skidmore , Owings & Merrill to design and build the township . The John B. Pierce Foundation were brought in as a consultant . In turn , Skidmore , Owings & Merrill brought in numerous subcontractors . This first phase of construction became known as the East Town . It included some 3 @,@ 000 family dwellings , an administrative center , three shopping centers , three grade schools for 500 children each and a high school for 500 , recreation buildings , men 's and women 's dormitories , cafeterias , a medical services building and a 50 @-@ bed hospital . The emphasis was on speed of construction and getting around wartime shortages of materials . Where possible , <unk> and gypsum board were used instead of wood , and foundations were made from concrete blocks rather than poured concrete . The work was completed in early 1944 . 
 In addition to the East Town , a self @-@ contained community known as the East Village , with 50 family units , its own church , dormitories and a cafeteria , was built near the Elza gate . This was intended as a segregated community for Black people , but by the time it was completed , it was required by white people . Black people were instead housed in " hutments " ( one @-@ room shacks ) in segregated areas , some in " family hutments " created by joining two regular hutments together . 
 The Army presence at Oak Ridge increased in August 1943 when Nichols replaced Marshall as head of the Manhattan Engineer District . One of his first tasks was to move the district headquarters to Oak Ridge although the name of the district did not change . In September 1943 the administration of community facilities was outsourced to Turner Construction Company through a subsidiary , the Roane @-@ Anderson Company . The company was paid a fee of $ 25 @,@ 000 per month on a cost @-@ plus contract , about 1 percent of the $ 2 @.@ 8 million monthly cost of running the town facilities . Roane @-@ Anderson did not take over everything at once . A phased takeover started with Laundry No. 1 on 17 October 1943 . Transportation and garbage collection soon followed . It assumed responsibility for water and sewage in November , and electricity in January 1944 . The number of Roane @-@ Anderson workers peaked at around 10 @,@ 500 in February 1945 , including concessionaires and subcontractors . Thereafter , numbers declined to 2 @,@ 905 direct employees and 3 @,@ 663 concessionaires and subcontractors when the Manhattan Project ended on 31 December 1946 . 
 By mid @-@ 1943 , it had become clear that the initial estimates of the size of the town had been too low , and a second phase of construction was required . Plans now called for a town of 42 @,@ 000 people . Work began in the fall of 1943 , and continued into the late summer of 1944 . Hospitals were expanded , as were the police and fire services , and the telephone system . Only 4 @,@ 793 of a planned total of 6 @,@ 000 family houses were built , mostly on the East Town area and the undeveloped stretch along Tennessee State Route 61 . They were supplemented by 55 new dormitories , 2 @,@ 089 trailers , 391 hutments , a cantonment area of 84 hutments and 42 barracks . Some 2 @,@ 823 of the family units were prefabricated off @-@ site . The high school was expanded to cater for 1 @,@ 000 students . Two additional primary schools were built , and existing ones were expanded so that they could cater for 7 @,@ 000 students . 
 Although expected to accommodate the needs of the entire workforce , by late 1944 expansion of both the electromagnetic and gaseous diffusion plants led to forecasts of a population of 62 @,@ 000 . This prompted another round of construction that saw an additional 1 @,@ 300 family units and 20 dormitories built . More shopping and recreational facilities were added , the schools were expanded to cater for 9 @,@ 000 students , and a 50 @-@ bed annex was added to the hospital . The number of school children reached 8 @,@ 223 in 1945 . Few issues resonated more with the scientists and highly skilled workers than the quality of the education system . Although school staff were nominally employees of the Anderson County Education Board , the school system was run autonomously , with federal funding under the supervision of administrators appointed by the Army . Teachers enjoyed salaries that were considerably higher than those of Anderson County . The population of Oak Ridge peaked at 75 @,@ 000 in May 1945 , by which time 82 @,@ 000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works , and 10 @,@ 000 by Roane @-@ Anderson . 
 In addition to the township , there were a number of temporary camps established for construction workers . It was initially intended that the construction workers should live off @-@ site , but the poor condition of the roads and a shortage of accommodations in the area made commuting long and difficult , and in turn made it difficult to find and retain workers . Construction workers therefore came to be housed in large <unk> and trailer camps . The largest , the trailer camp at Gamble Valley , had four thousand units . Another , at Happy Valley , held 15 @,@ 000 people . The population of the construction camps declined as the construction effort tapered off , but they continued to be occupied in 1946 . 
 The main shopping area was Jackson Square , with about 20 shops . The Army attempted to keep prices down by encouraging competition , but this met with limited success due to the captive nature of the population , and the requirements of security , which meant that firms and goods could not freely move in and out . The Army could give prospective concessionaires only vague information about how many people were in or would be in the town , and concessions were only for the duration of the war . Concessions were therefore charged a percentage of their profits in rental rather than a fixed fee . The Army avoided imposing draconian price controls , but limited prices to those of similar goods in Knoxville . By 1945 , community amenities included 6 recreation halls , 36 bowling alleys , 23 tennis courts , 18 ball parks , 12 playgrounds , a swimming pool , a 9 @,@ 400 @-@ volume library , and a newspaper . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 From 1 April 1943 , access to the Clinton Engineer Works was strictly controlled , with wire fences , guarded gates , and guards patrolling the perimeter . All employees had to sign a security declaration , the purpose of which was to make them aware of possible penalties under the Espionage Act of 1917 . Noting the distillation facilities and their high energy consumption , " I thought they were making sour mash to drop on the Germans , get them all drunk , " engineer Benjamin <unk> recalled , before realizing the facilities were enriching nuclear isotopes . Mail was censored , and lie detectors were employed in security checks . Everyone was issued with a color @-@ coded badge that restricted where they could go . Despite the security , the Clinton Engineer Works was penetrated by atomic spies George Koval and David Greenglass , who passed secrets to the Soviet Union . 
 Occupational health and safety presented a challenge , because workers were handling a variety of toxic chemicals , using hazardous liquids and gases under high pressures , and working with high voltages , not to mention the largely unknown dangers presented by radioactivity and handling fissile materials . Accidents represented unacceptable numbers of work days lost , and a vigorous safety program was instituted . Since it did not matter where accidents occurred , this included safety off the job , in homes and in the schools . Safety indoctrination was included in job training , and safety training courses were held . Safety posters , manuals and films were distributed . In December 1945 , the National Safety Council presented the Manhattan Project with the Award of Honor for Distinguished Service to Safety in recognition of its safety record . The Clinton Engineer Works also received an award of merit in the National Traffic Safety Contest . Many workers had to drive long distances over poorly built and inadequately maintained roads . There were 21 deaths from motor vehicles at the Clinton Engineer Works : two in 1943 , nine in 1944 , eight in 1945 and two in 1946 . This represented a better road safety record than other towns of comparable size . 
 The citizens of Oak Ridge were not allowed to have any form of local government ; but the state of Tennessee , concerned over the potential loss of tax revenue , did not cede sovereignty over the land . The residents of Oak Ridge therefore did not live on a federal reservation , and were entitled to vote in state and county elections . However , notice of the Clinton City elections was withheld by local authorities until a week after the deadline to pay the poll tax . On the day of a 1945 referendum on whether Anderson should remain a dry county , the Edgemoor Bridge was suddenly closed for repairs , and the dry vote carried . A subsequent vote in 1947 reversed this result , with 4 @,@ 653 dry votes compared to 5 @,@ 888 wet ; 5 @,@ 369 of the wet votes came from Oak Ridge . 
 This was but one point of difference between Oak Ridge residents and the rest of Anderson County . While most Oak Ridge residents had high school diplomas , and many had college degrees , the average education level of adults in Anderson County was only 6 @.@ 8 years . Oak Ridge residents demanded , and Groves insisted on , schools with fine teachers and first @-@ rate facilities . To achieve this , the Manhattan District paid teachers nearly twice as much as Anderson County . The consequent drain of qualified teachers from surrounding areas aroused considerable resentment . 
 The Manhattan District accepted that wages and salaries had to be high enough to allow contractors to hire and retain good workers . It generally allowed wages and salaries to be paid by contractors as they saw fit , subject to limits imposed by wartime national wage and price controls intended to limit inflation . Salaries above $ 9 @,@ 000 had to be approved by Patterson and Groves . 
 The War Production Board was asked to keep stores in Oak Ridge well @-@ stocked in order to reduce absenteeism among the workers . When shortages did occur , the relatively well @-@ paid Oak Ridge residents bought up scarce goods in surrounding areas . In both cases , they attracted the ire of their residents . Personnel employed by the Manhattan District were not exempted from being drafted under the Selective Service System . Efforts were made to employ draft @-@ exempt personnel , and deferments were requested only for critical personnel , mainly young scientists and technicians . 
 = = The war ends = = 
 On 10 May 1945 , Women 's Army Corps typists at Manhattan District headquarters began preparing press kits on the Manhattan Project for use after an atomic bomb had been dropped . Fourteen press releases were prepared , and thousands of copies made by mimeograph . The final wartime shipment of uranium @-@ 235 left the Clinton Engineer Works on 25 July 1945 . Shipments reached Tinian on C @-@ 54 aircraft on 28 and 29 July . They were incorporated into the Little Boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima on 6 August . The news was greeted with wild celebration in Oak Ridge . Patterson issued a letter to the men and women of the Clinton Engineer Works : 
 Today the whole world knows the secret which you have helped us keep for many months . I am pleased to be able to add that the warlords of Japan now know its effects better , even than we ourselves . The atomic bomb which you have helped to develop with high devotion to patriotic duty is the most devastating military weapon that any country has ever been able to tum against its enemy . No one of you has worked on the entire project or knows the whole story , Each of you has done his own job and kept his own secret , and so today I speak for a grateful nation when I say congratulations , and thank you all . I hope you will continue to keep the secrets you have kept so well . The need for security and for continued effort is fully as great now as it ever was . We are proud of every one of you . 
 = = Postwar years = = 
 By 1945 , Roane @-@ Anderson was divesting itself of many of its tasks . American Industrial Transit took over the transport system , and Southern Bell the telephone system . Tri @-@ State Homes began managing housing . In 1946 , tenants were permitted to paint their houses in different colors from the wartime olive drab . Comprehensive medical insurance , originally instituted for security reasons , was replaced with policies from the Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company . Health care had been provided by the Army . As Army doctors were separated from the service they were replaced with civilian doctors employed by Roane @-@ Anderson . The dental service was transferred to civilians in February 1946 , and private medical practices were permitted at Oak Ridge from 1 March 1946 on . 
 The hospital remained an Army hospital until 1 March 1949 , when it was transferred to Roanne @-@ Anderson . Monsanto took over the operation of the Clinton Laboratories on 1 July 1945 . Control of the entire site passed to the Atomic Energy Commission on 1 January 1947 . The Clinton Laboratories became the Clinton National Laboratory in late 1947 , and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in January 1948 . Union Carbide took over its management in December 1947 , bringing all of Oak Ridge 's operations under its control . 
 While the war was in progress , the Manhattan District resisted allowing labor unions access to its facilities . In 1946 , they were permitted to operate at the Clinton Engineer Works . Elections were held at K @-@ 25 , Y @-@ 12 and X @-@ 10 in August and September 1946 and the United Chemical Workers became their representative . A contract was negotiated with Union Carbide on 10 December . The Atomic Trades and Labor Council became the representative of the Clinton Laboratories , signing a contract with Monsanto on 18 December . 
 At its peak in May 1945 , 82 @,@ 000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works , and 75 @,@ 000 people lived in the township . By January 1946 , these figures had fallen to 43 @,@ 000 and 48 @,@ 000 respectively . By the time the Manhattan Project concluded at the end of 1946 , the corresponding figures were 34 @,@ 000 and 43 @,@ 000 . The departure of large numbers of construction workers meant that 47 percent of those remaining were family members of workers . Eight dormitories were closed in October 1945 . Most of those who remained in dorms now had their own rooms . The white hutments began to be removed . Trailers were returned to the Federal Public Housing Authority . 
 The end of the war brought national attention to Oak Ridge , and there was bad publicity about the conditions that the Black residents were living in . Roane @-@ Anderson dusted off plans for a village for them . The new village , called Scarboro , was built where the Gamble Valley Trailer Camp had once stood . Construction commenced in 1948 , and the first residents moved in two years later . It would house the entire Black community of Oak Ridge until the early 1960s . 
 In 1947 , Oak Ridge was still part of " an island of socialism in the midst of a free enterprise economy . " The AEC pressed forward with plans to withdraw from running the community , but it could never be too fast for some members of Congress . AEC officials patiently explained over and over how Roane @-@ Anderson provided far more than regular municipal services . For the residents , the benefits of a free enterprise economy were slight . They enjoyed low rents and no property taxes , but high standards of services and an excellent school system . Oak Ridge City Historian William J. Wilcox , Jr . , noted that the townspeople " thoroughly enjoyed their much protected existence and the benevolence the Army had provided " . A straw poll of the residents on opening the gates showed them opposed , 10 to 1 . 
 Nonetheless , on 19 March 1949 the residential and commercial portion of Oak Ridge was ceremoniously opened to public access . Vice President Alben W. Barkley , Governor Gordon Browning , Atomic Energy Commission Chairman David E. Lilienthal , and movie star Marie McDonald were on hand to watch the guards take down the barriers . Access to the nuclear facilities was controlled by three Oak Ridge gatehouses . On 6 June 1951 , the Senate Appropriations Committee called on the Atomic Energy Commission to discontinue " the present undemocratic method " of operating the community , and it initiated steps to coerce Oak Ridge residents to establish democratic institutions and adopt a free enterprise system . 
 = Prince Marko = 
 Marko Mrnjavčević ( Serbian Cyrillic : Марко <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̩ ̂ <unk> ͡ <unk> ͡ ɕ ] ; c . 1335 – 17 May 1395 ) was the de jure Serbian king from 1371 to 1395 , while he was the de facto ruler of territory in western Macedonia centered on the town of Prilep . He is known as Prince Marko ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> Марко , Kraljević Marko , IPA : [ <unk> ͡ ɕ <unk> ] ) and King Marko ( Bulgarian : <unk> Марко ; Macedonian : <unk> Марко ) in South Slavic oral tradition , in which he has become a major character during the period of Ottoman rule over the Balkans . Marko 's father , King Vukašin , was co @-@ ruler with Serbian Tsar Stefan Uroš V , whose reign was characterised by weakening central authority and the gradual disintegration of the Serbian Empire . Vukašin 's holdings included lands in western Macedonia , Kosovo and Metohija . In 1370 or 1371 , he crowned Marko " young king " ; this title included the possibility that Marko would succeed the childless Uroš on the Serbian throne . 
 On 26 September 1371 , Vukašin was killed and his forces defeated in the Battle of Maritsa . About two months later , Tsar Uroš died . This formally made Marko the king of the Serbian land ; however , Serbian noblemen , who had become effectively independent from the central authority , did not even consider to recognise him as their supreme ruler . Sometime after 1371 , he became an Ottoman vassal ; by 1377 , significant portions of the territory he inherited from Vukašin were seized by other noblemen . King Marko , in reality , came to be a regional lord who ruled over a relatively small territory in western Macedonia . He funded the construction of the Monastery of Saint Demetrius near Skopje ( better known as Marko 's Monastery ) , which was completed in 1376 . Marko died on 17 May 1395 , fighting for the Ottomans against the Wallachians in the Battle of Rovine . 
 Although a ruler of modest historical significance , Marko became a major character in South Slavic oral tradition . He is venerated as a national hero by the Serbs , Macedonians and Bulgarians , remembered in Balkan folklore as a fearless and powerful protector of the weak , who fought against injustice and confronted the Turks during the Ottoman occupation . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Until 1371 = = = 
 Marko was born about 1335 as the first son of Vukašin Mrnjavčević and his wife Alena . The patronymic " Mrnjavčević " derives from <unk> , described by 17th @-@ century Ragusan historian Mavro <unk> as a minor nobleman from Zachlumia ( in present @-@ day Herzegovina and southern Dalmatia ) . According to <unk> , <unk> 's sons were born in Livno in western Bosnia , where he may have moved after Zachlumia was annexed from Serbia by Bosnia in 1326 . The Mrnjavčević <unk> may have later supported Serbian Emperor ( tsar ) Stefan Dušan in his preparations to invade Bosnia as did other <unk> nobles , and , fearing punishment , emigrated to the Serbian Empire before the war started . These preparations possibly began two years ahead of the invasion , which took place in 1350 . From that year comes the earliest written reference to Marko 's father Vukašin , describing him as Dušan 's appointed župan ( district governor ) of Prilep , which was acquired by Serbia from Byzantium in 1334 with other parts of Macedonia . In 1355 , at about age 47 , Stefan Dušan died suddenly of a stroke . 
 Dušan was succeeded by his 19 @-@ year @-@ old son Uroš , who apparently regarded Marko Mrnjavčević as a man of trust . The new Emperor appointed him the head of the embassy he sent to Ragusa ( now Dubrovnik , Croatia ) at the end of July 1361 to negotiate peace between the empire and the Ragusan Republic after hostilities earlier that year . Although peace was not reached , Marko successfully negotiated the release of Serbian merchants from Prizren who were detained by the Ragusans and was permitted to withdraw silver deposited in the city by his family . The account of that embassy in a Ragusan document contains the earliest @-@ known , undisputed reference to Marko Mrnjavčević . An inscription written in 1356 on a wall of a church in the Macedonian region of Tikveš , mentions a Nikola and a Marko as governors in that region , but the identity of this Marko is disputed . 
 Dušan 's death was followed by the stirring of separatist activity in the Serbian Empire . The south @-@ western territories , including Epirus , Thessaly , and lands in southern Albania , seceded by 1357 . However , the core of the state ( the western lands , including Zeta and Travunia with the upper Drina Valley ; the central Serbian lands ; and Macedonia ) , remained loyal to Emperor Uroš . Nevertheless , local noblemen asserted more and more independence from Uroš ' authority even in the part of the state that remained Serbian . Uroš was weak and unable to counteract these separatist tendencies , becoming an inferior power in his own domain . Serbian lords also fought each other for territory and influence . 
 Vukašin Mrnjavčević was a skilful politician , and gradually assumed the main role in the empire . In August or September 1365 Uroš crowned him king , making him his co @-@ ruler . By 1370 Marko 's potential patrimony increased as Vukašin expanded his personal holdings from Prilep further into Macedonia , Kosovo and Metohija , acquiring Prizren , Pristina , Novo Brdo , Skopje and Ohrid . In a charter he issued on 5 April 1370 Vukašin mentioned his wife ( Queen Alena ) and sons ( Marko and Andrijaš ) , signing himself as " Lord of the Serb and Greek Lands , and of the Western Provinces " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> и <unk> и <unk> <unk> ) . In late 1370 or early 1371 Vukašin crowned Marko " Young King " , a title given to heirs presumptive of Serbian kings to secure their position as successors to the throne . Since Uroš was childless Marko could thus become his successor , beginning a new — Vukašin 's — dynasty of Serbian sovereigns , and ending the two @-@ century Nemanjić dynasty . Most Serbian lords were unhappy with the situation , which strengthened their desire for independence from the central authority . 
 Vukašin sought a well @-@ connected spouse for Marko . A princess from the Croatian House of Šubić of Dalmatia was sent by her father , Grgur , to the court of their relative Tvrtko I , the ban of Bosnia . She was supposed to be raised and married by Tvrtko 's mother Jelena . Jelena was the daughter of George II Šubić , whose maternal grandfather was Serbian King Dragutin Nemanjić . The ban and his mother approved of Vukašin 's idea to join the Šubić princess and Marko , and the wedding was imminent . However , in April 1370 Pope Urban V sent Tvrtko a letter forbidding him to give the Catholic lady in marriage to the " son of His Magnificence , the King of Serbia , a schismatic " ( filio <unk> viri Regis <unk> <unk> ) . The pope also notified King Louis I of Hungary , nominal overlord of the ban , of the impending " offence to the Christian faith " , and the marriage did not occur . Marko subsequently married Jelena ( daughter of Radoslav Hlapen , the lord of Veria and Edessa and the major Serbian nobleman in southern Macedonia ) . 
 During the spring of 1371 , Marko participated in the preparations for a campaign against Nikola Altomanović , the major lord in the west of the Empire . The campaign was planned jointly by King Vukašin and Đurađ I Balšić , lord of Zeta ( who was married to Olivera , the king 's daughter ) . In July of that year Vukašin and Marko camped with their army outside Scutari , on Balšić 's territory , ready to make an incursion towards Onogošt in Altomanović 's land . The attack never took place , since the Ottomans threatened the land of Despot Jovan Uglješa ( lord of Serres and Vukašin 's younger brother , who ruled in eastern Macedonia ) and the Mrnjavčević forces were quickly directed eastward . Having sought allies in vain , the two brothers and their troops entered Ottoman @-@ controlled territory . At the Battle of Maritsa on 26 September 1371 , the Turks annihilated the Serbian army ; the bodies of Vukašin and Jovan Uglješa were never found . The battle site , near the village of <unk> in present @-@ day eastern Greece , has ever since been called as <unk> <unk> ( " Serbian rout " ) in Turkish . The Battle of Maritsa had far @-@ reaching consequences for the region , since it opened the Balkans to the Turks . 
 = = = After 1371 = = = 
 When his father died , " young king " Marko became king and co @-@ ruler with Emperor Uroš . The Nemanjić dynasty ended soon afterwards , when Uroš died on 2 ( or 4 ) December 1371 and Marko became the formal sovereign of Serbia . Serbian lords , however , did not recognise him , and divisions within the state increased . After the two brothers ' deaths and the destruction of their armies , the Mrnjavčević family was left powerless . Lords around Marko exploited the opportunity to seize significant parts of his patrimony . By 1372 Đurađ I Balšić took Prizren and Peć , and Prince Lazar Hrebeljanović took Pristina . By 1377 Vuk Branković acquired Skopje , and Albanian magnate Andrea Gropa became virtually independent in Ohrid ; however , he may have remained a vassal to Marko as he had been to Vukašin . Gropa 's son @-@ in @-@ law was Marko 's relative , Ostoja <unk> of the clan of <unk> from Travunia . He was one of Serbian noblemen from Zachlumia and Travunia ( adjacent principalities in present @-@ day Herzegovina ) who received lands in the newly conquered parts of Macedonia during Emperor Dušan 's reign . 
 The only sizable town kept by Marko was Prilep , from which his father rose . King Marko became a petty prince ruling a relatively small territory in western Macedonia , bordered in the north by the Šar mountains and Skopje ; in the east by the Vardar and the Crna Reka rivers , and in the west by Ohrid . The southern limits of his territory are uncertain . Marko shared his rule with his younger brother , Andrijaš , who had his own land . Their mother , Queen Alena , became a nun after Vukašin 's death , taking the monastic name <unk> , but was co @-@ ruler with Andrijaš for some time after 1371 . The youngest brother , Dmitar , lived on land controlled by Andrijaš . There was another brother , <unk> , about whom little is known . When Marko became an Ottoman vassal is uncertain , but it was probably not immediately after the Battle of Maritsa . 
 At some point Marko separated from Jelena and lived with <unk> , the wife of a man named Grgur , and Jelena returned to her father in Veria . Marko later sought to reconcile with Jelena but he had to send <unk> to his father @-@ in @-@ law . Since Marko 's land was bordered on the south by Hlapen 's , the reconciliation may have been political . Scribe <unk> , a subject of Marko 's , transcribed a liturgical book for the church in the village of <unk> , <unk> and when he finished , he composed an inscription which begins as follows : 
 Marko 's fortress was on a hill north of present @-@ day Prilep ; its partially preserved remains are known as <unk> <unk> ( " Marko 's towers " ) . Beneath the fortress is the village of Varoš , site of the medieval Prilep . The village contains the Monastery of Archangel Michael , renovated by Marko and Vukašin , whose portraits are on the walls of the monastery 's church . Marko was <unk> of the Church of Saint Sunday in Prizren , which was finished in 1371 , shortly before the Battle of Maritsa . In the inscription above the church 's entrance , he is called " young king " . 
 The Monastery of St. Demetrius , popularly known as Marko 's Monastery , is in the village of Markova <unk> ( near Skopje ) and was built from c . 1345 to 1376 ( or 1377 ) . Kings Marko and Vukašin , its <unk> , are depicted over the south entrance of the monastery church . Marko is an austere @-@ looking man in purple clothes , wearing a crown decorated with pearls . With his left hand he holds a scroll , whose text begins : " I , in the Christ God the pious King Marko , built and inscribed this divine temple ... " In his right hand , he holds a horn symbolizing the horn of oil with which the Old Testament kings were anointed at their coronation ( as described in 1 Samuel 16 : 13 ) . Marko is said to be shown here as the king chosen by God to lead his people through the crisis following the Battle of Maritsa . 
 Marko minted his own money , in common with his father and other Serbian nobles of the time . His silver coins weighed 1 @.@ 11 grams , and were produced in three types . In two of them , the obverse contained a five @-@ line text : <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> ( " In the Christ God , the pious King Marko " ) . In the first type , the reverse depicted Christ seated on a throne ; in the second , Christ was seated on a mandorla . In the third type , the reverse depicted Christ on a mandorla ; the obverse contained the four @-@ line text <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> ( " Pious King Marko " ) , which Marko also used in the church inscription . He omitted a territorial designation from his title , probably in tacit acknowledgement of his limited power . Although his brother Andrijaš also minted his own coins , the money supply in the territory ruled by the Mrnjavčević brothers primarily consisted of coins struck by King Vukašin and Tsar Uroš . About 150 of Marko 's coins survive in numismatic collections . 
 By 1379 , Prince Lazar Hrebeljanović , the ruler of Moravian Serbia , emerged as the most @-@ powerful Serbian nobleman . Although he called himself <unk> of all the Serbs ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , he was not strong enough to unite all Serbian lands under his authority . The Balšić and Mrnjavčević families , Konstantin Dragaš ( maternally a Nemanjić ) , Vuk Branković and Radoslav Hlapen continued ruling their respective regions . In addition to Marko , Tvrtko I was crowned King of the Serbs and of Bosnia in 1377 in the <unk> monastery . <unk> related to the Nemanjić dynasty , Tvrtko had seized western portions of the former Serbian Empire in 1373 . 
 On 15 June 1389 Serbian forces led by Prince Lazar , Vuk Branković , and Tvrtko 's nobleman Vlatko Vuković of Zachlumia , confronted the Ottoman army led by Sultan Murad I at the Battle of Kosovo , the best @-@ known battle in medieval Serbian history . With the bulk of both armies wiped out and Lazar and Murad killed , the outcome of the battle was inconclusive . In its aftermath the Serbs had insufficient manpower to defend their lands , while the Turks had many more troops in the east . Serbian principalities which were not already Ottoman vassals became such over the next few years . 
 In 1394 , a group of Ottoman vassals in the Balkans renounced their vassalage . Although Marko was not among them , his younger brothers Andrijaš and Dmitar refused to remain under Turkish dominance . They emigrated to the Kingdom of Hungary , entering the service of King Sigismund . They travelled via Ragusa , where they withdrew two @-@ thirds of their late father 's store of 96 @.@ 73 kilograms ( 213 @.@ 3 lb ) of silver , leaving the remaining third for Marko . Although Andrijaš and Dmitar were the first Serbian nobles to emigrate to Hungary , the Serbian northward migration would continue throughout the Ottoman occupation . 
 In 1395 the Turks attacked Wallachia to punish its ruler , Mircea I , for his incursions into their territory . Three Serbian vassals fought on the Ottoman side : King Marko , Lord Konstantin Dragaš , and Despot Stefan Lazarević ( son and heir of Prince Lazar ) . The Battle of Rovine , on 17 May 1395 , was won by the Wallachians ; Marko and Dragaš were killed . After their deaths the Turks annexed their lands , combining them into an Ottoman province centred in Kyustendil . Thirty @-@ six years after the Battle of Rovine , Konstantin the Philosopher wrote the Biography of Despot Stefan Lazarević and recorded what Marko said to Dragaš on the eve of the battle : " I pray the Lord to help the Christians , no matter if I will be the first to die in this war . " 
 = = In folk poetry = = 
 = = = Serbian epic poetry = = = 
 Marko Mrnjavčević is the most popular hero of Serbian epic poetry , in which he is called " Kraljević Marko " ( with the word <unk> meaning " prince " or " king 's son " ) . This informal title was attached to King Vukašin 's sons in contemporary sources as a surname ( Marko Kraljević ) , <unk> and it was adopted by the Serbian oral tradition as part of Marko 's name . 
 Poems about Kraljević Marko do not follow a storyline ; what binds them into a poetic cycle is the hero himself , with his adventures illuminating his character and personality . The epic Marko had a 300 @-@ year lifespan ; 14th- to 16th @-@ century heroes appearing as his companions include Miloš Obilić , Relja <unk> , Vuk the Fiery Dragon and <unk> Janko and his nephew , <unk> Sekula . Very few historical facts about Marko can be found in the poems , but they reflect his connection with the disintegration of the Serbian Empire and his vassalage to the Ottomans . They were composed by anonymous Serbian poets during the Ottoman occupation of their land . According to American <unk> George <unk> Noyes , they " combine tragic pathos with almost ribald comedy in a fashion worthy of an Elizabethan playwright . " 
 Serbian epic poetry agrees that King Vukašin was Marko 's father . His mother in the poems was Jevrosima , sister of voivode Momčilo , the lord of the <unk> Fortress ( on Mount Durmitor in Old Herzegovina ) . Momčilo is described as a man of immense size and strength with magical attributes : a winged horse and a sabre with eyes . Vukašin murdered him with the help of the voivode 's young wife , <unk> , despite Jevrosima 's self @-@ sacrificing attempt to save her brother . Instead of marrying <unk> ( the original plan ) , Vukašin killed the treacherous woman . He took Jevrosima from <unk> to his capital city , Skadar , and married her according to the advice of the dying Momčilo . She bore him two sons , Marko and Andrijaš , and the poem recounting these events says that Marko took after his uncle Momčilo . This epic character corresponds historically with Bulgarian brigand and mercenary Momchil , who was in the service of Serbian Tsar Dušan ; he later became a despot and died in the 1345 Battle of Peritheorion . According to another account , Marko and Andrijaš were mothered by a vila ( Slavic mountain nymph ) married by Vukašin after he caught her near a lake and removed her wings so she could not escape . 
 As Marko matured , he became headstrong ; Vukašin once said that he had no control over his son , who went wherever he wanted , drank and brawled . Marko grew up into a large , strong man , with a terrifying appearance , which was also somewhat comical . He wore a wolf @-@ skin cap pulled low over his dark eyes , his black moustache was the size of a six @-@ month @-@ old lamb and his cloak was a shaggy wolf @-@ pelt . A Damascus sabre swung at his waist , and a spear was slung across his back . Marko 's <unk> weighed 66 <unk> ( 85 kilograms ( 187 lb ) ) and hung on the left side of his saddle , balanced by a well @-@ filled wineskin on the saddle 's right side . His grip was strong enough to squeeze drops of water from a piece of dry cornel wood . Marko defeated a succession of champions against overwhelming odds . 
 The hero 's inseparable companion was his powerful , talking piebald horse Šarac ; Marko always gave him an equal share of his wine . The horse could leap three spear @-@ lengths high and four spear @-@ lengths forward , enabling Marko to capture the dangerous , elusive vila Ravijojla . She became his blood sister , promising to help him in dire straits . When Ravijojla helped him kill the monstrous , three @-@ hearted Musa <unk> ( who almost defeated him ) , Marko grieved because he had slain a better man than himself . 
 Marko is portrayed as a protector of the weak and helpless , a fighter against Turkish bullies and injustice in general . He was an idealised keeper of patriarchal and natural norms : in a Turkish military camp , he beheaded the Turk who <unk> killed his father . He abolished the marriage tax by killing the tyrant who imposed it on the people of Kosovo . He saved the sultan 's daughter from an unwanted marriage after she entreated him , as her blood brother , to help her . He rescued three Serbian voivodes ( his blood brothers ) from a dungeon and helped animals in distress . Marko was a rescuer and benefactor of people , and a promoter of life ; " Prince Marko is remembered like a fair day in the year " . 
 Characteristic of Marko was his reverence and love for his mother , Jevrosima ; he often sought her advice , following it even when it contradicted his own desires . She lived with Marko at his mansion in Prilep , his <unk> guiding him away from evil and toward good on the path of moral improvement and Christian virtues . Marko 's honesty and moral courage are noteworthy in a poem in which he was the only person who knew the will of the late Tsar Dušan regarding his heir . Marko refused to lie in favour of the pretenders — his father and uncles . He said truthfully that Dušan appointed his son , Uroš , heir to the Serbian throne . This almost cost him his life , since Vukašin tried to kill him . 
 Marko is represented as a loyal vassal of the Ottoman sultan , fighting to protect the potentate and his empire from outlaws . When summoned by the sultan , he participated in Turkish military campaigns . Even in this relationship , however , Marko 's personality and sense of dignity were apparent . He occasionally made the sultan uneasy , and meetings between them usually ended like this : 
 Marko 's fealty was combined with the notion that the servant was greater than his lord , as Serbian poets turned the tables on their conquerors . This dual aspect of Marko may explain his heroic status ; for the Serbs he was " the proud symbol expressive of the unbroken spirit that lived on in spite of disaster and defeat , " according to translator of Serbian epic poems David Halyburton Low . 
 In battle , Marko used not only his strength and prowess but cunning and trickery . Despite his extraordinary qualities he was not depicted as a superhero or a god , but as a mortal man . There were opponents who surpassed him in courage and strength . He was occasionally capricious , short @-@ tempered or cruel , but his predominant traits were honesty , loyalty and fundamental goodness . 
 With his comic appearance and behaviour , and his remarks at his opponents ' expense , Marko is the most humorous character in Serbian epic poetry . When a Moor struck him with a mace , Marko said laughingly , " O valiant black Moor ! Are you jesting or smiting in earnest ? " Jevrosima once advised her son to cease his bloody adventures and plough the fields instead . He obeyed in a grimly humorous way , ploughing the sultan 's highway instead of the fields . A group of Turkish Janissaries with three packs of gold shouted at him to stop ploughing the highway . He warned them to keep off the furrows , but quickly wearied of arguing : 
 Marko , age 300 , rode the 160 @-@ year @-@ old Šarac by the seashore towards Mount <unk> when a vila told him that he was going to die . Marko then leaned over a well and saw no reflection of his face on the water ; <unk> confirmed the vila 's words . He killed Šarac so the Turks would not use him for menial labor , and gave his beloved companion an elaborate burial . Marko broke his sword and spear , throwing his mace far out to sea before lying down to die . His body was found seven days later by Abbot Vaso and his deacon , <unk> . Vaso took Marko to Mount Athos and buried him at the Hilandar Monastery in an unmarked grave . 
 = = = Epic poetry of Bulgaria and Macedonia = = = 
 " Krali Marko " has been one of the most popular characters in Bulgarian folklore for centuries . Bulgarian epic tales in general ( and those about Marko in particular ) seem to originate from the southwestern part of the Bulgarian region , primarily in the present @-@ day Republic of Macedonia . Therefore , the tales are also part of the ethnic heritage of present @-@ day Macedonia . 
 According to local legend Marko 's mother was <unk> ( <unk> ) , sister of the Bulgarian <unk> Momchil ( who ruled territory in the Rhodope Mountains ) . At Marko 's birth three <unk> ( fairy sorceresses ) appeared , predicting that he would be a hero and replace his father ( King Vukašin ) . When the king heard this , he threw his son into the river in a basket to get rid of him . A samodiva named Vila found Marko and brought him up , becoming his foster mother . Because Marko drank the samodiva 's milk , he acquired supernatural powers and became a Bulgarian freedom fighter against the Turks . He has a winged horse named <unk> ( " dappled " ) and a stepsister , the samodiva <unk> . Bulgarian legends incorporate fragments of pagan mythology and beliefs , although the Marko epic was created as late as the 14 – 18th centuries . Among Bulgarian epic songs , songs about Krali Marko are common and pivotal . Bulgarian folklorists who collected stories about Marko included educator <unk> <unk> ( in the <unk> region of western Macedonia ) and Marko <unk> of Prilep ( throughout the region ) . 
 = = In legend = = 
 South Slavic legends about Kraljević Marko or Krali Marko are primarily based on myths much older than the historical Marko Mrnjavčević . He differs in legend from the folk poems ; in some areas he was imagined as a giant who walked stepping on hilltops , his head touching the clouds . He was said to have helped God shape the earth , and created the river gorge in Demir Kapija ( " Iron Gate " ) with a stroke of his sabre . This drained the sea covering the regions of Bitola , <unk> and Tikveš in Macedonia , making them habitable . After the earth was shaped , Marko arrogantly showed off his strength . God took it away by leaving a bag as heavy as the earth on a road ; when Marko tried to lift it , he lost his strength and became an ordinary man . 
 Legend also has it that Marko acquired his strength after he was suckled by a vila . King Vukašin threw him into a river because he did not resemble him , but the boy was saved by a cowherd ( who adopted him , and a vila suckled him ) . In other accounts , Marko was a shepherd ( or cowherd ) who found a vila 's children lost in a mountain and shaded them against the sun ( or gave them water ) . As a reward the vila suckled him three times , and he could lift and throw a large boulder . An Istrian version has Marko making a shade for two snakes , instead of the children . In a Bulgarian version , each of the three draughts of milk he suckled from the vila 's breast became a snake . 
 Marko was associated with large , solitary boulders and indentations in rocks ; the boulders were said to be thrown by him from a hill , and the indentations were his footprints ( or the hoofprints of his horse ) . He was also connected with geographic features such as hills , glens , cliffs , caves , rivers , brooks and groves , which he created or at which he did something memorable . They were often named after him , and there are many toponyms — from Istria in the west to Bulgaria in the east — derived from his name . In Bulgarian and Macedonian stories , Marko had an equally strong sister who competed with him in throwing boulders . 
 In some legends , Marko 's wonder horse was a gift from a vila . A Serbian story says that he was looking for a horse who could bear him . To test a steed , he would grab him by the tail and sling him over his shoulder . Seeing a diseased piebald foal owned by some carters , Marko grabbed him by the tail but could not move him . He bought ( and cured ) the foal , naming him Šarac . He became an enormously powerful horse and Marko 's inseparable companion . Macedonian legend has it that Marko , following a vila 's advice , captured a sick horse on a mountain and cured him . <unk> patches on the horse 's skin grew white hairs , and he became a piebald . 
 According to folk tradition Marko never died ; he lives on in a cave , in a moss @-@ covered den or in an unknown land . A Serbian legend recounts that Marko once fought a battle in which so many men were killed that the soldiers ( and their horses ) swam in blood . He lifted his hands towards heaven and said , " Oh God , what am I going to do now ? " God took pity on Marko , transporting him and Šarac to a cave ( where Marko stuck his sabre into a rock and fell asleep ) . There is moss in the cave ; Šarac eats it bit by bit , while the sabre slowly emerges from the rock . When it falls on the ground and Šarac finishes the moss , Marko will awaken and reenter the world . Some allegedly saw him after descending into a deep pit , where he lived in a large house in front of which Šarac was seen . Others saw him in a faraway land , living in a cave . According to Macedonian tradition Marko drank " eagle 's water " , which made him immortal ; he is with Elijah in heaven . 
 = = In modern culture = = 
 During the 19th century , Marko was the subject of several dramatizations . In 1831 the Hungarian drama Prince Marko , possibly written by István <unk> , was performed in <unk> and in 1838 , the Hungarian drama Prince Marko – Great Serbian Hero by <unk> <unk> was staged in Arad . In 1848 Jovan <unk> Popović wrote the tragedy The Dream of Prince Marko , in which the legend of sleeping Marko is its central motif . Petar <unk> wrote the drama Kraljević Marko , which glorifies southern Slav strength . In 1863 Francesco Dall <unk> presented his Italian drama , The Resurrection of Prince Marko . 
 Of all Serbian epic or historical figures , Marko is considered to have given the most inspiration to visual artists ; a monograph on the subject lists 87 authors . His oldest known depictions are 14th @-@ century frescoes from Marko 's Monastery and Prilep . An 18th @-@ century drawing of Marko is found in the Čajniče Gospels , a medieval parchment manuscript belonging to a Serbian Orthodox church in Čajniče in eastern Bosnia . The drawing is simple , unique in depicting Marko as a saint and reminiscent of <unk> reliefs . Vuk Karadžić wrote that during his late @-@ 18th @-@ century childhood he saw a painting of Marko carrying an ox on his back . 
 Nineteenth @-@ century lithographs of Marko were made by Anastas Jovanović , <unk> <unk> and others . Artists who painted Marko during that century include Mina Karadžić , Novak <unk> and <unk> Jakšić . Twentieth @-@ century artists include <unk> Petrović , Mirko <unk> , Uroš Predić and Paja Jovanović . A sculpture of Marko on Šarac by Ivan Meštrović was reproduced on a Yugoslavian banknote and stamp . Modern illustrators with Marko as their subject include Alexander Key , Aleksandar Klas , Zuko <unk> , Vasa <unk> and Bane <unk> . 
 Motifs in multiple works are Marko and Ravijojla , Marko and his mother , Marko and Šarac , Marko shooting an arrow , Marko plowing the roads , the fight between Marko and Musa and Marko 's death . Also , several artists have tried to produce a realistic portrait of Marko based on his frescoes . In 1924 Prilep Brewery introduced a light beer , Krali Marko . 
 = Major General John A. Logan = 
 Major General John A. Logan , also known as the General John A. Logan Monument and Logan Circle Monument , is an equestrian statue in Washington , D.C. that honors politician and Civil War general John A. Logan . The monument is sited in the center of Logan Circle , a traffic circle and public park in the Logan Circle neighborhood . The statue was sculpted by artist Franklin Simmons , whose other prominent works include the Peace Monument and statues in the National Statuary Hall Collection . The architect of the statue base was Richard Morris Hunt , designer of prominent buildings including the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City and The Breakers in Newport , Rhode Island . Prominent attendees at the dedication ceremony in 1901 included President William McKinley , members of his cabinet , Senator Chauncey Depew , Senator Shelby Moore Cullom , and General Grenville M. Dodge . 
 The sculpture is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , which were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The bronze sculpture rests on a bronze and granite base adorned with two reliefs depicting historically inaccurate moments in Logan 's life . The monument and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 John A. Logan ( 1826 – 1886 ) was a native of Illinois who served as a second lieutenant in the Mexican – American War before studying at the University of Louisville to become a lawyer . Originally a member of the Democratic Party , he was elected state senator and later a member of the U.S. House of Representatives . During the onset of the Civil War , Logan denounced what he considered extremists on both sides , but eventually volunteered to fight with the Union Army during the First Battle of Bull Run . He then resigned from Congress and was made colonel after he organized the 31st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment . Logan was wounded twice while serving in the war and considered an outstanding field commander . He was promoted to brigadier general following the victory at Fort Donelson . Logan played a significant role in the Union success at Vicksburg and served as that district 's military governor . Following the death of General James B. McPherson , Logan was given command of the Army of the Tennessee , but was soon relieved by General Oliver O. Howard after Logan became too involved with the 1864 presidential election . He left the army in 1865 and resumed his career in politics . 
 Logan was elected as a Republican to the U.S. House of Representatives and later to the U.S. Senate . In the 1884 presidential election , Logan unsuccessfully ran with Senator James G. Blaine as his vice presidential candidate , narrowly losing the race . During his time in office , Logan was considered one of the most vocal advocates for military veterans . He helped organize two veteran fraternal organizations , the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) and the Society of the Army of the Tennessee ( SAT ) , and was instrumental in the federal government recognizing Memorial Day ( originally called Decoration Day ) as an official holiday , first celebrated in 1868 . 
 Soon after Logan 's death in 1886 , the SAT began work on erecting a monument to the military hero . The organization worked closely with the GAR and Logan 's widow , Mary , to raise funds and lobby Congress for a monument . It would be the second equestrian monument in Washington , D.C. commissioned by the SAT , the first being the Major General James B. McPherson statue . Erection of the monument was approved by an act of Congress on March 2 , 1889 . A memorial commission was created to select a sculptor and site for the statue . Members of the commission asked sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens who he would recommend . He suggested Franklin Simmons ( 1839 – 1913 ) , an American artist working in Rome . Simmons had previously sculpted several Civil War monuments , including the Peace Monument in Washington , D.C. His other works in the city include several statues in the National Statuary Hall Collection and the United States Senate Vice Presidential Bust Collection . 
 The commission considered models by several sculptors before selecting Simmons in December 1892 , whose model was the " most agreeable to Mrs. Logan . " She admired not only the posture of Simmon 's model , but his idea to have the statue rest on a bronze base , unlike other monuments in the city that featured granite bases . Mary also liked that Simmons and members of the commission would follow her recommendations for the reliefs to be found on the statue base . Simmons was paid $ 65 @,@ 000 for his work ; around $ 13 @,@ 000 from the SAT and the remainder from the federal government . <unk> the piece proved more difficult than Simmons had expected since the Logan statue was his first and only equestrian work . He was forced to ask for several extensions beginning in 1896 . Simmons paid founder <unk> Nelli extra money to work around the clock on the base , designed by prominent architect Richard Morris Hunt , whose other works include the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City and The Breakers in Newport Rhode Island . 
 It only took Nelli three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months to complete the process instead of the planned year . The Cranford Paving Company was contracted to prepare the site and lay the granite foundation . Simmons was not pleased with the company 's work and new stone was ordered in September 1897 . Following the new stone 's placement , the base was installed on April 18 , 1898 . It wasn 't until 1900 that Simmons completed the sculpture and it was cast in Rome . Upon its completion , a ceremony attended by King Umberto I of Italy and his wife , Queen Margherita , was held at the foundry where Simmons was honored with knighthood . The sculpture was shipped to the United States and arrived in Brooklyn in December 1900 . Because the sculpture was too large to be transported by train , it was placed onto a two @-@ masted schooner and arrived in Washington , D.C. on January 16 , 1901 . It was installed on top of the base one week later . 
 The site chosen for the monument was the center of Iowa Circle , a park in an upscale neighborhood in the city 's northwest quadrant . The park was completely redesigned in 1891 to make room for the monument . By the time it was dedicated in 1901 , nearby Dupont Circle was lined with mansions and had become more popular with the city 's wealthy residents while Iowa Circle , surrounded by stately row houses , had become a middle @-@ class neighborhood . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The monument was formally dedicated on April 9 , 1901 . Temporary platforms for invited and distinguished guests were built near the base . Guests included President William McKinley , members of his cabinet , Senator Chauncey Depew , Senator Shelby Moore Cullom , General Grenville M. Dodge , Mary Logan and several members of the Logan family , representatives from the GAR and SAT , and Simmons . Prior to the ceremony , there was a large military parade led by Colonel Francis L. Guenther . The parade consisted of soldiers , marines , seamen from the nearby Navy Yard , the District of Columbia militia , and GAR and SAT veterans . Dodge , who was president of the SAT and the only living general depicted on one of the relief panels , presided over the ceremonies . George Tucker , a grandson of Logan , pulled a cord , parting the flags that had draped over the statue . This was followed by cheers and applause from the crowd while the Fourth Artillery fired a national salute . 
 McKinley , the last Civil War veteran to occupy the White House , gave an address which included the following remarks : " It is a good token when patriots are honored and patriotism exalted . Monuments which express the nation 's gratitude for great deeds inspire great deeds . The statue unveiled today proclaims our country 's appreciation of one of her heroic sons whose name is dear to the American people , the ideal volunteer soldier of two wars , the eminent senator and commoner , General John A. Logan . " Following the president 's speech , Depew also gave an address . His remarks included : " The history of our country is condensed in the Revolutionary and civil wars . As Washington stands out in the first of our crucial contests , so does Lincoln in the second . About Lincoln cluster Grant , Sherman , Sheridan , Logan , McPherson , and a host of other heroes ... Among those successful Americans in many lines who have won and held the public eye and died mourned by all their countrymen , there will live in the future in the history of the Republic no nobler figure , in peace and in war , in the pursuits of the citizen , and in work for the welfare of his fellow citizens , than General John A. Logan . " Cullom then read a letter from Illinois governor Richard Yates Jr . , who was unable to attend , which paid tribute to Logan and noted how proud the state 's citizens were of the Illinois native . The ceremony concluded following the benediction by Reverence J. G. Butler . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Initial reception to the statue was very positive . The New York Times described it as producing " an impression of dignity , beauty , and power . " But in the weeks following the dedication ceremony , praise turned to criticism and reporters noted " absurdities " in the relief panels . They noted that the relief depicting Logan gathered with other Civil War leaders plotting strategy together was very unlikely . The second panel , depicting Logan being sworn in as senator by Vice President Chester A. Arthur was called " impossible " and " ridiculous . " Logan was sworn into the Senate in 1879 and Arthur himself was not sworn in as vice president until 1881 . Two of the senators depicted in that relief were not sworn in until 1882 and 1884 , respectively , and another one died in 1877 . Mary Logan initially took credit for selecting the scenes depicted in the reliefs and received all of the blame when the errors were discovered . In a heated letter to the Evening Star , she said the reliefs were not meant to be historically accurate : " Of course , we knew all this , but we disregarded it because we wanted these panels to portray the most prominent men of the history of the country who were in the Senate during the 16 years that my husband was Senator . " She added to reproduce historically accurate scenes would have been " absurd . " 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In 1930 , Congress renamed Iowa Circle in honor of Logan , who had briefly lived at 4 Logan Circle in 1885 . The statue is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , that were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . It is also designated a contributing property to the Logan Circle Historic District , listed on the NRHP on June 30 , 1972 , and the Fourteenth Street Historic District , listed on the NRHP on November 9 , 1994 . The monument and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The monument is sited in the center of Logan Circle , a 1 @.@ 8 acre ( 0 @.@ 73 ha ) public park and traffic circle in the Logan Circle neighborhood at the convergence of 13th Street , P Street , Rhode Island Avenue and Vermont Avenue NW . Sidewalks lead from the edge of the circle to the monument on axis with the surrounding streets . Around twenty oak trees are planted throughout the circle and a small , ornamental iron fence surrounds the statue base . 
 The bronze equestrian statue measures 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) tall , 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) long , and 4 @.@ 05 ft ( 1 @.@ 23 m ) wide . It weighs approximately 11 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 000 kg ) . Logan is depicted with collar @-@ length hair and a moustache while wearing his Civil War military uniform ; a long belted jacket , boots , gloves , and a hat . He is holding the horse 's reins with his left hand and his right hand his holding his sword pointed downward . The horse is striding forward with its right foot raised . The inscriptions " <unk> . <unk> <unk> 1897 " and " FRANKLIN <unk> " are found on the statue . 
 The statue rests on a rectangular bronze base which is itself on top of a low granite base . The base is 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high , 22 ft ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) long , and 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) wide . It weights approximately 35 @,@ 000 lb ( 16 @,@ 000 kg ) . A bald eagle symbolizing Patriotism adorns the upper section of each corner of the bronze base . Around the inscription " <unk> " are palm leaves symbolizing Victory . These are located on the east and west sides of the lower portion of the bronze base . The relief on the west side of the base depicts Logan surrounded by fellow officers discussing the Civil War . The officers include Generals Francis Preston Blair , Jr . , Dodge , William Babcock Hazen , Mortimer Dormer Leggett , Joseph A. Mower , and Henry Warner Slocum , and Captain Bill Strong . On Logan 's proper right is a map spread on a table with three of the officers studying it . The remaining officers are looking towards Logan who has his left hand resting on the map . The relief on the east side of the base depicts Logan being sworn into office as a senator by Vice President Arthur . Logan 's right arm is raised while Arthur 's left hand is raised and holding a book . Other senators depicted in the relief include Roscoe Conkling , Cullom , William M. Evarts , John F. Miller , Oliver P. Morton , Allen G. Thurman , and Daniel W. Voorhees . A female allegorical figure is on the north and south sides of the base . The figure on the north side , representing Peace or Victory , is holding a laurel wreath in her right hand and a fasces in her left hand . She is wearing long robes and has a laurel wreath on her head . The figure on the south side , representing War , is holding a shield with her left hand and a sword with her right hand . She is wearing a dress adorned with armor details and a crown @-@ shaped helmet . 
 = Wilfred Talbot Smith = 
 Wilfred Talbot Smith ( born Frank Wenham ; 8 June 1885 – 27 April 1957 ) was an English occultist and ceremonial magician known as a prominent advocate of the religion of Thelema . Living most of his life in North America , he played a key role in propagating Thelema across the continent . 
 Born the illegitimate son of a domestic servant and her employer in Tonbridge , Kent , Smith migrated to Canada in 1907 , where he went through a variety of jobs and began reading about Western esotericism . Through Charles Stansfeld Jones he was introduced to the writings of Thelema 's founder , Aleister Crowley . He subsequently joined Crowley 's Thelemite order , the A ∴ A ∴ , and the Thelemite wing of the Ordo Templi Orientis ( O.T.O. ) . In 1915 , he joined the O.T.O. ' s British Columbia Lodge No. 1 , based in Vancouver , and rose to become one of its senior members . 
 In 1922 Smith moved to Los Angeles in the United States , where he , Jane Wolfe , and Regina Kahl tried to establish a new Thelemite community . They founded an incorporated Church of Thelema which gave weekly public performances of the Gnostic Mass from their home in Hollywood . Seeking to revive the inactive North American O.T.O. , in 1935 Smith then founded the O.T.O. Agape Lodge , which subsequently relocated to Pasadena . He brought a number of prominent Thelemites into the O.T.O. , including Jack Parsons and Grady Louis McMurtry , but he had a strained relationship with both Crowley and Crowley 's North American deputy , Karl Germer , who eventually ousted him from his position as Agape Lodge leader , replacing him with Parsons . Smith retreated to Malibu , where he continued to practice Thelema until his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1885 – 1914 = = = 
 Smith was born as Frank Wenham in Tonbridge , Kent , on 9 June 1885 . He was the illegitimate son of Oswald Cox , a member of a prominent local family who resided at Marl Field House , and one of his domestic servants , Minnie Wenham , whom Frank would never come to know . Considered an embarrassment by the wealthy Cox family , from an early age he was sent away to live with relatives , and aged four sent to a boarding school where he was physically abused by staff before being removed from the institution by his paternal grandmother , who took him for a year in Switzerland . From 1899 to 1901 , he studied at Bedales School , where he developed his lifelong hobby of book binding , before becoming the apprentice to a cabinet maker in Kendal until 1906 . 
 With few ties in Britain , he decided to emigrate to Canada , arriving in Nova Scotia in 1907 , where he gained work on a farm in Saskatchewan . From 1909 to 1911 he worked at a confectioner 's warehouse , and then for a further nine months at a logging camp , before gaining a job as an accounting clerk at the British Columbia Electric Railway in April 1912 . He had come to loath Christianity and the Victorian moral systems that he associated with it ; instead he began reading about Eastern religion , yoga , and Western esotericism . While at work , he met Charles Stansfeld Jones , a Thelemite who shared Smith 's interest in these subjects and who lent him copies of Aleister Crowley 's Book 4 and volume one , number one of The Equinox . Intrigued , Smith paid to join Crowley 's Britain @-@ based magical order , the A ∴ A ∴ , in doing so obtaining more of Crowley 's writings . He began performing many of the practices encouraged by the group , including yoga and the keeping of a diary recording his magical endeavours . 
 Smith entered into a relationship with a woman twenty years his senior , Emily Sophia " Nem " Talbot Smith , although it remains unclear whether they ever married . With Nem and her daughter Katherine , Smith moved into a specially @-@ constructed house designed by the Thelemite architect Howard E. White . Located at 138 13th Street East , North Vancouver , Smith converted the attic into a temple for Thelemic rituals . 
 = = = O.T.O. British Columbia Lodge No. 1 : 1915 – 1922 = = = 
 Smith also decided to join the Ordo Templi Orientis ( O.T.O. ) , an occult organisation whose British branch , the Mysteria Magica Maxima ( MMM ) , was run by Crowley , who used it to promote Thelema . In January 1915 , Smith signed up to the MMM , and in April went through the <unk> degree initiation at the British Columbia Lodge No. 1 . In May , he took part in the Lodge 's public performance of the Rites of Isis , which it was hoped would attract further members . In a private capacity , he meanwhile continued performing his A ∴ A ∴ practices , and also began experimenting with the entheogenic properties of <unk> . In October 1915 , Crowley visited the Lodge , where he met with Smith . Soon after , Smith would be upgraded to the position of Master Magician within the Lodge , and in March 1916 received the <unk> level in the A ∴ A ∴ , adopting as his personal magical motto the Latin words <unk> <unk> ( " I will snatch away the cloud " ) . 
 Smith 's relationship with Nem was strained , and he began an affair with his step @-@ daughter , Katherine . In November 1916 , the three of them tried to resign from the O.T.O. lodge so as to prevent their problems affecting the group . Their resignations were rejected , and by January 1917 they were once again active within the lodge . Nevertheless , in March the lodge shut down for 13 months , during which time Crowley and Jones scrutinised Smith 's diaries to ascertain his magical progress . Katherine became pregnant with Smith 's child , who was born in December 1917 , and named Noel Talbot @-@ Smith . Jones proclaimed that Noel represented " the Crowned and Conquering Child " <unk> in the main Thelemite holy book , The Book of the Law . Jones was soon named O.T.O. Viceroy for Canada , and in April he re @-@ initiated the lodge at Smith 's home , with Smith himself being appointed the lodge 's Right Worshipful Master . Jones himself claimed that he had undergone a " Great Initiation " and was now an <unk> ; his relationship with Crowley broke down , and he subsequently resigned from the O.T.O. , deeply disappointing Smith . 
 Smith meanwhile continued working towards the A ∴ A ∴ grade of <unk> , while the British Columbia Lodge No. 1 became increasingly moribund following the death of White , a key member , who had succumbed to Spanish Flu aged 33 in November 1918 . Jones had rejoined the O.T.O. and relocated to Detroit in the United States . When Smith was fired from his job following a bout of flu in February 1920 , he decided to join Jones in Detroit , where there was a small O.T.O. community ; there he gained work as a clerk with the Detroit City Gas Company . In his absence , Nem was appointed Right Worshipful Master of the Vancouver lodge . In March 1921 , Jones and Smith proceeded to Chicago , but in June Smith returned to North Vancouver to see his family . That year , Jones convinced Smith to join an esoteric organisation known as the Universal Brotherhood ( UB ) . Smith however was unnerved that rather than expressing a Thelemic viewpoint , the UB adhered to Roman Catholicism , and he also considered its literature purposeless , vague , and grandiose ; he soon dropped out . Back in Vancouver , Smith aided one his initiates , Frank Page , in founding the British Columbia Lodge No. 3 in Kamloops , creating all the furniture for their temple . Nevertheless , the lodge closed after a year , with Smith 's own British Columbia Lodge No. 1 also becoming defunct in February 1922 . 
 = = = Los Angeles : 1922 – 1935 = = = 
 Unable to find work in Vancouver , Smith headed to Los Angeles in California , United States . On the way he stopped at San Francisco , where he met with Cecil Frederick Russell , a Thelemite who had departed from the <unk> orthodoxy to found his own group , the Choronzon Club . Smith however disliked Russell , and later claimed that he had been unnerved when Russell began expressing a sexual interest in children . After settling in Los Angeles , Smith gained a job at the Southern California Gas Company , entered into a relationship with a woman named Ann Barry , and began attending occasional meetings of the United Lodge of Theosophists , an esoteric organisation centred in the city . Jones meanwhile had united Thelema with auto @-@ suggestion to found his own group , the <unk> Society ( PMS ) , and he appointed Smith to be its Local Recorder for Los Angeles ; out of friendship to Jones , Smith did so , but was uninterested in the PMS ' teachings . Through their correspondences , Crowley came to reject the PMS and relations between himself and Jones once again broke down , this time permanently . Smith retained much affection for Jones , whom he saw as his mentor and friend , but nevertheless agreed with Crowley over the PMS and also rejected Jones ' ongoing fascination with the UB , which Smith considered incompatible with Thelema ; their relationship too came to an end in 1926 . 
 Now based in Los Angeles , Smith applied for US citizenship but was rejected , due to the fact that in his application he had claimed to be married but he was unable to prove with paperwork . Seeking to promote Thelema in the city , he adopted his own student , Oliver Jacobi , whom he mentored in the A ∴ A ∴ system , and in the autumn of 1927 , he developed a close friendship with fellow Thelemite and Hollywood actress Jane Wolfe . Although he continued to have sexual relationships with other women , Smith retained his love for Katherine , who came to visit him in Los Angeles , where they were legally married on 24 August 1927 at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale , the day before she returned to Montreal . She tried to get Smith to abandon occultism and Thelema and return to her in Canada , but he refused , leading her to file for divorce in May 1930 , taking sole custody of their child . Smith continued to have sexual and romantic relationships with other women , and – influenced by Crowley 's bisexuality – also experimented with same @-@ sex sexual relations , but felt no attraction to men . From July to September 1929 , a married woman named <unk> Schneider moved in with Smith , and they had an affair , but she soon returned to her husband , while from July to December 1930 , Smith began undertaking sex magic rituals with Wolfe , although their relationship remained platonic . Smith soon met Regina Kahl and her sister Leona " Lee " Watson , whom he initiated into the O.T.O. in early 1931 , with Regina also joining the A ∴ A ∴ . Smith had sexual relations with both sisters , but while Regina – with whom his activity became sadomasochistic – became romantically attached to him , Lee soon abandoned Thelema . 
 In 1932 , Crowley , now based back in England , fell seriously ill , and believing his death to be immanent , he sent Smith a testament proclaiming that in the event of his death , Smith would become Frater Superior and Outer Head of the Order ( <unk> ) of the O.T.O. ; he soon however recovered . In May of that year , Smith and Kahl began renting the large house at 1746 Winona Boulevard in Hollywood , and began to take in lodgers to help pay for it . Kahl and Wolfe began using the attic for Thelemic rituals , and in March 1933 they performed their first public Gnostic Mass in the room , hoping to attract interested persons to Thelema . Crowley was pleased with their progress , and asked them to raise funds so that he could afford to visit . The weekly performances of the Gnostic Mass began to attract increasingly large crowds , with their " Crowley Nights " attracting around 150 guests , among them the film star John Carradine . In April 1934 , Smith incorporated the Church of Thelema under US law , although retained the North American O.T.O. as an unincorporated secret society . Crowley however was confused , and believed that Smith had incorporated the O.T.O. , something which angered him ; he subsequently complained about Smith in letters to other initiates . After an argument , Crowley and Smith ceased correspondence for a time . Smith also attempted to revive the largely defunct North American O.T.O. , attracting 15 initial initiates , many of whom were dissatisfied members of the Choronzon Club , which was now in decline . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = The Agape Lodge : 1935 – 1944 = = = 
 With the O.T.O. now being revived in North America , Smith founded the Agape Lodge No. 1 , based at his Hollywood home , and brought in 7 initiates to the <unk> level in September 1935 . He advertised the foundation of his group through an advert in American Astrology magazine and printed a pamphlet explaining what the O.T.O. was . The Agape Lodge held regular meetings , lectures , and study classes , as well as social events and a weekly Gnostic Mass open to the public . In February 1936 they held a Mass in honour of Wayne Walker , a proponent of New Thought who ran a group known as The Voice of Healing ; they had hoped to attract Walker and his supporters to Thelema , but they were put off by the Lodge 's sexual openness . Later that year , Smith and Jacobi 's employer , the Southern California Gas Company , discovered their involvement in the Lodge , demoting Smith to bookkeeper and firing Jacobi . Angered , Jacobi left the Lodge altogether , while Smith shut down the group 's private ritual activities for the next three years . As a result , the public attendance of the Gnostic Mass plummeted . 
 Activities picked up again when Kahl , who worked as a drama teacher , brought three of her interested students into the group , among them Phyllis Seckler , and other individuals also joined the group , among them Louis T. Culling and Roy Leffingwell . However , the rising number of members caused schisms and arguments , and the Lodge again ceased its private activities from March 1940 to March 1941 . They returned to their activities to initiate a couple who had become interested in the O.T.O. through attending the Gnostic Mass , rocket scientist Jack Parsons and his wife Helen . Parsons became enamored with Thelema , although initially expressed both " repulsion and attraction " for Smith . Smith wrote to Crowley , claiming that Parsons was " a really excellent man ... He has an excellent mind and much better intellect than myself ... JP is going to be very valuable " . The Parsons would help bring new members into the group ; Grady McMurtry and his fiancee Claire Palmer , and Helen 's sister Sara Northrup . In February 1939 a young college student who had attended the mass , <unk> <unk> , was murdered ; although police drew no connection to the Lodge , sensationalist local tabloids connected the two , although were unaware that the Lodge was involved with Crowley or Thelema . A sympathetic local radio reporter allowed Smith to explain the purpose of the Mass to allay fears of the group , but the interview was never aired in an agreement with local press that they would drop the story . 
 By this point , the Agape Lodge was fully operational once more , although Crowley had remained highly critical of Smith , believing that he was failing to raise sufficient funds for Crowley 's personal use . He appointed Karl Germer , a German Thelemite recently arrived in the US , to be his representative on the continent , and instructed Germer to oversee the payment of dues to himself . He also specified that it would now be Germer , and not Smith , who was his chosen successor . Attempting to placate Crowley , in December 1941 Smith stated that all Lodge members now had to contribute 5 % of their earnings as an " Emergency Fee " that went to Crowley . Crowley 's criticisms nevertheless continued , and Smith suffered a mild heart attack , retiring prematurely from work at the age of 56 before undergoing an operation to remove <unk> in February 1942 . 
 Smith decided to relocate Agape Lodge to a larger premises , renting the large house at 1003 South Orange Grove Avenue in Pasadena from June 1942 for $ 100 a month , moving many of the lodge members in to the house , living as a form of commune and raising livestock and vegetables in the grounds . Parsons had begun a relationship with Sara Northrup , while Smith consoled Helen , who would become his partner for the rest of his life ; nevertheless the four remained friends . Although they had ceased to publicly perform the Gnostic Mass , membership of the lodge continued to grow . A number of prominent members however left , among them Regina Kahl and Phyllis Seckler . Soon , both the FBI and the Pasadena police department began to investigate the O.T.O. and Agape Lodge , particularly as Germer , now leader of the North American O.T.O. , was German ; ultimately , they decided that the group was no threat to national security , describing it as a probable " love cult " . Crowley however had remained highly critical of Smith 's leadership of the lodge , and ordered Wolfe to send him on a personal magical retreat ; she felt conflicted , but eventually conceded to Crowley 's demands . Both Crowley and Germer wanted to see Smith ousted permanently , believing that he had become a bad influence on the other lodge members ; many of the members , including Jack and Helen Parsons , wrote to them to defend their mentor , but Germer nevertheless ordered him to stand down , with Parsons appointed head of the lodge . 
 In April Helen gave birth to Smith 's son , who was named Kwan Lanval Parsons . In May , Smith and Helen left for a two @-@ room cabin in Rainbow Valley with their baby , where Smith undertook his magical retirement . Back in England , Crowley undertook an astrological analysis of Smith 's birth chart , and came to the conclusion that he was the incarnation of a god , greatly altering his estimation of him ; Smith however remained sceptical . Refusing to take orders from Germer any more , Smith resigned from the O.T.O. , while Parsons – who remained sympathetic and friendly to Smith during the conflict – ceased lodge activities and resigned as its head . In a letter informing Crowley of this decision , Smith remarked " Would to God you knew your people better . " Germer subsequently appointed Max Schneider head of the Agape Lodge , which remained inactive , while Crowley , Germer , and Schneider began spreading lies about Smith , including that he was responsible for raping initiates , claims that were denied by many Lodge members . 
 = = = Final years : 1944 – 1957 = = = 
 In September 1944 Smith went on a second magical retirement , during which he performed pranayama and the lesser banishing ritual of the pentagram , invoked Thoth , and recited the Holy Books of Thelema from memory . During the retreat he learned that Kahl , his former lover , had died , which greatly upset him . Returning to his Pasadena home , he was welcomed by Parsons , but Crowley insisted that Smith be shunned by the lodge members , and so he moved back to Hollywood . Increasingly alienated by Crowley 's attitude , Parsons resigned from the O.T.O. in August 1946 . Now renting a house , Smith sought out various handyman jobs , when he learned that Crowley had died and been succeeded as <unk> of the O.T.O. by Germer . He became good friends with the art dealer Baron Ernst von <unk> , who commissioned Smith to construct Asian @-@ style furniture for his gallery . Smith 's own health was deteriorating , and in 1948 he suffered from a number of mild heart attacks . He nevertheless continued to believe in Thelema , and hoped to revive the Church of Thelema through performing the Gnostic Mass once more . Following Parsons ' death in an explosion – which Smith suspected was a case of suicide – Smith was invited to perform the Gnostic Mass in his memory . 
 Although they had long disliked each other , Germer recognised that Smith was the only living individual with a good practical knowledge of the O.T.O. degree system , and so put him in contact with Kenneth Grant , who was then trying to revive the O.T.O. in London . Smith and Germer would only meet in person for the first time in June 1956 , when the latter was visiting California , and soon after Germer introduced him to young Brazilian Thelemite Marcelo Ramos Motta , who would later grow to despise Smith . Smith purchased a plot of land in Malibu where he built his own house for himself , Helen , and their son , which he named " Hoc Id Est " ( " This Is It " ) . Construction was interrupted in February 1955 when he underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate . This developed into prostate cancer , and mistrusting of conventional medicine , he sought out an alternative treatment at the <unk> Clinic in Dallas , Texas , which he visited in December 1956 , but they were unable to help him . Smith died as a result of the disease at home on 27 April 1957 , subsequently being cremated at the Grandview Memorial Park in Glendale . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The Unknown God was reviewed by Robert Ellwood of the University of Southern California for the peer @-@ reviewed journal Nova Religio : The Journal of Alternative and Emergent Religions . Ellwood described it as " the definitive work on American <unk> " , noting that it was the product of 15 years of " careful and documented " research . He praised " Starr 's lucid style and the inherent fascination of the material , replete with vivid characters , epic rows , and sexual intrigue " . 
 = Red Skelton = 
 Richard Bernard " Red " Skelton ( July 18 , 1913 – September 17 , 1997 ) was an American entertainer . He was best known for his national radio and television acts between 1937 and 1971 , and as host of the television program The Red Skelton Show . Skelton , who has stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in radio and television , also appeared in vaudeville , films , nightclubs , and casinos , all while he pursued an entirely separate career as an artist . 
 Skelton began developing his comedic and pantomime skills from the age of 10 , when he became part of a traveling medicine show . He then spent time on a showboat , worked the burlesque circuit , then entered into vaudeville in 1934 . The Doughnut Dunkers , a pantomime sketch of how different people ate doughnuts written by Skelton and his wife launched a career for him in vaudeville , in radio and in films . Skelton 's radio career began in 1937 with a guest appearance on The Fleischmann 's Yeast Hour which led to his becoming the host of Avalon Time in 1938 . He became the host of The Raleigh Cigarette Program in 1941 where many of his comedy characters were created and had a regularly scheduled radio program until 1957 . Skelton made his film debut in 1938 alongside Ginger Rogers and Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. in Alfred Santell 's Having Wonderful Time , and he went on to appear in numerous musical and comedy films throughout the 1940s and early 1950s , with starring roles in Ship Ahoy ( 1941 ) , I Dood It ( 1943 ) , Ziegfeld Follies ( 1946 ) and The Clown ( 1953 ) . 
 He was most eager to work in television , even when the medium was in its infancy . The Red Skelton Show made its television premiere on September 30 , 1951 , on NBC . By 1954 , Skelton 's program moved to CBS , where it was expanded to one hour and renamed The Red Skelton Hour in 1962 . Despite high ratings , his television show was cancelled by CBS in 1970 as the network believed more youth @-@ oriented programs were needed to attract younger viewers and their spending power . Skelton moved his program to NBC , where he completed his last year with a regularly scheduled television show in 1971 . After he no longer had a television program , Skelton 's time was spent making up to 125 personal appearances a year and on his artwork . 
 Skelton 's artwork of clowns remained a hobby until 1964 when his wife , Georgia , convinced him to have a showing of his work at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas while he was performing there . Sales of his originals were successful and Skelton also sold prints and lithographs of them , earning $ 2 @.@ 5 million yearly on lithograph sales . At the time of his death , his art dealer believed that Skelton had earned more money through his paintings than from his television work . 
 Skelton believed his life 's work was to make people laugh ; he wanted to be known as a clown because he defined it as being able to do everything . He had a 70 @-@ year career as a performer and entertained three generations of Americans during this time . Many of Skelton 's personal and professional effects , including prints of his artwork , were donated to Vincennes University by his widow , where they are part of the Red Skelton Museum of American Comedy . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years , the medicine show and the circus ( 1913 – 29 ) = = = 
 Born on July 18 , 1913 , in Vincennes , Indiana , Richard Skelton was the fourth and youngest son of Ida Mae ( née Fields ) and Joseph Elmer Skelton . Joseph , a grocer , died two months before Richard was born ; he had once been a clown with the Hagenbeck @-@ Wallace Circus . During Skelton 's lifetime there was some dispute about the year of his birth . Author Wesley Hyatt suggests that since he began working at such an early age , Skelton may have claimed he was older than he actually was in order to gain employment . Vincennes neighbors described the Skelton family as being extremely poor ; a childhood friend remembered that her parents broke up a youthful romance between her sister and Skelton because they thought he had no future . 
 Because of the loss of his father , Skelton went to work as early as the age of seven , selling newspapers and doing other odd jobs to help his family , who had lost the family store and their home . He quickly learned the newsboy 's patter and would keep it up until a prospective buyer bought a copy of the paper just to quiet him . According to later accounts , Skelton 's early interest in becoming an entertainer stemmed from an incident that took place in Vincennes around 1923 , when a stranger , supposedly the comedian Ed Wynn , approached Skelton , who was the newsboy selling papers outside a Vincennes theater . When the man asked Skelton what events were going on in town , Skelton suggested he see the new show in town . The man purchased every paper Skelton had , providing enough money for the boy to purchase a ticket for himself . The stranger turned out to be one of the show 's stars , who later took the boy backstage to introduce him to the other performers . The experience prompted Skelton , who had already shown comedic tendencies , to pursue a career as a performer . 
 Skelton discovered at an early age that he could make people laugh . Skelton dropped out of school around 1926 or 1927 , when he was 13 or 14 years old , but he already had some experience performing in minstrel shows in Vincennes , and on a showboat , " The Cotton Blossom " , that plied the Ohio and Missouri rivers . He enjoyed his work on the riverboat , moving on only after he realized that showboat entertainment was coming to an end . Skelton , who was interested in all forms of acting , took a dramatic role with the John Lawrence stock theater company , but was unable to deliver his lines in a serious manner ; the audience laughed instead . In another incident , while performing in Uncle Tom 's Cabin , Skelton was on an unseen treadmill ; when it malfunctioned and began working in reverse , the frightened young actor called out , " Help ! I 'm backing into heaven ! " He was fired before completing a week 's work in the role . At the age of 15 , Skelton did some early work on the burlesque circuit , and reportedly spent four months with the <unk> @-@ Wallace Circus in 1929 , when he was 16 years old . 
 Ida Skelton , who held multiple jobs to support her family after the death of her husband , did not suggest that her youngest son had run away from home to become an entertainer , but " his destiny had caught up with him at an early age " . She let him go with her blessing . Times were tough during the Great Depression , and it may have meant one less child for her to feed . Around 1929 , while Skelton was still a teen , he joined " Doc " R.E. Lewis 's traveling medicine show as an errand boy who sold bottles of medicine to the audience . During one show , when Skelton accidentally fell from the stage , breaking several bottles of medicine as he fell , people laughed . Both Lewis and Skelton realized one could earn a living with this ability and the fall was worked into the show . He also told jokes and sang in the medicine show during his four years there . Skelton earned ten dollars a week , and sent all of it home to his mother . When she worried that he was keeping nothing for his own needs , Skelton reassured her : " We get plenty to eat , and we sleep in the wagon . " 
 = = = Burlesque to vaudeville ( 1929 – 37 ) = = = 
 As burlesque comedy material became progressively more ribald , Skelton moved on . He insisted that he was no prude ; " I just didn 't think the lines were funny " . He became a sought @-@ after master of ceremonies for dance marathons ( known as " <unk> " at the time ) , a popular fad in the 1930s . The winner of one of the marathons was Edna Stillwell , an usher at the old Pantages Theater . She approached Skelton after winning the contest and told him that she did not like his jokes ; he asked if she could do better . They married in 1931 in Kansas City , and Edna began writing his material . At the time of their marriage Skelton was one month away from his 18th birthday ; Edna was 16 . When they learned that Skelton 's salary was to be cut , Edna went to see the boss ; he resented the interference , until she came away with not only a raise , but additional considerations as well . Since he had left school at an early age , his wife bought textbooks and taught him what he had missed . With Edna 's help , Skelton received a high school equivalency degree . 
 The couple put together an act and began booking it at small midwestern theaters . When an offer came for an engagement in Harwich Port , Massachusetts , some 2 @,@ 000 miles from Kansas City , they were pleased to get it because of its proximity to their ultimate goal , the vaudeville houses of New York City . To get to Massachusetts they bought a used car and borrowed five dollars from Edna 's mother , but by the time they arrived in St. Louis they had only fifty cents . Skelton asked Edna to collect empty cigarette packs ; she thought he was joking , but did as he asked . He then spent their fifty cents on bars of soap , which they cut into small cubes and wrapped with the tinfoil from the cigarette packs . By selling their products for fifty cents each as fog remover for eyeglasses , the Skeltons were able to afford a hotel room every night as they worked their way to Harwich Port . 
 = = = = " Doughnut Dunkers " = = = = 
 Skelton and Edna worked for a year in Camden , New Jersey , and were able to get an engagement at Montreal 's Lido Club in 1934 through a friend who managed the chorus lines at New York 's Roxy Theatre . Despite an initial rocky start , the act was a success , and brought them more theater dates throughout Canada . 
 Skelton 's performances in Canada lead to new opportunities and the inspiration for a new , innovative routine that brought him recognition in the years to come . While performing in Montreal , the Skeltons met Harry Anger , a vaudeville producer for New York City 's Loew 's State Theatre . Anger promised the pair a booking as a headlining act at Loew 's , but they would need to come up with new material for the engagement . While the Skeltons were having breakfast in a Montreal diner , Edna had an idea for a new routine as she and Skelton observed the other patrons eating doughnuts and drinking coffee . They devised the " Doughnut Dunkers " routine , with Skelton 's visual impressions of how different people ate doughnuts . The skit won them the Loew 's State engagement and a handsome fee . 
 The couple viewed the Loew 's State engagement in 1937 as Skelton 's big chance . They hired New York comedy writers to prepare material for the engagement , believing they needed more sophisticated jokes and skits than the routines Skelton normally performed . However , his New York audience did not laugh or applaud until Skelton abandoned the newly written material and began performing the " Doughnut Dunkers " and his older routines . The doughnut @-@ dunking routine also helped Skelton rise to celebrity status . In 1937 , while he was entertaining at the Capitol Theater in Washington , D.C. , President Franklin D. Roosevelt invited Skelton to perform at a White House luncheon . During one of the official toasts , Skelton grabbed Roosevelt 's glass , saying , " Careful what you drink , Mr. President . I got rolled in a place like this once . " His humor appealed to FDR and Skelton became the master of ceremonies for Roosevelt 's official birthday celebration for many years afterward . 
 = = = Film work = = = 
 Skelton 's first contact with Hollywood came in the form of a failed 1932 screen test . In 1938 he made his film debut for RKO Pictures in the supporting role of a camp counselor in Having Wonderful Time . He appeared in two short subjects for Vitaphone in 1939 : Seeing Red and The Broadway Buckaroo . Actor Mickey Rooney contacted Skelton , urging him to try for work in films after seeing him perform his " Doughnut Dunkers " act at President Roosevelt 's 1940 birthday party . For his MGM screen test , Skelton performed many of his more popular skits , such as " Guzzler 's Gin " , but added some impromptu pantomimes as the cameras were rolling . " Imitation of Movie Heroes Dying " were Skelton 's impressions of the cinema deaths of stars like George Raft , Edward G. Robinson and James Cagney . 
 Skelton began appearing in numerous films for MGM . In 1940 he provided comic relief as a lieutenant in Frank Borzage 's war drama Flight Command , opposite Robert Taylor , Ruth Hussey and Walter Pidgeon . In 1941 he also provided comic relief in Harold S. <unk> 's Dr. Kildare medical dramas , Dr. Kildare 's Wedding Day and The People vs. Dr. Kildare . Skelton was soon starring in comedy features as inept radio detective " The Fox " , the first of which was Whistling in the Dark ( 1941 ) in which he began working with director S. Sylvan Simon , who would become his favorite director . He reprised the same role opposite Ann Rutherford in Simon 's other pictures , including Whistling in Dixie ( 1942 ) and Whistling in Brooklyn ( 1943 ) . In 1941 , Skelton began appearing in musical comedies , starring opposite Eleanor Powell , Ann Sothern and Robert Young in Norman Z. McLeod 's Lady Be Good . In 1942 Skelton again starred opposite Eleanor Powell in Edward Buzzell 's Ship Ahoy , and alongside Ann Sothern in McLeod 's Panama Hattie . 
 In 1943 , after a memorable role as a nightclub <unk> attendant who becomes King Louis XV of France in a dream opposite Lucille Ball and Gene Kelly in Roy Del Ruth 's Du Barry Was a Lady , Skelton starred as Joseph Rivington Reynolds , a hotel valet besotted with Broadway starlet Constance Shaw ( Powell ) in Vincente Minnelli 's romantic musical comedy , I Dood It . The film was largely a remake of Buster Keaton 's Spite Marriage ; Keaton , who had become a comedy consultant to MGM after his film career had diminished , began coaching Skelton on set during the filming . Keaton worked in this capacity on several of Skelton 's films , and his 1926 film The General was also later rewritten to become Skelton 's A Southern Yankee ( 1948 ) , under directors S. Silvan Simon and Edward Sedgwick . Keaton was convinced enough of Skelton 's comedic talent that he approached MGM studio head Louis B. Mayer with a request to create a small company within MGM for himself and Skelton , where the two could work on film projects . Keaton offered to forgo his salary if the films made by the company were not box office hits ; Mayer chose to decline the request . In 1944 , Skelton starred opposite Esther Williams in George Sidney 's musical comedy Bathing Beauty , playing a songwriter with romantic difficulties . He next had a relatively minor role as a " TV announcer who , in the course of demonstrating a brand of gin , progresses from mild inebriation through messy drunkenness to full @-@ blown stupor " in the " When Television Comes " segment of Ziegfeld Follies , which featured William Powell and Judy Garland in the main roles . In 1946 , Skelton played boastful clerk J. Aubrey Piper opposite Marilyn Maxwell and Marjorie Main in Harry Beaumont 's comedy picture The Show @-@ Off . 
 Skelton 's contract called for MGM 's approval prior to his radio shows and other appearances . When he renegotiated his long @-@ term contract with MGM , he wanted a clause that permitted him to remain working in radio and to be able to work on television , which was then largely experimental . At the time , the major work in the medium was centered in New York ; Skelton had worked there for some time and was able to determine that he would find success with his physical comedy through the medium . By 1947 , Skelton 's work interests were focused not on films , but on radio and television . His MGM contract was rigid enough to require the studio 's written consent for his weekly radio shows , as well as any benefit or similar appearances he made ; radio offered less restrictions , more creative control and a higher salary . Skelton asked for a release from MGM after learning he could not raise the $ 750 @,@ 000 needed to buy out the remainder of his contract . He also voiced frustration with the film scripts he was offered while on the set of The Fuller Brush Man , saying , " Movies are not my field . Radio and television are . " He did not receive the desired television clause nor a release from his MGM contract . In 1948 , columnist Sheilah Graham printed that Skelton 's wishes were to make only one film a year , spending the rest of the time traveling the U.S. with his radio show . 
 Skelton 's ability to successfully ad @-@ lib often meant that the way the script was written was not always the way it was recorded on film . Some directors were delighted with the creativity , but others were often frustrated by it . S. Sylvan Simon , who became a close friend , allowed Skelton free rein when directing him . MGM became annoyed with Simon during the filming of The Fuller Brush Man , as the studio contended that Skelton should have been playing romantic leads instead of performing slapstick . Simon and MGM parted company when he was not asked to direct retakes of Skelton 's A Southern Yankee ; Simon asked that his name be removed from the film 's credits . 
 Skelton was willing to negotiate with MGM to extend the agreement provided he would receive the right to pursue television . This time the studio was willing to grant it , making Skelton the only major MGM personality with the privilege . The 1950 negotiations allowed him to begin working in television beginning September 30 , 1951 . During the last portion of his contract with the studio , Skelton was working in radio and on television in addition to films . He would go on to appear in films such as Jack Donohue 's The Yellow Cab Man ( 1950 ) , Roy Rowland and Buster Keaton 's Excuse My Dust ( 1951 ) , Charles Walters ' Texas Carnival ( 1951 ) , Mervyn LeRoy 's Lovely to Look At ( 1952 ) , Robert Z. Leonard 's The Clown ( 1953 ) and The Great Diamond Robbery ( 1954 ) , and Norman Z. McLeod 's poorly received Public Pigeon No. 1 ( 1957 ) , his last major film role , which originated incidentally from an episode of the television anthology series Climax ! . In a 1956 interview , he said he would never work simultaneously in all three media again . As a result , Skelton would make only a couple of minor appearances in films after this , including playing a saloon drunk in Around the World in Eighty Days ( 1956 ) , a gambler in Ocean 's 11 ( 1960 ) , and a Neanderthal man in Those Magnificent Men in Their Flying Machines ( 1965 ) . 
 = = = Radio , divorce and remarriage ( 1937 – 51 ) = = = 
 Performing the " Doughnut Dunkers " routine led to Skelton 's first appearance on Rudy Vallée 's The Fleischmann 's Yeast Hour on August 12 , 1937 . Vallée 's program had a talent show segment and those who were searching for stardom were eager to be heard on it . Vallée also booked veteran comic and fellow Indiana native Joe Cook to appear as a guest with Skelton . The two Hoosiers proceeded to trade jokes about their home towns , with Skelton contending to Cook , an Evansville native , that the city was a suburb of Vincennes . The show received enough fan mail after the performance to invite both comedians back two weeks after Skelton 's initial appearance and again in November of that year . 
 On October 1 , 1938 , Skelton replaced Red Foley as the host of Avalon Time on NBC ; Edna also joined the show 's cast , under her maiden name . She developed a system for working with the show 's writers : selecting material from them , adding her own and filing the unused bits and lines for future use ; the Skeltons worked on Avalon Time until late 1939 . Skelton 's work in films led to a new regular radio show offer ; between films , he promoted himself and MGM by appearing without charge at Los Angeles area banquets . A radio advertising agent was a guest at one of his banquet performances and recommended Skelton to one of his clients . 
 Skelton went on the air with his own radio show , The Raleigh Cigarette Program , on October 7 , 1941 . The bandleader for the show was Ozzie Nelson ; his wife , Harriet , who worked under her maiden name of Hilliard , was the show 's vocalist and also worked with Skelton in skits . 
 = = = = " I dood it ! " = = = = 
 Skelton introduced the first two of his many characters during The Raleigh Cigarette Program 's first season . The character of Clem <unk> was based on a Vincennes neighbor named Carl Hopper , who was hard of hearing . Skelton 's voice pattern for Clem was similar to the later cartoon character , Bullwinkle ; there was enough similarity to cause Skelton to contemplate filing a lawsuit against Bill Scott , who voiced the cartoon moose . The second character , The Mean <unk> Kid , or " Junior " , was a young boy full of mischief , who typically did things he was told not to do . " Junior " would say things like , " If I dood it , I gets a whipping . " , followed moments later by the statement , " I dood it ! " Skelton performed the character at home with Edna , giving him the nickname " Junior " long before it was heard by a radio audience . While the phrase was Skelton 's , the idea of using the character on the radio show was Edna 's . Skelton starred in a 1943 movie of the same name , but did not play " Junior " in the film . 
 The phrase was such a part of national culture at the time that , when General Doolittle conducted the bombing of Tokyo in 1942 , many newspapers used the phrase " Doolittle Dood It " as a headline . After a talk with President Roosevelt in 1943 , Skelton used his radio show to collect funds for a Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc to be given to the Soviet Army to help fight World War II . Asking children to send in their spare change , he raised enough money for the aircraft in two weeks ; he named the bomber " We Dood It ! " In 1986 the Soviet newspaper Pravda offered praise to Skelton for his 1943 gift , and in 1993 , the pilot of the plane was able to meet Skelton and thank him for the bomber . 
 Skelton also added a routine he had been performing since 1928 . Originally called " Mellow Cigars " , the skit entailed an announcer who became ill as he smoked his sponsor 's product . Brown and Williamson , the makers of cigarettes , asked Skelton to change some aspects of the skit ; he renamed the routine " Guzzler 's Gin " , where the announcer became inebriated while sampling and touting the imaginary sponsor 's wares . While the traditional radio program called for its cast to do an audience warm @-@ up in preparation for the broadcast , Skelton did just the opposite . After the regular radio program had ended , the show 's guests were treated to a post @-@ program performance . He would then perform his " Guzzler 's Gin " or any of more than 350 routines for those who had come to the radio show . He updated and revised his post @-@ show routines as diligently as those for his radio program . As a result , studio audience tickets for Skelton 's radio show were in high demand ; there were times where up to 300 people needed to be turned away for lack of seats . 
 = = = = Divorce from Edna , marriage to Georgia = = = = 
 In 1942 , Edna announced that she was leaving Skelton but would continue to manage his career and write material for him . He did not realize she was serious until Edna issued a statement about the impending divorce through NBC . They were divorced in 1943 , leaving the courtroom arm in arm . The couple did not discuss the reasons for their divorce and Edna initially prepared to work as a script writer for other radio programs . When the divorce was finalized , she went to New York , leaving her former husband three fully prepared show scripts . Skelton and those associated with him sent telegrams and called her , asking her to come back to him in a professional capacity . Edna remained the manager of the couple 's funds because Skelton spent money too easily . An attempt at managing his own checking account that began with a $ 5 @,@ 000 balance , ended five days later after a call to Edna saying the account was overdrawn . Skelton had a weekly allowance of $ 75 , with Edna making investments for him , choosing real estate and other relatively stable assets . She remained an advisor on his career until 1952 , receiving a generous weekly salary for life for her efforts . 
 The divorce meant that Skelton had lost his married man 's deferment ; he was once again classified as 1 @-@ A for service . He was drafted into the army in early 1944 ; both MGM and his radio sponsor tried to obtain a deferment for the comedian , but to no avail . His last Raleigh radio show was on June 6 , 1944 , the day before he was formally inducted as a private ; he was not assigned to the entertainment corps at that time . Without its star , the program was discontinued , and the opportunity presented itself for the Nelsons to begin a radio show of their own , The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet . 
 By 1944 , Skelton was engaged to actress Muriel Morris , who was also known as Muriel Chase ; the couple had obtained a marriage license and told the press they intended to marry within a few days . At the last minute , the actress decided not to marry him , initially saying she intended to marry a wealthy businessman in Mexico City . She later recanted the story about marrying the businessman , but continued to say that her relationship with Skelton was over . The actress further denied that the reason for the breakup was Edna 's continuing to manage her ex @-@ husband 's career ; Edna stated that she had no intention of either getting in the middle of the relationship or reconciling with her former husband . He was on army furlough for throat discomfort when he married actress Georgia Maureen Davis in Beverly Hills , California , on March 9 , 1945 ; the couple met on the MGM lot . Skelton traveled to Los Angeles from the eastern army base where he was assigned for the wedding . He knew he would possibly be assigned overseas soon and wanted the marriage to take place first . After the wedding , he entered the hospital to have his tonsils removed . The couple had two children ; Valentina , a daughter , was born May 5 , 1947 , and a son , Richard , was born May 20 , 1948 . 
 = = = = A cast of characters = = = = 
 Skelton served in the United States Army during World War II . After being assigned to the entertainment corps , Skelton performed as many as ten to twelve shows per day before troops in both the United States and in Europe . The pressure of his workload caused him to suffer exhaustion and a nervous breakdown . His nervous collapse while in the army left him with a serious stuttering problem . While recovering at an army hospital in Virginia , he met a soldier who had been severely wounded and was not expected to survive . Skelton devoted a lot of time and effort to trying to make the man laugh . As a result of this effort , his stuttering problem was cured ; his army friend 's condition also improved and he was no longer on the critical list . He was released from his army duties in September 1945 . His sponsor was eager to have him back on the air , and Skelton 's program began anew on NBC on December 4 , 1945 . 
 Upon returning to radio , Skelton brought with him many new characters that were added to his repertoire : Bolivar <unk> , described as a " <unk> braggart " ; Cauliflower <unk> , a boxer ; Deadeye , a cowboy ; Willie Lump @-@ Lump , a fellow who drank too much ; and San Fernando Red , a conman with political aspirations . By 1947 , Skelton 's musical conductor was David Rose , who would go on to television with him ; he had worked with Rose during his time in the army and wanted Rose to join him on the radio show when it went back on the air . 
 On April 22 , 1947 , Skelton was censored by NBC two minutes into his radio show . When he and his announcer Rod O 'Connor began talking about Fred Allen being censored the previous week , they were silenced for 15 seconds ; comedian Bob Hope was given the same treatment once he began referring to the censoring of Allen . Skelton forged on with his lines for his studio audience 's benefit ; the material he insisted on using had been edited from the script by the network before the broadcast . He had been briefly censored the previous month for the use of the word " diaper " . After the April incidents , NBC indicated it would no longer pull the plug for similar reasons . 
 Skelton changed sponsors in 1948 ; Brown & Williamson , owners of Raleigh cigarettes , withdrew due to program production costs . His new sponsor was Procter & Gamble 's Tide laundry detergent . The next year he changed networks , going from NBC to CBS , where his radio show aired until May 1953 . After his network radio contract was over , he signed a three @-@ year contract with Ziv Radio for a syndicated radio program in 1954 . His syndicated radio program was offered as a daily show ; it included segments of his older network radio programs as well as new material done for the syndication . He was able to use portions of his older radio shows because he owned the rights for rebroadcasting them . 
 = = = Television ( 1951 – 70 ) = = = 
 Skelton was unable to work in television until the end of his 1951 MGM movie contract ; a renegotiation to extend the pact provided permission after that point . He signed a contract for television on NBC with Procter and Gamble as his sponsor on May 4 , 1951 , and said he would be performing the same characters on television as he had been doing on radio . The MGM agreement with Skelton for television performances did not allow him to go on the air before September 30 , 1951 . His television debut , The Red Skelton Show , premiered on that date : at the end of his opening monologue , two men backstage grabbed his ankles from behind the set curtain , hauling him offstage face down . A 1943 instrumental hit by David Rose , called " Holiday for Strings " , became Skelton 's TV theme song . The move to television allowed him to create two non @-@ human characters , seagulls Gertrude and <unk> , which he performed while the pair were flying by tucking his thumbs under his arms to represent wings and shaping his hat to look like a bird 's bill . He patterned his meek , henpecked television character of George Appleby after his radio character , J. Newton <unk> , who had similar characteristics . His " Freddie the Freeloader " clown was introduced on the program in 1952 , with Skelton copying his father 's makeup for the character . He learned how to duplicate his father 's makeup and perform his routines through his mother 's recollections . A ritual became established at the end of every program , with Skelton 's shy boyish wave and words of , " Good night and may God bless . " 
 During the 1951 – 52 season , the program was broadcast from a converted NBC radio studio . The first year of the television show was done live ; this led to problems as there was not enough time for costume changes ; Skelton was on camera for most of the half @-@ hour , including the delivery of a commercial which was written into one of the show 's skits . In early 1952 , Skelton had an idea for a television sketch about someone who had been drinking not being able to know which way is up . The script was completed and he had the show 's production crew build a set that was perpendicular to the stage , so it would give the illusion that someone was walking on walls . The skit , starring his character Willie Lump @-@ Lump , called for the character 's wife to hire a carpenter to re @-@ do the living room in an effort to teach her husband a lesson about his drinking . When Willie wakes up there after a night of drinking , he realizes he is not lying on the floor but on the living room wall . Willie 's wife goes about the house normally , but to Willie , she appears to be walking on a wall . Within an hour after the broadcast , the NBC switchboard had received 350 calls regarding the show , and Skelton had received more than 2 @,@ 500 letters about the skit within a week of its airing . 
 Skelton was delivering an intense performance live each week , and the strain showed in physical illness . In 1952 , he was drinking heavily from the constant pain of a diaphragmatic hernia and marital problems ; he thought about divorcing Georgia . NBC agreed to film his shows in the 1952 – 53 season at Eagle Lion Studios , next to the Sam Goldwyn Studio , on Santa Monica Boulevard in Hollywood . Later the show was moved to the new NBC television studios in Burbank . Procter & Gamble was unhappy with the filming of the television show , and insisted that Skelton return to live broadcasts . The situation caused him to think about leaving television at that point . Declining ratings prompted sponsor Procter & Gamble to cancel his show in the spring of 1953 , with Skelton announcing that any future television shows of his would be variety shows , where he would not have the almost constant burden of performing . Beginning with the 1953 – 54 season , he switched to CBS , where he remained until 1970 . For the initial move to CBS , he had no sponsor . The network gambled by covering all expenses for the program on a sustaining basis ; his first CBS sponsor was <unk> . He curtailed his drinking and his ratings at CBS began to improve , especially after he began appearing on Tuesday nights for co @-@ sponsors Johnson 's Wax and Pet Milk Company . 
 By 1955 , Skelton was broadcasting some of his weekly programs in color , which was the case approximately 100 times between 1955 and 1960 . He tried to encourage CBS to do other shows in color at the facility , but CBS mostly avoided color broadcasting after the network 's television set manufacturing division was discontinued in 1951 . By 1959 , Skelton was the only comedian with a weekly variety television show ; others who remained on the air , such as Danny Thomas , were performing their routines as part of situation comedy programs . He performed a preview show for a studio audience on Mondays , using their reactions to determine which skits needed to be edited for the Tuesday program . For the Tuesday afternoon run @-@ through prior to the actual show , he ignored the script for the most part , ad @-@ libbing through it at will . The run @-@ through was well attended by CBS Television City employees Sometimes during sketches , both live telecasts and taped programs , Skelton would break up or cause his guest stars to laugh . 
 = = = = Richard 's illness and death = = = = 
 At the height of Skelton 's popularity , his nine @-@ year @-@ old son Richard was diagnosed with leukemia and was given a year to live . While the network told him to take as much time off as necessary , Skelton felt that until he went back to his television show , he would be unable to be at ease and make his son 's life a happy one . He returned to his television show on January 15 , 1957 , with guest star Mickey Rooney helping to lift his spirits . In happier times , he frequently mentioned his children on his program , but found it extremely difficult to do so after Richard became ill . Skelton resumed this practice only after his son had asked him to do so . After his son 's diagnosis , Skelton took his family on an extended trip , so Richard could see as much of the world as possible . When they arrived in London , there were press accusations that the trip was more about publicity than his seriously ill son . There were also newspaper reports about Richard 's illness being fatal , which were seen by the boy . The family returned to the United States after the British press stories . 
 The Skelton family received support from CBS management and from the public following the announcement of Richard 's illness . Skelton himself was beset by a serious illness and by a household accident which kept him off the air . He suffered a life @-@ threatening asthma attack on December 30 , 1957 , and was taken to St. John 's Hospital in Santa Monica , where his doctors said that " if there were ten steps to death , Red Skelton had taken nine of them by the time he had arrived " . Initially hospitalized for an indeterminate length of time , Skelton later said he was working on some notes for television and the next thing he remembered , he was in a hospital bed ; he did not know how serious his illness was until he read about it himself in the newspapers . His illness and recovery kept him off the air for a full month ; Skelton returned to his television show on January 28 , 1958 . 
 Richard died on May 10 , 1958 ; it was ten days before the child 's tenth birthday . Skelton was scheduled to do his weekly television show on the day his son was buried . Though there were recordings of some older programs available which the network could have run , he asked that guest performers be used instead . Calling themselves The Friends of Red Skelton , his friends in the television , film and music industries organized The Friends Of Red Skelton Variety Show , which they performed to replace The Red Skelton Show for that week ; by May 27 , 1958 , Skelton had returned to his program . The death of Richard profoundly affected the family ; by 1961 Richard 's model trains had been moved to a storeroom in the Bel Air mansion , but Skelton refused to have them dismantled . In 1962 , the Skelton family moved to Palm Springs , and Skelton used the Bel Air home only on the two days a week when he was in Los Angeles for his television show taping . 
 = = = = The Red Skelton Hour = = = = 
 In early 1960 , Skelton purchased the old Charlie Chaplin Studios and updated it for videotape recording . With a recently purchased three @-@ truck mobile color television unit , he recorded a number of his series episodes and specials in color . Even with his color facilities , CBS discontinued color broadcasts on a regular basis and Skelton shortly thereafter sold the studio to CBS and the mobile unit to local station , KTLA . Prior to this , he had been filming at Desilu Productions . Skelton then moved back to the network 's Television City facilities , where he resumed taping his programs until he left the network . In the fall of 1962 , CBS expanded his program to a full hour , retitling it The Red Skelton Hour . While a staple of his radio programs , he did not perform his " Junior " character on television until 1962 , after extending the length of his program . 
 Skelton frequently employed the art of pantomime for his characters : a segment of his weekly program was called the " Silent Spot " and the sketch was performed in pantomime . He attributed his use of pantomime and few props to his early days when he did not want to have a lot of luggage , so he crafted routines that used few of them . He explained that the right hat was the key to his being able to get into character . 
 Skelton 's season premiere for the 1960 – 61 television season was a tribute to the United Nations . Six hundred people from the organization , including diplomats , were invited to be part of the audience for the show . The program was entirely done in pantomime , as UN representatives from 39 nations were in the studio audience . One of the sketches he performed for the UN was that of the old man watching the parade . The sketch had its origins in a question Skelton 's son , Richard , asked his father about what happens when people die . He told his son , " They join a parade and start marching . " In 1965 , Skelton did another show in complete pantomime . This time he was joined by Marcel Marceau ; the two artists alternated performances for the hour @-@ long program , sharing the stage to perform Pinocchio . The only person who spoke during the hour was Maurice Chevalier , who served as the show 's narrator . 
 In 1969 , Skelton performed a self @-@ written monologue about the Pledge of Allegiance . In the speech , he commented on the meaning of each phrase of the pledge . He credited one of his Vincennes grammar school teachers , Mr. Laswell , with the original speech . The teacher had grown tired of hearing his students monotonously recite the pledge each morning ; he then demonstrated to them how it should be recited , along with comments about the meaning behind each phrase . CBS received 200 @,@ 000 requests for copies ; the company subsequently released the monologue as a single on Columbia Records . A year later , he performed the monologue for President Richard Nixon at the first " Evening at the White House " , a series of entertainment events honoring the recently inaugurated president . 
 = = = Off the air and bitterness ( 1970 – 83 ) = = = 
 As the 1970s began , the networks began a major campaign to discontinue long @-@ running shows that they considered stale or lacking youth appeal . Despite Skelton 's continued strong ratings , CBS saw his show as fitting into this category and cancelled the program along with other comedy and variety shows hosted by veterans such as Jackie Gleason and Ed Sullivan . Performing in Las Vegas when he got the news of his CBS cancellation , Skelton said , " My heart has been broken . " His program had been one of the top ten highest rated shows for 17 of the 20 years he was on television . Skelton moved to NBC in 1970 in a half @-@ hour Monday night version of his former show . Its cancellation after one season ended his television career , and he returned to live performances . In an effort to prove the networks wrong , he gave many of these at colleges and proved popular with the audience . Skelton was bitter about CBS 's cancellation for many years afterwards . Believing the demographic and salary issues to be irrelevant , he accused CBS of bowing to the anti @-@ establishment , anti @-@ war faction at the height of the Vietnam War , saying his conservative political and social views caused the network to turn against him . He had invited prominent Republicans , including Vice President Spiro Agnew and Senate Republican Leader Everett Dirksen , to appear on his program . 
 There were personal as well as professional changes taking place in Skelton 's life at this time . He divorced Georgia in 1971 and married Lothian Toland , daughter of cinematographer Gregg Toland , on October 7 , 1973 . While he disassociated himself from television soon after his show was cancelled , his bitterness had subsided enough for him to appear on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson on July 11 , 1975 ; it was his first television appearance since he no longer had a television program . Johnny Carson , one of his former writers , began his rise to network television prominence by substituting for Skelton after his dress rehearsal injury in 1954 . Skelton was also a guest on The Merv Griffin Show in October of the same year . Any hopes he may have had to ease back into television through the talk show circuit came to an abrupt halt on May 10 , 1976 , when Georgia Skelton committed suicide by gunshot on the 18th anniversary of Richard Skelton 's death . Georgia was 54 and had been in poor health for some time . He put all professional activities on hold for some months as he mourned his former wife 's death . 
 Skelton made plans in 1977 to sell the rights to his old television programs as part of a package which would bring him back to regular television appearances . The package called for him to produce one new television show for every three older episodes ; this appears to not have materialized . In 1980 , he was taken to court by 13 of his former writers over a story that his will called for the destruction of recordings of all his old television shows upon his death . Skelton contended his remarks were made at a time when he was very unhappy with the television industry and were taken out of context . He said at the time , " Would you burn the only monument you 've built in over 20 years ? " As the owner of the television shows , Skelton initially refused to allow them to be syndicated as reruns during his lifetime . In 1983 , Group W announced that it had come to terms with him for the rights to rebroadcast some of his original television programs from 1966 through 1970 ; some of his earlier shows were made available after Skelton 's death . 
 = = = Skelton onstage = = = 
 Skelton 's 70 @-@ year career as an entertainer began as a stage performer . He retained a fondness for theaters , and referred to them as " palaces " ; he also likened them to his " living room " , where he would privately entertain guests . At the end of a performance , he would look at the empty stage where there was now no laughter or applause and tell himself , " Tomorrow I must start again . One hour ago , I was a big man . I was important out there . Now it 's empty . It 's all gone . " 
 Skelton was invited to play a four week date at the London Palladium in July 1951 . While flying to the engagement , Skelton , Georgia and Father Edward J. Carney , were on a plane from Rome with passengers from an assortment of countries that included 11 children . The plane lost the use of two of its four engines and seemed destined to lose the rest , meaning that the plane would crash over Mont Blanc . The priest readied himself to administer last rites . As he did so , he told Skelton , " You take care of your department , Red , and I 'll take care of mine . " Skelton diverted the attention of the passengers with pantomimes while Father Carney prayed . They ultimately landed at a small airstrip in Lyon , France . He received both an enthusiastic reception and an invitation to return for the Palladium 's Christmas show of that year . 
 Though Skelton had always done live engagements at Nevada hotels and appearances such as state fairs during his television show 's hiatus , he focused his time and energy on live performances after he was no longer on the air , performing up to 125 dates a year . He often arrived days early for his engagement and would serve as his own promotion staff , making the rounds of the local shopping malls . Before the show , his audiences received a ballot listing about 100 of his many routines and were asked to tick off their favorites . The venue 's ushers would collect the ballots and tally the votes . Skelton 's performance on that given day was based on the skits his audience selected . After he learned that his performances were popular with the hearing @-@ impaired because of his heavy use of pantomimes , Skelton hired a sign language interpreter to translate the non @-@ pantomime portions of his act for all his shows . He continued performing live until 1993 , when he celebrated his 80th birthday . 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 In 1974 , Skelton 's interest in film work was rekindled with the news that Neil Simon 's comedy The Sunshine Boys would become a movie ; his last significant film appearance had been in Public Pigeon No. 1 in 1956 . He screen tested for the role of Willy Clark with Jack Benny , who had been cast as Al Lewis . Although Simon had planned to cast Jack Albertson , who played Willy on Broadway , in the same role for the film , Skelton 's screen test impressed him enough to change his mind . Skelton declined the part , however , reportedly due to an inadequate financial offer , and Benny 's final illness forced him to withdraw as well . George Burns and Walter Matthau ultimately starred in the film . 
 In 1981 , Skelton made several specials for HBO including Freddie the Freeloader 's Christmas Dinner ( 1981 ) and the Funny Faces series of specials . He gave a Royal Command Performance for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds in 1984 , which was later shown in the U.S. on HBO . A portion of one of his last interviews , conducted by Steven F. <unk> , was broadcast as part of the 2005 PBS special The Pioneers of Primetime . 
 Skelton died on September 17 , 1997 , at the Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage , California , at the age of 84 , after what was described as " a long , undisclosed illness " . He is interred in the Skelton Family Tomb , the family 's private room , alongside his son , Richard Freeman Skelton , Jr. and his second wife , Georgia Maureen Davis Skelton , in The Great Mausoleum 's Sanctuary of Benediction at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale , California . Skelton was survived by his widow , Lothian Toland Skelton ; his daughter , Valentina Marie Skelton Alonso ; and granddaughter Sabrina Maureen Alonso . 
 = = Art and other interests = = 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Skelton began producing artwork in 1943 , but kept his works private for many years . He said he was inspired to try his hand at painting after visiting a large Chicago department store that had various paintings on display . Inquiring as to the price of one which Skelton described as " a bunch of blotches " , he was told , " Ten thousand wouldn 't buy that one . " He told the clerk he was one of the ten thousand who would not buy the painting , instead buying his own art materials . His wife Georgia , a former art student , persuaded him to have his first public showing of his work in 1964 at the Sands hotel in Las Vegas where he was performing at the time . Skelton believed painting was an asset to his comedy work , as it helped him to better visualize the imaginary props used in his pantomime routines . 
 In addition to his originals , Skelton also sold reproductions and prints through his own mail order business . He made his work available to art galleries by selling them franchises to display and sell his paintings . He once estimated the sale of his lithographs earned him $ 2 @.@ 5 million per year . Shortly after his death , his art dealer said he believed that Skelton made more money on his paintings than from his television work . At the time of his death , Skelton had produced over 1 @,@ 000 oil paintings of clowns . When asked why his artwork focused on clowns , he said at first , " I don 't know why it 's always clowns . " He continued after thinking a moment by saying . " No , that 's not true — I do know why . I just don 't feel like thinking about it ... " At the time of Skelton 's death , his originals were priced at $ 80 @,@ 000 and upward . 
 = = = Other interests = = = 
 Skelton was a prolific writer of both short stories and music . After sleeping only four or five hours a night , he would wake up at 5 AM and begin writing stories , composing music , and painting pictures . He wrote at least one short story a week and had composed over 8 @,@ 000 songs and symphonies by the time of his death . He wrote commercials for <unk> tobacco and sold many of his compositions to Muzak , a company that specialized in providing background music to stores and other businesses . Skelton was also interested in photography ; when attending Hollywood parties , he would take photos and give the film to newspaper reporters waiting outside . He was never without a miniature camera and kept a photographic record of all his paintings . Skelton was also an avid gardener who created his own Japanese and Italian gardens and cultivated bonsai trees at his home in Palm Springs , California . 
 = = Fraternity and honors = = 
 Skelton was a Freemason , a member of Vincennes Lodge No. 1 , in Indiana . He also was a member of both the Scottish and York Rite . He was a recipient of the Gold Medal of the General Grand Chapter , Royal Arch Masons , for Distinguished Service in the Arts and Sciences . On September 24 , 1969 , he received the honorary 33rd degree in the Scottish Rite and was a <unk> Medal recipient in 1995 . Skelton became interested in Masonry as a small boy selling newspapers in Vincennes , when a man bought a paper from him with a five dollar bill and told him to keep the change . The young Skelton asked his benefactor why he had given him so much money ; the man explained that he was a Mason and Masons are taught to give . Skelton decided to become one also when he was grown . He was also member of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows , as well as a Shriner in Los Angeles . 
 Skelton was made an honorary brother of Phi Sigma Kappa at Truman State University . In 1961 he became an honorary brother of the Phi Alpha Tau Fraternity of Emerson College when he was awarded the Joseph E. Connor Award for excellence in the field of communications . He also received an honorary degree from the college at the same ceremony . Skelton received an honorary high school diploma from Vincennes High School . He was also an honorary member of Kappa Kappa Psi National Honorary Band Fraternity ; Skelton had composed many marches which were used by more than 10 @,@ 000 high school and college bands . In 1986 , Skelton received an honorary degree from Ball State University . 
 The Red Skelton Memorial Bridge spans the Wabash River and provides the highway link between Illinois and Indiana on U.S. Route 50 , near Skelton 's home town of Vincennes . He attended the dedication ceremonies in 1963 . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 In 1952 , Skelton received Emmy Awards for Best Comedy Program and Best Comedian . He also received an Emmy nomination in 1957 for his non @-@ comedic performance in Playhouse 90 's presentation of " The Big Slide " . Skelton and his writers won another Emmy in 1961 for Outstanding Writing Achievement In Comedy . He was named an honorary faculty member of Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Clown College in 1968 and 1969 . 
 Skelton 's first major post @-@ television recognition came in 1978 , when the Golden Globe Awards named him as the recipient for their Cecil B. DeMille Award , which is given to honor outstanding contributions in entertainment . His excitement was so great upon receiving the award and a standing ovation , that he clutched it tightly enough to break the statuette . When he was presented with the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences ' Governor 's Award in 1986 , Skelton received a standing ovation . " I want to thank you for sitting down " , he said when the ovation subsided . " I thought you were pulling a CBS and walking out on me . " The honor came 16 years after his television program left the airwaves . 
 Skelton received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Screen Actors Guild in 1987 , and in 1988 , he was inducted into the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences ' Television Hall of Fame . He was one of the International Clown Hall of Fame 's first inductees in 1989 . Skelton and Katharine Hepburn were honored with lifetime achievement awards by the American Comedy Awards in the same year . He was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1994 . Skelton also has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his radio and television work . 
 = = Legacy and tributes = = 
 Skelton preferred to be described as a clown rather than a comic : " A comedian goes out and hits people right on . A clown uses pathos . He can be funny , then turn right around and reach people and touch them with what life is like . " " I just want to be known as a clown " , he said , " because to me that 's the height of my profession . It means you can do everything — sing , dance and above all , make people laugh . " His purpose in life , he believed , was to make people laugh . 
 In Groucho and Me , Groucho Marx called Skelton " the most <unk> clown in show business " , and " the logical successor to [ Charlie ] Chaplin " , largely because of his ability to play a multitude of characters with minimal use of dialogue and props . " With one prop , a soft battered hat " , Groucho wrote , describing a performance he had witnessed , " he successfully converted himself into an idiot boy , a peevish old lady , a teetering @-@ tottering drunk , an overstuffed <unk> , a tramp , and any other character that seemed to suit his fancy . No grotesque make @-@ up , no funny clothes , just Red . " He added that Skelton also " plays a dramatic scene about as effectively as any of the dramatic actors . " In late 1965 ventriloquist Edgar Bergen , reminiscing about the entertainment business , singled out Skelton for high praise . " It 's all so very different today . The whole business of comedy has changed — from 15 minutes of quality to quantity . We had a lot of very funny people around , from Charley Chase to Charlie Chaplin and Laurel and Hardy . The last one of that breed is Red Skelton . " Harry Cohn of Columbia Pictures also praised Skelton , saying , " He 's a clown in the old tradition . He doesn 't need punch lines . He 's got heart . " 
 Skelton and Marcel Marceau shared a long friendship and admiration of each other 's work . Marceau appeared on Skelton 's CBS television show three times , including one turn as the host in 1961 as Skelton recovered from surgery . He was also a guest on the three Funny Faces specials that Skelton produced for HBO . In a TV Guide interview after Skelton 's death , Marceau said , " Red , you are eternal for me and the millions of people you made laugh and cry . May God bless you forever , my great and precious companion . I will never forget that silent world we created together . " CBS issued the following statement upon his death : " Red 's audience had no age limits . He was the consummate family entertainer — a winsome clown , a storyteller without peer , a superb mime , a singer and a dancer . " 
 The Red Skelton Performing Arts Center was dedicated in February 2006 on the campus of Vincennes University , one block from the home in Vincennes where Skelton was born . The building includes an 850 @-@ seat theater , classrooms , rehearsal rooms , and dressing rooms . Its grand foyer is a gallery for Skelton 's paintings , statues , and film posters . The theater hosts theatrical and musical productions by Vincennes University , as well as special events , convocations and conventions . The adjacent Red Skelton Museum of American Comedy opened on July 18 , 2013 , on what would have been Skelton 's 100th birthday . It houses his personal and professional materials , which he had collected since the age of ten , in accordance with his wishes that they be made available in his hometown for the public 's enjoyment . Skelton 's widow , Lothian , noted that he expressed no interest in any sort of Hollywood memorial . The museum is funded jointly by the Red Skelton Museum Foundation and the Indiana Historical Society . Other Foundation projects include a fund that provides new clothes to Vincennes children from low @-@ income families . The Foundation also purchased Skelton 's birthplace and continues to finance its restoration . Restoration continues as well at the historic Vincennes Pantheon Theatre , where Skelton performed during his youth . 
 The town of Vincennes has held an annual Red Skelton Festival since 2005 . A " Parade of a Thousand Clowns " , billed as the largest clown parade in the Midwest , is followed by family @-@ oriented activities and live music performances . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Features = = = 
 = = = Short subjects = = = 
 = = = Box office ranking = = = 
 For a number of years US exhibitors voted Skelton among the most popular stars in the country : 
 1944 – 16th 
 1949 – 13th 
 1951 – 14th 
 1952 – 21st most popular 
 = = Published works = = 
 Red Skelton 's Favorite Ghost Stories . 1965 . OCLC <unk> . 
 A Red Skeleton in Your Closet ; Ghost Stories Gay and Grim . 1965 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gertrude & <unk> . 1974 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Ventriloquist . 1984 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Old Whitey . 1984 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Great Lazarus . 1986 . 
 = Battle of Amiens ( 1918 ) = 
 The Battle of Amiens , also known as the Third Battle of Picardy ( French : <unk> Bataille de Picardie ) , which began on 8 August 1918 , was the opening phase of the Allied offensive later known as the Hundred Days Offensive that ultimately led to the end of the First World War . Allied forces advanced over 11 kilometres ( 7 mi ) on the first day , one of the greatest advances of the war , with Henry Rawlinson 's British Fourth Army playing the decisive role . The battle is also notable for its effects on both sides ' morale and the large number of surrendering German forces . This led Erich Ludendorff to describe the first day of the battle as " the black day of the German Army " . Amiens was one of the first major battles involving armoured warfare and marked the end of trench warfare on the Western Front ; fighting becoming mobile once again until the armistice was signed on 11 November 1918 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On 21 March 1918 , the German Empire had launched Operation Michael , the first in a series of attacks planned to drive the Allies back along the length of the Western Front . With the signing of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk with revolutionary @-@ controlled Russia , the Germans were able to transfer hundreds of thousands of men to the Western Front , giving them a significant , if temporary , advantage in manpower and material . These offensives were intended to translate this advantage into victory . Operation Michael was intended to defeat the right wing of the British Expeditionary Force , but a lack of success before Arras ensured the ultimate failure of the offensive . A final effort was aimed at the town of Amiens , a vital railway junction , but the advance had been halted at Villers @-@ Bretonneux by British and Australian troops on 4 April . 
 Subsequent German offensives — Operation Georgette ( 9 – 11 April ) , Operation Blücher @-@ Yorck ( 27 May ) , Operation Gneisenau ( 9 June ) and Operation Marne @-@ Rheims ( 15 – 17 July ) — all made advances elsewhere on the Western Front , but failed to achieve a decisive breakthrough . 
 By the end of the Marne @-@ Rheims offensive , the German manpower advantage had been spent and their supplies and troops were exhausted . The Allied generalissimo , General Ferdinand Foch , ordered a counteroffensive which led to the Second Battle of the Marne , after which victory he was promoted to Marshal of France . The Germans , recognising their untenable position , withdrew from the Marne to the north . Foch now tried to move the Allies back onto the offensive . 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 Foch disclosed his plan on 23 July 1918 , following the Franco @-@ American victory at the Battle of Soissons . The plan called for reducing the Saint @-@ Mihiel salient ( which would later see combat in the Battle of Saint @-@ Mihiel ) and freeing the railway lines that ran through Amiens from German shellfire . 
 The commander of the British Expeditionary Force , Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig , already had plans in place for an attack near Amiens . When the British retreat had ended in April , the headquarters of the British Fourth Army under General Sir Henry Rawlinson had taken over the front astride the Somme . Its left hand corps was the British III Corps under Lieutenant General Richard Butler , while the Australian Corps under Lieutenant General John Monash held the right flank and linked up with French armies to the south . On 30 May , all the Australian infantry divisions were united under the corps HQ , for the first time on the Western Front . The Australians had mounted a number of local counter @-@ attacks which both revealed the suitability of the open and firm terrain south of the Somme for a larger offensive and also established and refined the methods which were to be used . 
 Rawlinson had submitted Monash 's proposals to Haig in July and Haig had forwarded them to Foch . At a meeting on 24 July , Foch agreed to the plan but insisted that the French First Army , which held the front to the south of the British Fourth Army , should participate . Rawlinson opposed this as his and Monash 's plans depended on the large @-@ scale use of tanks ( now finally available in large numbers ) to achieve surprise , by avoiding a preliminary bombardment . The French First Army lacked tanks and would be forced to bombard the German positions before the infantry advance began , thus removing the element of surprise . Eventually , it was agreed that the French would participate , but not launch their attack until 45 minutes after the Fourth Army . It was also agreed to advance the proposed date of the attack from 10 August to 8 August , to strike the Germans before they had completed their withdrawal from the Marne salient . 
 Rawlinson had already finalised his plans in discussion with his Corps commanders ( Butler , Monash , Sir Arthur Currie of the Canadian Corps and Lieutenant General Charles Kavanagh of the Cavalry Corps ) on 21 July . For the first time , the Australians would attack side by side with the Canadian Corps . Both had a reputation for aggressive and innovative tactics and a strong record of success over the past two years . 
 The tactical methods had been tested by the Australians in a local counter @-@ attack at the Battle of Hamel on 4 July . The German defenders of Hamel were deeply dug in , and their position commanded a very wide field of fire . Similar positions had resisted capture for two months in the Battle of the Somme . The Australians had used surprise rather than weight at Hamel . The artillery had opened fire only at the moment the infantry and tanks advanced , and the Germans were rapidly overrun . 
 A key factor in the final plan was secrecy . There was to be no pre @-@ battle bombardment , only artillery fire immediately prior to the advance of Australian , Canadian , and British forces . The final plan for the Fourth Army involved 1 @,@ 386 field guns and howitzers and 684 heavy guns , making up 27 medium artillery brigades and thirteen heavy batteries , in addition to the infantry divisions ' artillery . The fire plan for the Fourth Army 's artillery was devised by Monash 's senior artillery officer , Major General <unk> Budworth . British sound ranging advances in artillery techniques and aerial photographic reconnaissance made it possible to dispense with " ranging shots " to ensure accurate fire . Budworth had produced a timetable which allowed 504 out of 530 German guns to be hit at " zero hour " , while a creeping barrage preceded the infantry . This method was similar to the <unk> which the Germans themselves had used in their Spring Offensive , but its effectiveness was increased by the surprise achieved . 
 There were also to be 580 tanks . The Canadian and Australian Corps were each allocated a brigade of four battalions , with 108 Mark V fighting tanks , 36 Mark V " Star " , and 24 unarmed tanks intended to carry supplies and ammunition forward . A single battalion of Mark V tanks was allocated to III Corps . The Cavalry Corps were allocated two battalions each of 48 Medium Mark A Whippet tanks . 
 The Allies had successfully moved the Canadian Corps of four infantry divisions to Amiens without them being detected by the Germans . This was a noteworthy achievement and reflected well on the increasingly efficient <unk> of the British armies . A detachment from the Corps of two infantry battalions , a wireless unit and a casualty clearing station had been sent to the front near Ypres to bluff the Germans that the entire Corps was moving north to Flanders . The Canadian Corps was not fully in position until 7 August . To maintain secrecy , the Allied commanders pasted the notice " Keep Your Mouth Shut " into orders issued to the men , and referred to the action as a " raid " rather than an " offensive " . 
 = = = Preliminaries = = = 
 Although the Germans were still on the offensive in late July 1918 , the Allied armies were growing in strength , as more American units arrived in France , and British reinforcements were transferred from the Home Army in Britain and the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . The German commanders realized in early August that their forces might be forced onto the defensive , though Amiens was not considered to be a likely front . The Germans believed the French would probably attack the Saint @-@ Mihiel front east of Rheims , or in Flanders near Mount Kemmel , while they believed the British would attack along either the Lys or near Albert . The Allies had indeed mounted a number of local counter @-@ offensives in these sectors , both to gain local objectives to improve their defensive positions and to distract attention from the Amiens sector . German forces began to withdraw from the Lys and other fronts in response to these theories . The Allies maintained equal artillery and air fire along their various fronts , moving troops only at night , and feigning movements during the day to mask their actual intent . 
 The German front east of Amiens was held by their Second Army under General Georg von der <unk> , with six divisions in line ( and two facing the French 1st Army ) . There were only two divisions in immediate reserve . There was some concern among the Allies on 6 August when the German 27th Division actually attacked north of the Somme on part of the front on which the Allies planned to attack two days later . The German division ( a specially selected and trained <unk> formation ) penetrated roughly 800 yards ( 730 m ) into the one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half mile front . This attack was made in retaliation for a trench raid by the 5th Australian Division north of the Somme on the night of 31 July , which had gained many prisoners , before the Australian Corps was concentrated south of the river . The German division moved somewhat back to its original position on the morning of 7 August , but the movement still required changes to the Allied plan . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The battle began in dense fog at 4 : 20 am on 8 August 1918 . Under Rawlinson 's Fourth Army , the British III Corps attacked north of the Somme , the Australian Corps to the south of the river in the centre of Fourth Army 's front , and the Canadian Corps to the south of the Australians . The French 1st Army under General <unk> opened its preliminary bombardment at the same time , and began its advance 45 minutes later , supported by a battalion of 72 Whippet tanks . Although German forces were on the alert , this was largely in anticipation of possible retaliation for their incursion on the sixth and not because they had learned of the preplanned Allied attack . Although the two forces were within 460 metres ( 500 yd ) of one another , gas bombardment was very low , as the bulk of the Allied presence was unknown to the Germans . The attack was so unexpected that German forces only began to return fire after five minutes , and even then at the positions where the Allied forces had assembled at the start of the battle and had long since left . 
 In the first phase , seven divisions attacked : the British 18th ( Eastern ) and 58th ( 2 / 1st London ) , the Australian 2nd and 3rd , and the Canadian 1st , 2nd and 3rd Divisions . Parts of the American 33rd Division supported the British attackers north of the Somme . 
 The attackers captured the first German position , advancing about 3 @.@ 7 km ( 4 @,@ 000 yd ; 2 @.@ 3 mi ) by about 7 : 30 am . In the centre , supporting units following the leading divisions attacked the second objective a further 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) distant . Australian units reached their first objectives by 7 : 10 am , and by 8 : 20 am , the Australian 4th and 5th Divisions and the Canadian 4th Division passed through the initial breach in the German lines . The third phase of the attack was assigned to infantry @-@ carrying Mark V * tanks . However , the infantry was able to carry out this final step unaided . The Allies penetrated well to the rear of the German defences and cavalry now continued the advance , one brigade in the Australian sector and two cavalry divisions in the Canadian sector . RAF and armoured car fire kept the retreating Germans from rallying . 
 The Canadian and Australian forces in the centre advanced quickly , pushing the line 4 @.@ 8 km ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) forward from its starting point by 11 : 00 am . The speed of their advance was such that a party of German officers and some divisional staff were captured while eating breakfast . A gap 24 km ( 15 mi ) long was punched in the German line south of the Somme by the end of the day . There was less success north of the river , where the British III Corps had only a single tank battalion in support , the terrain was rougher and the German incursion of 6 August had disrupted some of the preparations . Although the attackers gained their first objectives , they were held up short of the Chipilly Spur , a steep wooded ridge . 
 The British Fourth Army took 13 @,@ 000 prisoners while the French captured a further 3 @,@ 000 . Total German losses were estimated to be 30 @,@ 000 on 8 August . The Fourth Army 's casualties , British , Australian and Canadian infantry , were approximately 8 @,@ 800 , exclusive of tank and air losses and those of their French allies . 
 German Army Chief of Staff Paul von Hindenburg noted the Allies ' use of surprise and that Allied destruction of German lines of communication had hampered potential German counter @-@ attacks by isolating command positions . The German General Erich Ludendorff described the first day of Amiens as the " Schwarzer Tag des deutschen Heeres " ( " the black day of the German Army " ) , not because of the ground lost to the advancing Allies , but because the morale of the German troops had sunk to the point where large numbers of troops began to capitulate . He recounted instances of retreating troops shouting " You 're prolonging the war ! " at officers who tried to rally them , and " <unk> ! " at reserves moving up . Five German divisions had effectively been engulfed . Allied forces pushed , on average , 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) into enemy territory by the end of the day . The Canadians gained 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) , Australians 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) , British 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) , and the French 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . 
 = = = Later fighting = = = 
 The advance continued on 9 August , though not with the same spectacular results of the first day . The battle was widened on the north and the south of the initial attack ( with the southern part of the battle ( involving French forces ) called Battle of Montdidier ( French : Bataille de Montdidier ) . 
 The infantry had outrun the supporting artillery and the initial force of more than 500 tanks that played a large role in the Allied success was reduced to six tanks fit for battle within four days . The Germans on Chipilly Spur commanded a wide field of fire to the south of the Somme , and their flanking fire held up the left units of the Australian Corps until late on 9 August , when a small Australian party slipped across the river and captured the village of Chipilly itself , together with a renewed attack by III Corps . On the Canadian front , congested roads and communication problems prevented the British 32nd Division being pushed forward rapidly enough to maintain the momentum of the advance . 
 On 10 August , there were signs that the Germans were pulling out of the salient from Operation Michael . According to official reports , the Allies had captured nearly 50 @,@ 000 prisoners and 500 guns by 27 August . Even with the lessened armour the British drove 19 km ( 12 mi ) into German positions by 13 August . 
 Field Marshal Haig refused the request of Marshal Foch to continue the offensive , preferring instead to launch a fresh offensive by Byng 's Third Army between the Ancre and Scarpe . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Battle of Amiens was a major turning point in the tempo of the war . The Germans had started the war with the Schlieffen Plan before the Race to the Sea slowed movement on the Western Front and the war devolved into trench warfare . The German Spring Offensive earlier that year had once again given Germany the offensive edge on the Western Front . Armoured support helped the Allies tear a hole through trench lines , weakening once impregnable trench positions . The British Third Army with no armoured support had almost no effect on the line while the Fourth , with fewer than a thousand tanks , broke deep into German territory . Australian commander John Monash was knighted by King George V in the days following the battle . 
 British war correspondent Philip Gibbs noted Amiens ' effect on the war 's tempo , saying on 27 August that , " the enemy ... is on the defensive " and , " the initiative of attack is so completely in our hands that we are able to strike him at many different places . " Gibbs also credits Amiens with a shift in troop morale , saying , " the change has been greater in the minds of men than in the taking of territory . On our side the army seems to be buoyed up with the enormous hope of getting on with this business quickly " and that , " there is a change also in the enemy 's mind . They no longer have even a dim hope of victory on this western front . All they hope for now is to defend themselves long enough to gain peace by negotiation . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Blaxland , Gregory ( 1981 ) . Amiens 1918 . London : W.H. Allen & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 352 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Christie , Norm ( 1999 ) . For King & Empire : The Canadians at Amiens , August 1918 . Ottawa : CEF Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , Daniel G. ( 1987 ) . Spearhead to Victory : Canada and the Great War . Edmonton : <unk> Publishers . ISBN <unk> . 
 Hart , Peter ( 2008 ) . 1918 : A Very British Victory . London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , A. ( 2004 ) [ 1950 ] . The Battle of Amiens 1918 ( Reprinted ed . ) . Uckfield , East Sussex : Naval & Military Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 2008 ) . Amiens 1918 : The Black Day of the German Army . Campaign # 197 . Osprey Publishing . ISBN <unk> . 
 McWilliams , James ; Steel , R. James ( 2001 ) . Amiens : Dawn of Victory . Dundurn Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 342 @-@ X. 
 Riley , Jonathan ( 2010 ) . Decisive Battles . Continuum . ISBN 1 @-@ 8472 @-@ 525 @-@ 08 . 
 Schreiber , Shane B. ( 2004 ) . Shock Army of the British Empire : The Canadian Corps in the Last 100 Days of the Great War . Ontario : <unk> Publishing . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Sad ( Maroon 5 song ) = 
 " Sad " is the ninth track from American band Maroon 5 's fourth studio album Overexposed ( 2012 ) . It was written by Adam Levine and James Valentine ; they produced the song together with Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy . Valentine started composing the song on his home piano , before introducing the melody to Levine , who wrote the lyrics and called the song his most personal track on the album . " Sad " is a piano ballad that is similar to the works by British singer @-@ songwriter Adele . It received generally mixed reviews from music critics ; some of them called it a standout track on Overexposed , however , others criticized Levine 's voice on the song . Following the release of the album , due to strong digital downloads , the song peaked at number 12 on the singles chart in South Korea . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Sad " was written by Maroon 5 's lead singer Adam Levine together with band 's guitarist , Valentine . According to Valentine , the development of the song began one morning , " before he was even awake " he was dreaming of his living room 's piano playing the melody . He further stated that it was cool and he liked the chords to the verse . He later went to the studio where Levine had a concept for the song including couple of lines for the chorus . It was produced by Levine and Valentine together with Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy . For an interview with MTV News , Levine told that " Sad " is his most personal track on the album , although not revealed the inspiration behind it . The song was recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles by Noah Passovoy while Eric Eylands served as engineering assistant . Serbian <unk> mixed it at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach together with John Hanes and Phil Seaford who served as mixing engineer and mixing assistant respectively . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Sad " is a piano ballad with a length of three minutes and fourteen seconds . It is written in the key of E minor , in common time , with a tempo of 116 beats per minute . Levine 's vocal range spans from the low note of D4 to the high note of G5 . " Sad " highlights Levine 's soulful tone that his voice possesses . Nick Levine of NME labeled the song as " an Adele @-@ <unk> weepie " . Similarly , The New York Times ' Nate Chinen compared " Sad " to Adele 's 2011 single " Someone Like You " . Rick Florino of Artistdirect wrote that it " echoes Elton John in terms of epic scope and shows just how vulnerable Levine can get . " Lyrically , " Sad " is a song on which Levine " achingly " declares the end of his relationship and his heartbreak . According to Jacqui Swift , it was inspired by the singer 's break up with Victoria 's Secret model Anne <unk> . The song begins with the lyrics , " Man , it 's been a long day stuck thinking ' bout it . " The chorus is simple and consists of Levine singing " I 'm so Sad " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Both <unk> Nair of The UrbanWire and Suzanne Byrne of RTÉ.ie called the song a standout track on Overexposed . Jacqui Swift of The Sun labeled " Sad " together with " Beautiful Goodbye " and " Love Somebody " as an emotive moments on the album . Alex Lai of Contactmusic.com called the song " bearable " . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey stated that the track lacks the honest and raw emotion of the band 's 2004 single " She Will Be Loved " . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters called the song a " coldly calculated " moment on Overexposed and further wrote that it doesn 't match well with Levine 's voice . According to him his vocals are too " showy " to make the " Sad " ' s chorus sound genuine . Similarly , Bruce <unk> of The Citizen criticized Levine 's voice and wrote that he " doesn ’ t adapt his voice to change the mood – it 's as high and shrill as it is in the songs with fuller arrangements . " Rolling Stone 's Rob Sheffield labeled " Sad " as a " boring moment " on the album with a " droll " title . Nate Chinen of The New York Times criticized the song 's chorus and further stated , " no one bothered to upgrade a place @-@ holder lyric during the process of songwriting . No machine is perfect . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Conway Studios , Los Angeles , California ; mixed at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Overexposed , A & M / Octone Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Overexposed , due to strong digital downloads " Sad " debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 12 on June 24 , 2012 , with sales of 28 @,@ 107 digital copies . The next week , it fell to number 19 and sold additional 13 @,@ 044 copies . It stayed on the chart for total of six weeks . 
 = The Power of Madonna = 
 " The Power of Madonna " is the fifteenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on April 20 , 2010 . When cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) demands that Madonna 's music be played over the school intercom system , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) sets the club a Madonna @-@ themed assignment , hoping to empower the female club members . " The Power of Madonna " was written and directed by series creator Ryan Murphy , and serves as a musical tribute to Madonna , featuring cover versions of eight of her songs , with the singer having granted Glee the rights to her entire catalogue of music . Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna , an album containing studio recordings of songs performed in the episode , was released on April 20 , 2010 . 
 The episode was watched by 12 @.@ 98 million American viewers , and was generally well received by critics . Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly and Aly Semigran of MTV both deemed it the best episode of the show thus far , and the Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson called it potentially " the most @-@ enjoyable hour of television of all time . " Other reviews were more mixed , with Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club criticizing the increasing number of musical performances for disrupting the tonal balance of the show , and IGN 's Eric Goldman questioning the series ' writing . Madonna herself approved of the episode , calling it " brilliant on every level " . 
 The episode won " Outstanding Sound Mixing For A Comedy Or Drama Series ( One Hour ) " at the Creative Arts Emmy Awards , while Jane Lynch won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for her performance in this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) has the Cheerios emulate Madonna , so that they will be more empowered in their cheerleading routines . Continuing her blackmail of Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , Sue has Madonna tracks played over the school intercom throughout the day . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) overhears the girls in the club discussing difficulties they are having in relationships and life . Rachel ( Lea Michele ) asks the other girls for advice on a boy pressuring her to have sex , while Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) tells them that Artie ( Kevin McHale ) has asked her to start wearing more revealing clothes if she wants to be with him . When Will observes the Cheerios performing a routine with stilts to " Ray of Light " , he is inspired to set a Madonna @-@ themed assignment to restore the girls to equal status . Most of the male club members are unimpressed , even when the girls perform " Express Yourself " . Club co @-@ captains Rachel and Finn ( Cory Monteith ) practice performing a mash @-@ up of " Borderline " and " Open Your Heart " . 
 When Will ridicules Sue 's fashion sense , Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) and Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) give her a makeover , recreating Madonna 's " Vogue " video . Guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) is inspired by Madonna 's example , and tells Will that she intends to lose her virginity to him that evening . Santana ( Naya Rivera ) offers to take Finn 's virginity , and Rachel and her boyfriend Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) also decide to have sex , leading to a dream performance of " Like a Virgin " between all three couples . Ultimately , Emma and Rachel do not go through with it , but Finn does have sex with Santana . He later hides this from Rachel , having concluded that the sex was meaningless , and that he truly regretted it , in contrasted with Rachel , who despite not going through with it , claims she did as she said and it was no big deal . 
 Jesse transfers to William McKinley High School , leaving the Vocal Adrenaline glee club to join New Directions , so that he and Rachel can be openly together . There is resistance from the group , who believe that this will result in them getting even fewer solos than they had been , and they suspect that Jesse is a spy for his former club . Kurt and Mercedes are recruited by Sue to join the Cheerios and perform " 4 Minutes " with them during a school assembly . They tell Will that they are unhappy about never being given solos , and will be in both groups . The boys sing " What It Feels Like for a Girl " , and decide to treat the girls better . Artie apologizes to Tina for his prior behavior , and they kiss . Finn formally welcomes Jesse into New Directions and tells him and Rachel that he won 't interfere in their relationship . The entire glee club sings " Like a Prayer " backed by a gospel choir , and Kurt and Mercedes each have a solo in the song . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 2009 , Madonna granted Glee the rights to her entire catalogue of music , and the producers planned an episode which would feature Madonna songs exclusively . Series creator Ryan Murphy had worked with Madonna in the past , and wished to produce a Glee tribute to her . Madonna agreed and " cooperated in every way possible . " The episode was filmed in January 2010 . Lynch performed Madonna 's " Vogue " , her first vocal performance on the show . Rehearsals for the routine began in December 2009 . It was filmed in black and white , with the original video playing in front of the performers as they worked . Lynch also wore a conical bra in the episode , emulating Madonna 's image . 
 Before the episode 's track listing was announced , Morrison hoped that his character , glee club director Will Schuester , would sing " Like a Virgin " , believing it befit Will 's relationship with guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury . TV Guide 's William Keck later confirmed that Emma would be involved in the staging of " Like a Virgin " , with Mays ' agreement that the song is " very appropriate and fitting " for her character . 
 Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna , an EP containing studio recordings of songs performed in the episode , was released on April 20 , 2010 . Its tracklist encompasses " Express Yourself " , a mash @-@ up of " Borderline " and " Open Your Heart " , " Vogue " , " Like A Virgin " , " 4 Minutes " , " What it Feels Like for a Girl " , and " Like a Prayer " . The iTunes edition features a bonus track , " Burning Up " , which was not performed in the episode . Although they were not performed by the show 's cast , Madonna 's " Ray of Light " , " Burning Up " , " Justify My Love " , and " Frozen " were also used as backing tracks in the episode . All songs on the EP apart from the bonus track were also released as singles , available for digital download . In its first week of release , Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna reached number one on the Billboard 200 , with 98 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Power of Madonna " was watched by 12 @.@ 98 million American viewers and attained a 5 @.@ 3 / 13 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 98 million viewers , and was the most @-@ watched show of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels . It attained the highest audience share in the 16 – 34 demographic in its timeslot . In Canada , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 096 million viewers and was the sixth most @-@ viewed program of the week . In Australia , Glee attained a new ratings high , winning its timeslot in all key demographics . It was watched by 1 @.@ 42 million viewers , making Glee the eleventh most @-@ viewed show of the week . 
 Lynch received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for her performance in the episode . At the 2010 Creative Arts Emmy Awards , Phillip W. Palmer , Doug <unk> and Joseph H. Earle won the " Outstanding Sound Mixing For A Comedy Or Drama Series ( One Hour ) " award . Lou A. Eyrich and Marisa <unk> were additionally nominated for the " Outstanding Costumes for a Series " award . Competing against the Glee episode " Hairography " , Stacey K. Black , Mary G. <unk> , Roxanne N. <unk> and Gina <unk> were nominated for " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single @-@ Camera Series " , and competing against the episode " Theatricality " , <unk> Krueger <unk> , Kelley Mitchell , Jennifer Greenberg , Robin Neal @-@ Luce , Kelcey Fry and Zoe <unk> were nominated for " Outstanding Makeup For A Single @-@ Camera Series ( Non @-@ Prosthetic ) " . 
 Madonna approved of the episode , telling Us Weekly that she found it " brilliant on every level " , praising the scripting and the message of equality . The episode also received positive reviews from critics . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly called it " one of the best hours of TV you ’ re likely to see all year " , writing that the episode pays Madonna " the highest compliment possible " in not just expressing admiration for the singer , but " demonstrat [ ing ] a potent understanding of why Madonna matters . " Fellow Entertainment Weekly writer Tim Stack deemed it the best episode of Glee thus far , grading each of the songs performed " B + " through to " A + " . Stack felt that the episode lived up to its hype , an opinion concurred with by Aly Semigran of MTV , who also deemed " The Power of Madonna " the show 's best episode to date . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle went further in his praise , calling " The Power of Madonna " potentially " the most @-@ enjoyable hour of television of all time . " Kevin Coll of Fused Film felt that the episode redeemed the series following its " dismal comeback " with " Hell @-@ O " , calling it " a great story that explored the characters of Glee in much better depth than they ever have . " 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " B " , however was less positive than other critics . While he stated that the musical numbers were " among the best things the show has ever done " , he felt that " just about everything else around them gets short shrift " , criticizing the increase in performances on the first half of the season for upsetting the balance of the series . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode 8 / 10 , observing that while he was in the minority of reviewers for not " absolutely loving it " , he found " The Power of Madonna " to be " a bit messy in the writing department , even while it delivered several really great scenes and moments along the way . " 
 = Super Bowl XLI = 
 Super Bowl XLI was an American football game between the American Football Conference ( AFC ) champion Indianapolis Colts and the National Football Conference ( NFC ) champion Chicago Bears to decide the National Football League ( NFL ) champion for the 2006 season . The Colts defeated the Bears by the score of 29 – 17 . The game was played on February 4 , 2007 , at Dolphin Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . 
 This game featured two teams ending long Super Bowl appearance droughts . Indianapolis , who finished with a 12 – 4 regular season record , were making their first Super Bowl appearance since winning Super Bowl V in the 1970 season during the team 's tenure in Baltimore ; they had moved to Indianapolis in 1984 . Meanwhile , the Bears , who posted an NFC @-@ best 13 – 3 regular season record , were making their first appearance since winning Super Bowl XX in the 1985 season . In addition , the Bears ' Lovie Smith and the Colts ' Tony Dungy both became the first African @-@ American head coaches to coach in the Super Bowl . 
 In the first Super Bowl played in rainy conditions , the Colts overcame a 14 – 6 first @-@ quarter deficit to outscore the Bears 23 – 3 in the last three quarters . Chicago posted the then @-@ earliest lead in Super Bowl history when returner Devin Hester ran back the opening kickoff 92 yards for a touchdown after 14 seconds had elapsed ( a record later broken in Super Bowl XLVIII when the Seattle Seahawks scored a safety 12 seconds into the game ) . The Colts forced five turnovers , including cornerback Kelvin Hayden 's 56 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown . Indianapolis kicker Adam Vinatieri also scored three field goals . Colts quarterback Peyton Manning was named the game 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) , completing 25 of 38 passes for 247 yards and a touchdown , with one interception for a passer rating of 81 @.@ 8 . 
 CBS ' broadcast of the game was watched by an estimated average of 93 @.@ 2 million viewers , making it at the time the fifth most watched program in U.S. television history . The halftime show , headlined by the musician Prince , peaked at 140 million television viewers , and was widely acclaimed by music critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Host selection process = = = 
 Dolphin Stadium won the bid to host Super Bowl XLI on September 17 , 2003 after a campaign against Phoenix , Tampa , New York City , and Washington , D.C. With this game , the Miami Metropolitan Area tied New Orleans , Louisiana as the city to host the most Super Bowls ( 9 ) . 
 This was the fourth Super Bowl at Dolphin Stadium , which has also been known as " Joe Robbie Stadium " and " Pro Player Stadium " . The venue previously hosted Super Bowls XXIII ( broadcast on NBC ) , XXIX ( on ABC ) , and XXXIII ( on FOX ) . Super Bowls II , III , V , X , and XIII were also in Miami , but held at the Miami Orange Bowl . This was the first Super Bowl played at the stadium since the city of Miami Gardens where the stadium is located was incorporated on May 13 , 2003 . 
 In February 2006 , the NFL and the South Florida Super Bowl XLI Host Committee unveiled the slogan " one game , one dream " for the game , referring to the entire South Florida region working together to present the event . The Super Bowl XLI logo was also unveiled , featuring the colors orange ( to represent the sun ) and blue ( for the ocean ) . The " I " in the Roman numeral " XLI " was drawn to resemble a pylon placed at each corner of an end zone because " the goal is to get to the game . " This year 's logo has the same shade of orange as the logo of the host city 's home team , the Miami Dolphins . The " XL " part is similar to that of Super Bowl XL 's logo . 
 = = = Teams = = = 
 = = = = Chicago Bears = = = = 
 Chicago finished the season with an NFC best 13 – 3 record and advanced to the second Super Bowl in franchise history . They defeated the Seattle Seahawks 27 @-@ 24 in the divisional round of the playoffs , and the New Orleans Saints 39 @-@ 14 in the NFC Championship game to advance to Super Bowl XLI . The team excelled on defense , ranking third in fewest points allowed ( 255 ) and second in fewest points allowed per drive . They also ranked second in scoring ( 427 points ) , although only tenth in points per offensive drive thanks to a league leading 65 points scored on defensive or special teams plays . 
 The Bears offense was led by quarterback Rex Grossman , the team 's first round draft pick in 2003 . Over the previous three seasons , Grossman had played in just 8 regular season games due to injuries , but he recovered to start in all 16 games in 2006 . By the end of the season , he finished with 3 @,@ 193 yards and 23 touchdowns , the most by a Bears quarterback since 1995 . Grossman had difficulty avoiding turnovers , however , and threw 20 interceptions and lost five fumbles during the year . In the last seven games of the season , he turned the ball over 18 times . Many fans and sports writers expected head coach Lovie Smith to bench him at some point , but Smith insisted that Grossman would be the starter throughout the entire season . 
 Receivers Muhsin Muhammad ( 60 receptions , 863 yards , 5 touchdowns ) and Bernard Berrian ( 51 receptions , 775 yards , 7 touchdowns ) provided the main deep threat on the team , along with tight end Desmond Clark , who caught 45 passes for 626 yards and 6 touchdowns . Chicago 's running game was led by running backs Thomas Jones and Cedric Benson . Jones rushed for 1 @,@ 210 yards and caught 36 passes , while Benson rushed for 647 yards and scored 6 touchdowns . 
 Chicago 's defense allowed the 5th least total yardage , allowed less than 100 yards per game on the ground , and allowed the fewest yards per drive of any NFL team . The line was anchored by Adewale <unk> , who had 6 @.@ 5 sacks , and Pro Bowler Tommie Harris , who recorded 5 , along with rookie Mark Anderson , who led the team with 12 sacks . Behind them , two of the three Bears starting linebackers , Lance Briggs , and Brian Urlacher , were selected to the 2007 Pro Bowl . In the secondary , cornerbacks Ricky Manning , Jr. and Charles Tillman each recorded five interceptions . The defense was also able to make up for the offense 's poor performance earlier in the season , as explained in the win against the Cardinals in Week 6 . 
 The loss of Harris to injury after the twelfth game of the season coincided with a decline in defensive performance . Before his loss , the Bears allowed only two opponents to score more than twenty points ( 23 points to the Arizona Cardinals in week six and 31 to the Miami Dolphins in week 9 ) . After his injury , Chicago opponents scored more than 20 points in six of the seven remaining games , including two of three playoff games . Only the New Orleans Saints in the NFC Championship game were held below 21 points . 
 The Bears special teams sent 3 players to the Pro Bowl , including special teams ace Brendon <unk> , kicker Robbie Gould ( who led all NFL kickers with 143 points ) , and rookie return man Devin Hester , who gained 600 punt return yards with a 12 @.@ 8 yards per return average , the second highest in the NFL . He also set a league record with 6 touchdowns on special teams . 
 = = = = Indianapolis Colts = = = = 
 The Colts ' first trip to the Super Bowl in 36 years set a record for longest time between appearances by a team . Their return was the culmination of a nine @-@ year @-@ long building process . In 1998 , they drafted quarterback Peyton Manning to lead the team . Over the next four seasons , Manning , along with other stars such as receiver Marvin Harrison and running back Edgerrin James , turned the Colts into one of the best offensive teams in the NFL , but the team struggled to find consistency on defense and always ended up with either a losing season or elimination from the playoffs in the first round . In 2002 , Indianapolis fired head coach Jim Mora and replaced him with Tony Dungy . Dungy had developed one of the best defenses in the NFL while coaching the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , and it was hoped he could solve the Colts ' defensive problems as well . 
 Over the next four seasons , the Colts won 48 of 64 games , but still could not find much success in the postseason . In 2002 , they were blown out 41 – 0 in the wild card round by the New York Jets . In 2003 , they won their first two playoff games behind impressive offensive performances , and reached the AFC title game . There , they lost to the eventual champion New England Patriots 24 – 14 , with Manning throwing four interceptions . In 2004 , the Colts had one of the most spectacular offensive seasons in NFL history , scoring 522 points and gaining 6 @,@ 582 yards , while Manning set NFL records for most touchdown passes and highest passer rating . But again the Patriots ' defense ( and snowy conditions ) proved too formidable , as they lost 20 – 3 in the divisional round of the playoffs . 
 In 2005 , the Colts ' defense improved , making the team the clear favorites in the NFL . They won the first 13 games of the season and finished with a 14 – 2 record , while ranking second in the NFL in both points scored and fewest points allowed . But once again they lost in the divisional round of the playoffs , this time to the # 6 seeded Pittsburgh Steelers , 21 – 18 . After another disappointing loss , Manning had developed a reputation of being unable to make it to a championship , a reputation that followed him from college after he was unable to win an NCAA title with the Tennessee Volunteers ( who won a title the year after he graduated ) . The Colts lost some key players after the 2005 season , including James , who departed the Colts for the Arizona Cardinals , and kicker Mike Vanderjagt , the NFL 's all @-@ time leader in field goal percentage , who left for the Dallas Cowboys . 
 Still , the Colts remained one of the AFC 's top teams in the 2006 season . Manning made the Pro Bowl for the 7th time in his career , completing 362 of 555 passes for 4 @,@ 397 yards and an NFL @-@ best 31 touchdowns , with an additional 4 rushing touchdowns and with only 9 interceptions and 15 sacks . His favorite target was Harrison , who caught 95 passes for 1 @,@ 366 yards and 12 touchdowns . Receiver Reggie Wayne was also a major deep threat with 86 receptions for 1 @,@ 310 yards and 9 touchdowns . Tight ends Ben <unk> and Dallas Clark were also reliable targets , each recording over 30 receptions for over 300 yards . On the ground , rookie running back Joseph Addai led the team with 1 @,@ 081 yards and a 4 @.@ 8 yards @-@ per @-@ carry average despite not starting any games in the regular season . He also caught 40 receptions for 325 yards and scored 8 touchdowns . Running back Dominic Rhodes was also a major contributor , rushing for 641 yards and catching 36 passes for 251 yards . The offensive line was led by Pro Bowlers Jeff Saturday and Tarik Glenn . On special teams , the Colts signed kicker Adam Vinatieri to replace Vanderjagt . While Vinatieri 's career field goal percentage was lower , the Colts considered him to be an improvement because of his reputation for making " clutch " kicks , a reputation aided by his game winning field goals in Super Bowl XXXVI and Super Bowl XXXVIII . 
 Indianapolis ' defense ranked second in the NFL in fewest passing yards allowed . Dwight Freeney and Robert Mathis ( who recorded 9 @.@ 5 sacks and forced 4 fumbles ) were widely considered to be among the best pass @-@ rushing defensive ends in the NFL . Behind them , linebacker Cato June led the team in tackles ( 92 ) and interceptions ( 3 ) . The Colts ' run defense , however , was a major problem , giving up 2 @,@ 768 yards on the ground , an average of 173 per game and last in the NFL . Another major issue for the Colts was their coverage teams , as they ranked 30th out of 32 teams in average kickoff return yardage allowed and 31st in average punt return yardage allowed . 
 Indianapolis started out the season winning their first nine games , but ended up losing four of their next seven and finished with a 12 – 4 record , giving them the # 3 playoff seed . Thus , having to play in a wild card playoff game . In the playoffs , they defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 23 @-@ 8 , defeated the Baltimore Ravens 15 @-@ 6 in the divisional round , and advanced to Super Bowl XLI with a 38 @-@ 34 win over the New England Patriots in the AFC Championship game . 
 = = = = Regular season statistical comparison = = = = 
 The chart below provides a comparison of regular season statistics in key categories ( overall rank amongst 32 teams in parentheses ) . 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 Although the Colts ' rushing defense looked extremely weak during the season , it ended up being a key factor on their road to the Super Bowl . First , Indianapolis defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 23 – 8 , holding Chiefs running back Larry Johnson ( who rushed for 1 @,@ 789 yards during the season ) to just 32 yards on 13 carries . Then , they defeated the Baltimore Ravens 15 – 6 , winning on a playoff record @-@ tying five field goals by Vinatieri and holding running back Jamal Lewis ( who rushed for 1 @,@ 132 yards during the season ) to just 53 yards . 
 Then the Colts faced their arch @-@ rival New England Patriots in the AFC Championship Game . New England jumped to an early 21 – 3 lead , but Indianapolis stormed back in the second half , outscoring the Patriots 32 – 13 with an additional field goal late in the first half . With 2 : 22 left in the game , the Colts had the ball on their own 20 @-@ yard line trailing 34 – 31 . On the first four plays of the drive , Manning completed three passes , moving the ball 69 yards to the Patriots 11 @-@ yard line in just 24 seconds . Three plays later , Addai scored a 3 @-@ yard touchdown run to put them in the lead , 38 – 34 with only 60 seconds left in regulation . The Patriots responded with a drive to the Colts 45 @-@ yard line , but defensive back Marlin Jackson ended the drive with an interception to give Indianapolis the win . This happened to be the biggest comeback in AFC @-@ NFC Conference Championship history . 
 Meanwhile , the Bears started out their post @-@ season with a 27 – 24 win over the Seattle Seahawks with Robbie Gould 's 49 @-@ yard field goal in overtime . One week later , they defeated the New Orleans Saints 39 – 14 in the NFC Championship Game . Chicago dominated most of the game , jumping to a 16 – 0 early lead . Two touchdown passes from Saints quarterback Drew Brees , cut the score to 16 – 14 , but the Bears responded with 23 unanswered points to propel them to their first Super Bowl since 1985 . Thomas Jones finished the game with a franchise postseason record 123 rushing yards and two touchdowns . 
 It was the first time since the 1996 postseason that the home team won both of the conference championship games . The Colts were the first dome team to win the Super Bowl in an outdoor game ( the St. Louis Rams were the first dome team to win a Super Bowl , XXXIV inside the Georgia Dome in Atlanta ) . The 2006 Indianapolis Colts were the first division champion to win a Super Bowl with four postseason wins and the second division champion ( 2003 Carolina Panthers ) to win a conference title with three postseason wins . 
 For the Bears , this marked the first time that a Chicago sports team not owned by Jerry Reinsdorf had reached the finals in their league since the Blackhawks lost in the 1992 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 = = = Super Bowl pre @-@ game practices and notes = = = 
 The Indianapolis Colts held pre @-@ game practices for Super Bowl XLI at the Miami Dolphins Training Facility on the campus of Nova Southeastern University in Davie , Florida . The Colts ' " Team and Family " hotel was the Marriott Harbor Beach . At the 2007 Indianapolis 500 pre @-@ race ceremonies on May 27 , 2007 , eventual Super Bowl XLI MVP Peyton Manning stated to ABC Sports commentator Brent Musburger the day before the game that two @-@ time Indianapolis 500 winner Hélio Castroneves gave a pep talk to the Colts team . 
 The Chicago Bears held pre @-@ game practices for Super Bowl XLI at the Miami Hurricanes Football Facility , on the campus of the University of Miami in Coral Gables , Florida . 
 Chicago defensive tackle Tank Johnson was required to request a judge 's order to leave the state of Illinois due to an arrest for unlicensed ownership of six firearms and two assault rifles . On January 23 , 2007 , the judge granted him permission to travel out of state to play in the Super Bowl . 
 Chicago and Indianapolis are the two closest cities , geographically , to ever play in a Super Bowl ; at 182 miles ( 293 km ) apart ( connected by a route that is mostly Interstate 65 ) , they are slightly closer than New York and Baltimore , whose teams played each other at III ( 207 miles ) and XXXV ( 188 miles ) . This prompted Colts coach Tony Dungy to joke to Jim Nantz , at the end of the AFC Championship game , that the two teams should split the difference and play the game in Fort Wayne . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The game was televised in the United States by CBS in high @-@ definition with play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Jim Nantz and color commentator Phil Simms . This was the first Super Bowl announced by Nantz . Additionally , the game had Steve Tasker ( Bears sideline ) and Solomon <unk> ( Colts sideline ) reporting on the sidelines and Lesley Visser ( Bears sideline ) and Sam Ryan ( Colts sideline ) in the stands . 
 This was the first Super Bowl aired on CBS since the Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake incident three years earlier , in Super Bowl XXXVIII ; and the first since the Viacom / CBS split at the end of 2005 . Extensive pre @-@ game coverage , hosted by The NFL Today team of James Brown , Shannon Sharpe , Boomer Esiason and Dan Marino , whose name graces the address of the game site ( <unk> Dan Marino Boulevard ) , began at noon ( US EST ) with NFL Films ' " Road to the Super Bowl " year in review ( narrated by Tom Selleck ) . This was followed by " The Phil Simms All @-@ Iron Team " , and a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour Super Bowl Today pre @-@ game show followed by game coverage at 6 : 25 PM . Other contributors to the pre @-@ game show included Katie Couric , anchor of the CBS Evening News , Armen <unk> , CBS News Chief Investigative <unk> , Randy Cross , who reported from Iraq where U.S. military forces played a touch football game known as " The Baghdad Bowl " and Dick Enberg , who participated in his 12th Super Bowl telecast as a host , play @-@ by @-@ play announcer , or contributor . Westwood One provided radio coverage of the event , with Marv Albert and Boomer Esiason as announcers . 
 The American Forces Network ( AFN ) provided coverage of the Super Bowl for U.S. forces stationed overseas and to all U.S. Navy ships at sea . 
 The opening title sequence of CBS television coverage featured the composition Lux Aeterna , by artist Clint Mansell , in the background . 
 Nielsen Media Research reported 93 million viewers for Super Bowl XLI , making it at the time the fifth most watched program in U.S. television history ( trailing only the M * A * S * H finale and Super Bowls XLIII , XXX , and XLII ) . 
 = = = Commercials = = = 
 Advertising rates were reported as being slightly higher than in the year before , with CBS confirming a price of $ 2 @.@ 6 million for some 30 @-@ second spots , compared with $ 2 @.@ 5 million during Super Bowl XL . However , CNN reported that after discounts , the average price is likely closer to $ 1 @.@ 8 to $ 2 million . Familiar advertisers in recent years such as Anheuser @-@ Busch , <unk> , General Motors and Coca @-@ Cola bought multiple advertising spots , and other popular advertisers like Go Daddy and Emerald Nuts had commercials this year . 
 The only major hype related to commercials in the months leading up to Super Bowl XLI involved various campaigns to allow consumers to be involved in the creation of Super Bowl ads , inspired by consumer @-@ generated content sites like YouTube . Frito @-@ Lay announced a campaign in September 2006 to allow the public to submit ads for their Doritos brand and vote on the best one , which aired during the Super Bowl . Doritos actually aired two of the ads due to a close voting margin ; the winning ad ( featuring a chance meeting with a man and a woman that feature the qualities of Doritos ) aired in the first quarter , while a second ( with a checkout lady overly enamored with the product ) aired in the second quarter . The five finalists each received $ 10 @,@ 000 in this contest . General Motors announced a similar contest , open only to college students , for their Chevrolet brand ; however , the ad would be produced professionally based on ideas suggested by the public . The winning ad featured men gathering around an HHR model with women in it and stripping off their clothes and giving it a car wash . The NFL itself advertised a similar contest to generate suggestions for a commercial promoting the league , with the winning concept featuring fans ' disappointment that their teams ' season was over . 
 The annual USA Today Super Bowl Ad Meter survey chose a Budweiser ad featuring crabs worshiping an ice chest with that particular beer inside as the top ad of Super Bowl XLI , followed by another Bud commercial featuring a stray dog with mud spots climbing onto the brewery 's trademark <unk> @-@ drawn wagon in a parade . In all , Anheuser @-@ Busch took seven of the top ten spots in the annual survey , sweeping the top three spots . A YouTube user survey chose the Doritos " Snack Hard " ad ( produced for the incredible price of $ 12 , the cost of three bags of the snack product ) as their top ad , that ad finished fourth in the USA Today survey . <unk> results were slightly different with only 6 of Anheuser @-@ Busch 's ads finishing in the top ten . The highest ranked being the Bud Light " Rock , Paper , Scissors " spot . Also in the top ten were Blockbuster Video 's " Mouse " , Doritos ' " Car Wreck " , GM 's " Robot " and Taco Bell 's " Lion 's Talk ' Carne ' . " 
 One ad that drew criticism from the gay community was for the Snickers candy bar featuring two men accidentally " kissing " each other after sharing the product in question , then proceeded to rip chest hairs as a manly act as homophobic . The ad proved to be controversial , and the ad was cancelled the next day by <unk> USA ( Mars , Incorporated 's snack food division ) , and three other versions were deleted from the <unk> web site . The ad was ninth in the USA Today ad survey , and according to a <unk> publicist , not intended to harm anyone . 
 A different ad for General Motors featured a laid off assembly line robot contemplating suicide , which drew criticism from the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention . The group asked for an apology from GM , and that the ad be taken off the air and the company 's website . The suicide scene was replaced with a scene of the robot watching a car being crushed at a junkyard when it was shown again during the 79th Academy Awards on February 25 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 The Super Bowl was broadcast live in Canada on CBS ( which is available in Canada ) as well as Global TV and NTV which both took the main CBS commentary , and on the French cable channel RDS . In the United Kingdom the Super Bowl was broadcast on ITV1 , Sky Sports 1 & Sky Sports <unk> with Sky Sports taking the main CBS commentary and ITV taking the NFL supplied international commentary feed of Spero Dedes and Sterling Sharpe . 
 Super Bowl XLI was broadcast in over 200 countries . Amongst the television networks who broadcast Super Bowl XLI were : 
 = = Entertainment = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ game ceremonies = = = 
 Before the game , Cirque du Soleil , Romero Britto and Louie Vega performed as the pre @-@ game act , and Billy Joel sang the National Anthem , accompanying himself on piano . He also performed at Super Bowl XXIII , which was played at the same venue . Joel became the second person to sing the National Anthem twice for a Super Bowl ; Aaron Neville sang the national anthem before Super Bowl XXIV , in New Orleans , and Super Bowl XL ( along with Aretha Franklin ) , in Detroit . Joel also became the most recent male artist to perform the national anthem as all performers who sang after him were female . 
 Marlee Matlin and Jason Hay @-@ Southwell performed the National Anthem in American Sign Language . 
 Besides participating in the CBS telecast of the pre @-@ game show , Dan Marino also participated in the coin toss along with Norma Hunt , the widow of Lamar Hunt , the former owner of the Kansas City Chiefs and the man who gave the Super Bowl its name . 
 = = = Halftime show = = = 
 American singer and musician Prince performed in the halftime show . The setlist for Prince 's performance was a short rendition of " We Will Rock You " by Queen , his signature hit " Let 's Go Crazy " , " Baby , I 'm a Star " , cover versions of the Creedence Clearwater Revival hit " Proud Mary " , the Bob Dylan composition " All Along the Watchtower " , and the Foo Fighters song " Best of You " , and in light of the conditions , he fittingly finished the performance with another signature song , " Purple Rain " in the downpour . The 12 @-@ minute performance featured Prince accompanied by two dancers he calls " The <unk> " and the Florida A & M University marching band , the Marching 100 . Prince had rehearsed with the drum line for a week before the performance . The performance was on a large , central stage which was shaped after the artist 's logo , and was outlined with lights . He played before 74 @,@ 512 fans at Dolphin Stadium ( who had been given flashlights to point at the stage during the performance of Purple Rain ) . The event was carried " to the biggest audience of his life – 140 million television viewers . " Overall , the show was energetic and quite well received by the rain @-@ soaked audience surrounding the stage . Music critics were extremely enthusiastic about his performance , one calling it " arguably the best halftime show in Super Bowl history " , and others saying it was one of the best ever . 
 Following the game , however , controversy emerged about a silhouetted camera shot of Prince , projected against a large sheet by a bright light on the other side of the performer . The controversy centered around his guitar , which detractors claimed seemed phallic , and critics stating that it " looked embarrassingly rude , crude and unfortunately placed . " Though the guitar has been considered by some an extension of a male player 's sexuality ( especially highlighted by such artists as Jimi Hendrix , Eddie Van Halen , and even Prince himself ) , supporters of Prince say that the show did not , in fact , become any more sexually charged than usual , noting that " a guitar at waist level does look like an enormous phallus . " ABC late @-@ night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! responded to this mild controversy by including two satirically <unk> Super Bowl clips on its weekly segment " This Week in Unnecessary Censorship " for the February 9 , 2007 episode . The first " censored " clip was the kickoff show introduction for CBS ' coverage of the Super Bowl , with the first two letters of " kickoff " blurred out as if " <unk> " were censored , then with a clip of the shadow of Prince playing guitar with the guitar neck blurred out as if an actual penis were being blurred . 
 = = = Post @-@ game ceremonies = = = 
 Former Colts and Dolphins head coach Don Shula presented the Vince Lombardi Trophy to the Colts after the game , and Peyton Manning was named MVP . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The Bears won the coin toss and elected to receive . For the first time in Super Bowl history , the game was played in the rain , which was continuous throughout the game . 
 The rain did not hinder Bears ' return man Devin Hester , who ran back the opening kickoff 92 yards for a touchdown to give Chicago the then earliest lead in Super Bowl history . The Colts avoided kicking to Hester for the rest of the game , allowing him only one punt return , and choosing to squib kick whenever Hester was in the deep kickoff return position . 
 On Indianapolis ' first drive of the game , defensive back Chris Harris intercepted a deep , third @-@ down pass from Peyton Manning and returned it 6 yards to the Bears ' 35 @-@ yard line . However , Chicago could not gain a first down on their ensuing possession and they were forced to punt . After several short runs and passes , Manning beat the Bears ' defense with a 53 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Reggie Wayne , cutting the Bears ' lead to 7 – 6 . The touchdown occurred because of a mental error on the Bears ' secondary . Cornerback Charles Tillman passed Reggie Wayne onto safety <unk> Manning . However , Manning chose to follow tight end Ben <unk> over the middle , leaving Wayne all alone . The score remained the same , at 7 – 6 , after punter / holder Hunter Smith fumbled the snap on the point @-@ after @-@ touchdown ( PAT ) attempt . On the ensuing kickoff , Chicago tight end Gabe Reid fumbled Adam Vinatieri 's bouncing kickoff while being tackled by Robert Mathis ; Colts linebacker <unk> Hagler recovered the loose ball . However , on the next play , Indianapolis gave the ball back when running back Joseph Addai fumbled the handoff and Bears defensive end Mark Anderson recovered it . 
 On the first play after the turnover , Thomas Jones ' 52 @-@ yard run moved the ball to the Colts ' 5 @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Rex Grossman threw a 4 @-@ yard touchdown pass to receiver Muhsin Muhammad , giving the Bears a 14 – 6 lead . After forcing an Indianapolis punt , Chicago lost another turnover when Cedric Benson 's fumble was recovered by Colts defensive end Dwight Freeney on the Bears ' 43 @-@ yard line . Indianapolis subsequently advanced to the 36 @-@ yard line , but decided to punt rather than risk a 53 @-@ yard field @-@ goal attempt . 
 Following a Chicago punt , Indianapolis drove 47 yards and scored with Vinatieri 's 29 @-@ yard field goal to make the score 14 – 9 . Chicago was forced to punt again on their next drive , and return man Terrence Wilkins returned the ball 12 yards to his own 42 @-@ yard line . Manning started out the drive with a 22 @-@ yard completion to Marvin Harrison . His next pass went to tight end Dallas Clark for 17 yards . Two more completions moved the ball to the Bears ' 11 @-@ yard line , and then Dominic Rhodes took the ball to the end zone with three consecutive carries , the last one a 1 @-@ yard touchdown run to give his team a 16 – 14 lead with 6 : 09 left in the second quarter . 
 After another Chicago punt , the Colts advanced to the Bears ' 36 @-@ yard line before Tillman ended the drive by forcing and recovering a fumble from tight end Bryan Fletcher . But on the next play , Grossman fumbled a snap , and Colts defensive lineman Raheem Brock recovered the ball . Manning then led the Colts to Chicago 's 17 @-@ yard line . With two seconds left , Vinatieri attempted a 36 @-@ yard field goal , but his kick sailed wide left , and the score remained 16 – 14 at halftime . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Wilkins returned the second half kickoff 26 yards to the Colts 's 38 @-@ yard line . On the ensuing possession , Addai rushed five times for 25 yards and caught four passes for 19 yards as the Colts drove 56 yards in 13 plays and scored with a 29 @-@ yard field goal from Vinatieri , increasing their lead to 19 – 14 . On the Bears ' next drive , Jones started out with a 14 @-@ yard run , and then Muhammad caught a 9 @-@ yard pass , bringing up second down and one on the Colts ' 45 @-@ yard line . But on the next play , Grossman was sacked for an 11 @-@ yard loss by Anthony McFarland . Then , on third down , he fumbled the snap . Grossman recovered the fumble himself , but the Bears were forced to punt , and Wilkins returned the ball 12 yards to the Colts ' 36 @-@ yard line . Rhodes then gained 52 yards on four carries , with a facemask penalty adding another 10 . Chicago managed to halt the drive at their own 2 @-@ yard line , but Vinatieri kicked his third field goal to make the score 22 – 14 . 
 Chicago tight end John Gilmore picked up Vinatieri 's bouncing kickoff and returned it 9 @-@ yards to his own 45 @-@ yard line , with an unnecessary roughness penalty on Mathis adding another 15 yards and giving the Bears a first down on the Colts ' 40 @-@ yard line . Chicago could only gain 14 yards on their ensuing possession , but it was enough for Robbie Gould to make a 44 @-@ yard field goal , cutting the score to 22 – 17 . After an Indianapolis 7 @-@ play drive ended in a punt , Chicago started on their own 20 @-@ yard line with 13 : 38 left in the game . But four plays later , Colts defensive back Kelvin Hayden intercepted a pass intended for Muhammad and returned it 56 yards for a touchdown . 
 From that point on , the Colts took over the game . Four plays after the ensuing kickoff , Colts defensive back Bob Sanders intercepted Grossman 's pass and returned it 38 yards to the Bears 41 @-@ yard line . Chicago 's defense eventually forced a punt , but Smith 's 32 @-@ yard kick pinned the Bears back at their own 8 @-@ yard line . The Bears drove to their own 47 , but on a fourth down conversion attempt , tight end Desmond Clark dropped a potential first down reception after being leveled by defensive back Matt Giordano . The Colts subsequently called eight consecutive Dominic Rhodes runs before turning the ball over on downs themselves , leaving only 1 : 42 remaining in regulation . Five plays later , the game was over . 
 = = = Box score = = = 
 = = = Statistical overview = = = 
 This was the third Super Bowl to have two players rush for more than 100 yards as Dominic Rhodes had 113 for the Colts and Thomas Jones had 112 for the Bears . Tony Dungy is the third man to win the Super Bowl as a head coach as well as a player , following Tom Flores and Mike Ditka . 
 For the Colts , Rhodes rushed for 113 yards and a touchdown , while also catching an 8 @-@ yard reception . Addai rushed for 77 yards and caught 10 passes for 66 yards . Wilkins returned four kickoffs for 89 yards and 3 punts for 42 yards . Adam Vinatieri became the first kicker ever to play in five Super Bowls and the first to win four Super Bowl rings . Vinatieri 's three field goals and two extra points gave him a total of 49 points for the entire 2006 post @-@ season , an NFL record . The Colts ' win was the first major professional championship for Indiana since the Indiana Pacers ' ABA title in the 1972 – 73 season . 
 Hester 's touchdown for the Bears on the opening kickoff was the first one in Super Bowl history , and the ninth kick return for a touchdown in a Super Bowl ; only three of the nine teams who did this went on to win the game ( the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl XXXI , the Baltimore Ravens in Super Bowl XXXV , and the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII ) . Hester 's return also kept a streak alive for there being a kickoff return for a touchdown in each Super Bowl played at Dolphin Stadium . Hester 's and Wayne 's touchdowns in the first quarter marked the first time in Super Bowl history the first two touchdowns were scored by players from the same college ( University of Miami ) . Jones was the Bears ' top rusher with 112 yards , while also catching four passes for 18 yards . Desmond Clark was the Bears top receiver with six receptions for 64 yards . Grossman completed 20 of 28 passes for 165 yards and a touchdown , with two interceptions , leaving him with a QB rating of 68 @.@ 3 for the game . Muhsin Muhammad became the third player ever to score a touchdown in the Super Bowl for two different teams , joining Ricky <unk> and Jerry Rice . 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 Source : NFL.com Super Bowl XLI 
 = = = Statistical comparison = = = 
 = = = Individual leaders = = = 
 <unk> / attempts <unk> <unk> gain <unk> 
 = = Starting lineups = = 
 Source : 
 Hall of Fame ‡ 
 = = Officials = = 
 Referee : Tony <unk> # 99 
 Umpire : Carl <unk> # 124 
 Head <unk> : George Hayward # 54 
 Line Judge : Ron <unk> # 107 
 Field Judge : Jim <unk> # 58 
 Side Judge : John Parry # 132 
 Back Judge : Perry <unk> # 46 
 Alternate Referee : Jeff <unk> # 42 
 Alternate Umpire : Butch Hannah # 40 
 Alternate Line Judge : Carl Johnson # 101 
 Alternate Field Judge : Buddy Horton # 82 
 Alternate Back Judge : Richard Reels # 83 
 = = Controversies prohibiting fan parties and presentations = = 
 = = = Prohibiting tailgating = = = 
 The NFL upset many fans by banning the traditional practice of tailgating at Super Bowl XLI . Originally , spokesmen for Dolphin Stadium announced that tailgating would be permitted as usual , however the NFL quickly contradicted this statement announcing an NFL owner @-@ imposed ban on all tailgating and non @-@ ticketed fans were forbidden within a two @-@ block @-@ radius of the stadium . 
 = = = Prohibiting church display = = = 
 The NFL upset a large number of fans by threatening churches with lawsuits if they had Super Bowl parties . National Football League assistant counsel Rachel L. Margolies sent a letter to the Fall Creek Baptist Church in Indianapolis , ordering the church to cancel its party and remove the trademarked Super Bowl name from its website . She said that the church could not use the words " Super Bowl " as it violates trademark law , could not charge admission as that violates copyright law , could not use its projection screen ( only one television could be used and it could not be over 55 inches ) , and could not " promote a message " in connection with the game . Regarding the last point , the Fall Creek Baptist church planned to also show an extra video to highlight the Christian testimonies of Colts coach Tony Dungy and Chicago Bears coach Lovie Smith . " While this may be a noble message " , Rachel L. Margolies wrote , " we are consistent in refusing the use of our game broadcasts in connection with events that promote a message , no matter the content . " Sports bars nationwide were allowed to show the game , as are businesses that televise sports as part of their everyday operations because they don 't charge admission and they leave the message the NFL intended intact . 
 The Indianapolis Star picked up the story , and soon pastors across the U.S. were working to cancel their parties . Immediately the NFL received a backlash of bad publicity , with indignant football fans in constant sarcasm ( akin to rules imposed about on @-@ field behavior i.e. taunting opposition teams ) referring to the NFL as the " No Fun League . " For example , the enforcement of this policy earned the NFL a " Worst Person in the World " silver on the edition of February 2 , 2007 of Countdown with Keith Olbermann . 
 After a long series of bad press , the NFL issued a written statement clarifying their policy , saying that they did not object to churches hosting Super Bowl parties so long as they did not charge admission and showed the game on " a television of the type commonly used at home " . This statement did not attempt to forbid coordination of any other message with the game , something typically done by churches , nor did it attempt to forbid the use of the term " Super Bowl . " 
 = David Jewett Waller , Sr. = 
 David Jewett Waller , Sr. ( January 26 , 1815 – December 7 , 1893 ) was an American Presbyterian minister , entrepreneur , landowner and civic leader who lived in the American state of Pennsylvania . He also helped build several local railroads , such as the North and West Branch Railway and also owned many coal mines . By the time of his death , he was one of the most well @-@ known people in northeastern Pennsylvania . He helped increasing the population and industrialization of Bloomsburg , Pennsylvania . He also organized and created a number of churches in Pennsylvania . 
 Waller was born in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania and attended the Wilkes @-@ Barre Academy , Williams College , and the Princeton Theological Seminary . He spent most of his life in Bloomsburg , Pennsylvania , where he died . He was ordained in 1839 and attended General Assemblies of the Presbyterian Church in addition to preaching in Columbia County . He retired from preaching in 1871 and most of his involvement in industrial and commercial work started at this point , including involvement in the railroad and the coal industries . He died in 1893 at the age of 78 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Waller was born on January 26 , 1815 , in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania , the oldest of five children . He was born to Phineas Waller and Elizabeth Jewett and was descended from early settlers of Massachusetts and Connecticut . His ancestors moved to Pennsylvania two generations before his birth . When he was eight years old , his father moved to <unk> , New York , while he and his half @-@ brother Nathan remained in Pennsylvania . He then went to live with his aunts Rachel and Sally , enabling him to attend the Wilkes @-@ Barre Academy and avoid his mother , who was an alcoholic . Waller attended the Wilkes @-@ Barre Academy and received good grades , despite what historian William M. <unk> called a " prickly " personality . However , he received good grades in school . 
 Waller taught Sunday school while in his early teens . When he was 15 , he attended Williams College , from which he graduated in 1834 . At Williams College , he came near to being expelled after arguing with a teacher . After Williams College , he considered being a lawyer , businessman or government worker . His brother William advised against his becoming a government worker or businessman , so he decided to become a minister . He attended the Princeton Theological Seminary starting in October 1834 and continuing for three years . Here he also came near to being expelled after a dispute with the teacher John Breckenridge . He graduated from the Princeton Theological Seminary in 1837 with a Bachelor of Divinity degree . Waller moved to Bloomsburg , Pennsylvania in 1838 . 
 = = Service to the church = = 
 In 1838 , the Presbyterian Church in Milton , Pennsylvania requested Waller 's service , but he instead began preaching in Bloomsburg , Pennsylvania . He also preached in Wilkes @-@ Barre and Lancaster in late 1838 and in Danville and Milton in early 1839 . On May 1 , 1839 , he was ordained in Bloomsburg , Pennsylvania . His Presbyterian ministry began on a church on Third Street in Bloomsburg . When he began preaching , his ministry covered all of Columbia County , as well as an area from Danville to the Wyoming Valley . In 1840 , he stopped preaching at Briar Creek and Berwick , as they became part of a separate ministry . In 1842 , he began preaching in Orangeville and New <unk> he preached in Espy since at least 1857 . Due to the size of his ministry , he was never able to preach at a given church more than once every two weeks and only preached at most churches once a month . He typically traveled approximately 5000 miles per year to preach or conduct funerals . Initially his salary was $ 600 . 
 Waller was a counsel in ecclesiastical trials . He went to the General Assemblies in 1844 , 1853 , 1861 , 1865 to 1867 , 1876 , 1886 , and 1890 . He was interested in foreign missions and devoted one service per month to news from foreign missions and was elected to a four @-@ year term on the Board of Foreign Missions in 1865 . He was elected to be the Moderator of Presbytery in 1842 , 1851 , and 1881 . At that time he was the only person to be elected to that position more than once . 
 In addition to preaching at churches , Waller also revived , organized , or founded a number of them . In 1839 , he revived the <unk> Church , near Briar Creek , and a church at Berwick . He and two other people officially organized the Presbyterian church in Orangeville in October 1843 . He and three others also attempted unsuccessfully to organize a church it Catawissa . In 1856 , he traveled to Schuylkill County and preached in churches there numerous times and in 1857 , he and two other people organized a church in Ashland in Schuylkill County . 
 = = Land purchase and sale = = 
 Waller owned 20 percent ( 900 acres ) of the land in Bloomsburg at various times during his life , which is more than any other person has held in the town to date . He also owned land in other parts of Columbia County and the Wyoming <unk> his lands in Bloomsburg primarily included northeastern , southeastern , and south @-@ central Bloomsburg , but also included some small areas of land near Bloomsburg 's border with Hemlock Township . He sold some of his land , but also donated parts of it by selling those areas for $ 1 . 
 Waller developed a number of community features on this land , including five churches , the Columbia County Courthouse and Jail , and several industries such as the Magee Carpet Company and the Bloomsburg Silk Mills . In 1870 , he sold three acres of land on Seventh Street in Bloomsburg for the purpose of building a park , but the land was instead used for athletic competitions . In 1890 , he sold two lots at the corner of Sixth Street and Iron Street to Paul E. Wirt , a fountain pen manufacturer . He also hired the town engineer Samuel <unk> to develop Bloomsburg from Fifth Street to the Susquehanna River . Most of this work was done after Waller was no longer a minister . 
 In 1869 , Waller purchased 330 acres of land along Fishing Creek from the Bloomsburg Iron Company and for $ 3000 and later sold it for $ 19 @,@ 037 . He sold some land in Mount Pleasant Township for a place to house poor people . He also made a number of a number of purchases of land near the end of his life , including 93 acres at the confluence of Fishing Creek and Raven Creek in 1890 and 22 @.@ 5 acres along the Susquehanna River in Scott Township and Bloomsburg in May 1893 . 
 In 1854 , Waller and two other people were chosen to find a location for Bloomsburg 's Rosemont Cemetery . They chose a hill immediately north of Bloomsburg , which was partly his land , so on August 1 , 1855 he sold them 2 acres and 33 @.@ 5 perches of land to the Rosemont Cemetery Company for $ 490 . He was president of the company from 1856 to his death in 1893 . 
 = = Work in industries = = 
 Waller was also involved in matters related the local railroads . On October 3 , 1877 , he sold some of his land in Bloomsburg to the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad for the purpose of a new railroad station . He was also involved in the building of the North and West Branch Railway between 1880 and 1881 . He started raising money for this railroad in 1872 and broke the ground for the railroad in March 1872 . Waller put most of his money into the building of the North and West Branch Railway . The work on the railroad stopped during the Panic of 1873 but resumed in 1880 . The North and West Branch Railway Company was sold in 1881 but he managed to regain much of the company . The company was leased to the Pennsylvania Railroad on November 23 , 1881 , but remained its own company for approximately 20 years . He was president of the North and West Branch Railway in the 1880s . In 1888 , he sold a piece of land to the town of Bloomsburg for the purpose of building the Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad through it . It was he who initially conceived the idea of the Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad . Waller also successfully convinced the Lackawanna and Bloomsburg Railroad to move its Bloomsburg station to his land on Market Street . 
 Waller was involved in the process of mining anthracite and owned large tracts of coal @-@ containing land . In 1837 , he invested jointly in an area of coal @-@ containing land in Plymouth Township ( now Larksville ) with his uncle , <unk> Collins . He and Collins divided the land into their own parcels in 1840 . He and several of his siblings also bought a piece of coal @-@ mining land from his father for $ 10 @,@ 000 in 1857 . Waller gradually bought the coal @-@ containing lots of his siblings until he had close to 250 acres of land with coal in 1872 . In 1878 , he purchased 28 acres of coal @-@ mining land in Plymouth Township from Joseph <unk> 's heirs . Altogether his coal @-@ mining lands outputted 50 @,@ 000 tons ( 45 @,@ 454 tonnes ) per year , although this was only a small portion of the total coal output of the Wyoming Valley . After retiring as a minister he also purchased 2000 acres of coal @-@ mining land near Chattanooga . 
 = = Other work = = 
 In 1834 , Waller went to New York City to be a tutor , but left after three or four weeks . This was the last time in his life that he was paid as a teacher but he still opened and funded some schools . He opened a classical school in Bloomsburg , which was built in 1839 , and he contributed $ 3500 to it . Shortly after arriving in Bloomsburg , he organized a singing school and also created a Bible class in 1839 . The class continued until after his death . He helped to open Bloomsburg 's State Normal School . He was appointed a trustee of Lafayette College in 1849 by the Synod of Philadelphia . He held that position until 1879 . He was also on Lafayette College 's Ways and Means committee and helped stop the college from closing in 1852 . In 1856 , Waller helped convert a classical school into the Bloomsburg Literary Institute and served as one of the nine initial trustees . He resigned from being a trustee in 1866 after a dispute about where to set up a new building for the institute . Despite resigning from the trustees , he helped conduct the opening ceremony of the institute 's new building on April 3 , 1867 . 
