 In 1876 , Waller ran as a Republican candidate for US Congress . He lost the election by <unk> votes to Democratic lawyer Francis Dolan Collins . He did , however , win Columbia County in the election . He was also the proprietor of a furnace on Roaring Creek and built the Bloomsburg Sanitarium at the corner of Sixth Street and Market Street in Bloomsburg in 1870 . Waller was vice president of the State Agricultural Society . He also extended Market Street in Bloomsburg and built many houses along it . Along with John Ramsay , he built First Street in Bloomsburg and sold the lots on it to Welsh immigrants some time before 1847 . He also laid out other residential streets in Bloomsburg . He supported moving the county seat of Columbia County from Danville to Bloomsburg , although he was unable to convince Danville 's businessmen to move their industries to Bloomsburg . In 1866 , he was made one of three trustees of Bloomsburg 's Board of Trade . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On May 23 , 1839 , Waller married Philadelphian Julia <unk> . He first met <unk> while visiting friends in Philadelphia during his time at the Princeton Theological Seminary . The couple had nine children between 1840 and 1858 , six of whom survived to adulthood , and five of whom were alive at the time of his death . He lived at the corner of 5th and Market Streets in Bloomsburg , although at one point he owned much of the land between 4th Street , the Susquehanna River , Railroad Street , and Ferry Road in Bloomsburg . In 1871 , he suffered a driving accident and was temporarily injured . He was in another accident in 1875 and due to this , he needed to walk with crutches for the remainder of his life . Waller also suffered from rheumatism and neuralgia due to extensive traveling . He retired from being a minister on April 16 , 1871 . He died in on December 7 , 1893 , at the age of 79 . The services for his death were held in his home . The historian J.H. Battle made note of Waller 's hospitality . He was interested in geology and another Presbyterian minister gave him a large mineralogy @-@ related collection in 1848 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On the day of Waller 's funeral , businesses in Bloomsburg closed from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. , a unique honor in the town 's history . He was buried in the Old Rosemont Cemetery . During his lifetime , Waller made 25 purchases and 130 sales of land . By 1887 the area that he owned between 4th and 9th Streets in Bloomsburg were home to more than 200 houses . The community of Waller , Pennsylvania is named after him . In his two @-@ column obituary in Bloomsburg 's newspaper , it was stated that " No other man has left or probably will leave a greater impression on this community that he [ Waller ] did " . There is a stained glass window that features Waller on a church in Bloomsburg . Approximately 20 of his sermons still survive . He was also the creator of the Waller Trust , which existed until the 1970s . 
 = Port of Liverpool Building = 
 The Port of Liverpool Building ( formerly Mersey Docks and Harbour Board Offices , more commonly known as the Dock Office ) is a Grade II * listed building in Liverpool , England . It is located at the Pier Head and , along with the neighbouring Royal Liver Building and Cunard Building , is one of Liverpool 's Three Graces , which line the city 's waterfront . It is also part of Liverpool 's UNESCO @-@ designated World Heritage Maritime Mercantile City . 
 The building was designed by Sir Arnold <unk> and F.B. Hobbs and was developed in collaboration with Briggs and Wolstenholme . It was constructed between 1904 and 1907 , with a reinforced concrete frame that is clad in Portland Stone . The building was the headquarters of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board ( MDHB ) for 87 years , from 1907 to 1994 , when the company relocated to new premises at Seaforth Dock . In 2001 it was sold to Downing , a Liverpool @-@ based property developer , and between 2006 and 2009 underwent a major £ 10m restoration that restored many original features of the building . 
 The Port of Liverpool Building is in the Edwardian Baroque style and is noted for the large dome that sits atop it , acting as the focal point of the building . It is approximately rectangular in shape with canted corners that are topped with stone cupolas . At 220 feet ( 67 m ) the building is the fourteenth tallest building in Liverpool . Like the neighbouring Cunard Building , it is noted for the ornamental detail both on the inside and out , and in particular for the many maritime references and expensive decorative furnishings . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1898 the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board ( MDHB ) decided to close down and infill George 's Dock , which was located on the site of what is the Pier Head today . The land was sold to the Liverpool Corporation in 1900 , although the MDHB opted to keep the southern section so that they could build a new central headquarters for the company , having been previously located at various sites around the city , including the Old Custom 's House . 
 In 1900 a committee was formed by the MDHB to plan and develop a new building for the company . Under the leadership of Robert Gladstone , a competition was launched for local architects to submit designs for the new building . Alfred Waterhouse , a renowned local architect , was brought in to help judge the competition and prizes of £ 300 , £ 200 and £ 100 were offered for the three best designs . In total , seven entries were submitted , with the winning design being that of the architects Sir Arnold <unk> and F.B. Hobbs , which had been developed in collaboration with Briggs and Wolstenholme . Due to boundary changes of the land on which the building was to be built , amendments were made to the design , most notably with the central dome , which was only added at the last minute . 
 In 1903 , with the design now confirmed , the MDHB requested that a number of builders submit a tender document for the construction of the building to the revised design . Over 30 builders were contacted , with William Brown & Son of Manchester winning the contract to construct the new building . Work began in 1904 , with the first nine months of construction focusing on laying the building 's foundations , which were dug to a depth of 30 – 40 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 – 12 @.@ 2 m ) below ground level . The building 's frame was built from reinforced concrete , which was then clad in Portland Stone , a design that meant the building was more fire resistant than with other structural forms . It was completed in 1907 at a cost of approximately £ 250 @,@ 000 , although when the cost of furniture , fittings and professional fees was taken into account , the total cost was nearer £ 350 @,@ 000 . Staff from the MDHB headquarters officially moved into the building on 15 July 1907 , with staff from departments located in other areas of the city moving in throughout the rest of the year . 
 During the Second World War , Liverpool 's importance as a major port saw it become a target for the Luftwaffe and during the May Blitz of 1941 , a heavy bomb exploded in the basement , on the eastern side of the building . The damage from the explosion was significant with the eastern wing being seriously damaged by fire . Nonetheless the building 's structural integrity meant that much of the building could be re @-@ occupied with only temporary repairs . In the aftermath of the war the building was fully restored ; the cost of restoration exceeding the original construction costs . 
 The building acted as the head offices of the MDHB ( renamed the Mersey Docks and Harbour Company in 1972 ) for some 87 years . In 1994 the company moved to new headquarters at the Maritime Centre near Seaforth Dock in the north of the city , in order to be closer to what was now the centre of Liverpool 's docking system . However , the company remained the owners of the building until 2001 when it was acquired by Downing , a Liverpool @-@ based property developer . 
 Plans submitted in 2005 for the restoration of the building were approved by Liverpool City Council . The scheme involved major internal and external work that would fully restore the Grade II * listed building . The plans included opening the building to the public , by creating a new viewing floor inside the dome and a publicly accessible sunken piazza on the riverside frontage that would provide a small parade of restaurants , cafes and shops . A sixth level of the building , which had been " dismantled " in the aftermath of the Second World War , was also to be restored , providing a series of luxury apartments . The first stage of the renovation was completed in early 2008 , when the restoration of the Portland stone on the river facing side of the building was completed . The £ 10m restoration project was fully completed in early 2009 , when the last scaffolding was removed from the outside of the building and 20 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 2 @,@ 000 m2 ) of refurbished office space was completed . 
 = = Architectural design = = 
 The Port of Liverpool Building is one of the Three Graces that line the Pier Head and the architectural features were designed to be reflective of Liverpool 's importance to the maintenance of the British Empire . However , the building that exists today is actually a modified version of the originally chosen design . Initially , the plan had called for the main entrance of the building to be located on the south @-@ west corner , but boundary changes to land on which it was to be built meant that the design was significantly revised to give it the symmetrical look it has today . Notably , the initial design did not include the large dome that sits so prominently above the building today . Inspired by an unused design for Liverpool 's Anglican Cathedral , which had been developed several years earlier , the architects added the dome to the design in order to give the building a more imposing look . This decision , however , was not without controversy , as many board members believed that it should not be down to the Port Authority to " beautify the town " . Nonetheless , it was added to the design , becoming the focal point of the building itself . 
 Designed in Edwardian Baroque style , the Port of Liverpool Building 's structural form has been likened to those of Renaissance palaces . Approximately 264 by 216 feet ( 80 by 66 m ) in size , the building rises to 220 feet ( 67 m ) in height , making it the fourteenth tallest building in the city . Covering five floors , the main body of the building is 80 ft tall to the cornice . The main entrance is located in the centre of the river @-@ facing side of the building and is flanked by two three @-@ metre @-@ high stone statues of women representing " Commerce " and " Industry " , which were designed by Charles John Allen . Each corner of the building is canted and has a tall hexagonal turret that is topped by a stone cupola , which would have originally been crowned by a lantern . Because the building has a large central dome , it has been compared architecturally to many other buildings throughout the world , including Belfast City Hall , the Capitol Building , St. Peter 's Basilica and St. Paul 's Cathedral . 
 The Port of Liverpool Building was constructed using a reinforced concrete frame , which not only made the building structurally strong , but also much more fire resistant than buildings in the past . As a result of being built on the site of the former George ’ s Dock , the building required deeper foundations than normal and in total some 35 @,@ 000 tons of cement were used . Due to the building ’ s proximity to the River Mersey , extensive work was carried out during the development of the basement level in order to make sure it was water resistant . Asphalt was used extensively to coat the floors and walls of the basement , in order to make sure it stayed dry . 
 Internally , the building 's form centres on a full @-@ height , octagonal hall that sits below the central dome . The hall has round , arched openings from the first floor upwards , providing large gallery spaces , whilst its floor is decorated with a mosaic depicting the points of a compass . Office spaces are located off long central corridors , which are decorated with white Calcutta Marble . A large portion of the building costs ( approximately 25 % ) were spent on decorations and fittings ; the inside of the building is lavishly decorated using expensive materials including mahogany from Spain and oak from Danzig for the woodwork , bronze for the floor furniture and fittings , and white marble for the floors and walls . One noted interior feature is the grey granite grand staircase , which is lined with stained glass windows adorned with images of Poseidon , anchors , ships bells and shells and dedications to countries of the British Empire including Singapore , South Africa , Canada and Australia . The grand nature of the inside of the building 's interior has meant that it has been used as a film set in several productions , including The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes ( TV series ) . 
 Throughout the building , there are numerous references to the sea and the maritime operations of both Liverpool and the British Empire . The main entrance gates are decorated with a globe supported by dolphins , while the cast iron gates and gate piers are decorated with mermaids , shells and anchors , and have shields with the initials " M.D. & H.B. " . The outside light fittings are designed such that the lights themselves appear to be held in the hands of the Roman God Neptune . Similarly , the lifts are also decorated with maritime references , in the form of gilded emblems representing the globe , seahorses and anchors . In the central hall , the frieze between the ground and first floor is adorned with the words of psalm 107 : " They that go down to the sea in ships that do business in great waters these see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep . Anno Domini <unk> " . 
 = Nailsea = 
 Nailsea is a town in the unitary authority of North Somerset in the ceremonial county of Somerset , England , approximately 8 miles ( 13 km ) southwest of Bristol and about 11 miles ( 18 km ) northeast of the seaside resort of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . The nearest village is Backwell , which lies south of Nailsea on the opposite side of the Bristol to Exeter railway line . Nailsea is a commuter town with a population of 15 @,@ 630 . 
 The town was an industrial centre based on coal mining and glass manufacture , which have now been replaced by service industries . The surrounding North Somerset Levels has wildlife habitats including the Tickenham , Nailsea and Kenn Moors biological Site of Special Scientific Interest and <unk> Pool / Backwell Lake Local Nature Reserve . Nailsea is close to the M5 motorway and Bristol Airport , and its railway station , Nailsea and Backwell , has services operated by First Great Western . 
 Secondary education is provided by Nailsea School ( rebuilt as an Academy in 2009 ) , and primary education by St Francis School , Grove School , Kingshill School and Golden Valley . Churches include the 14th @-@ century Holy Trinity Church and Christ Church , which was built in 1843 . 
 = = History = = 
 The name of the town may be derived from the Old English for <unk> 's island , although it has also been suggested it was spelt <unk> in 1657 . 
 The parish of Nailsea was part of the Portbury Hundred . Little is known of the area occupied by Nailsea before the coal mining industry began , although it was used as a quarry in Roman times from which pennant sandstone was extracted . The Romans otherwise ignored Nailsea from 40 – 400 AD , but left a small villa near <unk> Bridge . 
 Nailsea 's early economy relied on coal mining , which began as early as the 16th century . The earliest recorded date for coal mining in Nailsea was 1507 when coal was being transported to light fires at Yatton . By the late 1700s the town had a large number of pits . Around this time Nailsea was visited by the social reformer Hannah More who founded a Sunday school for the workers . The Elms Colliery , ( Middle Engine Pit ) , one of the most complete examples of an 18th @-@ century colliery left in England , is now in disrepair . It has been designated a Scheduled Ancient Monument and is included in the Heritage at Risk Register produced by English Heritage . Remains of the old pits , most of which had closed down by the late 19th century as mining capital migrated to the richer seams of South Wales , are still visible around the town . 
 The coal mines attracted glass manufacturer John Robert Lucas , who in 1788 established the Nailsea Glassworks that became the fourth @-@ largest of its kind in the United Kingdom , mostly producing low @-@ grade bottle glass . The works closed down in 1873 , but " Nailsea " glass ( mostly made by glass workers at the end of their shift in Nailsea and at other glass works ) is still sought after by collectors around the world . The site of the glass works has been covered by a Tesco supermarket car park , leaving it relatively accessible for future archaeological digs . Other parts of the site have been cleared and filled with sand to ensure that the remains of the old glass works are preserved . 
 The 15th @-@ century Nailsea Court , southwest of the town , is a Grade I listed building . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Nailsea was part of Long Ashton Rural District from 1894 to 1974 . It is now within the North Somerset unitary authority , which covers part of the ceremonial county of Somerset but it is administered independently of the non @-@ metropolitan county . Its administrative headquarters is in the town hall in Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . 
 Two electoral wards exist in Nailsea . Their area and population are the same as described above . 
 It is in the North Somerset constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . Since the general election of 2010 the constituency has been represented by Liam Fox of the Conservative Party . Nailsea is also part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament , which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Land Yeo river flows to the east of the town . The North Somerset Levels to the west have been drained and farmed by generations of farmers . Tickenham , Nailsea and Kenn Moors SSSI is a 129 @.@ 4 hectare biological Site of Special Scientific Interest . The soils in the area include clays of the Allerton and <unk> Series and peat soils of the Sedgemoor and Godney Series , which are drained by a network of large rhynes and smaller field ditches , which support exceptionally rich plant and invertebrate fauna communities . Exceptional populations of Coleoptera occur , amongst which are at least 12 nationally scarce species and 2 nationally rare species , including Britain ’ s largest water beetle the great silver water beetle ( Hydrophilus piceus ) . There are several other local nature reserves . 
 The <unk> Pool / Backwell Lake Local Nature Reserve , southeast of the town centre and close to the Nailsea and Backwell railway station , was constructed as a balancing pond in the mid @-@ 1970s , and has since become home to various wildfowl and dragonflies and a foraging area for bats . Bird species seen on the reserve include gadwall , shoveller , pochard , tufted duck , grey heron and mute swans . 
 Nearby towns and villages include Backwell , Wraxall , Portishead , Clevedon , and Tickenham . Nailsea is 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the centre of Bristol , and close to the tourist centres of Weston super Mare and Bath . It is 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 14 km ) by road from the port and service area at Avonmouth . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 In common with the rest of South West England , Nailsea has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest , with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) are common . In summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , although convective cloud sometimes forms inland and reduces the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most of the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by the Sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Primary income often comes from employment in the service sector , including industries such as insurance and banking , defence related employment , retail and management . Employment within Nailsea includes work in shops , schools , estate agents and banks . Larger businesses in Nailsea include GE , and Bristol Wessex Billing Services Ltd . , the billing company jointly owned by Bristol Water and Wessex Water . Other businesses are situated at units in the town . Nailsea has three large industrial and business estates located at Southfield road , Blackfriars road and Coates Estate ( former site of the local cider making industry ) . Nailsea 's shopping area includes Somerset Square , Crown Glass Place , Colliers Walk , and a high street . There are <unk> chains in the town ( Tesco , Waitrose , Co @-@ Op and Iceland ) and some national banks and estate agents . 
 <unk> 's cider factory in Nailsea was first opened in 1788 and was bought by Showerings of Shepton Mallet in 1956 . The brand was subsequently merged with <unk> and absorbed by Matthew Clark Brands . Prior to Coates , there was Heath Brewery , owned by the Thatcher family , which was situated behind the former Friendship Inn . The site of the old factory is now called ' Coates Estate ' and is home to a diverse range of both local and national businesses . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 Nailsea has several pubs and used to have a small nightclub called Decades , formerly known as the AJ 's Bar . There are dedicated youth clubs and two Scouting divisions , which organise the Nailsea Carnival and Mayfair respectively . Nailsea has theatre , musical and orchestral groups . Most are open to all ages and meet and perform regularly at different venues including The Scotch Horn Centre , Nailsea Methodist Church , The <unk> Centre , The Grove Recreation Centre , and Nailsea Little Theatre . Nailsea 's outdoor recreational areas include the playing fields by the Grove Centre and the public park to the rear of the Scotch Horn Centre and Tesco . There are three children 's play parks and smaller areas of green land in the town 's housing estates . The Scotch Horn Park contains a skate park and children 's play park . There are no cinemas in Nailsea , but The Curzon in nearby Clevedon has been operating since 1912 . 
 The adjacent village of Wraxall has a couple of tourist attractions . Noah 's Ark Zoo Farm has displays of exotic , agricultural and domestic animals including rhinoceros , camels , monkeys , reptiles and most recently a giraffe . It offers hands @-@ on experience with animals and a chance to learn about conservation . Tyntesfield , a 19th @-@ century Victorian country house and grounds , was bought and opened up by the National Trust in 2002 . An edition of the North Somerset Times is published as the Nailsea Times . 
 Nailsea has a popular carnival annually which has been held since the 1960s , in which all of the local schools and Scouts participate . It also holds a very popular beer & cider festival also held annually at Nailsea and Backwell Rugby Football Club which started in 2004 . The festival holds over 160 local brews every year 
 = = Transport = = 
 The principal road serving Nailsea is the B3130 . It leads westwards to Clevedon , where the motorway network can be accessed at Junction 20 of the M5 ; eastwards it links with the A370 ( for Bristol ) and the A38 ( for Bristol Airport ) . Another link to the A370 at Backwell offers a route south and west for traffic to other local towns such as Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Nailsea ’ s main car parks are in Clevedon Road , Station Road and Link Road , all of which are free for the first three hours . Bus services in Nailsea are operated by First Bus . The main routes are the X8 / 9 which runs every 15 mins to Bristol jointly run by First and Abus , and the hourly A2 between Clevedon / Portishead and Weston @-@ Super @-@ Mare via Bristol Airport , which also serves the railway station . 
 Nailsea and Backwell railway station is on the edge of neighbouring Backwell . It is managed by First Great Western , who run all services from the station , but is only staffed for a few hours on busy mornings . Trains run seven days each week , with a weekday off @-@ peak service of two trains per hour in each direction , running between Taunton and Cardiff Central or Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Bristol Parkway . Mornings and evenings see some direct services to and from London Paddington . Platform 1 ( westbound ) can only be accessed by steps , but Platform 2 ( eastbound ) can be reached either by steps or a 1 in 12 ( 8 % ) ramp . The station has a car park for 100 cars , but is due for expansion . Over 350 @,@ 000 journeys are made from the station each year . 
 Bristol Airport is less than 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the town centre . 
 = = Education = = 
 Secondary education in Nailsea is provided by Nailsea School , which attained Technology and Media Arts College specialist status before a £ 28 @.@ 8 million revamp in 2010 . Nailsea has infants , junior , primary schools , and a music school , some of them including : Kings Hill C of E , Golden Valley , Hannah More Infants , St. Francis Catholic School and Grove School . Ravenswood School caters for children with special needs and learning difficulties . There are also <unk> for children in the area who are too young for infants school . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 In the 2001 census 78 % of Nailsea 's respondents claimed Christianity as their religious preference ; 16 % claimed to have " no religious preference " , the second largest group . All of the religious buildings are Christian in nature . Christ Church and the 14th @-@ century Holy Trinity Church are Church of England parish churches . Christ Church was built in 1843 by George Gilbert Scott and William <unk> Moffatt and has been designated as a Grade II listed building . Holy Trinity features a tower with six Bells , a cemetery , and a community centre called " The Trinity Centre " . It is Grade I listed . 
 Nailsea Methodist Church was founded in 1789 ; the first building opened three years later . In 1914 a new chapel was opened on Silver Street , and a youth club was added in the 1960s . In early 1992 the old church was replaced with a larger , flexible , multi @-@ purpose building and the youth club was refurbished and renamed the Wesley Centre after Methodism ’ s founder , John Wesley . There is also Nailsea Baptist Church , the Catholic Church of St Francis of Assisi , Southfield Church , the United Reformed Church and the Community Church . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Nailsea has four football clubs , AFC Nailsea , Selkirk United , Nailsea United FC and Nailsea Town F.C. The two clubs also organise junior football teams in the area , catering for under 8s to under 16s . Nailsea Cricket Club was formed in the mid @-@ 1850s and runs six sides across senior , junior , and women 's ' cricket , covering an area of West Bristol and North Somerset . 
 Nailsea also has a ladies hockey club , which was formed in 1924 . The club has two league teams : a youth team and a veterans team . The Scotch Horn Centre provides both an aerobic exercise and a free weights gym , as well as squash courts , and room for other indoor sports . Nailsea does not have a public swimming pool despite a long @-@ running campaign by the Nailsea Swimming Pool Interest Group to build one . Other leisure facilities in the area include a swimming pool in nearby Backwell and a golf club in Tickenham . 
 Nailsea and Backwell Rugby Football Club 's 1st XV play in level 8 of the RFU league system as of 2012 , and the 2nd XV in Somerset 2 North ( level 10 ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 One of Nailsea 's best known celebrities was Adge Cutler , the Somerset folk singer , whose backing band was The Wurzels . He worked at the Coates cider factory . The Wurzels ' album Live at the Royal Oak was recorded at The Royal Oak , a public house on the High Street . Cutler is buried in Christ Church graveyard . 
 Mervyn Kitchen was born in Nailsea in 1940 , He became an English first @-@ class cricketer . In his playing days he was a left @-@ handed batsman for Somerset County Cricket Club , making 15 @,@ 230 runs in his 354 first @-@ class games . He topped the county averages in 1966 and 1968 . He went on to umpire in 20 Test matches and 28 One Day Internationals before retiring in 2005 . Another Somerset cricketer , Stephen Newton , was also born in Nailsea in 1853 . 
 The gymnast Charles <unk> , who competed in the 1908 Summer Olympics , was born in Nailsea in 1881 . 
 Professional golfer Chris Wood grew up in Nailsea , and currently resides there . 
 = Brazil v Germany ( 2014 FIFA World Cup ) = 
 The Brazil vs Germany football match that took place on 8 July 2014 at the Estádio Mineirão in Belo Horizonte , Brazil , was the first semi @-@ final match of the 2014 FIFA World Cup . 
 Both Brazil and Germany reached the semifinals with an undefeated record in the competition , with the Brazilians ' quarterfinals with Colombia causing them to lose striker Neymar to injury , and defender and captain Thiago Silva to accumulation of yellow cards . Despite the absences , a close match was expected , given both teams were traditional FIFA World Cup forces , sharing eight tournaments won and having previously met in the 2002 FIFA World Cup Final , where Brazil won 2 – 0 and earned their fifth title . This match , however , ended in a stunning loss for Brazil ; Germany led 5 – 0 at half time , with four goals scored within six minutes , and subsequently brought the score up to 7 – 0 in the second half . Brazil scored a goal in the last minute , ending the match 7 – 1 . Germany 's Toni Kroos was selected as the man of the match . 
 The game marked a number of tournament records . Germany 's win marked the largest margin of victory in a FIFA World Cup semi @-@ final . The game saw Germany overtake Brazil as the highest scoring team in World Cup tournament history and become the first team to reach eight World Cup Finals . Miroslav Klose scored his 16th career World Cup goal and surpassed Brazil 's own Ronaldo as the tournament 's all @-@ time record goalscorer . Brazil 's loss broke their 62 @-@ match home unbeaten streak in competitive matches going back to Copa America 1975 ( to Peru 1 – 3 ) and equalled their biggest margin of defeat , a 6 – 0 loss to Uruguay in 1920 . Ultimately , the match was described as a national humiliation . 
 The game was subsequently referred to by the international media as the Mineirazo ( <unk> [ <unk> ] in Brazil ) , evoking the spirit of national shame brought by the Maracanazo ( Maracanaço ) in which Brazil unexpectedly lost the 1950 FIFA World Cup on home soil to Uruguay . Brazil subsequently lost the third place playoff to Netherlands , and Germany went on to win the World Cup for the fourth time after defeating Argentina in the 2014 FIFA World Cup Final . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brazil were hosting the FIFA World Cup for the second time ( after 1950 ) , and had won the tournament on five previous occasions . Germany were a three @-@ time winner but had not won the tournament in 24 years . Brazil were in the semi @-@ finals for the first time since 2002 , from which they emerged victorious and subsequently won the tournament against Germany ; while Germany were in a record @-@ breaking fourth consecutive semi @-@ final . Both teams had entered the tournament among the favourites to win , with Germany ranked 2nd and Brazil ranked 3rd in the FIFA World Rankings . 
 Brazil 's route to the semi @-@ final included a group stage with Croatia , Mexico and Cameroon in Group A , from which they advanced with seven points before beating Chile in the Round of 16 in a penalty shoot @-@ out , and Colombia in the quarter @-@ finals . Germany had been drawn with Portugal , Ghana and the United States in Group G , and advanced with seven points before beating Algeria in the Round of 16 ( after extra time ) and France in the quarter @-@ finals . The two teams had met in 21 previous matches , but their only previous encounter in the single @-@ elimination round of the World Cup was the final of the 2002 FIFA World Cup , which Brazil won 2 – 0 . 
 Brazil defender and captain Thiago Silva was suspended for the match due to accumulation of yellow cards , despite an appeal against the suspension by the Brazilian Football Confederation . Forward Neymar was also unavailable for the match , having been sidelined for the rest of the tournament after suffering a fractured vertebra in the quarter @-@ final match against Colombia . Dante and Bernard , making their first starts of the tournament , replaced Thiago Silva and Neymar respectively with Luiz Gustavo replacing Paulinho in defensive midfield . Germany were unchanged from their quarter @-@ final . Goalkeeper Júlio César and stand @-@ in captain David Luiz paid tribute to Neymar by holding his shirt during the national anthem ceremony . Even with the absences , analysts expected a close match , feeling the home crowd could provide an advantage . 
 = = Match = = 
 Both teams had reached the semi @-@ finals undefeated in their previous matches of the tournament . The officiating was led by Mexican referee Marco Antonio Rodríguez , in what proved to be the final match of his career . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Both teams started with attacking play , with Brazilian Marcelo 's shot going wide in the 3rd minute and German Sami Khedira 's shot in the 7th minute being inadvertently blocked by his team @-@ mate Toni Kroos . In the 11th minute , the Germans scored from their first corner of the game . Thomas Müller escaped his mark by David Luiz in the penalty box , and Toni Kroos 's delivery found him wide open for a side @-@ footed shot into the net . In the following minutes , Brazil tried to respond immediately but their attacking forays came to naught ; although Philipp Lahm needed to deliver a brilliant tackle to keep Marcelo from setting up a chance in the penalty box . Instead , in the 23rd minute , Germany scored again after Kroos and Müller combined to set up Miroslav Klose , who scored on the rebound after his initial shot was saved by goalkeeper Júlio César . It was Klose 's 16th goal at a World Cup , surpassing Ronaldo as the all @-@ time World Cup top scorer . 
 Klose 's goal initiated a flurry of German scoring as Brazil appeared to lose control of the game . Kroos added two more goals in quick succession : in the 24th minute , he volleyed home from Lahm 's cross while unmarked , then in the 26th minute , just a few seconds after Brazil 's kick @-@ off , Kroos caught Fernandinho in possession in his own half , then linking up with Khedira to evade the Brazilian defence , leading to Kroos scoring again with a simple finish , just 70 seconds after his first goal . Khedira himself scored in the 29th minute after exchanging passes with Mesut Özil . All five of Germany 's first half goals came within the first half @-@ hour , with four of them coming within six minutes . Brazil had no shots on target in the first half . Many Brazil supporters in the crowd were reduced to tears and a state of shock such that the crowd 's first serious dissent at the Brazil team came only at half time . The resulting fights in the Mineirão stands forced the Military Police to send a special forces squad into the stadium . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Brazil 's substitution of Paulinho and Ramires for Fernandinho and Hulk resulted in them threatening more from the restart ; they forced Germany goalkeeper Manuel Neuer to save shots from Oscar , Paulinho and Fred . By the 60th minute , the Germans came close to scoring again , with Júlio César denying Müller twice . Another German goal indeed came in the 69th minute — Lahm picked out substitute André Schürrle , who was left unmarked and side @-@ footed the ball in from close @-@ range . Schürrle was not done yet ; in the 79th minute , he received Müller 's cross from the left and hit a powerful shot over Júlio César at the near post . At this point with the score at 7 – 0 , the remaining home fans gave the Germans a standing ovation , as they applauded Schürrle 's goal and started cheering for Germany 's passes . Close to the end , Özil received a through ball but barely missed the chance to make it eight . Seconds later , Brazil broke away and Oscar scored in the 90th minute to make it 7 – 1 , but it was no consolation , as the final score matched Brazil 's worst ever loss ( 6 – 0 to Uruguay in 1920 ) , and ended a run of 62 competitive home matches unbeaten for Brazil . The Brazilian players left the pitch in tears to a chorus of boos . 
 Toni Kroos was selected Man of the Match , with 3 shots , 2 goals , 93 % pass accuracy , 1 assist and 2 chances created . 
 Brazilian striker Fred , who was replaced by Willian in the 70th minute , received a particularly hostile reaction from the home fans . According to Opta Sports , Fred failed to make a single tackle , cross , run or interception during the match , and actually spent the majority of his time in possession of the ball on the centre spot due to six restarts . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Records = = 
 The game 's result was the biggest winning margin in a World Cup semi @-@ final or final . The outcome was also the worst loss by a host country in World Cup history , as the six @-@ goal difference doubled the previous record margin . By the end of the game , a total of 167 goals had been scored at the 2014 World Cup , the 2nd @-@ most at a single World Cup , after 1998 with 171 goals . With 18 total shots on target , the match had the joint @-@ most shots on target of any match in 90 minutes at the 2014 World Cup . The match also had the fastest four goals scored in World Cup history , with Germany scoring in the span of six minutes ( from 23 ' to 29 ' ) ; in 1954 , Austria took seven minutes ( 25 ' to 32 ' ) and in 1982 , Hungary also took seven minutes ( 69 ' to 76 ' ) to score four goals . Germany equalled the record for most goals scored against the host nation of the World Cup , with Austria defeating Switzerland 7 – 5 in the 1954 World Cup . Germany also overtook Brazil to become the all @-@ time highest @-@ scoring team in FIFA World Cup history , their total of 223 at full @-@ time passing Brazil 's 221 . Before the match Brazil and Germany were even with seven World Cup finals each , the German victory made them the only squad to reach 8 finals . 
 For Brazil , the result became one of their two worst losses , equalling a 6 – 0 defeat to Uruguay in 1920 , and was their worst @-@ ever defeat at home ; their previous worst defeat at home was a 5 – 1 defeat by Argentina in Rio de Janeiro in 1939 . The loss broke Brazil 's 62 @-@ match home unbeaten streak in competitive matches , dating back to their 1 – 3 loss to Peru in the 1975 Copa América ; this match was also played at Estádio Mineirão in Belo Horizonte . The last time Brazil had lost a World Cup semi @-@ final was in 1938 , in a dramatic game against Italy in Marseille , and had emerged victorious from this stage the previous six times they had reached it , since the loss in 1974 against Netherlands was not formally a semi @-@ final . Brazil had never before conceded seven goals at home , although they once conceded eight goals in a 4 – 8 friendly defeat to Yugoslavia on 3 June 1934 ; the last time they conceded at least five was in a 6 – 5 win in the 1938 World Cup versus Poland ; at least four was in a 2 – 4 defeat at the 1954 World Cup against Hungary . Brazil 's previous largest losing deficit at the World Cup prior to the match was three goals , which came in the 0 – 3 defeat to France in the 1998 final . The game 's outcome also marked Brazil 's worst result against Germany , passing a 0 – 2 defeat in a 1986 friendly . 
 For Germany , the final result meant that , for the fourth straight time , they were positioned among the tournament 's top 3 teams ; moreover , the victory allowed the Germans to become the first side to reach eight World Cup finals . The match was a record 12th time a German team played in a semi @-@ final . Germany became the first team to score 7 goals in a World Cup semi @-@ final . The last time a team scored six goals was West Germany in 1954 versus Austria , same as in both semi @-@ finals in 1930 . It was Germany 's highest half @-@ time lead in a World Cup match , with their previous best being 4 – 0 against Saudi Arabia in 2002 , the match finished 8 – 0 which is Germany 's biggest World Cup victory . Only two teams have previously trailed by at least five goals at half @-@ time : Zaire ( versus Yugoslavia in 1974 ) and Haiti ( versus Poland in 1974 ) . The seven goals scored by Germany reflected a better goal @-@ scoring record in the World Cup Finals than that of 28 other nations in their respective history of the World Cup . 
 Germany 's Miroslav Klose equalled the Brazilian Cafu as the player with most matches being on the winning side at the World Cup , with 16 victories . Klose played his 23rd World Cup match , equalling Paolo Maldini on 2nd place on most World Cup matches , with only Lothar Matthäus remaining with more ( 25 ) . Klose has played in more knockout games than Matthäus or Cafu – 13 , and also became the only player to take part in four World Cup semi @-@ finals ( Uwe Seeler previously played in three semi @-@ finals ) . In the match , he broke the record for the most goals scored at the World Cup with 16 , overtaking Brazil 's Ronaldo 's total of 15 ; Ronaldo was in attendance at the match as a commentator . Thomas Müller 's goal was Germany 's 2,000th in the history of their national team . Müller became the third player in history to score five or more goals in two different World Cups ( after Klose and the Peruvian Teófilo Cubillas ) and the second player to score five or more goals in consecutive World Cups ( after Klose ) . Toni Kroos ' first @-@ half double scored in 69 seconds was the fastest pair of goals scored in World Cup history by the same player . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 According to reports , after Germany had scored their seventh goal , Neymar , who was watching the match on television , switched off his set and went to play poker . Brazil manager Luiz Felipe Scolari said the result was the " worst loss by a Brazilian national team ever " and accepted all responsibility for the defeat . He called it " the worst day of my life " , and resigned after the tournament . Stand @-@ in captain David Luiz and goalkeeper Júlio César both offered apologies to the people of Brazil . Fred , who was booed by Brazilian fans during the match , said it was the worst defeat in his and his teammates ' careers . He later announced his retirement from international football following the tournament . Recovering from his injury , Neymar expressed his support to his teammates and , despite the 7 – 1 score , said he was proud to be part of this team . 
 During the match , the German team seemed to realise that what was unfolding was not a normal football event . In a post @-@ match statement , Mats Hummels said that the German team had decided that they did not want to humiliate the Brazilians during the second half and after the match : 
 We just made it clear that we had to stay focused and not try to humiliate them . We said we had to stay serious and concentrate at half @-@ time . That 's something you don 't have to show on the pitch if you are playing . 
 You have to show the opponent respect and it was very important that we did this and didn 't try to show some magic or something like this . It was important we played our game for 90 minutes . 
 Accordingly , the Germans cut theatrics from their goal celebrations ; arms were raised but there was no jumping or screaming after scoring . Coach Joachim Löw stated his team had " a clear , persistent game @-@ plan " , and as they realised Brazil were " cracking up " , they took advantage as in contrast to the Brazilians ' nervousness the German players were " extremely cool " . Toni Kroos , who was chosen as Man of the Match , added that as the Germans felt that in " no game of the Cup , [ the Brazilians ] played their best " , the squad entered with the tactical knowledge on how to counter Brazil : " we took all the balls , and scored the goals " . Löw also declared the team had " no euphoria " during or after the game , as they knew that the 7 – 1 win meant nothing for the upcoming final , saying " We didn 't celebrate . We were happy , but we still have a job to do " . 
 Following the match , the German players and managers offered words of consolation to the Brazilians . Löw and players Per Mertesacker and Philipp Lahm even compared the pressure on the Brazilian team and resulting heartbreaking defeat with Germany 's own when they hosted the 2006 FIFA World Cup and also lost in the semifinals . Lahm added in an interview after the tournament that he had felt " very uneasy " during the match and " not at all euphoric " since the Brazilian team had made mistakes that " don 't usually happen at this level " , and Mertesacker noted that despite featuring the Germans at the top of their game , " even from the bench , [ the semifinal ] was crazy to watch " . Kroos stated that , despite Brazil having good players , " they couldn 't show their best performance " due to all the outside pressure , and expressed faith in " them returning with a good squad " . Löw observed in the immediate aftermath of the match that the Brazilian people were applauding his team . Later the Brazilian newspaper O Globo expressed appreciation for the gestures of the German players , calling them " world champions of sympathy " . 
 Brazilian footballing icon Pelé tweeted " I always said that football is a box of surprises . Nobody in this world expected this result " , followed by " [ Brazil ] Will try to get the sixth title in Russia . Congratulations to Germany " . Carlos Alberto Torres , the captain of Brazil 's winning team in 1970 , said that the country lost due to a " feeling of ' we 've already won ' " . He added that " Germany played how I like to see and Scolari 's tactics for this match were suicidal " . Argentina coach Alejandro Sabella struggled to explain Brazil 's loss , saying " Football is illogical " . In contrast , famed Argentinian striker Diego Maradona was seen singing a song mocking the Brazilian defeat . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 In Germany , the match 's coverage by ZDF set a record for the country 's most watched TV broadcast ever , with 32 @.@ 57 million viewers ( 87 @.@ 8 % of all viewers ) , beating the Germany v. Spain match at the 2010 FIFA World Cup . This record was beaten five days later with the final . In contrast , despite a weekly spike in audience , the broadcast by Brazilian Rede Globo saw the viewers total fall with each German goal . 
 The match was the most discussed sports game ever on Twitter with over 35 @.@ 6 million tweets , surpassing Super Bowl XLVIII , with 24 @.@ 9 million tweets during the game . At first incentive hashtags such as " # <unk> " were common , but once Germany built a 5 – 0 lead Brazilian users instead lent their frustration into self @-@ deprecatory humor , comparing Germany 's goals with the Volkswagen Gol car and stating the Brazilian team looked like " 11 <unk> " . Other Twitter users compared Germany 's dominating performance to their military efforts during World War II and The Holocaust , for example , dubbing it the " <unk> " . Bung Moktar Radin , a member of parliament of Malaysia , came under heavy criticism from the Malaysian public and the German ambassador , Holger Michael , for posting such a comment . The President of Brazil , Dilma Rousseff , stated on Twitter following the match that " like all Brazilians , I am deeply saddened by our loss " . The Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs , Yigal <unk> , mentioned the match when countering Brazil 's claim that his country was using disproportionate force in the Gaza conflict , saying " This is not football . In football , when a game ends in a draw , you think it is proportional , but when it finishes 7 – 1 it 's disproportionate " . 
 Due to the pressure on the home nation Brazil to win the World Cup and the subsequent shock of the loss , the media and FIFA dubbed the game the Mineirazo ( <unk> in Brazil ) , meaning " The Mineirão blow " , evoking the Maracanazo ( Maracanaço ) in which Brazil were defeated on home soil by outsiders Uruguay in the de facto final of the 1950 World Cup . The daughter of goalkeeper <unk> Barbosa , who was scapegoated for the 1950 defeat , said the loss was enough to redeem her father 's legacy , while Uruguayan striker Alcides <unk> , responsible for the Cup @-@ winning goal of the Maracanazo , felt that though both games were traumatic they could not be compared as the 1950 match had more at stake . Following the match , German fans were escorted out of the stadium by police and police were put on alert for possible riots . Observers noted that while the German supporters had shown respect to the defeated hosts , Argentinian fans were celebrating Brazil 's elimination . 
 There were reports of a mass robbery at a fan party in Rio de Janeiro and of fans setting fire to Brazilian flags in the streets of São Paulo even before the match was over . A number of buses were burned across São Paulo and an electronics store looted . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Brazilian newspapers greeted the result with headlines such as " The Biggest Shame in History " ( Lance ! ) , a " Historical humiliation " ( Folha de S.Paulo ) and " Brazil is slain " ( O Globo ) . German paper Bild heralded the " 7 – 1 Madness " by the " Lightning DFB team " . The French L 'Équipe simply said , " Le <unk> " ( The Disaster ) . Writing for Sky Sports , Matthew Stanger described the game as the " ultimate embarrassment " , while Miguel Delaney of ESPN referred to the match as the Mineirazo , echoing the term invented for the event by the South American Spanish language press . 
 Barney Ronay in The Guardian described it as " the most humiliating World Cup host nation defeat of all time " , and Joe Callaghan of The Independent described it as " the darkest night in Brazil 's footballing history " . Wyre Davies , the BBC 's Rio de Janeiro correspondent , said of Brazilian 's reactions at the stadium and fan parks that the " collective sense of shock , embarrassment and national humiliation across Brazil was impossible to ignore " . Football journalist Tim Vickery postulated that the all @-@ time low the result might be the catalyst for over @-@ due reform of Brazilian club football , which in his opinion had become complacent in comparison to other countries , resting on the laurels of the national team 's history of success . In his words , this was a chance to " recapture parts of its historic identity and reframe them in a modern , global context " . Reports had many comparisons with the Maracanazo that cost Brazil a title at home in 1950 , with the Brazilian media even considering that the 2014 defeat redeemed the 1950 squad . 
 Analysts deconstructed all the tactical and technical deficiencies that led to the blowout result . Scolari still relied on the team that won the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup despite many players going through dry spells , and most of them not having any World Cup experience . Brazil had not played particularly well during the group stage and first two knockout games , relying heavily upon Neymar in attack , and their flaws were exposed in the semi @-@ finals where they faced a much tougher adversary in Germany . Neymar was such a focal point that the team barely trained any formations without him . In his absence , Scolari replaced Neymar with Bernard to maintain the attacking tradition of Brazilian football , instead of the " logical call " [ which ] was surely to bring in an extra midfielder " against the Germans . The assistant coaches even supported bringing in the more defensive @-@ minded Ramires and Willian . Thus Fernandinho and Luiz Gustavo were overwhelmed in dealing the Germany midfield trio of Toni Kroos , Sami Khedira and Bastian Schweinsteiger . The defense that had already been questioned in previous games collapsed as Dante was proven to be an inadequate replacement for the suspended Silva , while David Luiz made uncharacteristic errors during the semi @-@ final . Other errors included setting up Marcelo to a more attacking play , while Gustavo was tasked with covering him , and the ineffective role of Fred who is often regarded as a tactical striker rather than goal @-@ scoring striker . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Brazil finished fourth after being defeated 0 – 3 in the third place play @-@ off by the Netherlands on 12 July . The defeat matched Brazil 's previous worst loss at the World Cup , 0 – 3 to France in the 1998 Final , and meant that they conceded a total of 14 goals throughout the tournament , which was the most Brazil had conceded in a single tournament , the most ever conceded by a World Cup host , and the most conceded by any team since Belgium allowed 15 during the 1986 tournament . Germany went on to win the World Cup for the fourth time , the first as a unified nation , after defeating Argentina 1 – 0 in the final match on 13 July . Germany had the support of the Brazilian crowd despite having eliminated the home team , given Brazil has a long @-@ standing football rivalry with neighbours Argentina . 
 The two consecutive losses , Brazil 's first consecutive home defeats since 1940 , led to coach Luiz Felipe Scolari 's resignation on 15 July . Two weeks later , the Brazilian Football Confederation brought back Dunga as head coach of the Brazil national team . He had managed the team from 2006 until 2010 , being dismissed following a 2 – 1 loss to the Netherlands in the 2010 FIFA World Cup quarter @-@ finals . 
 = John Adams = 
 John Adams ( October 30 [ O.S. October 19 ] 1735 – July 4 , 1826 ) was an American lawyer , author , statesman , and diplomat . He served as the second President of the United States ( 1797 – 1801 ) , the first Vice President ( 1789 – 97 ) , and as a Founding Father was a leader of American independence from Great Britain . Adams was a political theorist in the Age of Enlightenment who promoted republicanism and a strong central government . His innovative ideas were frequently published . He was also a dedicated diarist and correspondent , particularly with his wife and key advisor Abigail . 
 He collaborated with his cousin , revolutionary leader Samuel Adams , but he established his own prominence prior to the American Revolution . After the Boston Massacre , despite severe local anti @-@ British sentiment , he provided a successful though unpopular legal defense of the accused British soldiers , driven by his devotion to the right to counsel and the " protect [ ion ] of innocence " . As a delegate from Massachusetts to the Continental Congress , Adams played a leading role in persuading Congress to declare independence . He assisted Thomas Jefferson in drafting the Declaration of Independence in 1776 , and was its foremost advocate in the Congress . As a diplomat in Europe , he helped negotiate the eventual peace treaty with Great Britain , and acquired vital governmental loans from Amsterdam bankers . Adams was the primary author of the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780 which influenced American political theory , as did his earlier Thoughts on Government ( 1776 ) . 
 Adams ' credentials as a revolutionary secured for him two terms as President George Washington 's vice president ( 1789 to 1797 ) and also his own election in 1796 as the second president . In his single term as president , he encountered fierce criticism from the Jeffersonian Republicans , as well as the dominant faction in his own Federalist Party , led by his rival Alexander Hamilton . Adams signed the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts , and built up the army and navy in the face of an undeclared naval " Quasi @-@ War " with France . The major accomplishment of his presidency was a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the face of Hamilton 's opposition . Due to his strong posture on defense , Adams is " often called the father of the American Navy " . He was the first U.S. president to reside in the executive mansion , now known as the White House . 
 In 1800 , Adams lost re @-@ election to Thomas Jefferson , and retired to Massachusetts . He eventually resumed his friendship with Jefferson upon the latter 's own retirement by initiating a correspondence which lasted fourteen years . He and his wife established a family of politicians , diplomats , and historians now referred to as the Adams political family . Adams was the father of John Quincy Adams , the sixth President of the United States . He died on the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence . Modern historians in the aggregate have ranked his administration favorably . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 John Adams was born on October 30 , 1735 ( October 19 , 1735 Old Style , Julian calendar ) , to John Adams Sr. ( 1691 – 1761 ) and Susanna Boylston ( 1708 – 1797 ) . He had two younger brothers , Peter and Elihu . Adams ' birthplace was then in Braintree , Massachusetts ( now Quincy , Massachusetts ) , and is preserved at Adams National Historical Park . Adams ' mother was from a leading medical family of current Brookline , Massachusetts . His father was a Congregationalist deacon , a farmer , a cordwainer , and a lieutenant in the militia . He further served as a selectman ( town councilman ) and supervised the building of schools and roads . Adams often praised his father and recalled their close relationship . His paternal great @-@ grandfather David Adams was born and bred at " <unk> <unk> " , <unk> , Carmarthenshire , North Wales . He emigrated from Wales in 1675 and sixty years later his great @-@ grandson , John Adams , was born . 
 Though raised in modest surroundings , Adams felt an acute responsibility to live up to his family 's heritage of reverence . He was a direct descendent of Puritans , who came to the American wilderness in the 1630s , established a colonial presence in America , and profoundly affected the culture , laws , and traditions of their region . Journalist Richard <unk> wrote that Adams ' Puritan ancestors " believed they lived in the Bible . England under the Stuarts was Egypt ; they were Israel fleeing ... to establish a refuge for godliness , a city upon a hill . " By the time of John Adams ' birth in 1735 , Puritan tenets such as predestination were no longer as widely accepted , and many of their stricter practices had moderated with time , but Adams " considered them bearers of freedom , a cause that still had a holy urgency . " It was a value system he believed in and wished to live up to . Adams emphatically recalled that his parents , " held every Species of <unk> in ... Contempt and horror , " and portrayed " pictures of disgrace , or baseness and of Ruin " from any debauchery . 
 Adams , as the eldest child , was under a mandate from his parents to obtain a formal education . This began at age six at a Dame school for boys and girls , which was conducted at a teacher 's home , and centered upon The New England Primer . Shortly thereafter , Adams attended Braintree Latin School under Joseph <unk> , where studies included Latin , rhetoric , logic and arithmetic . Adams ' reflections on early education were in the negative mostly , including incidents of truancy , a dislike for his master and a desire to become a farmer . All questions on the matter ended when his father commanded that he remain in school saying , " You shall comply with my desires . " Deacon Adams also retained a new school master , Joseph Marsh , and his son responded positively . 
 = = = College education and adulthood = = = 
 At age sixteen , Adams entered Harvard College in 1751 . He took all his courses under the tutorship of Joseph Mayhew who administered his entrance exam . He did not share his father 's expectation that he become a minister . After graduating in 1755 with an A.B. degree , he taught school for a few years in Worcester , Massachusetts while pondering his permanent vocation . In the next four years he discerned a passion for prestige , saying that he craved " Honour or Reputation " and " more <unk> from [ his ] fellows " ; and at age twenty @-@ one he was determined to become " a great Man " . He decided to become a lawyer to further those ends , writing his father that he found among lawyers " noble and gallant achievements " but among the clergy , the " pretended sanctity of some absolute dunces . " Doctrinally , he later became a Unitarian , and dropped belief in predestination , eternal damnation , the divinity of Christ and most other Calvinist beliefs of his Puritan ancestors . Nevertheless , his remnant Puritanism frequently prompted reservations about his hunger for fame , which he once referred to as mere " <unk> " , and he questioned his not properly attending to the " happiness of [ his ] fellow men . " 
 The French and Indian War began in 1754 and Adams began to struggle with the issue of a young man 's responsibility in the conflict ; contemporaries of his social position were largely spectators , while those who were less solvent joined the battle as a means to make some money . Adams later said , " I longed more ardently to be a Soldier than I ever did to be a Lawyer . " He was acutely aware that he was the first in his family that " degenerated from the virtues of the house so far as not to have been an officer in the militia . " 
 = = = Law practice and marriage = = = 
 Adams followed the usual course of reading the law in order obtain his license to practice . In 1756 he became an apprentice in the office of John Putnam , a leading lawyer in Worcester . In 1758 , he earned an A.M. from Harvard , and was also that year admitted to the bar , having completed his studies under Putnam . From an early age , he developed the habit of writing descriptions of events and impressions of men which are scattered through his diary , which included his report of the 1761 argument of James Otis , Jr. in the Massachusetts Superior Court as to the legality of Writs of Assistance . Otis 's argument inspired Adams to the cause of the American colonies . In 1763 he had published seven essays in Boston newspapers – treatises that represented his forging into the convoluted realm of political theory . The essays were offered anonymously , with Adams using the nom de plume " Humphrey <unk> " ; this author reappeared in the Boston Gazette in 1765 to oppose the Stamp Act . While Adams was initially not as popular as his cousin Samuel , his influence emerged through his work as a constitutional lawyer and his in @-@ depth analysis of historical examples , together with his dedication to the principles of republicanism . Even so , Adams often found his inborn contentiousness to be a constraint in his political career . 
 Adams married his third cousin Abigail Smith ( 1744 – 1818 ) on October 25 , 1764 . Her parents were Elizabeth Quincy and Rev. William Smith , a Congregational minister at Weymouth , Massachusetts . They had six children ; Abigail " <unk> " in 1765 , future president John Quincy Adams in 1767 , Susanna in 1768 , Charles in 1770 , Thomas in 1772 , and Elizabeth ( who was stillborn ) in 1777 . 
 = = Career before the Revolution = = 
 = = = Opponent of Stamp Act 1765 = = = 
 Adams first rose to prominence leading widespread opposition to the Stamp Act of 1765 , imposed by the British Parliament without consulting the American legislatures , and requiring payment of a direct tax by the colonies for various stamped documents . Adams in 1765 authored the " Braintree Instructions " , a letter sent to the representatives of Braintree in the Massachusetts legislature , which served as a model for other towns ' instructions . In the piece he explained that the Stamp Act should be opposed since it denied two fundamental rights guaranteed to all Englishmen , and which all free men deserved : rights to be taxed only by consent and to be tried only by a jury of one 's peers . The instructions were a succinct and forthright defense of colonial rights and liberties . 
 In August 1765 , reprising his pen name " Humphrey <unk> " , he contributed four articles to the Boston Gazette ( republished in The London Chronicle in 1768 as True Sentiments of America , also known as A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law ) . He delivered a speech in December before the governor and council in which he pronounced the Stamp Act invalid on the ground that Massachusetts , being without representation in Parliament , had not given its assent to it . He later observed that many protests were sparked by an oft @-@ reprinted sermon of the Boston minister , Jonathan Mayhew , invoking Romans 13 to justify insurrection . In 1766 , a town meeting of Braintree elected John Adams as a selectman . 
 He moved the family to Boston in April of 1768 , renting a clapboard house on Brattle Street , a place known locally as the " White House . " He and Abigail and the children lived there for a year , then moved to Cold Lane ; still later they moved again , to a larger house in Brattle Square in the center of the city . 
 = = = Counsel for the British – Boston Massacre = = = 
 On March 5 , 1770 , a street confrontation , known as the Boston Massacre , resulted in British soldiers killing five civilians . The accused soldiers were arrested on criminal charges and expectedly had trouble finding legal representation . Adams ultimately agreed to defend them , though he feared it would hurt his reputation . In arguing their case , Adams made his legendary statement regarding jury decisions : " Facts are stubborn things ; and whatever may be our wishes , our inclinations , or the dictates of our passion , they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence . " He also expounded upon Blackstone 's Ratio : " It is more important that innocence be protected than it is that guilt be punished , for guilt and crimes are so frequent in this world that they cannot all be punished . But if innocence itself is brought to the bar and condemned , perhaps to die , then the citizen will say , ' whether I do good or whether I do evil is immaterial , for innocence itself is no protection , ' and if such an idea as that were to take hold in the mind of the citizen that would be the end of security whatsoever . " Adams won an acquittal for six of the soldiers . Two of them who had fired directly into the crowd were charged with murder but were convicted only of manslaughter . Adams was paid a small sum by his clients . 
 Biographer John Ferling opines that Adams made the most of juror selection during the <unk> dire stage of the trial , saying that Adams , " ... expertly exercised his right to challenge individual jurors and contrived what amounted to a packed jury . Not only were several jurors closely tied through business arrangements to the British army , but five ultimately became Loyalist exiles . " Indeed , Hiller B. Zobel , a scholar who has most closely studied the trial , concluded , " we can be fairly sure that before a single witness had been sworn , the outcome of the trial was certain . " Ferling also surmises that Adams was likely encouraged to take the case in exchange for political office – when one of Boston 's seats in the Massachusetts legislature opened three months later , Adams was the town 's first choice to fill the vacancy . 
 His law practice increased greatly from this exposure , as did the demands on his time . In 1771 he moved Abigail and the children to Braintree , but he kept his office in Boston , saying , " I shall spend more Time in my Office than ever I did . " He also noted on the day of the family 's move , " Now my family is away , I feel no Inclination at all , no Temptation , to be any where but at my Office . I am in it by 6 in the Morning – I am in it at 9 at night . . . . In the Evening , I can be alone at my Office , and no where else . I never could in my family . " Nevertheless , after some time in the capital , he became disenchanted with the rural and " vulgar " Braintree as a home for his family . In August 1772 , therefore , Adams moved his family back to Boston . He purchased a large brick house on Queen Street , not far from his office . In 1774 , due to the increasingly unstable situation in Boston , Adams and Abigail returned the family to the farm , and Braintree remained their permanent Massachusetts home . 
 = = = Objections to British Parliament 's authority = = = 
 Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his judges until 1772 received their salaries from the Massachusetts legislature . The Coercive Acts and the Tea Act were then passed by Parliament , and the British Crown assumed payment of those wages , drawn from customs revenues imposed upon that colony . According to biographer Ferling , the British government thus singled out Massachusetts for reprisals of previous rebellion and hoped in the process to force the other colonies into line . Boston radicals protested and asked John Adams to proclaim their objections . In " Two Replies of the Massachusetts House of Representatives to Governor Hutchinson " Adams argued that the colonists had never been under the sovereignty of Parliament . Their original charter , as well as their allegiance , was exclusively with the king . If a workable line could not be drawn between parliamentary sovereignty and the total independence of the colonies , he continued , the colonies would have no other choice but independence from England . 
 Adams authored <unk> ; or , A History of the Dispute with America , From Its Origin , in 1754 , to the Present Time ; he repudiated the essays by Daniel Leonard which in turn defended Hutchinson 's arguments for the absolute authority of Parliament over the colonies . In <unk> ( " New Englander " ) Adams gave a point @-@ by @-@ point refutation of Leonard 's essays , and then provided one of the most extensive and learned arguments made by the colonists against British imperial policy . It was a systematic attempt by Adams to describe the origins , nature , and jurisdiction of ( unwritten ) British concepts of constitutionality . Adams used his wide knowledge of English and colonial legal history to argue that the provincial legislatures were fully sovereign over their own internal affairs , and that the colonies were connected to Great Britain only through the king . 
 The Boston Tea Party – a historic demonstration against the British enactments – took place in December 1773 . The British schooner Dartmouth , loaded with tea to be traded subject to the new tea tax , had previously dropped anchor . By 9 : 00 PM on the night of the 16th , the work of the protesters was done – they had demolished 342 chests of tea worth about ten thousand pounds – today 's equivalent of about $ 1 million . Adams was briefly retained by the Dartmouth owners regarding the question of their liability for the destroyed shipment . Adams applauded the destruction of the tea . There had been no choice , he thought , and he called the defiant boarding of the vessels and the quick obliteration of the <unk> beverage the " grandest Event " in the history of the colonial protest movement . He wrote the following day that the destruction of the <unk> tea by the protesters had been an " absolutely and indispensably " necessary action . 
 John Adams vehemently supported the right of all Americans to jury trials . Adams protested the 1765 passage of the Stamp Act , which gave jurisdiction to British Vice Admiralty Courts , rather than common law courts . Many colonists , including Adams , believed these courts , which operated without a jury , were corrupt and unfair . 
 = = Member of Continental Congress = = 
 Massachusetts sent Adams to the first and second Continental Congresses in 1774 and from 1775 to 1777 respectively . The Massachusetts delegation resolved to assume a largely passive role in the first Congress . But Adams felt strongly that the conservatives of 1774 , men like Joseph Galloway and James Duane , were no different than Hutchinson and Peter Oliver , and he denigrated such men , telling Abigail that " Spiders , Toads , Snakes , are their only proper Emblems . " Yet at that point his views were similar to those of conservative John Dickinson . He sought repeal of objectionable policies , but at the early stage he continued to see positive benefits for America remaining part of the British empire . 
 In 1774 , as a delegate to the First Constitutional Congress , John Adams renewed his push for the right to a jury trial , stating " Representative government and trial by jury are the heart and lungs of liberty . Without them , we have no other fortification against being ridden like horses , fleeced like sheep , worked like cattle , and fed and clothed like <unk> and hounds . ” 
 By early 1775 , Adams became convinced that Congress was moving in the proper direction – away from its relationship with Great Britain . " Reconciliation if practicable , " he said publicly , yet he agreed with Benjamin Franklin 's confidential observation that independence was inevitable . In the fall of 1775 no one in Congress labored more ardently than Adams to hasten America 's separation from Great Britain . 
 In June 1775 , with a view of promoting union among the colonies , he nominated George Washington of Virginia as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army then assembled around Boston . His influence in Congress was great , and he then argued in favor of permanent severance from Britain . In October 1775 , he was also appointed the chief judge of the Massachusetts Superior Court , but he never served , and resigned in February 1777 . 
 Over the next decade , Americans from every state gathered and deliberated on new governing documents , employing many of Adams ' innovative positions . Prior tradition suggested that a society 's form of government need not be codified in a single document . As radical as it was to write constitutions , what was equally profound was the revolutionary nature of American political thought as the summer of 1776 dawned . 
 = = = Thoughts on Government = = = 
 A number of delegates sought Adams ' advice about forming new governments , and found his views so convincing they urged him to commit them to paper . He did so in separate letters to these colleagues , each missive a bit longer and more thoughtful . So impressed was Richard Henry Lee that , with Adams 's consent , he had the most comprehensive letter printed . Published anonymously just after mid @-@ April 1776 , it was titled simply Thoughts on Government and styled as " a Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend . " Many historians agree that none of Adams ' other compositions rivaled the enduring influence of this pamphlet . 
 Adams advised that the form of government should be chosen to attain the desired ends – the happiness and virtue of the greatest number of people . He wrote that , " There is no good government but what is republican . That the only valuable part of the British constitution is so because the very definition of a republic is an empire of laws , and not of men . " The treatise also defended bicameralism , for " a single assembly is liable to all the vices , follies and frailties of an individual " . He also suggested that there should be a separation of powers between the executive , the judicial and the legislative branches , and further recommended that if a continental government were to be formed then it " should <unk> be confined " to certain enumerated powers . Thoughts on Government was referenced as an authority in every state @-@ constitution writing hall . 
 = = = Declaration of Independence = = = 
 Adams in the 1776 session of Congress drafted the preamble to the Lee resolution of colleague Richard Henry Lee ( Virginia ) , which called on the colonies to adopt new independent governments . On June 7 , 1776 he seconded the resolution , which stated , " These colonies are , and of right ought to be , free and independent states . " Adams also championed the measure until it was adopted by Congress on July 2 . Once the resolution passed , independence became inevitable , though it still had to be declared formally . The commitment was , as Adams put it , " independence itself " . 
 A Committee of Five was charged with drafting the Declaration , and included Adams , along with Thomas Jefferson , Benjamin Franklin , Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman . The Committee , after discussing the general outline that the document should follow , decided that Jefferson would write the first draft . Jefferson particularly thought Adams should write the document ; but Adams persuaded the Committee to choose Jefferson while agreeing to consult with Jefferson personally . Adams recorded his exchange with Jefferson on the question : Jefferson asked , " Why will you not ? You ought to do it . " To which Adams responded , " I will not – reasons enough . " Jefferson replied , " What can be your reasons ? " And Adams responded , " Reason first , you are a Virginian , and a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business . Reason second , I am obnoxious , suspected , and unpopular . You are very much otherwise . Reason third , you can write ten times better than I can . " " Well , " said Jefferson , " if you are decided , I will do as well as I can . " Adams concluded , " Very well . When you have drawn it up , we will have a meeting . " The Committee left no minutes , and the drafting process itself is uncertain – accounts written many years later by Jefferson and Adams , although frequently cited , are otherwise contradictory . Although the first draft was written primarily by Jefferson , Adams assumed a primary role in its completion . After editing the document further , Congress approved it on July 4 . Many years later Jefferson hailed Adams as " the pillar of [ the Declaration 's ] support on the floor of Congress , [ its ] ablest advocate and defender against the multifarious assaults it encountered . " 
 = = = Government during revolution = = = 
 After defeating the Continental Army at the Battle of Long Island on August 27 , 1776 , British Admiral Richard Howe mistakenly assumed a strategic advantage to be at hand , and requested the Second Continental Congress send representatives in an attempt to negotiate peace . A delegation , including Adams and Benjamin Franklin , met with Howe at the Staten Island Peace Conference on September 11 . Howe 's authority was premised on the Colonists ' submission , so no common ground was to be found . When Lord Howe unhappily stated he could view the American delegates only as British subjects , Adams replied , " Your lordship may consider me in what light you please , ... except that of a British subject . " Adams learned many years later that his name was on a list of people specifically excluded from Howe 's pardon @-@ granting authority . Being quite unimpressed with General Howe , and also after payments to colonial volunteers were increased , Adams in September of 1776 said about the war , " We shall do well enough . " Indeed , if Washington got his men , the British would be " ruined " . 
 In 1777 , Adams began serving as the head of the Board of War and Ordnance ; in fact , he sat on no less than ninety committees , chairing twenty @-@ five . No other congressman approached the assumption of such a work load . As Benjamin Rush reported , he was acknowledged " to be the first man in the House . " He was also referred to as a " one man war department " , working eighteen @-@ hour days and mastering the details of raising , equipping and fielding an army under civilian control . He also authored the " Plan of Treaties , " laying out the Congress 's requirements for the crucial treaty with France . 
 = = Diplomat in Europe = = 
 = = = Commissioner to France and Minister Plenipotentiary = = = 
 In the spring of 1776 Adams advocated in Congress that independence was necessary in order to establish trade , and conversely trade was essential for the attainment of independence ; he specifically urged negotiation of a commercial treaty with France . He was then appointed , along with Franklin , Dickinson , Benjamin Harrison V of Virginia and Robert Morris of Pennsylvania , " to prepare a plan of treaties to be proposed to foreign powers " . Indeed , while Jefferson was laboring over the Declaration of Independence , Adams worked on the Model Treaty . 
 Adams joined Franklin and Arthur Lee in 1778 as a commissioner to France , replacing Silas Deane . He sailed for France with his 10 @-@ year @-@ old son John Quincy aboard the frigate Boston early that year . The stormy trip was treacherous , with lightning injuring 19 sailors and killing one . Adams ' ship was later pursued by several British frigates in the mid @-@ Atlantic , but evaded them . Near the coast of Spain , Adams himself took up arms to help capture a heavily armed British merchantman ship , the Martha . Later , a cannon malfunction killed one and injured five more of the crew before the ship arrived in France . 
 Adams did not speak French , the international language of diplomacy at the time . He therefore assumed a less visible role , but emerged as the commission 's chief administrator , imposing order and methods lacking in his delegation 's finances and record @-@ keeping affairs . His first stay in Europe , between April 1 , 1778 , and June 17 , 1779 , was otherwise unremarkable , and he returned to his home in Braintree in early August 1779 . Back home , Adams became one of the founders and charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780 . 
 In the fall of 1779 Adams was unanimously appointed a Minister Plenipotentiary , charged with negotiating a " treaty of peace , amity and commerce " with peace commissioners from Britain . Following the conclusion of the Massachusetts constitutional convention , he departed for Europe in November aboard the French frigate Sensible – accompanied by John Quincy and 9 @-@ year @-@ old son Charles . In France , constant disagreement between Lee and Franklin eventually resulted in Adams assuming the role of tie @-@ breaker in almost all votes on commission business ; Adams also increased his usefulness by mastering the French language . In time Lee was recalled and Adams later developed his own enmity towards the older Franklin , whom the younger , more aggressive Adams felt was overly deferential to the French . 
 The French foreign minister , Charles Gravier disapproved of Adams , so Franklin , Thomas Jefferson , John Jay , and Henry Laurens were appointed to collaborate with Adams ; nevertheless , Jefferson did not go to Europe and Laurens was posted to the Dutch Republic . Jay , Adams , and Franklin played the major part in the final negotiations . <unk> Franklin and distrustful of Vergennes , Jay and Adams decided not to consult with France ; instead , they dealt directly with the British commissioners . 
 Throughout the negotiations , Adams successfully demanded that the right of the United States to the fisheries along the Atlantic coast be recognized . The American negotiators were able to secure a favorable treaty securing most lands east of the Mississippi , and the document was signed on September 3 , 1783 . 
 = = = Ambassador to Holland = = = 
 In July 1780 Adams replaced Laurens as the ambassador to the Dutch Republic , then one of the few other Republics in the world . With the aid of the Dutch Patriot leader Joan van der <unk> tot den Pol , Adams secured the recognition of the United States as an independent government at The Hague on April 19 , 1782 . In February 1782 the Frisian states was the first Dutch province to recognize the United States , while France had been the first European country to grant diplomatic recognition in 1778 . He also negotiated a loan of five million guilders financed by Nicolaas van <unk> and Wilhelm Willink . By 1794 a total of eleven loans were granted in Amsterdam to the United States with a value of 29 million guilders . In October 1782 , he negotiated with the Dutch a treaty of amity and commerce , the first such treaty between the United States and a foreign power following the 1778 treaty with France . The house that Adams bought during this stay in The Netherlands became the first American @-@ owned embassy on foreign soil . 
 In 1784 and 1785 , he was one of the architects of extensive trade relations between the United States and Prussia . The Prussian ambassador in The Hague , Friedrich Wilhelm von <unk> , was involved , as were Jefferson and Franklin , who were in Paris . 
 = = = Ambassador to Great Britain = = = 
 Adams was appointed in 1785 the first American minister to the Court of St. James 's ( ambassador to Great Britain ) . When asked by a counterpart if he had any British relatives , Adams replied , " Neither my father or mother , grandfather or grandmother , great grandfather or great grandmother , nor any other relation that I know of , or care a farthing for , has been in England these one hundred and fifty years ; so that you see I have not one drop of blood in my veins but what is American " . 
 During her visit to Washington to mark the bicentennial of American independence in 1976 , Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom gave historical perspective to Adam 's service : " John Adams , America 's first ambassador , said to my ancestor , King George III , that it was his desire to help with the restoration of ' the old good nature and the old good humor between our peoples . ' That restoration has long been made , and the links of language , tradition , and personal contact have maintained it " . 
 Adams was joined by his wife while in London ; they suffered the stares and hostility of the Court , and chose to escape it when they could by seeking out Richard Price , minister of Newington Green Unitarian Church and instigator of the Revolution Controversy . 
 = = Conceptions of constitutional government = = 
 Adams ' preoccupation with political and governmental affairs – which caused considerable separation from his wife and children – ironically had a distinct familial context , which he articulated in 1780 : " I must study <unk> and War that my sons may have the liberty to study <unk> and Philosophy . My sons ought to study Geography , natural History , Naval Architecture , navigation , Commerce and Agriculture , in order to give their children a right to study Painting , Poetry , Musick , <unk> , Statuary , Tapestry , and <unk> . " 
 The Massachusetts Constitution of that year , to which Adams was a primary contributor , structured its government closely on his views of politics and society ; in 1779 , he drafted the document together with Samuel Adams and James Bowdoin . It was the first constitution written by a special committee , then ratified by the people ; and was also the first to feature a bicameral legislature . Included were a distinct executive – though restrained by an executive council – with a partial ( two @-@ thirds ) veto , and a separate judicial branch . 
 While in London , Adams published a work entitled A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States ( 1787 ) . In it he repudiated the views of Turgot and other European writers as to the viciousness of state government frameworks . In the book , Adams suggested that " the rich , the well @-@ born and the able " should be set apart from other men in a senate — that would prevent them from dominating the lower house . Adams ' Defence is described as an articulation of the classical republican theory of mixed government . Adams contended that social classes exist in every political society , and that a good government must accept that reality . For centuries , dating back to Aristotle , a mixed regime balancing monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy — that is , the king , the nobles , and the people — was required to preserve order and liberty . 
 Wood ( 2006 ) has maintained that Adams ' political philosophy had become irrelevant by the time the Federal Constitution was ratified . By then , American political thought , transformed by more than a decade of vigorous debate as well as formative experiential pressures , had abandoned the classical perception of politics as a mirror of social estates . Americans ' new understanding of popular sovereignty was that the citizenry were the sole possessors of power in the nation . Representatives in the government enjoyed mere portions of the people 's power and only for a limited time . Adams was thought to have overlooked this evolution and revealed his continued attachment to the older version of politics . Yet Wood ignored Adams ' peculiar definition of the term " republic , " and his support for a constitution ratified by the people . He also underestimated Adams ' belief in checks and balances , such as Adams ' statement that , " Power must be opposed to power , and interest to interest . " This sentiment was later echoed by James Madison 's famous statement that , " [ a ] <unk> must be made to counteract ambition " , in The Federalist No. 51 , explaining the separation of powers established under the new Constitution . Adams was unsurpassed in his dedication to establishing checks and balances as a governing strategem . 
 On the government 's role in education Adams offered unambiguously that , " The whole people must take upon themselves the education of the whole people and be willing to bear the expenses of it . There should not be a district of one mile square , without a school in it , not founded by a charitable individual , but maintained at the public expense of the people themselves . 
 = = Vice Presidency = = 
 When Washington won the presidential election of 1789 with 69 votes in the electoral college , Adams came in second with 34 votes and became Vice President ; in that capacity , he became under the Constitution the President of the United States Senate . Due to a delay in the decision of the electoral college , Adams first presided over the Senate on April 21 . Washington was officially sworn in and gave his inaugural address on April 30 . Beyond Adams ' nominal position in the Senate ( he was allotted a vote as tie breaker when required ) , he otherwise played a minor role in the politics of the early 1790s . He was reelected Vice President in 1792 . Washington seldom asked Adams for advice on policy and legal issues during his tenure as vice president . 
 At the start of Washington 's administration , Adams became deeply involved in a month @-@ long Senate controversy over the official title of the President . Adams favored grandiose titles derived from British Crown tradition , such as " His Majesty the President " or " His High <unk> , the President of the United States and Protector of Their Liberties . " Jefferson described Adams ' proposed titles as " superlatively ridiculous . " The plain " President of the United States " eventually won the debate . The perceived pomposity of his stance , along with his being overweight , led to Adams earning the nickname " His <unk> . " 
 As president of the Senate , Adams cast a historic 31 tie @-@ breaking votes . He thus protected the president 's sole authority over the removal of appointees and influenced the location of the nation 's capital . But his views did not always align with Washington , who joined Franklin as the object of Adams ' ire , as shown in this quote : " The History of our Revolution will be one continued lie . . . . The essence of the whole will be that Dr. Franklin 's electrical Rod smote the Earth and out sprung General Washington . That Franklin <unk> him with his Rod — and henceforth these two conducted all the Policy , Negotiations , Legislatures and War . " On at least one occasion , he persuaded senators to vote against legislation that he opposed , and he frequently lectured the Senate on procedural and policy matters . Adams ' political views and his attempt to assume a more active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration . Toward the end of his first term , as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters , he began to exercise more restraint . When the nation 's first two opposing political parties formed , he joined the Federalist Party , though he was consistently in opposition to its dominant leader Alexander Hamilton . 
 Adams ' two terms as Vice President were frustrating experiences for him . He complained to his wife Abigail , " My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man contrived or his imagination conceived . " 
 = = Presidential Election of 1796 = = 
 The 1796 election was the premier contest under the First Party System . Adams was the presumptive presidential nominee of the Federalist Party ; the other Federalist candidate was Thomas Pinckney , the Governor of South Carolina , considered electable as the vice @-@ president . At that time there was no formal practice of naming a vice @-@ presidential nominee – the result was left to the electoral college in determining the vice @-@ president as the second @-@ place winner of electoral votes . 
 Adams ' and Pinckney 's opponents , of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party , were former Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson of Virginia , who was joined by Senator Aaron Burr of New York as the party 's second nominee . Many Federalists would have preferred Hamilton to be a candidate . Although Hamilton supported Adams , his more austere background made him somewhat resentful ; some suspected Hamilton of supporting Pinckney over Adams , though this was later demonstrated to be false – Hamilton was more determined to defeat Jefferson . Hamilton and his supporters did however believe that Adams lacked the seriousness and popularity that had caused Washington to be successful , and feared that Adams was too vain , opinionated , unpredictable and stubborn to follow their directions . Adams vowed he would resign if elected to the second place spot of vice @-@ president under Jefferson . 
 Burr was the only active campaigner in the group . In keeping with the current practice , Adams stayed in his home town ( as did the others ) rather than actively campaign for the Presidency . He specifically wanted to stay out of what he called the " silly and wicked game " . His party , however , campaigned for him , while the Democratic @-@ Republicans campaigned for Jefferson . It was expected that Adams would dominate the votes in New England , while Jefferson was expected to win the Southern states . In the end , Adams won the election by a narrow margin of 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson ( who became the vice president ) , including one crucial vote from Jefferson 's own Virginia and also one from North Carolina . 
 = = Presidency : 1797 – 1801 = = 
 Adams followed Washington 's lead in using the presidency to exemplify republican values and civic virtue ; and his service was free of scandal . He continued to strengthen the central government by expanding the navy and army . In July 1798 Adams signed into law the Act for the Relief of Sick and Disabled Seamen , which authorized the establishment of a government @-@ operated marine hospital service . 
 Historians debate his decision to retain en masse the members of Washington 's cabinet . Many felt he was oblivious to the political danger of such a decision , in light of the cabinet 's loyalty to Hamilton . The " Hamiltonians who surround him , " Jefferson soon remarked , " are only a little less hostile to him than to me . " Although aware of the Hamilton factor , Adams was convinced their retention ensured a smoother succession . Adams ' economic programs maintained those of Hamilton , who indeed had regularly consulted with key cabinet members , especially the powerful Secretary of the Treasury , Oliver Wolcott , Jr . Adams was in other respects quite independent of his cabinet , often making decisions despite strong opposition from it . Such self @-@ reliance enabled him to avoid war with France , despite a strong desire among his cabinet secretaries for the conflict . The Quasi @-@ War with France resulted in the detachment from European affairs that Washington had sought . It also had psychological benefits , allowing America to view itself as holding its own against a European power . 
 Historian George Herring argues that Adams was the most independent @-@ minded of the founders . Though he aligned with the Federalists , he was somewhat a party unto himself , disagreeing with the Federalists as much as he did the Democratic @-@ Republicans . He was often described as " prickly " , but his tenacity was fed by good decisions made in the face of universal opposition . Adams was often combative , which diminished presidential decorum , as Adams himself admitted in his old age : " [ As president ] I refused to suffer in silence . I sighed , sobbed , and groaned , and sometimes screeched and screamed . And I must confess to my shame and sorrow that I sometimes swore . " Adams ' resolve to advance peace with France , rather than to continue hostilities , especially reduced his popularity . This played an important role in his reelection defeat , however he was so pleased with the outcome that he had it engraved on his tombstone . Adams spent much of his term at home in Massachusetts , ignoring the details of political patronage nursed by other office holders . 
 = = = Quasi @-@ War and peace with France = = = 
 The president 's term was marked by disputes concerning the country 's role , if any , in the expanding conflict in Europe , where Britain and France were at war . Hamilton and the Federalists supported Britain , while Jefferson and the Democratic @-@ Republicans favored France . The French had supported Jefferson for president and became even more belligerent at his loss . When Adams entered office , he decided to continue Washington 's policy of staying out of the European war . The intense battle over the Jay Treaty in 1795 had previously polarized politics throughout the nation . The French saw America as Britain 's junior partner and began seizing American merchant ships that were trading with the British . Nevertheless , most Americans were initially pro @-@ French due to France 's assistance during the Revolutionary War , and would not have sufficiently rallied behind anyone to stop France . 
 Sentiments changed with the XYZ Affair , in which the French demanded huge bribes before any discussions could begin regarding American complaints ; this substantially weakened popular American support of France . The pro @-@ French Jeffersonians lost support and quickly became the minority as many began to demand full @-@ scale war . The affair heightened fears of sedition by the administration 's opponents and legislation was introduced in response . The president knew that America would be unable to win a conflict , as France at the time was dominating the fight in most of Europe . Adams therefore pursued a strategy whereby American ships harassed French ships in an effort sufficient to stem the French assaults on American interests . This was the undeclared naval war between the U.S. and France – the Quasi @-@ War which broke out in 1798 . 
 There was danger of invasion from the more powerful French forces , so Adams and the Federalist congress built up the army , bringing back Washington as its commander . Washington wanted Hamilton to be his second @-@ in @-@ command and Adams reluctantly accommodated . It became apparent that Hamilton was truly in charge due to Washington 's advanced years . The angered president remarked at the time , " Hamilton I know to be a proud Spirited , conceited , aspiring Mortal always pretending to Morality , " he wrote , but " with as debauched Morals as old Franklin who is more his Model than anyone I know . " 
 Adams also rebuilt the Navy , adding six fast , powerful frigates , most notably the USS Constitution . To pay for the military buildup , Congress imposed new taxes on property : the Direct Tax of 1798 . It was the first ( and last ) such federal tax . Taxpayers were angered , especially in southeast Pennsylvania , where the bloodless Fries 's Rebellion broke out among rural German @-@ speaking farmers who protested what they saw as a threat to their republican liberties and to their churches . 
 Hamilton assumed control in the War department , and the rift between Adams ' and Hamilton 's supporters widened . Many sought to vest Hamilton with command authority over the army , and they also resisted giving prominent Democratic @-@ Republicans positions in the army , which Adams wanted to do in order to gain bipartisan support . By building a large standing army , Hamilton 's supporters raised popular alarms and played into the hands of the Democratic @-@ Republicans . They also alienated Adams and his large personal following . They <unk> viewed the Federalist party as their own tool and ignored the need to pull together the entire nation in the face of war with France . Overall , however , patriotic sentiments and a series of naval victories , popularized the war as well as the president . 
 In February 1799 , Adams surprised many by sending diplomat William Vans Murray on a peace mission to France . Napoleon , realizing that the conflict was pointless , signaled his readiness for friendly relations . At the Convention of 1800 the Treaty of Alliance of 1778 was superseded and the United States was then free of foreign entanglements , as Washington had advised in his farewell address . Adams brought in John Marshall as Secretary of State and demobilized the emergency army . Adams proudly avoided war , but deeply split his party in the process . 
 = = = Alien and Sedition Acts = = = 
 Despite the discredit of the XYZ Affair , the Democratic @-@ Republicans ' opposition persisted . In the midst of war , which included the reign of terror during the French Revolution , political tensions were incendiary . Some pro @-@ French Democratic @-@ Republicans even fostered a movement in America , similar to the French Revolution , to overthrow the Federalists . When Democratic @-@ Republicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws , some Federalists voiced the intention to send in an army and force them to capitulate . As the hostility sweeping Europe bled over into America , calls for secession began to reach new heights . Some Federalists accused the French and their associated immigrants of provoking civil unrest . In an attempt to quell the uprising , the Federalists introduced , and the Congress passed , a series of laws collectively referred to as the Alien and Sedition Acts , which were signed by Adams in 1798 . 
 Congress specifically passed four measures – the Naturalization Act , the Alien Friends Act , the Alien Enemies Act and the Sedition Act . These statutes were designed to mitigate the threat of secessionists by disallowing their most extreme firebrands . The Naturalization Act increased to 14 years the period of residence required for an immigrant to attain American citizenship ( naturalized citizens tended to vote for the Democratic @-@ Republicans . ) The Alien Friends Act and the Alien Enemies Act allowed the president to deport any foreigner ( from friendly and hostile nations , respectively ) which he considered dangerous to the country . The Sedition Act made it a crime to publish " false , scandalous , and malicious writing " against the government or its officials . Punishments included 2 – 5 years in prison and fines of up to $ 5 @,@ 000 . Although Adams had not promoted any of these acts , he signed them into law . 
 The acts became controversial from prosecution thereunder of a Congressman and a number of newspaper editors . Indeed , the Federalist administration initiated fourteen or more indictments under the Sedition Act , as well as suits against five of the six most prominent Democratic @-@ Republican newspapers . The majority of the legal actions began in 1798 and 1799 , and went to trial on the eve of the 1800 presidential election – timing that hardly appeared coincidental , according to biographer Ferling . Other historians have cited evidence that the Alien and Sedition Acts were rarely enforced , namely : 1 ) only 10 convictions under the Sedition Act have been identified ; 2 ) Adams never signed a deportation order ; and 3 ) the sources of expressed furor over the acts were Democratic @-@ Republicans . However , other historians have emphasized that the Acts were employed for political targeting from the outset , causing many aliens to leave the country . The Acts as well allowed for prosecution of many who opposed the Federalists , even on the floor of Congress . In any case , the election of 1800 in fact became a bitter and volatile contest , with each side expressing extraordinary fear of the other and its policies ; after Democratic @-@ Republicans prevailed in the elections of 1800 , they used the acts against Federalists before the laws finally expired . 
 = = = Election of 1800 = = = 
 The death of Washington in 1799 weakened the Federalists , as they lost the one man who united the party . In the presidential election of 1800 , Adams and his fellow Federalist candidate , Charles Cotesworth Pinckney , opposed the Republican ticket of Jefferson and Burr . Hamilton tried his hardest to sabotage Adams ' campaign in the hope of boosting Pinckney 's chances of winning the presidency . In the end , Adams lost narrowly to Jefferson by 65 to 73 electoral votes , with New York providing the decisive margin . 
 Adams ' defeat resulted from 1 ) the stronger organization of the Democratic @-@ Republicans , 2 ) Federalist disunity , 3 ) the controversy of the Alien and Sedition Acts , 4 ) the popularity of Jefferson in the south and 5 ) the effective politicking of Aaron Burr in New York State , where the legislature shifted from Federalist to Democratic @-@ Republican on the basis of a few wards in New York City controlled by Burr 's machine . 
 In the closing months of his term Adams became the first president to occupy the new , but unfinished President 's Mansion ( later known as the White House ) beginning November 1 , 1800 . " I pray Heaven to bestow the best of Blessings on this House and all that shall hereafter inhabit it , " Adams wrote on his second night in the mansion . " May none but honest and wise Men ever rule under this roof . " 
 After his defeat in the hotly contested election , Adams was depressed when he left office . His son Charles had also recently died from alcoholism , and he was anxious to rejoin his wife Abigail , who had left for Massachusetts months before the inauguration . As a result , he did not attend Jefferson 's inauguration , departing the White House at 4 : 00 a.m. that day , and making him one of only four presidents surviving in office not to attend his successor 's inauguration . Adams ' correspondence with Jefferson at the time is not indicative of the animosity and resentment that scholars have attributed to him . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 = = = = Supreme court = = = = 
 Adams named John Marshall as the fourth Chief Justice of the United States to succeed Oliver Ellsworth , who had retired due to ill health . Marshall 's long tenure represents the most lasting influence of the Federalists , as he infused the Constitution with a judicious and carefully reasoned nationalistic interpretation and established the Judicial Branch as the equal of the Executive and Legislative branches . 
 = = = = Other judicial appointments = = = = 
 The lame @-@ duck session of Congress in late 1800 enacted the Judiciary Act of 1801 , which created a set of federal appeals courts between the district courts and the Supreme Court . The purpose of the statute was twofold – first , to remedy the defects in the federal judicial system inherent in the Judiciary Act of 1789 , and second , to enable the defeated Federalists to staff the new judicial offices with loyal Federalists in the face of the party 's defeat in 1800 – the party had lost control of both houses of congress in addition to the White House . Adams filled the vacancies created in this statute by appointing a series of judges , whom his opponents called the " Midnight Judges " because most of them were appointed just days before his presidential term expired . Most of these judges lost their posts when the Jeffersonian Republicans enacted the Judiciary Act of 1802 , abolishing the courts created by the Judiciary Act of 1801 and returning the federal courts to their original structure as specified in the 1789 statute . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Adams resumed farming at his home <unk> in the town of Quincy ; he also began work on an autobiography ( which he never finished ) and resumed correspondence with such old friends as Benjamin Waterhouse and Benjamin Rush . 
 After Jefferson 's retirement from public life in 1809 , Adams became more vocal . He published a three @-@ year marathon of letters in the Boston Patriot newspaper , refuting line @-@ by @-@ line an 1800 pamphlet by Hamilton which attacked his conduct and character . Though Hamilton had died in 1804 in a duel with Aaron Burr , Adams felt the need to vindicate his character against the New Yorker 's vehement charges . 
 The years of retirement in the Adams ' household were not without some temporary financial adversity ; in 1803 the bank holding his cash reserves of about $ 13 @,@ 000 collapsed . Son John Quincy came to the rescue by purchasing from him his properties in Weymouth and Quincy , including <unk> , for the sum of $ 12 @,@ 800 . 
 Daughter Abigail ( " <unk> " ) was married to Representative William Stephens Smith , but she returned to her parents ' home after the failure of the marriage ; she died of breast cancer in 1813 . His wife Abigail died of typhoid on October 28 , 1818 . His son Thomas and wife Ann , along with seven children , lived with Adams to the end of Adams ' life , as well as Louisa Smith ( Abigail 's niece by her brother William ) . Sixteen months before John Adams ' death , his son , John Quincy Adams , became the sixth president of the United States in 1825 , the only son to succeed his father as President until George W. Bush in 2001 . 
 = = Correspondence with Jefferson = = 
 In early 1812 , Adams reconciled with Jefferson . Their mutual friend Benjamin Rush , a fellow signer of the Declaration of Independence who had been corresponding with both , encouraged them to reach out to the other . On New Year 's Day Adams sent a brief , friendly note to Jefferson to accompany the delivery of " two pieces of homespun , " a two @-@ volume collection of lectures on rhetoric by John Quincy Adams . Jefferson replied immediately with a cordial letter , and the two men revived their friendship , which they sustained by mail . The correspondence that they resumed in 1812 lasted the rest of their lives , and has been hailed as among their great legacies of American literature . 
 Their letters represent an insight into both the period and the minds of the two revolutionary leaders and Presidents . The missives lasted fourteen years , and consisted of 158 letters – 109 from Adams and 49 from Jefferson . The two men discussed " natural aristocracy . " Jefferson said , " The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature for the instruction , the trusts , and government of society . And indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man for the social state , and not to have provided virtue and wisdom enough to manage the concerns of society . May we not even say that the form of government is best which provides most effectually for a pure selection of these natural [ aristocrats ] into the offices of government ? " Adams wondered if it ever would be so clear who these people were , " Your distinction between natural and artificial aristocracy does not appear to me well founded . Birth and wealth are conferred on some men as imperiously by nature , as genius , strength , or beauty . . . . When aristocracies are established by human laws and honour , wealth , and power are made hereditary by municipal laws and political institutions , then I acknowledge artificial aristocracy to commence . " It would always be true , Adams argued , that fate would bestow influence on some men for reasons other than true wisdom and virtue . That being the way of nature , he thought such " talents " were natural . A good government , therefore , had to account for that reality . 
 = = Death = = 
 Less than a month before his death , Adams issued a statement about the destiny of the United States , which historians such as Joy Hakim have characterized as a " warning " for his fellow citizens : " My best wishes , in the joys , and festivities , and the solemn services of that day on which will be completed the fiftieth year from its birth , of the independence of the United States : a memorable epoch in the annals of the human race , destined in future history to form the brightest or the blackest page , according to the use or the abuse of those political institutions by which they shall , in time to come , be shaped by the human mind . " 
 On July 4 , 1826 , the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence , Adams died at his home in Quincy , at approximately 6 : 20 PM . Jefferson died earlier the same day . Adams ' crypt lies at United First Parish Church in Quincy , Massachusetts , with his wife Abigail and son John Quincy Adams . When Adams died , his last words included an acknowledgement of his longtime friend and rival : " Thomas Jefferson survives " , though Adams was unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before . 
 = = Political philosophy and views = = 
 = = = Slavery = = = 
 Adams never bought a slave and declined on principle to utilize slave labor , saying , " I have , through my whole life , held the practice of slavery in such abhorrence , that I have never owned a negro or any other slave , though I have lived for many years in times , when the practice was not disgraceful , when the best men in my vicinity thought it not inconsistent with their character , and when it has cost me thousands of dollars for the labor and subsistence of free men , which I might have saved by the purchase of negroes at times when they were very cheap . " Adams generally tried to keep the issue out of national politics , because of the anticipated southern response during a time when unity was needed to achieve independence . He spoke out in 1777 against a bill to emancipate slaves in Massachusetts , saying that the issue was presently too divisive , and so the legislation should " sleep for a time . " He also was against use of black soldiers in the Revolution , due to opposition from southerners . Slavery was abolished in Massachusetts about 1780 , when it was forbidden by implication in the Declaration of Rights that John Adams wrote into the Massachusetts Constitution . Abigail Adams , on the other hand , vocally opposed slavery . 
 = = = Accusations of monarchism = = = 
 Throughout his lifetime Adams expressed controversial and shifting views regarding the virtues of monarchical and hereditary political institutions . At times he conveyed substantial support for these approaches , suggesting for example that " hereditary monarchy or aristocracy " are the " only institutions that can possibly preserve the laws and liberties of the people . " Yet at other times he distanced himself from such ideas , calling himself " a mortal and irreconcilable enemy to Monarchy " and " no friend to hereditary limited monarchy in America . " Such denials did not assuage his critics , and Adams was often accused of being a Monarchist . 
 Many of these attacks are considered to have been scurrilous , including suggestions that he was planning to " crown himself king " and " grooming John Quincy as heir to the throne " . However , Peter Shaw has argued that : " [ T ] he inevitable attacks on Adams , crude as they were , stumbled on a truth that he did not admit to himself . He was leaning toward monarchy and aristocracy ( as distinct from kings and aristocrats ) at the time he wrote ' Davila ' , though he did not directly reveal this in its essays . Decidedly , sometime after he became vice @-@ president , Adams concluded that the United States would have to adopt a hereditary legislature and a monarch ... and he outlined a plan by which state conventions would appoint hereditary senators while a national one appointed a president for life . " In contradiction to such notions , Adams asserted in a letter to Thomas Jefferson : " If you suppose that I have ever had a design or desire of attempting to introduce a government of King , Lords and Commons , or in other words an hereditary Executive , or an hereditary Senate , either into the government of the United States , or that of any individual state , in this country , you are wholly mistaken . There is not such a thought expressed or intimated in any public writing or private letter of mine , and I may safely challenge all of mankind to produce such a passage and quote the chapter and verse . " 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Adams was raised a Congregationalist , since his ancestors were Puritans . According to biographer McCullough , " as his family and friends knew , Adams was both a devout Christian , and an independent thinker " . In a letter to Benjamin Rush , Adams credited religion with the success of his ancestors since their migration to the New World in the 1630s . Adams was educated at Harvard when the influence of deism was growing there , and sometimes used deistic terms in his speeches and writing . He also believed that regular church service was beneficial to man 's moral sense . Everett ( 1966 ) concludes that " Adams strove for a religion based on a common sense sort of reasonableness " and maintained that religion must change and evolve toward perfection . Fielding ( 1940 ) argues that Adams ' beliefs synthesized Puritan , deist , and humanist concepts . Adams at one point said that Christianity had originally been revelatory , but was being misinterpreted and misused in the service of superstition , fraud , and unscrupulous power . Goff ( 1993 ) acknowledges Fielding 's " persuasive argument that Adams never was a deist because he allowed the suspension of the laws of nature and believed that evil was internal , not the result of external institutions . " 
 Frazer ( 2004 ) notes that while Adams shared many perspectives with deists , " Adams clearly was not a deist . Deism rejected any and all supernatural activity and intervention by God ; consequently , deists did not believe in miracles or God 's providence .... Adams , however , did believe in miracles , providence , and , to a certain extent , the Bible as revelation . " Frazer further argues that Adams ' " theistic rationalism , like that of the other Founders , was a sort of middle ground between Protestantism and deism . " By contrast , David L. Holmes has argued that Adams , beginning as a Congregationalist , ended his days as a Christian Unitarian , accepting central tenets of the Unitarian creed , but also accepting Jesus as the redeemer of humanity and the biblical account of his miracles as true . Like many of his Protestant contemporaries , Adams criticized the claims to universal authority made by the Roman Catholic Church . In 1796 , Adams denounced political opponent Thomas Paine 's deistic criticisms of Christianity in The Age of Reason , saying , " The Christian religion is , above all the religions that ever prevailed or existed in ancient or modern times , the religion of wisdom , virtue , equity and humanity , let the <unk> Paine say what he will . " 
 = = Biographies = = 
 Adams ' grandson Charles Francis Adams , Sr. edited the first two volumes of The Works of John Adams , Esq . , Second President of the United States . This was published between 1850 and 1856 by Charles C. Little and James Brown in Boston . The first seven chapters were produced by Adams ' son John Quincy Adams . 
 The premier modern biography was Honest John Adams , a 1933 biography by the noted French specialist in American history Gilbert Chinard , who came to Adams after writing his acclaimed 1929 biography of Thomas Jefferson . For a generation , Chinard 's work was regarded as the best life of Adams , and it is still an important text in illustrating the themes of Adams ' biographical and historical scholarship . Following the opening of the Adams family papers in the 1950s , Page Smith published the first major biography to use these previously inaccessible primary sources ; his biography won a 1962 Bancroft Prize but was criticized for its <unk> of Adams ' intellectual life and its diffuseness . In 1975 , Peter Shaw published The Character of John Adams , a thematic biography noted for its psychological insight into Adams ' life . The 1992 character study by Joseph J. Ellis , Passionate Sage : The Character and Legacy of John Adams , was Ellis 's first major publishing success and remains one of the most useful and insightful studies of Adams ' personality . In 1992 , the Revolutionary War historian and biographer John E. Ferling published his acclaimed John Adams : A Life , also noted for its psychological sensitivity . 
 In 2001 , historian David McCullough published a biography entitled John Adams , that won various awards . McCullough 's biography was the basis for a 2008 TV miniseries . 
 = Murray Chotiner = 
 Murray M Chotiner ( October 4 , 1909 – January 30 , 1974 ) was an American political strategist , attorney , government official , and close associate and friend of President Richard Nixon during much of the 37th President 's political career . He served as campaign manager for the future president 's successful runs for the United States Senate in 1950 and for the vice presidency in 1952 , and managed the campaigns of other California Republicans . He was active in each of Nixon 's two successful runs for the White House in low @-@ profile positions . 
 Chotiner was born in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ; his father moved the family to California and then abandoned his wife and children . Murray Chotiner attended UCLA , and graduated from the Southwestern School of Law . He practiced law in Los Angeles , and branched out into public relations . Involving himself in Republican politics , he played an active part in several political campaigns and made an unsuccessful run for the California State Assembly in 1938 . 
 Nixon retained Chotiner as a consultant to his first congressional campaign in 1946 . In an era when the perceived threat of communism was a major domestic issue , Chotiner advised the future president to link his liberal opponent , Representative Jerry Voorhis , to a political organization which was believed to be communist @-@ dominated . Nixon was elected , and hired Chotiner to run his 1950 Senate campaign against Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas . Chotiner used a similar strategy in that campaign , stressing Douglas ' liberal voting record and printing the accusations on pink paper to hint at communist sympathy . Congressman Nixon easily defeated Douglas , and Chotiner next managed Nixon 's 1952 vice presidential campaign and counseled Nixon through allegations of antisemitism and revelations that there were privately run funds to pay Nixon 's political expenses — revelations that the candidate decisively overcame with his televised Checkers speech . 
 After Congress investigated Chotiner in 1956 , suspecting he was using his connections to Nixon for influence peddling to benefit his private legal clients , the vice president and his former campaign manager temporarily parted ways . Nixon recalled him to work on his unsuccessful 1962 campaign for Governor of California , and again for his successful 1968 presidential bid . After Nixon was inaugurated in 1969 , Chotiner received a political appointment to a government position and , in 1970 , became a member of the White House staff . He returned to private practice a year later , but was involved in Nixon 's 1972 re @-@ election campaign . Chotiner described the Watergate break @-@ in that occurred during Nixon 's 1972 campaign and that eventually brought down the Nixon administration as " stupid " , and when a newspaper accused him of organizing it , he sued for libel and won a substantial settlement . He remained an informal adviser to Nixon until he died in Washington , D.C. , following an auto accident in January 1974 , and Nixon mourned the loss of a man he described as a counselor and friend . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Chotiner was born on October 4 , 1909 , in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , the son of Albert Hyman Chotiner and Sarah Chotiner . The family moved to Columbus , Ohio , soon after Murray 's birth , and relocated to California in 1920 . Albert Chotiner , a cigar maker by trade , managed a chain of movie theaters in California , and soon abandoned his wife and children . 
 After attending the University of California , Los Angeles , Chotiner enrolled at the Southwestern School of Law , graduating at age 20 , the youngest graduate in the school 's history . However , he had to wait until he was 21 to be eligible to take the bar exam . He initially practiced law with his older brother , Jack — they had a general practice in which they defended a number of bookmakers — but eventually the <unk> dissolved the partnership , and Murray Chotiner opened a law practice on his own in Los Angeles . He later described many of his clients as " unsavory , to say the least " . In the early 1940s , he branched out into public relations . 
 Chotiner initially registered to vote as a Democrat , but soon switched parties , joining the Republicans . He involved himself in Republican politics , working on Herbert Hoover 's unsuccessful presidential re @-@ election campaign in 1932 . In 1938 , the young attorney ran against longtime Republican incumbent Charles W. Lyon for the California State Assembly . Lyon cross @-@ filed and secured his re @-@ election by winning both primaries , defeating Chotiner in the Republican poll , and narrowly beating Robert A. Heinlein ( who subsequently turned to writing science fiction ) in the Democratic contest . 
 When Earl Warren successfully ran for Governor of California in 1942 , Chotiner served as his field director . However , he alienated Warren when , hoping for a favor in light of his 1942 support , he asked the newly inaugurated governor to decline to approve the extradition of one of his clients to another state . Warren had Chotiner thrown out of his office , and the future chief justice refused to let him have anything to do with his re @-@ election campaign in 1946 . According to Nixon biographer Earl Mazo , Chotiner stated that while people remembered him for " making " Richard Nixon , " the real man I created was Earl Warren " . 
 Chotiner served as counsel to state committees investigating violence in motion picture strikes and conditions in children 's boarding homes and in homes for the elderly . In 1944 , Chotiner was elected president of the conservative California Republican Assembly , a grassroots organization of party activists ; he had previously served as president of the Los Angeles Republican Assembly . In addition to his political involvement , he was active in the Los Angeles Jewish Community Relations Committee . 
 = = Rise of Richard Nixon ( 1946 – 1952 ) = = 
 = = = Congressional races = = = 
 One of the first professional campaign managers ; Chotiner was retained as a political consultant by Nixon 's 1946 campaign for Congress against incumbent Representative Jerry Voorhis . He advised linking Voorhis with a political action committee , believed to be communist @-@ dominated , run by the Congress of Industrial Organizations . The consultant was only able to devote a limited amount of time to the Nixon campaign since he was the Southern California campaign manager for the successful re @-@ election bid of Republican Senator William F. Knowland . Chotiner coined the campaign slogan , " We will not surrender " for Knowland , implying that Democratic challenger Will Rogers , Jr. would permit communism to take over the country . Both Republican candidates defeated their opponents . Two years later , Chotiner served as Southern California campaign manager for the unsuccessful 1948 presidential bid of New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey . 
 In September 1949 , Nixon hired Chotiner as campaign manager for his upcoming 1950 run for the United States Senate . Helen Gahagan Douglas defeated Manchester Boddy for the Democratic nomination in a primary that badly splintered the Democratic Party , while Nixon had little effective competition for the Republican slot . Chotiner realized that Nixon could not beat Douglas by advocating more social welfare programs , so he advised his candidate to attack Douglas on the issue of communism , seen as a Democratic vulnerability . Echoing a theme used by Boddy in the primary , Chotiner linked Representative Douglas with leftist Congressman Vito Marcantonio of the socialist American Labor Party , listing the matters in which the two had voted the same way in a leaflet printed on pink paper — the " Pink Sheet " — and popularizing a label for Douglas which had been first coined by Boddy — the " Pink Lady " . However , the Northern California campaign chairman for Nixon , John <unk> , and his paid assistant , Harvey Hancock , declined to use the Pink Sheet in their territory . With the Korean War raging , Douglas also tried to depict Nixon as soft on communism , stating this in her first speech of the general election campaign , but that strategy was not successful , and Chotiner noted , " She made the fatal mistake of attacking our strength instead of sticking to attacking our weakness . " 
 Chotiner had parted ways with Governor Warren , and the popular governor , who was running for a third term , " wanted no part " of the Nixon campaign . Nonetheless , Chotiner sought to maneuver the future chief justice into an endorsement of Representative Nixon . Chotiner instructed Young Republicans head and future congressman Joseph F. Holt to follow Douglas from appearance to appearance and demand to know who she was supporting for governor . Douglas repeatedly avoided the question , but with four days to go before the election and the Democratic candidate " close to collapse " from the bitter campaign , she responded to the latest Holt needle with her " hope and pray [ er ] " that Democratic gubernatorial candidate James Roosevelt would be elected . A delighted Chotiner had a reporter ask Warren about Douglas 's reply , and the governor commented , " In view of her statement , I might ask her how she expects I will vote when I mark my ballot for United States senator on Tuesday . " Chotiner publicized this response as an endorsement of Nixon , which Warren did not deny . Both Warren and Nixon won overwhelming victories on Election Day . 
 Chotiner 's strategy in the Nixon congressional races remains controversial . Former congressman Voorhis dubbed himself " the first victim of the Nixon @-@ Chotiner formula for political success " . Democrats labeled him a master of dirty tricks who ruthlessly destroyed Douglas 's political career by intimating that she was soft on communism . Chotiner 's son Kenneth later stated , " I think he really believed [ Douglas ] was evil ... He would equate a liberal or a Democrat with a communist . " Chotiner himself said of the campaign against Douglas , " We only stated the facts . The interpretation of the facts was the prerogative of the electorate . " 
 = = = 1952 campaign = = = 
 In 1952 , Chotiner served as campaign manager for Knowland . Knowland cross @-@ filed and won both major party primaries , virtually assuring his re @-@ election . The strategist also served as Holt 's campaign manager in the California 22nd Congressional district Republican primary . Senator Nixon endorsed Holt over State Senator Jack Tenney , and Chotiner asked Nixon to supply him with Tenney 's House Un @-@ American Activities Committee file — the state senator had once had communist leanings , though he had long renounced them . Nixon arranged for Chotiner to get the file , which was supposed to be for Congressional use only , though he apparently made no public use of the file in the campaign . Holt defeated Tenney in the primary , and went on to win the general election . 
 With the primary completed , Chotiner 's attention turned to the 1952 Republican National Convention in Chicago . While the California delegation was pledged to Governor Warren , ( who hoped to gain the Republican nomination for president in a brokered convention ) , the strategist realized that Nixon 's best chance for advancement was in the nomination of General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who was in a close battle with Senator Robert A. Taft for the party 's nomination . 
 Chotiner was quietly designated an alternate delegate to the convention as an original alternate had dropped out , and when Governor Warren learned of his selection , he " erupted ... furiously " . Chotiner had volunteered to take care of many of the convention arrangements for the California delegation , and for the Warren campaign headquarters at the Conrad Hilton Hotel . Seeking to avoid a split with Nixon , who assured Warren that Chotiner was merely there to handle physical arrangements , the governor grudgingly allowed Chotiner to retain his roles . When the California delegation 's train arrived in Chicago , the Warren campaign found that the buses which Chotiner had arranged to transport the delegation to its hotel were covered with " Eisenhower for President " banners — which the governor 's supporters hastily replaced with Warren signs . Chotiner had an extra phone surreptitiously installed in the Warren headquarters so he could quietly communicate the latest developments to Nixon . He also remained in close contact with Eisenhower aide and future Attorney General , Herbert Brownell . Warren paid a courtesy call on Eisenhower , and later wrote in his memoirs , " Imagine my surprise when the doorkeeper who admitted me to the general 's suite was Murray Chotiner . " Eisenhower was nominated over Taft and Warren in a close , first @-@ ballot victory . As a final indignity to Warren , it developed that Chotiner had overspent his budget , forcing the governor and others to pay hotel expenses from their own pockets . 
 Despite Chotiner 's maneuvering for Nixon , the senator was still uncertain if he should take the vice @-@ presidential slot if offered . Pat Nixon wanted her husband to decline it . Chotiner argued to the Nixons that if the Republicans lost , Nixon would retain his seat in the Senate , that if he served as Vice President and re @-@ entered private life , he would have a lucrative legal career , but that if Nixon did not move up to the Vice Presidency , with Senator Knowland relatively young and in good health , Nixon was likely to remain merely the junior senator from California for many years to come . Eisenhower offered Nixon the position , the senator accepted , and with Knowland 's re @-@ election bid all but won , Chotiner became Nixon 's campaign manager . 
 Soon after Nixon 's selection , controversy erupted over the senator 's 1951 purchase of a home with a restrictive covenant that forbade resale or rental to Jews . Chotiner , a Jew , successfully appealed to the Anti @-@ Defamation League and the Jewish press for support for Nixon in the controversy , providing them with a list of Jewish causes which he had favored . Nixon 's staff pointed out that the covenant was , in any event , invalid because of the U.S. Supreme Court 's 1948 ruling in Shelley v. Kraemer . The controversy " failed to gain fatal traction " but repeatedly surfaced in later Nixon campaigns . 
 When the media discovered that Nixon had received reimbursement for political expenses from a fund set up by a private group , the nominee was severely criticized , and he was pressured to give up his place on the ticket . Warren supporters , still smarting from the convention , had told reporters about the fund . Chotiner told Nixon that if he were forced off the ticket , Chotiner would hold a press conference and reveal the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes machinations that led to the candidate 's departure , the ensuing furor being of no consequence to them , as both Nixon and Chotiner would be through in politics . His spirits revived by Chotiner 's loyalty , Senator Nixon delivered the televised Checkers speech , during which he defended himself and emotionally stated he would not return a black and white dog that had been given to his children . Nixon received an outpouring of public support after the speech , but was angered at Eisenhower 's hesitance to issue a statement backing him . He dictated a telegram to his secretary , Rose Mary Woods , giving up his place on the ticket , but Chotiner took the telegram and ripped it up , unsent . Nixon later praised him for his support , " In the whole fund matter , Chotiner was the strongest of all — like a rock . " Eisenhower eventually supported Nixon , and the Republican ticket won a landslide victory in November . 
 = = " Man of influence " , investigations ( 1953 – 1960 ) = = 
 With Nixon as Vice President , Chotiner , " who loved politics and hated his bail bonds law practice in Beverly Hills " , moved part of his legal practice to Washington . The Californian was popular with many lawyers , reporters and politicians , and displayed a quick , though sardonic sense of humor . In November 1955 , Chotiner 's wife , Phyllis Lee , divorced him , stating that Chotiner was often gone for weeks at a time because of his business commitments . On November 17 , 1956 , Chotiner married his longtime assistant , Ruth Arnold . 
 Despite his success in advancing Nixon 's career , Chotiner was respected , but was not universally popular among the Vice President 's backers . Frank Jorgensen , one of Nixon 's first backers in the Voorhis race , said of the attorney , " I knew that Murray was very impatient with people who didn 't have the IQ that he had . He had the habit of a man like that of tramping on them . He 'd move ahead . He 'd just leave the wreckage behind him , but he would get the job done . " Nixon family friend and Whittier College trustee Herman Perry stated , " When Murray develops a little more of the techniques of public relations , I will be one of the first to recognize it and one of the first to give him credit ... The one thing I do not want him to do is be the quarterback and call the plays on the team on which I play . " 
 In 1955 , Chotiner lectured at the Republican national campaign school . He described his campaign philosophy : 
 I believe in all sincerity that if you do not deflate the opposition candidate before your own campaign gets started , the odds are you are doomed to defeat . I believe it is a smear to attack an individual on matters that have no relationship whatsoever to the campaign ... but it is not a smear if you point out the record of your opponent . 
 Chotiner was slated to play a major role in the Eisenhower / Nixon re @-@ election bid . However , he had represented two Atlantic City clothing manufacturers , the Kravitz brothers , who had been fined and barred from further government contracts for fraud , and on April 25 , 1956 , a subcommittee of the Senate Permanent Committee on Investigations , looking into military procurement , subpoenaed him to appear before it . The senators wanted to inquire why a New Jersey firm which already had six attorneys would hire a California lawyer , especially one with close ties to Vice President Nixon . 
 When Chotiner appeared before the subcommittee on May 2 , he testified that he had been retained by the firm when it was seeking to expand to California , that he had conferred with Justice Department attorneys regarding the criminal charges , and that no special favors had been asked or given . Under questioning by subcommittee counsel Robert F. Kennedy , the younger brother of committee member and future president John F. Kennedy , Chotiner also disclosed that he had been retained by New Jersey mobster Marco <unk> in an attempt to stave off a deportation order . He testified that he never discussed his clients with Nixon , and had not used the Vice President 's offices for business purposes . In a press release , Chotiner fired back at Kennedy , suggesting that he had been subpoenaed for political reasons . Denying any influence peddling , Chotiner asked whether the subcommittee counsel could " explain whether any influence was used in connection with his own appointment as attorney for a subcommittee of a committee of which his brother ... is a member . " Patrick Murphy Malin , head of the American Civil Liberties Union concurred that requiring Chotiner to testify had " overtones of political harassment . " Time magazine summed up the hearings , " At week 's end two points were clear : 1 ) Murray Chotiner had been sought out by , and had gone to work for , unsavory clients who obviously regarded him as a man of influence ; and 2 ) on the basis of evidence so far adduced , he had been remarkably unsuccessful in wielding any . " 
 On June 2 , 1956 , the Republican National Committee announced that Chotiner would have no role in the upcoming campaign . On June 6 , a House subcommittee disclosed that the California attorney had written to President Eisenhower asking the President to intercede on behalf of Stanley Weiss 's low @-@ cost charter line North American Airlines ( NAA ) before the Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) . The attorney admitted inquiring of White House aides concerning the case , but denied using any influence on behalf of any client . White House officials said that they had done no more than ask the CAB when a decision might be expected in NAA 's case , and that NAA had lost before the CAB anyway . 
 Congress 's investigations of Chotiner continued through much of 1956 , and were eventually postponed until after the election . The Senate subcommittee finally issued its report on September 5 , 1957 , placing no blame on Chotiner . The House investigation dragged on until 1958 , by which time the focus of the investigation was on White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams , who had sent Chotiner two letters regarding the airline matter . Nixon parted ways with Chotiner after the Senate testimony , calling his predicament " a tragedy " , but by 1959 , the two were friends again . Senator Knowland considered hiring Chotiner to manage his 1958 run for governor , but did not do so , and lost to Edmund G. " Pat " Brown . Chotiner would play no visible role in the unsuccessful 1960 Nixon presidential campaign . Despite his status as a political outcast , Nixon 's former campaign manager remained loyal to him , and remained convinced Nixon would one day be president . 
 = = Political wilderness and return ( 1960 – 1968 ) = = 
 Chotiner ran for the House of Representatives in 1960 , proclaiming himself " vindicated and exonerated " by the fact that no adverse report had been issued against him by the Senate . Chotiner claimed to have Nixon 's backing in the run ; however , Nixon declined to make an endorsement , and the attorney was defeated by <unk> E. Bell in the Republican primary . 
 In early 1962 , Chotiner managed the unsuccessful primary campaign of conservative California Senate candidate Loyd Wright , who was easily defeated by incumbent Senator Thomas H. <unk> in the Republican primary . In August 1962 , he joined Nixon 's campaign for Governor of California against incumbent Democratic Governor Pat Brown as an unpaid volunteer . Chotiner and Nixon had a major disagreement , with the consultant opposing the candidate 's decision to denounce the conservative John Birch Society . In its final weeks , the Brown @-@ Nixon battle became an " alley fight " , with legal battles over " smear " pamphlets distributed by each side . Chotiner 's involvement and the alleged use of his techniques were issues in the campaign , with one bitter Republican describing him as " a millstone around our neck " . Brown defeated Nixon by five percentage points . 
 Five days after the election , Chotiner appeared as a Nixon defender on Howard K. Smith 's News and Comment program on ABC in the episode entitled " The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon " . Nixon nemesis Alger Hiss also appeared on the broadcast , and Hiss 's participation led to such an uproar that sponsors pulled back from underwriting the program , and News and Comment left the air in the spring of 1963 . 
 Chotiner continued to practice law . In 1962 , his wife Ruth obtained an interlocutory divorce decree against him . After the decree became final , Chotiner married again in 1965 . In January 1966 , attorney and land developer Charles W. Hinman was arrested and charged with plotting to have Chotiner murdered . Chotiner had represented Hinman 's wife in a contested divorce case , and Hinman had been jailed for eleven days for failure to pay his fees . No actual attempt on his life took place . Hinman was sentenced to between one and five years in prison . In 1957 , one of Chotiner 's divorce clients had been killed along with her daughter by the client 's estranged husband in the attorney 's Beverly Hills office . 
 Chotiner was involved in Nixon 's successful 1968 presidential bid , but kept out of the public eye as special assistant to Nixon campaign manager John Mitchell . He served as liaison between the campaign and 14 Republican state organizations . He was able to place a " mole " on the Humphrey campaign press plane ; the agent sent back almost daily reports on off @-@ the @-@ record or unreported comments made by the Democratic candidate and his staff , and evaluations of their morale . Kevin Phillips said of Nixon 's 1968 presidential run , 
 [ Mitchell ] and Murray Chotiner were the real people in the campaign , not the artificial public relations phonies who called Nixon " the product " as if he were some kind of underarm deodorant . 
 = = Presidential adviser ( 1969 – 1974 ) = = 
 = = = Federal lawyer ( 1969 – 1971 ) = = = 
 The day after Nixon 's election as President in November 1968 , he asked Chotiner what job he would like , and Chotiner indicated that he wanted to be chairman of the Republican National Committee ( RNC ) , but was told that was impossible . However , Mitchell and soon @-@ to @-@ be White House Chief of Staff H.R. Haldeman wished to see Chotiner given a position outside the White House , as they saw him as a rival . Accordingly , they proposed that Chotiner be made RNC executive director , to wield the real power with the chairman as figurehead . A reluctant Nixon , who was worried about Chotiner 's hatchet @-@ man reputation , finally agreed , and Chotiner wrapped up his affairs in California . 
 Chotiner was given an office at the RNC , nominally as the official in charge of tickets for the inauguration . RNC chairman Ray Bliss and his aides were disturbed by his presence , and were told he would be gone after January 20 . Meanwhile , Nixon and his aides considered a new RNC chairman finally settling on Maryland Congressman Rogers Morton , who agreed to take the position once Bliss left , though Morton was not told of the promise to Chotiner . When the President @-@ elect met with Bliss on January 10 , 1969 , he could not bring himself to fire the chairman . With the situation unresolved , and Morton 's appointment unannounced , Chotiner sat in his RNC office for a month after the inauguration with nothing to do , as the RNC staff wondered at his presence . 
 Nixon , Haldeman , and Mitchell did nothing to clear up the situation , and Chotiner finally took action on his own and told Bliss that he was to take control . A shaken Bliss called Haldeman , who backed up Chotiner 's account , and Bliss immediately resigned . Bliss 's aides publicized the reasons for his resignation , and reporter David Broder contacted Chotiner , who confirmed the story . Morton refused to be a figurehead for Chotiner , or indeed to have Chotiner at the RNC in any capacity , and so stated to the media . Mitchell dispatched his subordinate , John Sears , to tell Chotiner he would have no place at the RNC . Chotiner took the bad news philosophically , stating that it was not the first time he had been treated badly , and that his estranged wife had predicted that Nixon would " screw " him . 
 However , some job still had to be found for Chotiner , who had wound up his California practice and sold his home . Haldeman refused to have him in the White House , and Nixon 's aides deemed that the Democratic @-@ controlled Senate was unlikely to confirm Chotiner for any post requiring its approval . On April 10 , 1969 , acting Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Theodore R. Gates appointed Chotiner as General Counsel to his office , as almost simultaneously , the White House announced Gates ' replacement , Carl J. Gilbert . On April 1 , Nixon had issued Executive Order <unk> , making the position of general counsel in that office a Schedule C , or political appointment , and significantly raising the salary of the position . Nixon press secretary Ron Ziegler stated that the salary had been raised because the new incumbent was expected to play a more active role than had previous holders of the position . 
 On January 13 , 1970 , Nixon appointed Chotiner as a special counsel to the President , reporting to White House Chief of Staff Haldeman , a move the chief of staff described in his diaries as a " mixed blessing " . Ziegler indicated that the new staffer would be handling " special projects of a wide variety " , and The New York Times speculated that in view of his past , his duties would most likely be political . Haldeman noted in his diaries that his new subordinate was to serve as the " inside White House man for political campaigns " . Chotiner served as liaison between the White House and Republican organizations in 31 states . Chotiner taught at a March 1970 seminar for Young Republican leaders where he suggested that the Republican running against Senator Edward Kennedy mention the Chappaquiddick incident at every opportunity , while insisting that it was not an issue in the campaign . Chotiner stated , " If he says it enough times , I think the voters of Massachusetts will understand all about Chappaquiddick . " 
 Chotiner was involved in recruiting Republican candidates in the unsuccessful attempt to get a Republican Senate majority in the 1970 elections . Some of Chotiner 's friends stated that Nixon involved him in this project after news reports claimed that Nixon had abandoned his former campaign manager , however , Chotiner himself denied that and stated he had been made special counsel because some people in the White House had decided he could be useful . The special counsel also coordinated Vice President Spiro Agnew 's campaign against " <unk> lib " senatorial candidates , including New York Republican Senator Charles Goodell , who was subsequently defeated by Conservative Party candidate James L. Buckley . Chotiner stated that his twenty @-@ year association with Nixon made it possible for him to move on matters without needing to consult the President on every detail . 
 = = = Final years ( 1971 – 1974 ) = = = 
 In January 1971 , Chotiner and his third wife , Mimi , divorced on the ground of irreconcilable differences , after five years of marriage and a bitter , contested trial . Mimi Chotiner testified that the couple 's matrimonial difficulties began when he left California to work for the Nixon campaign , while Murray Chotiner retorted that his wife had said that his government job in the Nixon Administration " wasn 't good enough for her " . Mrs. Chotiner had refused to accompany her husband to Washington , stating at trial that she remained because her children were in California schools . Murray Chotiner married again on May 30 . 
 In March 1971 , Chotiner resigned from his White House job and returned to the private practice of law . He represented former Teamsters president Jimmy Hoffa , who had been informally promised early parole from his jury tampering sentence . Chotiner wrote to Haldeman in November 1971 , noting that no action on Hoffa 's release seemed to be taking place , and President Nixon granted Hoffa clemency later that month . When Chotiner 's role became public in 1973 , he stated that he was proud of his actions on behalf of Hoffa . Chotiner also lobbied the White House on behalf of milk producers , who were seeking increased price supports and who were major contributors to the Republican Party . 
 During the 1972 presidential election , Chotiner served as head of the Ballot Security Task Force for the Nixon campaign , a job that The Washington Post described as " largely token " . At the instructions of Mitchell , in March 1971 , he hired out @-@ of @-@ work reporter Seymour Friedin to present himself as a working journalist and travel with the campaigns of various Democratic presidential hopefuls . Friedin sent reports back to Chotiner , who edited them , had them typed by his secretary , and forwarded them to Mitchell ( who had resigned as Attorney General in 1972 to manage Nixon 's re @-@ election bid ) and Haldeman . When Friedin secured other employment in August 1972 , Chotiner replaced him with <unk> Goldberg , who remained in that capacity for the remainder of the presidential campaign . The two journalists were collectively code @-@ named " Chapman 's Friend " , and were paid $ 1 @,@ 000 per week plus expenses from Chotiner 's law office account , with the account reimbursed by the Committee to Re @-@ elect the President ( CRP ) . The Committee reported the payments as reimbursement of his expenses , which the General Accounting Office opined was a violation of federal election law . Chotiner , however , stated that there was " nothing underhanded or illegal " about the arrangement , and Watergate prosecutors later chose not to prosecute CRP officials concerning the payments , deciding they could not prove criminal intent . 
 In April 1973 , the Manchester Union Leader accused Chotiner of having organized the Watergate break @-@ in . He responded by bringing suit for libel against the Union Leader and its lead investigator . In December 1973 , the parties reached a settlement by which Chotiner received an undisclosed , but substantial , sum of money and the newspaper printed a front page apology and retraction of its accusations in its December 31 , 1973 edition . Chotiner described Watergate in January 1973 as " a stupid , useless , inane experiment by people who have seen too many TV shows and especially too many productions of Mission Impossible " . According to The Washington Post , Chotiner was not close to Haldeman , John Ehrlichman , and most other staffers at the White House and CRP . In a taped discussion of the fallout from Watergate , Haldeman told Nixon that his former campaign manager was not " wired in " , and the President expressed strong opposition to Chotiner being used as a White House contact . At the suggestion that Chotiner could defend him , Nixon worried that the attorney might not be willing to do so . 
 Chotiner advised President Nixon to fire Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox in October 1973 in what became known as the Saturday Night Massacre , telling Nixon , " This guy Cox will use anything and everybody . It has to be taken away from him . " According to Nixon biographer and Chotiner friend Earl Mazo , he was convinced that " Dick wouldn 't have had anything to do with [ the Watergate break @-@ in ] " and was also convinced that the President would put the scandal behind him by the spring of 1974 . According to his brother Jack , " [ h ] e always considered Nixon a genius . " 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On January 23 , 1974 , Chotiner was involved in an automobile accident on Virginia State Route 123 in McLean , Virginia , by the home of Massachusetts Democratic Senator Edward M. Kennedy , who heard the collision and called for an ambulance . Chotiner had suffered a broken leg , and appeared to be recovering . The evening before he was due to be discharged from the hospital , he started gasping uncontrollably , and X @-@ rays revealed a blood clot near the lungs . Treatment was unsuccessful and he died of a pulmonary embolism at the Washington Hospital Center in Washington , D.C. Gerald R. Warren , Nixon 's deputy press secretary , stated that President Nixon was " deeply saddened " by the news . 
 Nixon described Chotiner as a " valued counselor and a trusted colleague . But above all , Murray Chotiner was my friend . " Chotiner was survived by his fourth wife , Nancy , his son , Kenneth , from his first marriage , two stepdaughters , Renee and Julie , and his brother . The President attended his funeral , and emotionally told Nancy Chotiner that her husband was a " great guy " . 
 Chotiner is buried at National Memorial Park in Falls Church , Virginia . The adage known as " Chotiner 's Law " is named for the former Nixon adviser . It holds that if an incumbent is seriously challenged in a primary election , he will be unable to recover and will lose the general election . Chotiner 's Law has held true in every presidential election since his death . 
 Chotiner was known to his friends as " the perfect political technician " and to his foes as " the complete political hatchet man " , but often said that he had done nothing in politics that he was not proud of . Rowland Evans and Robert Novak summed up Chotiner : 
 Chotiner was in many ways the most interesting personality in Nixon 's political camp : aggressive , egocentric , a professional among amateurs , brilliant , overbearing , ruthless , engaging , habitually guilty of overkill , constantly enlarging his area of operation . Painted in sinister colors by the press , he was both a public relations problem for Nixon and an invaluable campaign strategist . 
 = 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team ( United States ) = 
 The 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team ( " Thunderbird " ) is a modular infantry brigade combat team of the United States Army headquartered in Norman , Oklahoma . It is a part of the Oklahoma Army National Guard . 
 Formed from elements of the disbanded 45th Infantry Division which saw action during World War II and the Korean War , along with the 45th Field Artillery Group ( today 's 45th Fires Brigade ) and 90th Troop Command , the 45th Infantry Brigade was activated in 1968 and assigned to training duties for active duty army units until 1994 when the 45th was selected as one of 15 " enhanced brigades " . The brigade deployed as part of the UN peacekeeping force in the wake of the Bosnian War , with C Company , 1 @-@ 179th Infantry being among the first National Guard units to see duty there . In 2003 , A Co 1 @-@ 179 deployed to Saudi Arabia while B 1 @-@ 179 deployed to Kuwait to provide security for Patriot missile sites . During the invasion of Iraq , B Co 1 @-@ 179 pushed North of Baghdad establishing a foothold in Taji Iraq . Later that year , the 45th deployed to Afghanistan to train soldiers of the Afghan National Army which was followed by a deployment to Iraq to assist in the turning over of American military bases to Iraqi forces . A second brigade deployment to Afghanistan in 2011 assigned the brigade to full @-@ spectrum operations for the first time since the 1950s . 
 The brigade received all heraldry , lineage and honors from the 45th Infantry Division , including its shoulder sleeve insignia and campaign streamers for combat in World War II and Korea . It has since received several of its own decorations for participation in the subsequent conflicts . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The brigade is a subordinate unit of the Oklahoma Army National Guard , headquartered in Norman , OK . The brigade commands six battalions . These units are the 1st Squadron , 180th Cavalry Regiment , 700th Brigade Support Battalion , 1st Battalion , 179th Infantry Regiment , 1st Battalion , 160th Field Artillery Regiment , 1st Battalion , 279th Infantry Regiment , and 45th Brigade Special Troops Battalion . 
 = = 45th Infantry Division = = 
 The history of the 45th Brigade Combat Team can be traced back to 1890 with the formation of the Militia of the Territory of Oklahoma . That militia was mobilized in 1898 during the Spanish – American War but never deployed . In 1916 the First Oklahoma Infantry Regiment deployed for border security duty during the Mexican Border Conflict . In 1917 , the First Oklahoma Infantry Regiment , reassigned as part of the 142nd Infantry Regiment of the 36th Division fought in the final month of World War I. 
 On 19 October 1920 , the Oklahoma State militia was organized as the 45th Infantry Division of the Oklahoma Army National Guard and organized with troops from Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and Oklahoma . The division was organized and federally recognized as a US Army unit on 3 August 1923 in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . Prior to World War II , the division was called on many times to maintain order in times of disaster and to keep peace during periods of political unrest . Oklahoma Governor John C. Walton used division troops to prevent the State Legislature from meeting when they were preparing to impeach him in 1923 . Governor William H. Murray called out the guard several times during the depression to close banks , distribute food and once to force the State of Texas to keep open a free bridge over the Red River which Texas intended to collect tolls for , even after federal courts ordered the bridge not be opened . 
 The division would go on to see combat in World War II as one of four national guard divisions active during the war . The division was active for over five years , participating in eight campaigns , four amphibious assaults , for a total of 511 days of combat . Following World War II the division became an all @-@ Oklahoma organization . In 1950 , the division was also called into service during the Korean War , participating in four campaigns and fighting for 429 days . 
 = = Cold War years = = 
 In 1968 , the division was disbanded and the 45th Infantry Brigade ( Separate ) was formed in its place . The 45th Brigade assumed all of the 45th Division 's lineage and campaign participation credit , including its shoulder sleeve insignia featuring a Thunderbird , a common Native American symbol , as a tribute to the south @-@ western United States region which had a large population of Native Americans . The brigade also assumed the division 's nickname , " Thunderbirds " . The division 's three subordinate brigades were disbanded as a part of the organization , and were not affiliated with the 45th Infantry Brigade ( Separate ) . The brigade 's headquarters was subsequently relocated to Edmond , Oklahoma . In 1971 the brigade received its distinctive unit insignia . 
 The brigade did not participate in any overseas combat operations through the 1970s or 1980s , as the size of the active duty force negated the need for National Guard formations to be deployed during the relatively small contingencies of that period . The 45th did participate in <unk> ( Certain Strike ) in September 1987 . Instead , the brigade was primarily used to train active duty units , and other general peacetime missions within the United States . In 1991 , the brigade became affiliated with the 1st Cavalry Division , providing training services for the division soldiers . 
 = = Desert Storm = = 
 On 19 September 1990 the <unk> Supply and Service Company located in Wewoka , Oklahoma was called up for active duty in support of Desert Shield . This was the first of fourteen units from the Oklahoma National Guard called up in support of the action . Many of the units were sent to Saudi Arabia to provide support for the regular army in Desert Shield and Desert Storm . 
 = = Enhanced brigade = = 
 In 1994 , the brigade was selected as one of fifteen " enhanced " separate brigades of the Army National Guard , featuring authorization to recruit 10 % above required manning levels and a requirement to attend one of the Combat Training Centers not less than once every eight years , and ready to deploy within 90 days in case of emergencies . In 1997 , the brigade was integrated under the command structure of the 7th Infantry Division , allowing the 7th Division to provide oversight and support for the brigade 's activities should it be deployed , and potentially command and control when deployed , but that was never tested . In 1996 , the brigade 's garrison was relocated back to Oklahoma City . 
 In 2000 – 2001 several hundred soldiers of the brigade were deployed to Bosnia in support of NATO forces seeking to stabilize the country in the wake of the Bosnian War . Soldiers of the brigade were among the first National Guard units to see front @-@ line patrolling duty in the conflict , a job held exclusively by active duty units until that time . 
 The brigade trained for a rotation in the Joint Readiness Training Center at Fort Polk , Louisiana throughout 2000 and 2001 , before deploying to the center throughout 2002 and early 2003 . The brigade received praise from center commanders as performing the mission better than many brigades before it . After its rotation , the brigade trained the 39th Infantry Brigade of the Arkansas Army National Guard , which saw the next rotation in the <unk> . The 39th Brigade was also under the command of the 7th Infantry Division . 
 = = Iraq and Afghanistan = = 
 In January 2003 , components of the 45th Infantry Brigade were deployed to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait . Approximately 230 light infantry soldiers from A Company and B Company , 1st Battalion , 179th Infantry Regiment comprised Task Force Ironhorse under the United States Army Central Command ( <unk> ) . Their primary mission leading up to the invasion of Iraq was to provide security for Patriot missile sites defending the respective countries from impending SCUD missile attacks . In March 2003 , Company A was ordered from the area in and around Riyadh to the northern border cities of Tabuk and Arar , Saudi Arabia in defense of Iraqi retaliation and security of strategically redeployed Patriot Missile sites . Company B was ordered to advance into Iraq from the Kuwaiti border to provide security for ammo caches and forward operating Patriot missile sites . Task Force Ironhorse was the first deployment of Oklahoma National Guard infantry soldiers to a combat zone since the Korean War ( members of the Oklahoma National Guard deployed during Desert Storm as Field Artillery units ) . Task Force Ironhorse completed their mission and returned in August 2003 . 
 In fall of 2003 , the 45th Infantry Brigade was deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom , assuming command of Task Force Phoenix II from 2nd Brigade , 10th Mountain Division . The purpose of the soldiers ' deployment was to assist in training Afghan security forces . Over the next few years , soldiers of the 45th Infantry Brigade , including its Headquarters and Headquarters Company , would deploy in support of this mission . In April 2004 , 350 soldiers from the brigade 's 1st Battalion , 279th Infantry Regiment also deployed to Joint Task Force Phoenix . During this rotation , the brigade grew the size of the Afghan National Army to over 14 @,@ 000 as well as fielding a corps @-@ sized force ahead of schedule . In August 2004 , the brigade was replaced in this mission by the 76th Infantry Brigade , and subsequently returned home to the United States . The brigade spent three years back home , and in that time transformed into an infantry brigade combat team as a part of a new transformation plan for the Army . 
 In March 2006 , the 180th Cavalry ( still infantry in ' 06 ) deployed as part of Task Force Phoenix V. They were attached to the 41st BCT ( Oregon ARNG ) . They returned in June 2007 . In April 2007 , the brigade was alerted that it could be deployed to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom by the end of the year . Four months later they were alerted that they would be heading to Iraq in 2008 . The brigade mobilized in October of that year and trained in infantry techniques at army posts in Oklahoma and Arkansas . The 39th Infantry Brigade was also alerted for deployment during this time and deployed to Iraq in late 2007 . During its rotation , the brigade was charged with turning over military facilities and Forward Operating Bases to the Iraqi Army as well as the Iraqi Police Force . The brigade returned to the United States in October 2008 . The 45th IBCT deployed to Afghanistan in 2011 and reunited with the 201st Corps of the ANA , as partners this time , in combined combat operations against insurgent forces in Eastern Afghanistan suffering the loss of 14 Soldiers but making significant progress in disrupting and destroying insurgent operations while continuing to mentor the ANA and progressively handing off security missions to them . The full brigade mobilized in April 2011 , but a late change in the mission diverted the 180th Cavalry and 160th Field Artillery to separate missions to support Iraq operations from Kuwait . 
 Additionally , elements of the 45th Brigade have deployed to Egypt ( 1 – 180th Infantry Multinational Force and Observers ( <unk> ) ) , Kuwait ( 245th Military Intelligence Co OIF ) , and for separate rotations to Iraq ( 245th Engineer Co OIF ) and Afghanistan ( 1 – 180th Infantry Task Force Phoenix V ) as well as various homeland security missions . 
 = = Brigade commanders = = 
 MG David C. Matthews 1 February 1968 to 30 June 1970 
 BG George M. Donovan 1 July 1970 to 11 September 1973 
 BG James C. <unk> 12 September 1973 to 31 January 1976 
 BG Buster E. Smith 1 February 1976 to 24 June 1978 
 BG Lawrence F. Roy 25 June 1978 to 30 June 1983 
 BG Curtis W. <unk> 1 July 1983 to 15 February 1984 
 BG James J. Wasson 16 February to 28 August 1987 
 BG Donald G. Smith 29 August 1987 to 13 March 1991 
 BG Allan F. Mc <unk> 14 March 1991 to 6 December 1993 
 BG James E. Walker 7 December 1994 to 10 February 1995 
 BG Bradley D. Gambill 11 February 1995 to 10 July 1998 
 MG Jerry W. Grizzle 11 July 1998 to 12 May 2001 
 BG Thomas P. Mancino 13 May 2001 to 2 December 2004 
 BG Myles L. Deering 3 December 2004 to 12 November 2008 
 COL Lawrence I. <unk> 13 November 2008 to 5 February 2010 
 COL Joel P. Ward 6 February 2010 to 2 June 2012 
 COL Van L. <unk> 3 June 2012 to 2 August 2015 
 COL David Jordan . 3 August 2015 to Present 
 = = Lineage and Honors = = 
 = = = Lineage = = = 
 Constituted 19 October 1920 as Headquarters , 45th Division ( to be organized with troops from Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and Oklahoma ) . 
 Organized and federally recognized 3 August 1923 at Oklahoma City , Oklahoma ; Headquarters Detachment organized and <unk> recognized 1 July 1924 at Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment , 45th Division , inducted into federal service 16 September 1940 at Oklahoma City . 
 Redesignated 23 February 1942 as the 45th Infantry Division . 
 Reorganized and redesignated 23 February 1942 as Headquarters , 45th Infantry Division . 
 Inactivated 7 December 1945 at Camp Bowie , Texas . 
 Reorganized and federally recognized 5 September 1946 in the Oklahoma National Guard at Oklahoma City . 
 Ordered into active federal service 1 September 1950 at Oklahoma City . 
 ( Headquarters , 45th Infantry Division [ NGUS ] , organized and federally recognized 15 September 1952 at Oklahoma City ) . 
 Released from active federal service 30 April 1954 and reverted to state control ; federal recognition concurrently withdrawn from Headquarters , 45th Infantry Division ( NGUS ) . 
 Reorganized and redesignated 1 February 1968 as Headquarters , 45th Infantry Brigade , and location changed to Edmond ( Headquarters Company , 45th Infantry Brigade , concurrently reorganized and redesignated from Headquarters Company , 1st Battalion , 179th Infantry ) . 
 Location changed 1 October 1996 to Oklahoma City . 
 Ordered into active Federal service 19 September 2003 at Oklahoma City ; released from active Federal service 17 September 2004 and reverted to state control . 
 Ordered into active Federal service 19 October 2007 at Oklahoma City . 
 Reorganized and redesignated 1 September 2008 as Headquarters , 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team . 
 Released from active Federal service 21 November 2008 and reverted to state control . 
 Location changed 1 July 2010 to Norman . 
 Ordered into active Federal service 27 March 2011 at Norman ; released from active Federal service 29 April 2012 and reverted to state control . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 The brigade received all of the honors previously accorded to the 45th Infantry Division , including its campaign streamers , which give credit for participation in combat . Additionally , several of these streamers contain the Arrowhead device , signifying the division 's participation in amphibious assaults . 
 As the 45th Infantry Division : 
 As 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team 
 = Interstate 84 in Utah = 
 Interstate 84 ( I @-@ 84 ) is a part of the Interstate Highway System that links Portland , Oregon to I @-@ 80 near Echo , Utah . The 119 @.@ 77 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 192 @.@ 75 km ) segment in the U.S. state of Utah is the shortest of any of the three states the western portion of the Interstate Highway passes through , and contains the eastern terminus of the highway . I @-@ 84 enters Box Elder County near <unk> before becoming concurrent with I @-@ 15 in Tremonton . The concurrent highways travel south through Brigham City and Ogden and separate near the Ogden @-@ Hinckley Airport . Turing east along the Davis County border , I @-@ 84 intersects U.S. Route 89 ( US @-@ 89 ) and enters Weber Canyon as well as Morgan County . While in Morgan County , I @-@ 84 passes the Devil 's Gate @-@ Weber Hydroelectric Power Plant and Devil 's Slide rock formation . Past Morgan , the highway crosses into Summit County , past the Thousand Mile Tree before reaching its eastern terminus at I @-@ 80 near Echo . 
 Construction of the controlled @-@ access highway was scheduled in late 1957 under the designations Interstate 82S and Interstate 80N . The I @-@ 82S designation was only applied on paper for about a year , but the I @-@ 80N designation was the highway 's official designation until 1977 when it was renumbered I @-@ 84 by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials . By 1978 , construction of the freeway had been completed across Utah , as well as Oregon and most of Idaho . I @-@ 84 is unusual as there are two noncontiguous segments : Oregon , Idaho , and Utah as well as Pennsylvania , New York , Connecticut , and Massachusetts . Average traffic in 2012 , along the non @-@ concurrent parts of I @-@ 84 , ranged from as few as 6 @,@ 655 vehicles traveling along I @-@ 84 at the interchange with SR @-@ 86 in Henefer , and as many as 18 @,@ 945 vehicles used the highway at the SR @-@ 26 interchange in Riverdale . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Out of the three states that the western portion of I @-@ 84 passes through , the 119 @.@ 77 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 192 @.@ 75 km ) segment in Utah is the shortest . By comparison , the longest stretch of western I @-@ 84 through a single state is the 375 @.@ 17 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 603 @.@ 78 km ) segment in Oregon . I @-@ 84 also has a noncontiguous eastern segment that passes through Pennsylvania , New York , Connecticut , and Massachusetts : all four of these segments are shorter than the Utah segment . 
 Every year , the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , UDOT calculated that as few as 6 @,@ 655 vehicles traveled I @-@ 84 at the interchange with SR @-@ 86 in Henefer , and as many as 18 @,@ 945 vehicles used the highway at the SR @-@ 26 interchange in Riverdale . Between 27 and 57 percent of the traffic recorded consisted of trucks . These counts are of the portion of the freeway in Utah and are not reflective of the entire Interstate , or of its concurrency with I @-@ 15 . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire route is listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads that are important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = = Western segment = = = 
 Crossing the Idaho @-@ Utah state line , I @-@ 84 enters Box Elder County and the Curlew Valley near farmland that utilizes center pivot irrigation before intersecting SR @-@ 30 at a diamond interchange . The town of <unk> is crossed before passing to the north of the Hansel Mountains and the North Promontory Mountains . The town of Howell , accessible from an interchange with SR @-@ 83 , lays to the southeast of Blue Creek Reservoir in the Blue Creek Valley . Access to the Golden Spike National Historic Site is provided by SR @-@ 83 south of Howell . The Blue Spring Hills form the southern border of Howell as I @-@ 84 continues southeast . Additional center irrigation farmland is passed before giving way to more traditional farmland outside of the city of Tremonton , where a trumpet interchange marks where I @-@ 15 turns north towards Malad City and Pocatello . Heading southeast from this interchange , I @-@ 84 and I @-@ 15 are concurrent for just over 38 miles ( 61 km ) . 
 = = = <unk> with I @-@ 15 = = = 
 Concurrent highways I @-@ 15 / 84 continue south , parallel to rail belonging to the Union Pacific Railroad ( UP ) past the Wellsville Mountain Wilderness , to an interchange at 1100 West in Brigham City , also known as US @-@ 91 , which once in Brigham City becomes concurrent with US @-@ 89 and the two highways travel northeast from Brigham City into Box Elder Canyon towards Logan in the heart of the Cache Valley . US @-@ 89 closely parallels I @-@ 15 / 84 east , as the highways pass Willard Bay , the Willard Bay State Park and Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge before crossing into Weber County . 
 Upon entering Weber County the rail line that the highway has paralleled since Tremonton splits off eastwards near Defense Depot Ogden , as the concurrent highways continue south past Farr West and Slaterville before a Southern Pacific Railroad rail line , which traverses the Great Salt Lake on a causeway , crosses under the freeway . The city of Ogden is bypassed by the Interstates , with US @-@ 89 serving downtown . US @-@ 89 is accessible via interchanges with SR @-@ 39 , SR @-@ 79 and SR @-@ 104 in addition to I @-@ 84 further southeast . I @-@ 84 splits from I @-@ 15 at the south end of the Ogden @-@ Hinckley Airport , with I @-@ 15 continuing south towards Salt Lake City and Provo . 
 = = = Eastern segment = = = 
 Splitting from I @-@ 15 near Roy , I @-@ 84 passes between Hill Air Force Base , which is to the south of the highway , and Washington Terrace before clipping the extreme northern portions of Davis County . While in Davis County , I @-@ 84 intersects 475 East , also known as the Adams Avenue Parkway , before coming to a hybrid partial cloverleaf / half @-@ diamond interchange with US @-@ 89 along the Davis @-@ Weber county line . 
 I @-@ 84 follows the Weber River into Weber Canyon , Morgan County , and the Wasatch @-@ Cache National Forest . Once in the canyon , the carriageways of the highway split to accommodate the Devil 's Gate @-@ Weber Hydroelectric Power Plant . Following the river south , I @-@ 84 exits the forest and enters the county seat of Morgan . Leaving the city the highway turns back east , passing Devil 's Slide , an unusual rock formation just off the freeway . 
 Upon entering Summit County , I @-@ 84 passes the Thousand Mile Tree , planted by Union Pacific Railroad workers to mark the construction of 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) of rail from its origin in Omaha , Nebraska . The tree was said to be the only pine tree between Omaha and Salt Lake City . Another tree was planted as the original tree had died in 1900 and was removed in 1926 to during the conversion from single track to double track through the canyon . Past the tree the freeway passes through the town of Henefer before terminating at a directional T interchange with I @-@ 80 just south of the census @-@ designated place of Echo . Immediately south of the interchange is Echo Reservoir and Echo Dam . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Earlier roads = = = 
 Most of the original routing of what is now I @-@ 84 existed as early as 1923 ; however the portion of now I @-@ 84 into Idaho was not yet constructed . In 1926 , much of the route was signed as US @-@ 30S , from the now eastern terminus at I @-@ 80 ( US @-@ 530 then ) , northwest into Ogden . Between Ogden and Brigham City , the highway was to be concurrent with US @-@ 91 , then US @-@ 30S split off northwest to the Idaho border . The entire western branch of US @-@ 30S was an unimproved road , however the concurrency into Ogden was paved . The remainder of the route to its now terminus was mostly graded with a few improved sections , and by 1937 , the entire route was paved . 
 = = = Current road = = = 
 The first Utah State Route to have the number 84 is what is now known as SR @-@ 126 . SR @-@ 126 was originally numbered SR @-@ 84 until the 1977 renumbering of Utah State highways . Previously , the freeway 's legislative designation was SR @-@ 3 . Like the other two main Interstate Highways in Utah , I @-@ 15 ( the Veterans Memorial Highway ) and I @-@ 80 ( the Purple Heart Trail ) , I @-@ 84 has also been given a special name of " Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway " . House Bill <unk> authorizing the name designation was signed into law by Utah Governor Gary Herbert on March 30 , 2015 . The highway loosely follows the path of the First Transcontinental Railroad . The original routing of US @-@ 30S had the highway passing into Idaho west of Black Pine Peak however , the new I @-@ 84 was constructed to the east . The original roadways are now numbered SR @-@ 30 , SR @-@ 42 and Idaho State Highway <unk> . 
 Passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 formed the Interstate Highway System , however only the western segment of now I @-@ 84 was approved at this time , and a designation of I @-@ 82S was assigned to a then unconstructed controlled @-@ access highway across Box Elder County in 1957 . The eastern segment of the highway was added later in 1957 , and the route was numbered I @-@ 80N by 1958 . By 1968 , portions of the western half of the freeway had been completed , along with the segment between Tremonton and Brigham City . A portion of the freeway was completed around Morgan as well . By 1971 , most of the western portions of the freeway had been constructed with two sections remaining that had at @-@ grade intersections . Along the concurrency , there were gaps between Brigham City and Pleasant View , and one small gap near the Devil 's Slide . 
 The I @-@ 80N designation was changed to I @-@ 84 in 1977 by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials , over objections from the Washington State Department of Transportation and the Idaho Transportation Department , and with the support of UDOT and the Oregon Department of Transportation . By 1978 , construction of I @-@ 84 was complete across Utah , Oregon and most of Idaho . 
 In 1994 I @-@ 84 was planned to be used to transport low @-@ level radioactive waste from the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory to Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in Carlsbad , New Mexico via Wyoming . This did not start until 1999 however due to the delay in the opening of the New Mexican plant . A $ 20 million ( equivalent to $ 33 @.@ 9 million in 2015 ) reconstruction of the US @-@ 89 interchange at the mouth of Weber Canyon was financed partly by the funding obtained by the state in preparation for the 2002 Winter Olympics in 1998 , and was scheduled to begin in 2000 . Reconstruction of a 10 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 km ) segment of I @-@ 84 between Mountain Green and Morgan was done between 2004 and 2005 at a cost of $ 19 million ( equivalent to $ 25 @.@ 3 million in 2015 ) . One of the sub @-@ contractors on the job was found guilty of lying about sub @-@ par work done on installation of roadside impact absorbers along this stretch . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Fatal Frame : Mask of the Lunar Eclipse = 
 Zero : <unk> no Kamen ( <unk> 〜 <unk> 〜 , lit . Zero : Mask of the Lunar Eclipse ) , commonly referred to as Fatal Frame / Project Zero : Mask of the Lunar Eclipse in Western territories , is a survival horror video game developed by Tecmo Koei , Grasshopper Manufacture and Nintendo . It was published by Nintendo for the Wii video game console . The fourth installment in the Fatal Frame series and the first on a Nintendo console , it was released in Japan on July 31 , 2008 . Despite a European release being announced , the game has never been released outside Japan . A fan translation was released in 2010 . 
 The story , set on the fictional Rougetsu Island , focuses on Ruka Minazuki , one of a group of girls who was held captive on the island for unknown reasons . Years after their rescue , still suffering from amnesia , Ruka and the two surviving girls return to the island to seek out the truth . The game 's title stems from a ritual mask key to the story . The gameplay , as with previous entries in the series , revolves around the main character exploring environments and tackling hostile ghosts using the Camera Obscura . 
 The idea for Mask of the Lunar Eclipse came to series co @-@ creator Keisuke Kikuchi when he first saw the Wii hardware . Kikuchi and series co @-@ creator Makoto Shibata returned as respective producer and director , while Grasshopper Manufacture 's Goichi Suda acted as co @-@ director . The gameplay concept was making the player literally feel the fear evoked in the game . The addition of further developers to the project enabled the team to reconsider the standard formula , although it proved to be a chaotic experience . As with previous games , the theme songs were sung by Tsuki Amano . When released , it became the best @-@ selling entry in the series to that date , and received mixed to positive from Japanese and Western critics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Zero : <unk> no Kamen , commonly referred to in the West as Mask of the Lunar Eclipse , has players taking control of four different character navigating a variety of different environments , including traditional Japanese houses and a Meiji @-@ era sanatorium @-@ turned @-@ hotel . Environments are navigated from a third @-@ person perspective using the Wii Nunchuk . During exploration , the characters are regularly attacked by hostile spirits , who take away the characters ' health through touch . 
 The two central characters can fight off and defeat spirits using the series ' recurring Camera Obscura , a camera that captures spirits . Shots taken by the Camera Obscura deal varying amounts of damage based on how close the ghost is , the angle of the shot , and the film used . These factors are taken together to determine how many points the player is awarded for a shot . The most damaging type of shot is the " Fatal Frame " , which is achieved if a shot is taken when the ghost is attacking . Points are used as the in @-@ game currency , which can be used to at save points to purchase items such as medicine and other items . Blue gems scattered around the environment can be used to upgrade the Camera Obscura , with some upgrades speeding reload time or enabling shots to deal more damage . Types of film range from an unlimited low @-@ quality film that deals little damage to rarer and more powerful film types . 
 In addition to the Camera Obscura , the character can use a flashlight to explore their surroundings , and one character has access to a special Spirit <unk> , which uses moonlight to pacify spirits . The Camera Obscura and flashlights are controlled with the Wii Remote . Should a ghost attack , gestures with the Wii Remote can shake them off . The " New Game + " mode unlocks additional costumes and further items and upgrades , many of them dependent on how much the player has scored during the initial playthrough . On higher difficulties , the number of items available is reduced . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In 1970 , ten years prior to the start of the game , suspected serial killer Yō Haibara kidnapped five girls from their rooms in a sanatorium on Rougetsu , an island south of Honshu . The girls were rescued from a cavern beneath the sanatorium by detective Chōshirō Kirishima , who had been pursuing Haibara , but they had all lost their memories . Two years later , a catastrophe strikes Rougetsu Island which kills off the inhabitants . Eight years later , in the present , two of the rescued girls have died in mysterious circumstances and two of the survivors , Misaki Asō and Madoka <unk> , return to discover the truth about their pasts . Despite being warned by her mother not to return to the island , fellow survivor Ruka Minazuki goes there to find Misaki and Madoka . Shortly before Ruka 's arrival , Madoka is killed by hostile spirits . Chōshirō , the detective who rescued them , also returns to the island to both find Ruka and continue his pursuit of Haibara . During her exploration , Ruka learns that she and Misaki are suffering from a malady known as the Hidden Moon Disease , which affects their memories and identity and is spread by touch and vision . Each character also collects pieces of a mask used in a local ritual dance to ease the passing of souls into the afterlife . During the course of the story , it is revealed that Misaki arranged their return to the island so their illness might be cured , and that Chōshirō himself died ten years before , and is now helping the girls guided by the benevolent spirit of Ruka 's mother Sayaka . 
 It is gradually revealed that Ruka 's father <unk> had become obsessed with helping complete a ritual dance that would purify the islanders of the Hidden Moon Disease , which required the construction of a special mask for the dancer . Ruka herself became infected , and was treated at the sanatorium along with the other girls and the dancer , Haibara 's sister Sakuya . The ritual was a catastrophic failure , with Sakuya reaching the final stage of the Hidden Moon Disease and falling into a coma , while the other girls collapsed and had their memories wiped . Two years after Ruka and Sayaka left the island , Sakuya woke and spread the Hidden Moon Disease across the island , killing all the inhabitants including <unk> . To lay her to rest , the ritual must be completed , and for that her mask must be restored . Ruka comes into possession of all the mask fragments , which reform into the complete mask . Confronting Sakuya atop the island 's lighthouse , she manages to pacify her with a sacred tune communicated to her by Sayaka , then Chōshirō puts the mask on Sakuya , completing the ritual and allowing all the island 's spirits to pass into the afterlife . Depending on the game 's difficulty setting , Misaki 's fate is either left unknown , or her illness is cured after she is saved by Madoka 's spirit and she leaves the island with Ruka . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mask of the Lunar Eclipse was co @-@ developed by Koei Tecmo , Grasshopper Manufacture and Nintendo Software Planning & Development . Koei Tecmo was in charge of the gameplay and atmosphere , Grasshopper Manufacture were put in charge of character motion and other unspecified aspects of development , while Nintendo managed general production . Makoto Shibata and Keisuke Kikuchi , series creators and respective director and producer of the previous games in the series , returned to their respective posts . In addition , Grasshopper Manufacture 's Goichi Suda acted as a co @-@ director . According to a later interview with Kikuchi , he was first inspired when he saw the potential in the Wii hardware , and was the first to propose the project to Nintendo . The main development goal for Mask of the Lunar Eclipse was " feeling fear with [ the player 's ] body " , with gameplay functions closely tied into the Wii hardware . Among these were feeding sounds through the Wii remote 's speaker and creating effects using the rumble function . An adjustment they made was to the camera perspective : while it had been placed at a distance in previous games , it was shifted to an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder third @-@ person view so the control of the torch was more realistic . This raised concerns as to the pace of the character 's movement . Taking into account similar criticisms from fans of earlier games , the characters ' speed was increased . This aspect was undergoing revision until quite late into development . 
 When designing the game 's main setting , the team moved away from the traditional enclosed Japanese mansions from previous games in favor of somewhere that blended Eastern and Western architectural tastes to create different gameplay opportunities , described in @-@ game as a Meiji @-@ era hotel . Traditional mansion settings were also included , with more locations being present than in previous games . The color yellow was chosen as the game 's image color , while the key words used to describe the plot were " memory " , " moon " and " mask " . The subtitle refers to the mask that is key to the Kagura Dance Ritual . The mask in turn tied into story themes of the phases of the moon , the nature of memory , and music . During development , Shibata and Kikuchi felt that Grasshopper and Nintendo 's involvement helped them reevaluate the series formula and try out new things . After development , Kikuchi said that the three companies ' varying ideas on the project made the development " a complete and utter mess " , though it ultimately worked out well . The characters were designed by <unk> Sawaki , who had previously worked in that capacity on Ōkami and El Shaddai : Ascension of the Metatron . As with the previous two games , Mask of the Lunar Eclipse features songs by Japanese singer Tsuki Amano : the theme song " Zero Tuning " , and the ending theme " Noise " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mask of the Lunar Eclipse was first revealed in January 2008 at a Tecmo press conference . It was the first series title to be developed and released for a Nintendo console . It was released on July 31 , 2008 . Its release was timed to coincide with a traditional time in Japan for people to tell each other ghost stories . Upon release , the game featured several bugs affecting player progress through the game , as revealed in a message to fans from Nintendo . While no North American release was planned , a European release was in the works and was briefly outed by a French gaming magazine . After the leak , Nintendo stated that a European release had been planned , but since then the localization had been cancelled . In addition to Nintendo , no other third @-@ party publisher would publish the game overseas , leaving Mask of the Lunar Eclipse as a Japan @-@ exclusive title . 
 After Nintendo 's announcement , a three @-@ person team decided to create a fan translation of the game . The development process was compared by them to " a Frankenstein 's monster " , referring to how they needed to assess the data , construct a development schedule for the translation patch , going through theories about file structure , then creating a tool to access the game 's data files . The modification program was then tested on Super Smash Bros. Brawl by a dedicated tester , then sent back for refinement . They worked hard to preserve the atmosphere of the original game , along with attempting to make the translation as true as possible without being overly verbose . To help translate the text , they posted the script in segments on internet forums , then later restricted access to the work due to quality concerns . During this time , they found several competent translators who were able to do the final 20 % of script translation . It took several months for the entire process of extracting text , translation , then patching in the translated text to be completed . The patch ended up being quite large as the game designers had split the game into hundreds of different data archives and suitable accommodations and adjustments needed to be made for this . The fan translation was released on January 19 , 2010 . The patch was designed to work on any Wii device , bypassing the console 's region locking , and included a newly @-@ made costume for the main character . While receiving no official localized title , it has commonly been dubbed " Fatal Frame / Project Zero IV " or " Fatal Frame / Project Zero : Mask of the Lunar Eclipse " by journalists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its debut , Mask of the Lunar Eclipse sold approximately 30 @,@ 000 units , making one of the weaker debuts of the series . As of the end of December 2008 , the game had sold nearly 75 @,@ 000 units . While these were low sales compared to other Wii titles , it made Mask of the Lunar Eclipse the best @-@ selling title in the series to that date . 
 The reviewers for Famitsu were united in their opinion that , while not a revolutionary title within the series , it was a high @-@ quality game . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed regularly noted its similarity to previous entries in the series , <unk> the atmosphere and gameplay , while criticizing the control scheme and its negative effect on combat and navigation . In a preview of the game , Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku praised the game 's multiple storylines and settings , but was mixed about its familiar gameplay and again criticized the controls . In closing , he generally cited it as a good entry in the series . Matthew <unk> of Nintendo Life , echoing the criticism of the controls , said that it would please hardcore horror game players . Albert <unk> of Cubed3 again faulted the control set up . In most other respects he was highly positive , praising the story , combat and graphics , calling it a " labor of love " on the part of the development team . In its import review , Edge Magazine generally enjoyed the unsettling atmosphere that the developers had succeeded in creating by using the dark settings and close @-@ set camera angle . The reviewer also defended the often @-@ criticized control scheme , saying that it added to the feeling of fear . In closing , the reviewer said that the subtlety of the game showed the flaws other horror franchises such as Silent Hill . 
 = 1878 Wallingford tornado = 
 The Wallingford Tornado was an F4 tornado that struck the town of Wallingford , Connecticut , on August 9 , 1878 . The violent tornado destroyed most of the town , killing about 34 people — estimated totals varied — and injuring at least 70 , many severely . This was the deadliest tornado ever to strike the state of Connecticut , and the second deadliest ever in New England , after the Worcester tornado of 1953 . 
 = = Before the storm = = 
 The storm system that eventually spawned the Wallingford tornado produced damaging winds and at least one tornado far before it reached the town . The first tornado from this storm system touched down in South Kent , unroofing houses , blowing down barns , and uprooting and tossing trees into the air . It moved steadily southeast for 12 mi ( 19 km ) , moving just south of New Preston , and then through Washington , before turning north and dissipating . The next path of damage started further north along the <unk> River . It is unknown whether this was a tornado or straight @-@ line winds , but the damage path continued southeast for three miles before disappearing again . More damage was reported near Waterbury , where a house was unroofed two miles west of the town . In the town itself , branches and chimneys were damaged . 
 As the storm approached Wallingford , observers described a black , rolling funnel , with clouds blowing in from all directions . This system passed directly over Cheshire , producing a strong wind at the surface which caused some minor damage . The storm then moved directly towards Wallingford . 
 = = The Wallingford tornado = = 
 In Wallingford , the day prior to the tornado was clear , and said to be " one of the loveliest [ days ] of the season " . At around 5 p.m. the sky began to get dark , and by 5 : 30 p.m. the air was very black . At around 6 p.m. , the air at the surface was calm , but lightning began to fill the sky , and the clouds began moving at a very rapid pace , frightening some residents into shelter . 
 The tornado started at 6 : 15 p.m. local time as a waterspout over Community Lake , just west of town . It then moved through the center of town along Christian Street , damaging almost every structure as it went . The tornado tore houses from their foundations , throwing some more than 600 feet ( 180 meters ) . A receipt from the town was later found 65 miles ( 105 km ) east in <unk> , Rhode Island . Large trees were uprooted and snapped , and those that were still standing were stripped of small limbs and leaves . The Catholic Church was blown to bits , and heavy tombstones in the nearby cemetery were tossed around . The brand @-@ new brick high school building was almost completely destroyed . The tornado 's path through town was only two miles long , but the damage path was up to 600 feet ( 180 meters ) wide . 
 More tornadic damage was reported in southern Durham and Killingworth , with some homes severely damaged , but there were some minor injuries , one young woman in Killingworth was injured by shards of glass from a breaking window . Some sources insist that the Wallingford tornado dissipated a few miles west of the town , and this was an entirely separate tornado , but without a modern damage survey it is impossible to tell . The parent storm finally moved out over the ocean around 8 PM . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A district schoolhouse was converted into a temporary morgue immediately after the storm ; 21 bodies were discovered and placed there that night . One person was found dead 3300 feet ( 1 km ) from where he had been standing . The tornado brought down telegraph lines and poles around the area , so assistance from physicians in nearby towns took more than an hour . More than 50 special police were sworn in to prevent looting , and to control the crowds of curious onlookers who had come by train from surrounding cities . 
 Thirty five homes were completely destroyed , with many more being unroofed or receiving some sort of damage . Damage estimates were around $ 150 @,@ 000 from buildings alone ; utilities and railway facilities received a lot of damage as well . Final estimates were around $ 250 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @.@ 3 million when adjusted for inflation ) . 
 Tornadoes are not very uncommon in the state of Connecticut , but tornadoes of this power are rare . Though tornadoes have only been officially rated on the Fujita scale since 1950 , this tornado has been estimated to be of F4 @-@ intensity on the scale . This would make it one of only three tornadoes of this intensity to ever affect the state , as of 2008 . Thirty @-@ four people were killed by the tornado — thirty @-@ one more than the second @-@ deadliest Connecticut tornado — and 70 others injured . 
 = William of Tyre = 
 William of Tyre ( Latin : Willelmus <unk> ; c . 1130 – 29 September 1186 ) was a medieval prelate and chronicler . As archbishop of Tyre , he is sometimes known as William II to distinguish him from a predecessor , William of Malines . He grew up in Jerusalem at the height of the Kingdom of Jerusalem , which had been established in 1099 after the First Crusade , and he spent twenty years studying the liberal arts and canon law in the universities of Europe . 
 Following William 's return to Jerusalem in 1165 , King Amalric made him an ambassador to the Byzantine Empire . William became tutor to the king 's son , the future King Baldwin IV , whom William discovered to be a leper . After Amalric 's death , William became chancellor and archbishop of Tyre , two of the highest offices in the kingdom , and in 1179 William led the eastern delegation to the Third Council of the Lateran . As he was involved in the dynastic struggle that developed during Baldwin IV 's reign , his importance waned when a rival faction gained control of royal affairs . He was passed over for the prestigious Patriarchate of Jerusalem , and died in obscurity , probably in 1186 . 
 William wrote an account of the Lateran Council and a history of the Islamic states from the time of Muhammad . Neither work survives . He is famous today as the author of a history of the Kingdom of Jerusalem . William composed his chronicle in excellent Latin for his time , with numerous quotations from classical literature . The chronicle is sometimes given the title Historia rerum in partibus <unk> <unk> ( " History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea " ) or Historia <unk> ( " History of Jerusalem " ) , or the Historia for short . It was translated into French soon after his death , and thereafter into numerous other languages . Because it is the only source for the history of twelfth @-@ century Jerusalem written by a native , historians have often assumed that William 's statements could be taken at face value . However , more recent historians have shown that William 's involvement in the kingdom 's political disputes resulted in detectable biases in his account . Despite this , he is considered the greatest chronicler of the crusades , and one of the best authors of the Middle Ages . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The Kingdom of Jerusalem was founded in 1099 at the end of the First Crusade . It was the third of four Christian territories to be established by the crusaders , following the County of Edessa and the Principality of Antioch , and followed by the County of Tripoli . Jerusalem 's first three rulers , Godfrey of Bouillon ( 1099 – 1100 ) , his brother Baldwin I ( 1100 – 1118 ) , and their cousin Baldwin II ( 1118 – 1131 ) , expanded and secured the kingdom 's borders , which encompassed roughly the same territory as modern @-@ day Israel , Palestine , and Lebanon . During the kingdom 's early decades , the population was swelled by pilgrims visiting the holiest sites of Christendom . Merchants from the Mediterranean city @-@ states of Italy and France were eager to exploit the rich trade markets of the east . 
 William 's family probably originated in either France or Italy , since he was very familiar with both countries . His parents were likely merchants who had settled in the kingdom and were " apparently well @-@ to @-@ do " , although it is unknown whether they participated in the First Crusade or arrived later . William was born in Jerusalem around 1130 . He had at least one brother , Ralph , who was one of the city 's burgesses , a non @-@ noble leader of the merchant community . Nothing more is known about his family , except that his mother died before 1165 . 
 As a child William was educated in Jerusalem , at the cathedral school in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre . The <unk> , or school @-@ master , John the Pisan , taught William to read and write , and first introduced him to Latin . From the Historia it is clear that he also knew French and possibly Italian , but there is not enough evidence to determine whether he learned Greek , Persian , and Arabic , as is sometimes claimed . 
 Around 1145 William went to Europe to continue his education in the schools of France and Italy , especially in those of Paris and Bologna , " the two most important intellectual centers of twelfth @-@ century Christendom . " These schools were not yet the official universities that they would become in the 13th century , but by the end of the 11th century both had numerous schools for the arts and sciences . They were separate from the cathedral schools , and were established by independent professors who were masters of their field of study . Students from all over Europe gathered there to hear lectures from these masters . William studied liberal arts and theology in Paris and Orléans for about ten years , with professors who had been students of Thierry of Chartres and Gilbert de la Porrée . He also spent time studying under Robert of Melun and Adam de <unk> Ponte , among others . In Orléans , one of the pre @-@ eminent centres of classical studies , he read ancient Roman literature ( known simply as " the Authors " ) with Hilary of Orléans , and learned mathematics ( " especially Euclid " ) with William of Soissons . For six years , he studied theology with Peter Lombard and Maurice de Sully . Afterwards , he studied civil law and canon law in Bologna , with the " Four Doctors " , Hugo de Porta <unk> , <unk> , Martinus <unk> , and Jacob de <unk> . William 's list of professors " gives us almost a who 's who of the grammarians , philosophers , theologians , and law teachers of the so @-@ called Twelfth @-@ Century Renaissance " , and shows that he was as well @-@ educated as any European cleric . His contemporary John of Salisbury had many of the same teachers . 
 = = Religious and political life in Jerusalem = = 
 The highest religious and political offices in Jerusalem were usually held by Europeans who had arrived on pilgrimage or crusade . William was one of the few natives with a European education , and he quickly rose through the ranks . After his return to the Holy Land in 1165 , he became canon of the cathedral at Acre . In 1167 he was appointed archdeacon of the cathedral of Tyre by Frederick de la Roche , archbishop of Tyre , with the support of King Amalric . 
 Amalric had come to power in 1164 and had made it his goal to conquer Egypt . Egypt had been invaded by King Baldwin I fifty years earlier , and the weak Fatimid Caliphate was forced to pay yearly tribute to Jerusalem . Amalric turned towards Egypt because Muslim territory to the east of Jerusalem had fallen under the control of the powerful Zengid sultan Nur ad @-@ Din . Nur ad @-@ Din had taken control of Damascus in 1154 , six years after the disastrous siege of Damascus by the Second Crusade in 1148 . Jerusalem could now expand only to the southwest , towards Egypt , and in 1153 Ascalon , the last Fatimid outpost in Palestine , fell to the crusaders . Nur ad @-@ Din , however , also wished to acquire Egypt , and sent his army to hinder Amalric 's plans . This was the situation in the east when William returned from Europe . In 1167 Amalric married Maria Comnena , grand @-@ niece of Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus , and in 1168 the king sent William to finalize a treaty for a joint Byzantine @-@ crusader campaign against Egypt . The expedition , Amalric 's fourth , was the first with support from the Byzantine navy . Amalric , however , did not wait for the fleet to arrive . He managed to capture Damietta , but within a few years he was expelled from Egypt by one of Nur ad @-@ Din 's generals , Saladin , who would later become Jerusalem 's greatest threat . 
 Meanwhile , William continued his advancement in the kingdom . In 1169 he visited Rome , possibly to answer accusations made against him by Archbishop Frederick , although if so , the charge is unknown . It is also possible that while Frederick was away on a diplomatic mission in Europe , a problem within the diocese forced William to seek the archbishop 's assistance . 
 On his return from Rome in 1170 he may have been commissioned by Amalric to write a history of the kingdom . He also became the tutor of Amalric 's son and heir , Baldwin IV . When Baldwin was thirteen years old , he was playing with some children , who were trying to cause each other pain by scratching each other 's arms . " The other boys gave evidence of pain by their outcries , " wrote William , " but Baldwin , although his comrades did not spare him , endured it altogether too patiently , as if he felt nothing ... It is impossible to refrain from tears while speaking of this great misfortune . " William inspected Baldwin 's arms and recognized the possible symptoms of leprosy , which was confirmed as Baldwin grew older . 
 Amalric died in 1174 , and Baldwin IV succeeded him as king . Nur ad @-@ Din also died in 1174 , and his general Saladin spent the rest of the decade consolidating his hold on both Egypt and Nur ad @-@ Din 's possessions in Syria , which allowed him to completely encircle Jerusalem . The subsequent events have often been interpreted as a struggle between two opposing factions , a " court party " and a " noble party . " The " court party " was led by Baldwin 's mother , Amalric 's first wife Agnes of Courtenay , and her immediate family , as well as recent arrivals from Europe who were inexperienced in the affairs of the kingdom and were in favour of war with Saladin . The " noble party " was led by Raymond III of Tripoli and the native nobility of the kingdom , who favoured peaceful co @-@ existence with the Muslims . This is the interpretation offered by William himself in the Historia , and it was taken as fact by later historians . Peter W. Edbury , however , has more recently argued that William must be considered extremely partisan as he was naturally allied with Raymond , who was responsible for his later advancement in political and religious offices . The accounts of the 13th @-@ century authors who continued the Historia in French must also be considered suspect , as they were allied to Raymond 's supporters in the Ibelin family . The general consensus among recent historians is that although there was a dynastic struggle , " the division was not between native barons and newcomers from the West , but between the king 's maternal and paternal kin . " 
 Miles of Plancy briefly held the regency for the underaged Baldwin IV . Miles was assassinated in October 1174 , and Raymond III was soon appointed to replace him . Raymond named William chancellor of Jerusalem , as well as archdeacon of Nazareth , and on 6 June 1175 , William was elected archbishop of Tyre to replace Frederick de la Roche , who had died in October 1174 . William 's duties as chancellor probably did not take up too much of his time ; the scribes and officials in the chancery drafted documents and it may not have even been necessary for him to be present to sign them . Instead he focused on his duties as archbishop . In 1177 he performed the funeral services for William of Montferrat , husband of Baldwin IV 's sister Sibylla , when the patriarch of Jerusalem , Amalric of Nesle , was too sick to attend . 
 In 1179 , William was one of the delegates from Jerusalem and the other crusader states at the Third Lateran Council ; among the others were Heraclius , archbishop of Caesarea , <unk> , bishop of Acre and William 's future successor in Tyre , the bishops of <unk> , Bethlehem , Tripoli , and Jabala , and the abbot of Mount Sion . Patriarch Amalric and Patriarch of Antioch Aimery of Limoges were unable to attend , and William and the other bishops did not have sufficient weight to persuade Pope Alexander III of the need for a new crusade . William was , however , sent by Alexander as an ambassador to Emperor Manuel , and Manuel then sent him on a mission to the Principality of Antioch . William does not mention exactly what happened during these embassies , but he probably discussed the Byzantine alliance with Jerusalem , and Manuel 's protectorate over Antioch , where , due to pressure from Rome and Jerusalem , the emperor was forced to give up his attempts to restore a Greek patriarch . William was absent from Jerusalem for two years , returning home in 1180 . 
 = = Patriarchal election of 1180 = = 
 During William 's absence a crisis had developed in Jerusalem . King Baldwin had reached the age of majority in 1176 and Raymond III had been removed from the regency , but as a leper Baldwin could have no children and could not be expected to rule much longer . After the death of William of Montferrat in 1177 , King Baldwin 's widowed sister Sibylla required a new husband . At Easter in 1180 , the two factions were divided even further when Raymond and his cousin Bohemond III of Antioch attempted to force Sibylla to marry Baldwin of Ibelin . Raymond and Bohemond were King Baldwin 's nearest male relatives in the paternal line , and could have claimed the throne if the king died without an heir or a suitable replacement . Before Raymond and Bohemond arrived , however , Agnes and King Baldwin arranged for Sibylla to be married to a Poitevin newcomer , Guy of Lusignan , whose older brother Aimery of Lusignan was already an established figure at court . 
 The dispute affected William , since he had been appointed chancellor by Raymond and may have fallen out of favour after Raymond was removed from the regency . When Patriarch Amalric died on 6 October 1180 , the two most obvious choices for his successor were William and Heraclius of Caesarea . They were fairly evenly matched in background and education , but politically they were allied with opposite parties , as Heraclius was one of Agnes of Courtenay 's supporters . It seems that the canons of the Holy Sepulchre were unable to decide , and asked the king for advice ; due to Agnes ' influence , Heraclius was elected . There were rumours that Agnes and Heraclius were lovers , but this information comes from the partisan 13th @-@ century continuations of the Historia , and there is no other evidence to substantiate such a claim . William himself says almost nothing about the election and Heraclius ' character or his subsequent patriarchate , probably reflecting his disappointment at the outcome . 
 = = Death = = 
 William remained archbishop of Tyre and chancellor of the kingdom , but the details of his life at this time are obscure . The 13th @-@ century continuators claim that Heraclius excommunicated William in 1183 , but it is unknown why Heraclius would have done this . They also claim that William went to Rome to appeal to the Pope , where Heraclius had him poisoned . According to Peter Edbury and John Rowe , the obscurity of William 's life during these years shows that he did not play a large political role , but concentrated on ecclesiastical affairs and the writing of his history . The story of his excommunication , and the unlikely detail that he was poisoned , were probably an invention of the Old French continuators . William remained in the kingdom and continued to write up until 1184 , but by then Jerusalem was internally divided by political factions and externally surrounded by the forces of Saladin , and " the only subjects that present themselves are the disasters of a sorrowing country and its manifold misfortunes , themes which can serve only to draw forth lamentations and tears . " 
 His importance had dwindled with the victory of Agnes and her supporters , and with the accession of Baldwin V , infant son of Sibylla and William of Montferrat . Baldwin was a sickly child and he died the next year . In 1186 he was succeeded by his mother Sibylla and her second husband Guy of Lusignan , ruling jointly . William was probably in failing health by this point . Rudolf <unk> discovered that the date of William 's death was 29 September , but the year was not recorded ; whatever the year , there was a new chancellor in May 1185 and a new archbishop of Tyre by 21 October 1186 . Hans E. Mayer concluded that William died in 1186 , and this is the year generally accepted by scholars . 
 William 's foresight about the misfortunes of his country was proven correct less than a year later . Saladin defeated King Guy at the Battle of Hattin in 1187 , and went on to capture Jerusalem and almost every other city of the kingdom , except the seat of William 's archdiocese , Tyre . News of the fall of Jerusalem shocked Europe and plans were made to send assistance . According to Roger of Wendover , William was present at Gisors in France in 1188 when Henry II of England and Philip II of France agreed to go on crusade : " Thereupon the king of the English first took the sign of the cross at the hands of the Archbishop of Rheims and William of Tyre , the latter of whom had been entrusted by our lord the pope with the office of legate in the affairs of the crusade in the western part of Europe . " Roger was however mistaken ; he knew that an unnamed archbishop of Tyre was present and assumed it must have been the William whose chronicle he possessed , although the archbishop in question was actually William 's successor <unk> . 
 = = Works = = 
 William reports that he wrote an account of the Third Council of the Lateran , which does not survive . He also wrote a history of the Holy Land from the time of Muhammad up to 1184 , for which he used <unk> of Alexandria as his main source . This work seems to have been known in Europe in the 13th century but it also does not survive . August C. Krey thought William 's Arabic sources may have come from the library of the Damascene diplomat Usama ibn Munqidh , whose library was looted by Baldwin III from a shipwreck in 1154 . Alan V. Murray , however , has argued that , at least for the accounts of Persia and the Turks in his chronicle , William relied on Biblical and earlier medieval legends rather than actual history , and his knowledge " may be less indicative of eastern ethnography than of western <unk> . " 
 = = = Latin chronicle = = = 
 In the present work we seem to have fallen into manifold dangers and perplexities . For , as the series of events seemed to require , we have included in this study on which we are now engaged many details about the characters , lives , and personal traits of kings , regardless of whether these facts were commendable or open to criticism . Possibly descendants of these monarchs , while perusing this work , may find this treatment difficult to brook and be angry with the chronicler beyond his just deserts . They will regard him as either mendacious or jealous — both of which charges , as God lives , we have endeavored to avoid as we would a pestilence . 
 William 's great work is a Latin chronicle , written between 1170 and 1184 . It contains twenty @-@ three books ; the final book , which deals with the events of 1183 and the beginning of 1184 , has only a prologue and one chapter , so it is either unfinished or the rest of the pages were lost before the whole chronicle began to be copied . The first book begins with the conquest of Syria by Umar in the seventh century , but otherwise the work deals with the advent of the First Crusade and the subsequent political history of the Kingdom of Jerusalem . It is arranged , but was not written , chronologically ; the first sections to be written were probably the chapters about the invasion of Egypt in 1167 , which are extremely detailed and were likely composed before the Fatimid dynasty was overthrown in 1171 . Much of the Historia was finished before William left to attend the Lateran Council , but new additions and corrections were made after his return in 1180 , perhaps because he now realized that European readers would also be interested in the history of the kingdom . In 1184 he wrote the Prologue and the beginning of the twenty @-@ third book . 
 William had access to the chronicles of the First Crusade , including Fulcher of Chartres , Albert of Aix , Raymond of <unk> , <unk> of Dol , and the Gesta Francorum , as well as other documents located in the kingdom 's archives . He used Walter the Chancellor and other now @-@ lost works for the history of the Principality of Antioch . From the end of Fulcher 's chronicle in 1127 , William is the only source of information from an author living in Jerusalem . For events that happened in William 's own lifetime , he interviewed older people who had witnessed the events about which he was writing , and drew on his own memory . 
 William 's classical education allowed him to compose Latin superior to that of many medieval writers . He used numerous ancient Roman and early Christian authors , either for quotations or as inspiration for the framework and organization of the Historia . His vocabulary is almost entirely classical , with only a few medieval constructions such as " <unk> " ( someone who makes armour , a calque of the Arabic " <unk> " ) and " <unk> " ( to empty one 's bowels ) . He was capable of clever word @-@ play and advanced rhetorical devices , but he was prone to repetition of a number of words and phrases . His writing also shows phrasing and spelling which is unusual or unknown in purely classical Latin but not uncommon in medieval Latin , such as : 
 confusion between reflexive and possessive pronouns ; 
 confusion over the use of the accusative and ablative cases , especially after the preposition in ; 
 collapsed diphthongs ( i.e. the Latin diphthongs ae and oe are spelled simply e ) ; 
 the dative " mihi " ( " to me " ) is spelled " michi " ; 
 a single " s " is often doubled , for example in the adjectival place @-@ name ending which he often spells " <unk> " ; this spelling is also used to represent the Arabic " sh " , a sound which Latin lacks , for example in the name Shawar which he spells " <unk> " . 
 = = = Literary themes and biases = = = 
 Despite his quotations from Christian authors and from the Bible , William did not place much emphasis on the intervention of God in human affairs , resulting in a somewhat " secular " history . Nevertheless , he included much information that is clearly legendary , especially when referring to the First Crusade , which even in his own day was already considered an age of great Christian heroes . Expanding on the accounts of Albert of Aix , Peter the Hermit is given prominence in the preaching of the First Crusade , to the point that it was he , not Pope Urban II , who originally conceived the crusade . Godfrey of Bouillon , the first ruler of crusader Jerusalem , was also depicted as the leader of the crusade from the beginning , and William attributed to him legendary strength and virtue . This reflected the almost mythological status that Godfrey and the other first crusaders held for the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the late twelfth century . 
 William gave a more nuanced picture of the kings of his own day . He claimed to have been commissioned to write by King Amalric himself , but William did not allow himself to praise the king excessively ; for example , Amalric did not respect the rights of the church , and although he was a good military commander , he could not stop the increasing threat from the neighbouring Muslim states . On a personal level , William admired the king 's education and his interest in history and law , but also noted that Amalric had " breasts like those of a woman hanging down to his waist " and was shocked when the king questioned the resurrection of the dead . 
 About Amalric 's son Baldwin IV , however , " there was no ambiguity " . Baldwin was nothing but heroic in the face of his debilitating leprosy , and he led military campaigns against Saladin even while still underaged ; William tends to gloss over campaigns where Baldwin was not actually in charge , preferring to direct his praise towards the afflicted king rather than subordinate commanders . William 's history can be seen as an apologia , a literary defense , for the kingdom , and more specifically for Baldwin 's rule . By the 1170s and 1180s , western Europeans were reluctant to support the kingdom , partly because it was far away and there were more pressing concerns in Europe , but also because leprosy was usually considered divine punishment . 
 William was famously biased against the Knights Templar , whom he believed to be arrogant and disrespectful of both secular and ecclesiastical hierarchies , as they were not required to pay tithes and were legally accountable only to the Pope . Although he was writing decades later , he is the earliest author to describe the actual foundation of the Templar order . He was generally favourable towards them when discussing their early days , but resented the power and influence they held in his own time . William accused them of hindering the Siege of Ascalon in 1153 ; of poorly defending a cave @-@ fortress in 1165 , for which twelve Templars were hanged by King Amalric ; of sabotaging the invasion of Egypt in 1168 ; and of murdering Assassin ambassadors in 1173 . 
 Compared to other Latin authors of the twelfth century , William is surprisingly favourable to the Byzantine Empire . He had visited the Byzantine court as an official ambassador and probably knew more about Byzantine affairs than any other Latin chronicler . He shared the poor opinion of Alexius I Comnenus that had developed during the First Crusade , although he was also critical of some of the crusaders ' dealings with Alexius . He was more impressed by Alexius ' son John II Comnenus ; he did not approve of John 's attempts to bring the crusader Principality of Antioch under Byzantine control , but John 's military expeditions against the Muslim states , the common enemy of both Greeks and Latins , were considered admirable . Emperor Manuel , whom William met during his visits to Constantinople , was portrayed more ambivalently , much like King Amalric . William admired him personally , but recognized that the Empire was powerless to help Jerusalem against the Muslim forces of Nur ad @-@ Din and Saladin . William was especially disappointed in the failure of the joint campaign against Egypt in 1169 . The end of the Historia coincides with the massacre of the Latins in Constantinople and the chaos that followed the coup of Andronicus I Comnenus , and in his description of those events , William was certainly not immune to the extreme anti @-@ Greek rhetoric that was often found in Western European sources . 
 As a medieval Christian author William could hardly avoid hostility towards the kingdom 's Muslim neighbours , but as an educated man who lived among Muslims in the east , he was rarely polemical or completely dismissive of Islam . He did not think Muslims were pagans , but rather that they belonged to a heretical sect of Christianity and followed the teachings of a false prophet . He often praised the Muslim leaders of his own day , even if he lamented their power over the Christian kingdom ; thus Muslim rulers such as Mu 'in ad @-@ Din Unur , Nur ad @-@ Din , Shirkuh , and even Jerusalem 's ultimate conqueror Saladin are presented as honourable and pious men , characteristics that William did not bestow on many of his own Christian contemporaries . 
 = = = Circulation of the chronicle = = = 
 After William 's death the Historia was copied and circulated in the crusader states and was eventually brought to Europe . In the 13th century , James of Vitry had access to a copy while he was bishop of Acre , and it was used by Guy of <unk> , Matthew Paris , and Roger of Wendover in their own chronicles . However , there are only ten known manuscripts that contain the Latin chronicle , all of which come from France and England , so William 's work may not have been very widely read in its original form . In England , however , the Historia was expanded in Latin , with additional information from the Itinerarium Regis Ricardi , and the chronicle of Roger Hoveden ; this version was written around 1220 . 
 It is unknown what title William himself gave his chronicle , although one group of manuscripts uses Historia rerum in partibus <unk> <unk> and another uses Historia <unk> . The Latin text was printed for the first time in Basel in 1549 by Nicholas <unk> ; it was also published in the Gesta Dei per Francos by Jacques <unk> in 1611 and the <unk> des <unk> des <unk> ( RHC ) by Auguste @-@ Arthur <unk> and Auguste Le Prévost in 1844 , and <unk> ' text was reprinted in the Patrologia Latina by Jacques Paul Migne in 1855 . The now @-@ standard Latin critical edition , based on six of the surviving manuscripts , was published as Willelmi <unk> <unk> Chronicon in the Corpus <unk> in 1986 , by R. B. C. Huygens , with notes by Hans E. Mayer and Gerhard <unk> . The RHC edition was translated into English by Emily A. Babcock and August C. Krey in 1943 as " A History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea , " although the translation is sometimes incomplete or inexact . 
 = = = Old French translation = = = 
 A translation of the Historia into Old French , made around 1223 , was particularly well @-@ circulated and had many anonymous additions made to it in the 13th century . In contrast to the surviving Latin manuscripts , there are " at least fifty @-@ nine manuscripts or fragments of manuscripts " containing the Old French translation . There are also independent French continuations attributed to Ernoul and Bernard le <unk> . The translation was sometimes called the Livre dou <unk> ; it was known by this name throughout Europe as well as in the crusader Kingdom of Cyprus and in Cilician Armenia , and 14th @-@ century Venetian geographer Marino Sanuto the Elder had a copy of it . The French was further translated into Spanish , as the Gran Conquista de Ultramar , during the reign of Alfonso the Wise of Castile in the late 13th century . The French version was so widespread that the Renaissance author Francesco Pipino translated it back into Latin , unaware that a Latin original already existed . A Middle English translation of the French was made by William Caxton in the 15th century . 
 = = Modern assessment = = 
 William 's neutrality as an historian was often taken for granted until the late twentieth century . August C. Krey , for example , believed that " his impartiality ... is scarcely less impressive than his critical skill . " Despite this excellent reputation , D. W. T. C. Vessey has shown that William was certainly not an impartial observer , especially when dealing with the events of the 1170s and 1180s . Vessey believes that William 's claim to have been commissioned by Amalric is a typical ancient and medieval topos , or literary theme , in which a wise ruler , a lover of history and literature , wishes to preserve for posterity the grand deeds of his reign . William 's claims of impartiality are also a typical topos in ancient and medieval historical writing . 
 His depiction of Baldwin IV as a hero is an attempt " to vindicate the politics of his own party and to blacken those of its opponents . " As mentioned above , William was opposed to Baldwin 's mother Agnes of Courtenay , Patriarch Heraclius , and their supporters ; his interpretation of events during Baldwin 's reign was previously taken as fact almost without question . In the mid twentieth century , Marshall W. Baldwin , Steven Runciman , and Hans E. Mayer were influential in perpetuating this point of view , although the more recent re @-@ evaluations of this period by Vessey , Peter Edbury and Bernard Hamilton have undone much of William 's influence . 
 An often @-@ noted flaw in the Historia is William 's poor memory for dates . " Chronology is sometimes confused , and dates are given wrongly " , even for basic information such as the regnal dates of the kings of Jerusalem . For example , William gives the date of Amalric 's death as 11 July 1173 , when it actually occurred in 1174 . 
 Despite his biases and errors , William " has always been considered one of the greatest medieval writers . " Steven Runciman wrote that " he had a broad vision ; he understood the significance of the great events of his time and the sequence of cause and effect in history . " Christopher Tyerman calls him " the historian 's historian " , and " the greatest crusade historian of all , " and Bernard Hamilton says he " is justly considered one of the finest historians of the Middle Ages " . As the Dictionary of the Middle Ages says , " William 's achievements in assembling and evaluating sources , and in writing in excellent and original Latin a critical and judicious ( if chronologically faulty ) narrative , make him an outstanding historian , superior by medieval , and not inferior by modern , standards of scholarship . " 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 = Sunday football in Northern Ireland = 
 Sunday football in Northern Ireland ( Ulster Scots : <unk> <unk> en <unk> ) has been a controversial issue . Until 2008 , the Irish Football Association ( IFA ) under IFA Article 27 , prohibited any clubs affiliated with them from playing association football matches on Sunday . The ban initially came from Northern Ireland 's Protestant Christian majority 's observance of Sunday as the Sabbath ( a day of rest ) , but was also a way to combat a perceived encroachment on their culture by Catholics . Since the abolition of the ban , teams can play matches on Sunday if they have mutual agreement , although some teams such as Linfield have club rules against such games . 
 The Northern Ireland national team also had a policy of not playing on Sundays . This policy was later amended to allow Northern Ireland to play on Sundays away from home before being unofficially suspended due to changes in UEFA rules regarding playing dates for international competition qualifiers . On 29 March 2015 , the national team played their first home match on a Sunday against Finland . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the 1930s , the IFA had no official ban on Sunday football . However , unofficially no matches were scheduled on Sundays . In 1898 , the Leinster Football Association requested permission for matches on Sunday , which was unanimously rejected by the IFA as " very detrimental to the interests of the game " . In 1901 , the Munster Football Association made a similar request which was also turned down . It is not known when the official ban on Sunday football was instituted but it is known that it was created in the 1930s . The arguments in favour of the ban when was introduced are not recorded , but it is known that the nationalist and predominantly Catholic Gaelic Athletic Association decided to play games on Sundays and the unionist and predominantly Protestant IFA felt that this was an encroachment on their " soccer territory " and their Protestant culture . It has been stated by historians that it might also have been due to strict Protestant <unk> that led to the ban . When the Football Association of Ireland ( FAI ) broke away from the IFA in 1921 following allegations of the IFA having an alleged bias in favour of Belfast clubs , one of their first actions was to permit football being played on Sunday under their jurisdiction . While the IFA maintained a ban on Sunday football for all senior and junior men 's football , the independent Northern Ireland Women 's Football Association ( NIWFA ) played their matches on Sundays . 
 = = Effect = = 
 The IFA ban on football on Sundays was strictly enforced so that no club affiliated with the IFA could play football in Northern Ireland on Sundays . This included the Northern Ireland national team who also refused to play international matches on Sunday . Before the 1982 FIFA World Cup , it was noted that Northern Ireland would play France on a Sunday . As a result , the IFA relaxed their Sunday football ban to permit the Northern Ireland national team to play football on Sundays outside of Northern Ireland . As a result of this , born @-@ again Christian player Johnny Jameson refused to play for Northern Ireland in that match because it was on Sunday . In 2001 , Cliftonville attempted to play a friendly match against Derry City , who are based in County Londonderry but are affiliated with the FAI , on a Sunday . The IFA initially permitted this , but the match was cancelled after complaints from the North West of Ireland Football Association despite Cliftonville arguing that since Derry City organized it , it was outside of the IFA 's jurisdiction . The ban was also identified as causing problems for ethnic minority players ; the Chinese Football Association Northern Ireland , whose players mostly work in the catering industry , noted that its members often had " no choice " but to play on Sundays and pointed out the ban interfered with outreach efforts . 
 = = Abolition of ban = = 
 Towards the start of the 21st century , several clubs made moves to abolish the ban on Sunday football in Northern Ireland . In 2000 Newry Town put forward a motion to play football on Sunday on commercial grounds . However , it was rejected by the IFA overwhelmingly on moral grounds despite Newry Town stating they " do not wish to impinge on anyone 's Christian or moral ethics . " In 2003 , Cliftonville started a campaign to permit Sunday football if both clubs consented . In 2005 , Armagh City and <unk> Old Boys made a similar request to play on Sundays . Again the IFA rejected it on the grounds that it would interfere with the NIWFA 's fixtures . A year later , the request was made again and members of the IFA voted in favour of it 69 @-@ 28 however they failed to reach a 75 % majority needed due to the NIWFA 's clubs voting against it and thus the Sunday football ban remained in place . Maintaining the ban meant that Northern Ireland was the only country in UEFA which had a ban on Sunday football . This decision was criticized in the media who viewed the ban as outdated . Howard Wells , the IFA chief executive , took legal advice after it was suggested that the ban on Sunday football might not be supported in the European Court of Human Rights if a lawsuit was brought against them . After the failure of the 2006 motion , the predicted legal challenge , supported by the Equality Commission , emerged on the grounds of religious discrimination . 
 In 2007 , despite opposition from the Democratic Unionist Party , the IFA voted 91 @-@ 14 to remove IFA Article 27 from their constitution . It was replaced by IFA Article <unk> , which stated that no football would be scheduled on Sunday , but matches on Sunday could be played if both teams and the organizing competition agreed . It also stated that no player or club could be punished if they refused to play on Sunday . The ban on Sunday football in Northern Ireland was lifted on 1 June 2008 . The first match held on Sunday since the ban was lifted was an Irish Premiership match between Glentoran and Bangor at The Oval . Before the match there was a protest against it by members of the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster led by Reverend David <unk> . Despite the lifting of the ban on Sunday football , Article <unk> has been used very rarely . 
 Some clubs maintain a club ban on Sunday football . Linfield , the owners of Windsor Park , used as the home ground of the Northern Ireland national team , had it written in their club rules in Article 24 that no games would be permitted on their grounds on Sundays . Since this could have prevented Windsor Park hosting cup finals or international matches , Linfield members voted to change Article 24 to state that no games involving Linfield could take place at Windsor Park on Sundays . Ballymena United decided to play a friendly tournament in the Republic of Ireland on a Sunday . As a result , one of their sponsors pulled out of the club . 
 Despite the scrapping of the ban on Sunday football , the Northern Ireland national team continued to negotiate the fixture dates of friendlies and international competition qualifiers so that they were not on Sundays . In 2014 , UEFA changed the match date allocation for qualifying competitions from mutual agreement between associations to randomly selected dates from a computer . The IFA were informed this might mean matches on Sunday and they signed in agreement prior to the draw for UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying . When the draw was made , it was determined that Northern Ireland would play Finland at home on 29 March 2015 in Northern Ireland 's first international match at home on Sunday . Jim Allister , leader of the Traditional Unionist Voice party , questioned the choice of date ; the IFA replied that they had no control over it but accepted that some fans might boycott the match because it was on a Sunday . 
 = Nuthatch = 
 The nuthatches constitute a genus , Sitta , of small passerine birds belonging to the family Sittidae . Characterised by large heads , short tails , and powerful bills and feet , nuthatches advertise their territory using loud , simple songs . Most species exhibit grey or bluish upperparts and a black eye stripe . 
 Most nuthatches breed in the temperate or montane woodlands of the Northern Hemisphere , although two species have adapted to rocky habitats in the warmer and drier regions of Eurasia . However , the greatest diversity is in Southern Asia , and similarities between the species have made it difficult to identify distinct species . All members of this genus nest in holes or crevices . Most species are non @-@ migratory and live in their habitat year @-@ round , although the North American red @-@ breasted nuthatch migrates to warmer regions during the winter . A few nuthatch species have restricted ranges and face threats from deforestation . 
 Nuthatches are omnivorous , eating mostly insects , nuts and seeds . They forage for insects hidden in or under bark by climbing along tree trunks and branches , sometimes upside @-@ down . They forage within their territories when breeding , but they may join mixed feeding flocks at other times . Their habit of wedging a large food item in a crevice and then hacking at it with their strong bills gives this group its English name . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The nuthatch family , Sittidae , was described by René @-@ Primevère Lesson in 1828 . Sometimes the wallcreeper ( <unk> <unk> ) , which is restricted to the mountains of southern Eurasia , is placed in the same family as the nuthatches , but in a separate subfamily " <unk> " , in which case the nuthatches are classified in the subfamily " <unk> " . However , it is more often placed in a separate family , the <unk> . The wallcreeper is intermediate in its morphology between the nuthatches and the treecreepers , but its appearance , the texture of its plumage , and the shape and pattern of its tail suggest that it is closer to the former taxon . The nuthatch vanga of Madagascar ( formerly known as the coral @-@ billed nuthatch ) and the <unk> from Australia and New Guinea were once placed in the nuthatch family because of similarities in appearance and lifestyle , but they are not closely related . The resemblances arose via convergent evolution to fill an ecological niche . 
 The nuthatches ' closest relatives , other than the wallcreeper , are the treecreepers , and the two ( or three ) families are sometimes placed in a larger grouping with the wrens and gnatcatchers . This superfamily , the <unk> , is proposed on phylogenetic studies using mitochondrial and nuclear DNA , and was created to cover a clade of ( four or ) five families removed from a larger grouping of passerine birds , the <unk> . 
 The nuthatches are all in the genus Sitta Linnaeus , 1758 , a name derived from sittē , Ancient Greek for this bird . Nuthatch refers to the propensity of some species to wedge a large insect or seed in a crack and hack at it with their strong bills . Species boundaries in the nuthatches are difficult to define . The red @-@ breasted nuthatch , Corsican nuthatch and Chinese nuthatch have breeding ranges separated by thousands of kilometres , but are similar in habitat preference , appearance and song . They were formerly considered to be one species , but are now normally split into three and comprise a superspecies along with the Krüper 's and Algerian nuthatch . Unusually for nuthatches , all five species excavate their own nests . 
 The Eurasian , chestnut @-@ vented , Kashmir and chestnut @-@ bellied nuthatches form another superspecies and replace each other geographically across Asia . They are currently considered to be four separate species , but the south @-@ Asian forms were once believed to be a subspecies of the Eurasian nuthatch . A recent change in this taxonomy is a split of the chestnut @-@ bellied nuthatch into three species , namely the Indian nuthatch , Sitta castanea , found south of the Ganges , the Burmese nuthatch , Sitta <unk> , found in southeast Asia , and the chestnut @-@ bellied nuthatch sensu <unk> , S. <unk> , which occurs in the Himalayas . Mitochondrial DNA studies have demonstrated that the white @-@ breasted northern subspecies of Eurasian nuthatch , S. ( <unk> ) arctica , is distinctive , and also a possible candidate for full species status . This split has been accepted by the British Ornithologists ' Union . 
 A 2006 review of Asian nuthatches suggested that there are still unresolved problems in nuthatch taxonomy and proposed splitting the genus Sitta . This suggestion would move the red- and yellow @-@ billed south Asian species ( velvet @-@ fronted , yellow @-@ billed and sulphur @-@ billed nuthatches ) to a new genus , create a third genus for the blue nuthatch , and possibly a fourth for the beautiful nuthatch . 
 The fossil record for this group appears to be restricted to a foot bone of an early Miocene bird from Bavaria which has been identified as an extinct representative of the climbing <unk> , a clade comprising the treecreepers , wallcreeper and nuthatches . It has been described as <unk> rummeli . Two fossil species have been described in the Sitta genus : S. cuvieri Gervais , 1852 and S. <unk> Portis , 1888 , but probably not belong to nuthatches . 
 = = Description = = 
 Nuthatches are compact birds with short legs , compressed wings , and square 12 @-@ feathered tails . They have long , sturdy , pointed bills and strong toes with long claws . Nuthatches have blue @-@ grey backs ( violet @-@ blue in some Asian species , which also have red or yellow bills ) and white underparts , which are variably tinted with buff , orange , rufous or lilac . Although head markings vary between species , a long black eye stripe , with contrasting white supercilium , dark forehead and blackish cap is common . The sexes look similar , but may differ in <unk> colouration , especially on the rear flanks and under the tail . Juveniles and first @-@ year birds can be almost indistinguishable from adults . 
 The sizes of nuthatches vary , from the large giant nuthatch , at 195 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) and 36 – 47 g ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 7 oz ) , to the small brown @-@ headed nuthatch and the pygmy nuthatch , both around 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in length and about 10 g ( 0 @.@ 35 oz ) . 
 Nuthatches are very vocal , using an assortment of whistles , trills and calls . Their breeding songs tend to be simple and often identical to their contact calls but longer in duration . The red @-@ breasted nuthatch , which coexists with the black @-@ capped chickadee throughout much of its range , is able to understand the latter species ' calls . The chickadee has subtle call variations that communicate information about the size and risk of potential predators . Many birds recognise the simple alarm calls produced by other species , but the red @-@ breasted nuthatch is able to interpret the chickadees ' detailed variations and to respond appropriately . 
 = = Species = = 
 The species diversity for Sittidae is greatest in southern Asia ( possibly the original home of this family ) , where about 15 species occur , but it has representatives across much of the Northern Hemisphere . The currently recognised nuthatch species are tabulated below . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Members of the nuthatch family live in most of North America and Europe and throughout Asia down to the Wallace Line . Nuthatches are sparsely represented in Africa ; one species lives in a small area of northeastern Algeria and a population of the Eurasian nuthatch subspecies , S. e. <unk> , lives in the mountains of Morocco . Most species are resident year @-@ round . The only significant migrant is the red @-@ breasted nuthatch , which winters widely across North America , deserting the northernmost parts of its breeding range in Canada ; it has been recorded as a vagrant in Bermuda , Iceland and England . 
 Most nuthatches are woodland birds and the majority are found in coniferous or other evergreen forests , although each species has a preference for a particular tree type . The strength of the association varies from the Corsican nuthatch , which is closely linked with Corsican pine , to the catholic habitat of the Eurasian nuthatch , which prefers deciduous or mixed woods but breeds in coniferous forests in the north of its extensive range . However , the two species of rock nuthatches are not strongly tied to woodlands : they breed on rocky slopes or cliffs , although both move into wooded areas when not breeding . In parts of Asia where several species occur in the same geographic region , there is often an altitudinal separation in their preferred habitats . 
 Nuthatches prefer a fairly temperate climate ; northern species live near sea level whereas those further south are found in cooler highland habitats . Eurasian and red @-@ breasted nuthatches are lowland birds in the north of their extensive ranges , but breed in the mountains further south ; for example , Eurasian nuthatch , which breeds where the July temperature range is 16 – 27 ° C ( 61 – 81 ° F ) , is found near sea level in Northern Europe , but between 1 @,@ 750 and 1 @,@ 850 m ( 5 @,@ 740 and 6 @,@ 070 ft ) altitude in Morocco . The velvet @-@ fronted nuthatch is the sole member of the family which prefers tropical lowland forests . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Nesting , breeding and survival = = = 
 All nuthatches nest in cavities ; except for the two species of rock nuthatches , all use tree holes , making a simple cup lined with soft materials on which to rest eggs . In some species the lining consists of small woody objects such as bark flakes and seed husks , while in others it includes the moss , grass , hair and feathers typical of passerine birds . 
 Members of the red @-@ breasted nuthatch superspecies excavate their own tree holes , although most other nuthatches use natural holes or old woodpecker nests . Several species reduce the size of the entrance hole and seal up cracks with mud . The red @-@ breasted nuthatch makes the nest secure by <unk> sticky conifer resin globules around the entrance , the male applying the resin outside and the female inside . The resin may deter predators or competitors ( the resident birds avoid the resin by diving straight through the entrance hole ) . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch smears blister beetles around the entrance to its nest , and it has been suggested that the unpleasant smell from the crushed insects deters squirrels , its chief competitor for natural tree cavities . 
 The western rock nuthatch builds an elaborate flask @-@ shaped nest from mud , dung and hair or feathers , and decorates the nest 's exterior and nearby crevices with feathers and insect wings . The nests are located in rock crevices , in caves , under cliff overhangs or on buildings . The eastern rock nuthatch builds a similar but less complex structure across the entrance to a cavity . Its nest can be quite small but may weigh up to 32 kg ( 70 lb ) . This species will also nest in river banks or tree holes and will enlarge its nest hole if it the cavity is too small . 
 Nuthatches are monogamous . The female produces eggs that are white with red or yellow markings ; the clutch size varies , tending to be larger for northern species . The eggs are incubated for 12 to 18 days by the female alone , or by both parents , depending on the species . The altricial ( naked and helpless ) chicks take between 21 and 27 days to fledge . Both parents feed the young , and in the case of two American species , brown @-@ headed and pygmy , helper males from the previous brood may assist the parents in feeding . 
 For the few species on which data are available , the average nuthatch lifespan in the wild is between 2 and 3 @.@ 5 years , although ages of up to 10 years have been recorded . The Eurasian nuthatch has an adult annual survival rate of 53 % and the male Corsican nuthatch 61 @.@ 6 % . Nuthatches and other small woodland birds share the same predators : accipiters , owls , squirrels and woodpeckers . An American study showed that nuthatch responses to predators may be linked to reproductive strategies . It measured the willingness of males of two species to feed incubating females on the nest when presented with models of a sharp @-@ shinned hawk , which hunts adult nuthatches , or a house wren , which destroys eggs . The white @-@ breasted nuthatch is shorter @-@ lived than the red @-@ breasted nuthatch , but has more young , and was found to respond more strongly to the egg predator , whereas the red @-@ breasted showed greater concern with the hawk . This supports the theory that longer @-@ lived species benefit from adult survival and future breeding opportunities while birds with shorter life spans place more value on the survival of their larger broods . 
 Cold can be a problem for small birds that do not migrate . Communal roosting in tight <unk> can help conserve heat and several nuthatch species employ it — up to 170 pygmy nuthatches have been seen in a single roost . The pygmy nuthatch is able to lower its body temperature when roosting , conserving energy through hypothermia and a lowered metabolic rate . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Nuthatches forage along tree trunks and branches and are members of the same feeding guild as woodpeckers . Unlike woodpeckers and treecreepers , however , they do not use their tails for additional support , relying instead on their strong legs and feet to progress in jerky hops . They are able to descend head @-@ first and hang upside @-@ down beneath twigs and branches . Krüper 's nuthatch can even stretch downward from an upside @-@ down position to drink water from leaves without touching the ground . Rock nuthatches forage with a similar technique to the woodland species , but seek food on rock faces and sometimes buildings . When breeding , a pair of nuthatches will only feed within their territory , but at other times will associate with passing tits or join mixed @-@ species feeding flocks . 
 Insects and other invertebrates are a major portion of the nuthatch diet , especially during the breeding season , when they rely almost exclusively on live prey , but most species also eat seeds during the winter , when invertebrates are less readily available . Larger food items , such as big insects , snails , acorns or seeds may be wedged into cracks and pounded with the bird 's strong bill . Unusually for a bird , the brown @-@ headed nuthatch uses a piece of tree bark as a lever to pry up other bark flakes to look for food ; the bark tool may then be carried from tree to tree or used to cover a seed cache . 
 All nuthatches appear to store food , especially seeds , in tree crevices , in the ground , under small stones , or behind bark flakes , and these caches are remembered for as long as 30 days . Similarly , the rock nuthatches wedge snails into suitable crevices for consumption in times of need . European nuthatches have been found to avoid using their caches during benign conditions in order to save them for harsher times . 
 = = Status = = 
 Some nuthatches , such as the Eurasian nuthatch and the North American species , have extensive ranges and large populations , and few conservation problems , although locally they may be affected by woodland fragmentation . In contrast , some of the more restricted species face severe pressures . 
 The endangered white @-@ browed nuthatch is found only in the Mount Victoria area of Burma , where forest up to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level has been almost totally cleared and habitat between 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 500 m ( 6 @,@ 600 – 8 @,@ 200 ft ) is heavily degraded . Nearly 12 @,@ 000 people live in the <unk> Taung national park which includes Mount Victoria , and their fires and traps add to the pressure on the nuthatch . The population of the white @-@ browed nuthatch , estimated at only a few thousand , is decreasing , and no conservation measures are in place . The Algerian nuthatch is found in only four areas of Algeria , and it is possible that the total population does not exceed 1 @,@ 000 birds . Fire , erosion , and grazing and disturbance by livestock have reduced the quality of the habitat , despite its location in the Taza National Park . 
 Deforestation has also caused population declines for the vulnerable Yunnan and yellow @-@ billed nuthatches . The Yunnan nuthatch can cope with some tree loss , since it prefers open pine woodland , but although still locally common , it has disappeared from several of the areas in which it was recorded in the early 20th century . The threat to yellow @-@ billed is particularly acute on Hainan , where more than 70 % of the woodland has been lost in the past 50 years due to shifting cultivation and the use of wood for fuel during Chinese government re @-@ settlement programmes . 
 Krüper 's nuthatch is threatened by urbanisation and development in and around mature coniferous forests , particularly in the Mediterranean coastal areas where the species was once numerous . A law promoting tourism came into force in Turkey in 2003 , further exacerbating the threats to their habitat . The law reduced bureaucracy and made it easier for developers to build tourism facilities and summer houses in the coastal zone where woodland loss is a growing problem for the nuthatch . 
 = Homer Alone = 
 " Homer Alone " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 6 , 1992 . In the episode , stress from doing housework and being underappreciated at home causes Marge to have a mental breakdown and she decides to go on a vacation . She leaves for a spa called Rancho Relaxo , putting Bart and Lisa into the care of her sisters Patty and Selma and leaving Maggie at home with Homer . 
 The episode was written by David M. Stern and directed by Mark Kirkland . Stern had noticed that most of the writers were pitching stories about Bart and Homer , and he thought a " deeper vein of comedy " could be reached by having Marge suffer from a nervous breakdown . Originally , Marge 's trip was to a distressed mother 's institute rather than a spa . However , the plot was not well received at the table read for the episode and much of it was re @-@ written . The episode 's title references the film Home Alone which starred David Stern 's brother Daniel . 
 " Homer Alone " contains references to the Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner cartoons , Thelma and Louise , Home Alone , MacGyver , and the song " Baby Come Back " by Player . The episode has received generally positive reviews from critics . During its original airing on the Fox network during February sweeps , it acquired a 14 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating . The episode aired two days before the opening ceremony of the 1992 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 One day , Marge becomes stressed from all of the chores she does for her family . The day is particularly stressful as she must run several errands . While driving over a bridge , she listens to the radio and hears the DJs make a cruel prank call to a man . She suddenly snaps after Maggie accidentally bursts open her bottle and floods the car with milk and parks her car in the middle of the bridge , blocking traffic . The police try to convince her to move her car , to no avail . Finally , Homer arrives and convinces her to get out of the car , and she is promptly arrested by the police . Many women sympathize with Marge 's plight , and Mayor Quimby , hoping to gain popularity , orders her release . 
 That night , Marge decides to unwind by taking a vacation to a spa called Rancho Relaxo . She goes alone , putting Bart and Lisa into the care of her sisters Patty and Selma and leaving Maggie at home with Homer . Marge enjoys her much @-@ needed rest while the rest of the family have difficulty adapting to life without her . Homer finds that he is lonely , and not adept at taking care of Maggie . Bart and Lisa have a hard time adjusting to life with their aunts . 
 Maggie , upset about her mother 's absence , makes her way out of the house looking for Marge and goes missing . After a long search by Homer and Barney , Homer calls a baby search hotline . Meanwhile , Marge has done everything she wanted to do in her vacation and calls Homer to tell him she is coming back and he should pick her up at the train station . Maggie is found on the edge of the top of an ice @-@ cream shop and is returned to Homer just in time for Marge 's arrival . That night , Marge tells Homer and the kids , who are all sleeping next to her , that she would like more help around the house ; they assure her she has nothing to worry about . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Homer Alone " was written by David M. Stern . He had noticed that most of the writers were pitching stories about Bart and Homer , and he thought a " deeper vein of comedy " could be reached by having Marge suffer from a nervous breakdown . Executive producer James L. Brooks immediately approved the idea . Originally , Marge 's trip was to a distressed mother 's institute so they could show " what made Marge tick . " However , the plot was not well received at the table read for the episode . 
 The writers then re @-@ wrote much of the episode , switching the institute to a spa . They also added a video appearance from the fictional actor Troy McClure , voiced by Phil Hartman . According to executive producer Al Jean , the writers often used McClure as a " panic button " when they felt an episode needed more humor . The episode 's title is a play on the 1990 film Home Alone ; David Stern 's brother Daniel had starred in the movie as one of the main antagonists . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland . The scene at the train station where Marge leaves for Rancho Relaxo includes a brief cameo appearance of a character modeled after Simpsons director Jim Reardon . Reardon dislikes flying , and took trains whenever possible , so the animators always tried to include him in scenes at a train station . Susie Dietter served as assistant director for the episode and animated several of the scenes for the subplot with Bart , Lisa , Patty and Selma . In a scene where Homer sings a song to Maggie , he was designed to look dishevelled because the writers had wanted him to look drunk , although no attention was called to it . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The beginning of the episode where Homer chases Bart is a reference to the Warner Bros. / Chuck Jones Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner cartoons . The scene freezes , during which Bart and Homer 's scientific names are given as Brat 'us Don <unk> 'us and Homo Neanderthal 'us respectively . The background in the sequence references the Hanna – Barbera tradition of using backgrounds over and over and making it look like there is an " endless living room . " The scene where Marge is booked in prison references the Coen brothers film Raising Arizona . 
 The song that plays while Homer is on hold on the missing child hotline is " Baby Come Back " by Player . One of the films available at Rancho Relaxo is Thelma and Louise , which Marge ends up watching . " Homer Alone " is the first episode of The Simpsons that shows Patty and Selma 's fondness for MacGyver , and Selma says " Richard Dean Anderson will be in my dreams tonight . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on February 6 , 1992 on the Fox network during February sweeps , the episode acquired a 14 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 13 @.@ 08 million homes . It finished 25th in the ratings for the week of February 3 – 9 , 1992 , up from the season 's average rank of 37th . The Simpsons was the highest rated show on Fox that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " After the first few minutes , this episode becomes less about Marge than the family 's reliance on her . Bart and Lisa 's torturous time at Patty and Selma 's is wonderful [ ... ] , but it 's Homer losing Maggie , and working out what to tell Marge upon her return , that provides the best jokes . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson felt that the episode " comes close to finding the series in a rut , as it sort of offers another iteration of the ' Homer 's a bad father ' theme . 
 However , the emphasis on Marge 's issues makes it different , and it 's also fun to see life at Patty and Selma 's place . It 's another solid show . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode 3 / 5 , writing , " The episode serves only to demonstrate what is already obvious : that Marge holds the family together . 
 It 's entertaining to see Homer struggle with the most basic of parenting skills , but this happens at the expense of all the other episodes this season that show him to be a good father ( albeit flawed ) . Still , it 's nice to see Marge get her own show . " 
 = Part of Me ( Katy Perry song ) = 
 " Part of Me " is a song by American singer Katy Perry , released as the lead single from Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection . It was written by Perry and Bonnie McKee , with production and additional writing by Dr. Luke , Max Martin , and Cirkut . The song was not included on the original edition of Teenage Dream because Perry felt that it did not fit the composition of the album . A demo of the song leaked online in late 2010 , amid speculation that the lyrics were directed to the singer 's ex @-@ boyfriend Travie McCoy . " Part of Me " was re @-@ worked and officially released on February 13 , 2012 , through Capitol Records with artwork by art director Gavin Taylor and photography by Mary Ellen Matthews . 
 A dance @-@ pop and power pop song with a distinctive house beat , it has been compared to Jessie J 's 2011 single " Domino " and Perry 's 2010 singles " Firework " and " California Gurls " . Its lyrics describe a female protagonist who declares herself as unbreakable and strong following a break @-@ up . Many critics theorized that the lyrics addressed Perry 's divorce from Russell Brand , although Perry stated it was not about him since it was written in early 2010 . 
 " Part of Me " was a commercial success . It was the twentieth song to debut at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 , Perry 's seventh number @-@ one single on the chart , and her ninth consecutive number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The single debuted at No. 1 in Canada and the United Kingdom and has been certified Platinum in Australia , New Zealand , and the United States . Marketing campaigns for Adidas and The Sims 3 : Showtime have featured it . 
 An accompanying music video was filmed at the United States Marine Corps ' Camp Pendleton in Oceanside , California . The video depicts Perry enlisting in the Marines following a heartbreak . It garnered generally positive reviews for Perry 's " Girl power " message but drew criticism from feminist author Naomi Wolf , who denounced it as military propaganda . Perry debuted the first televised performance of song on at the 54th Grammy Awards and has also performed the song at the ECHO Awards , the 2012 Kids ' Choice Awards , and American Idol . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Part of Me " was written by Perry herself , Dr. Luke , Bonnie McKee , and Max Martin during the 2010 Teenage Dream writing sessions , which also produced the Hot 100 number @-@ one singles " California Gurls " , " Teenage Dream " and " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) . " Perry and McKee had been casual friends prior to Perry 's request for her help with a song that Perry had been writing called " Part of Me " . According to Rolling Stone , McKee stayed up all night writing the lyrics . When Perry was presented the song , she shouted " We 're buying you a car ! " by the time she heard the third line . 
 Perry recorded a demo of the track that leaked in full on December 30 , 2010 . The song was rumored to be a leftover cut from her Teenage Dream recording sessions , and fans speculated that the track might be included in an as @-@ yet @-@ unconfirmed re @-@ release of the LP . This re @-@ release was confirmed in January 2012 , when Perry announced through her official website that the album would contain all twelve songs from the original album , plus three new songs and a remix , and would be released on March 26 , 2012 . Perry 's press release stated : " This is the complete story of Teenage Dream . It was an incredible honor to tie the King of Pop 's Billboard Hot 100 record , but I 'm moving forward and had a few things left to get off my chest . So this is the complete special edition of my album for my fans . " 
 On February 13 , 2012 , " Part of Me " received an official release as the lead single from the album 's re @-@ release . Perry had planned all along to release the song on the deluxe edition of the album rather than the original , as it did not fit that album 's composition . On February 11 , two days before its worldwide premiere , the song was leaked for a second time with a reworked production and slightly changed lyrics . " Part of Me " was released to most iTunes stores worldwide on February 18 , 2012 , following her performance at the 54th Grammy Awards . In the United States , " Part of Me " was sent to contemporary radio playlists on February 21 , 2012 . The song was released in England , Scotland , Wales , France , and Ireland on March 18 , 2012 under the digital download and CD single formats . Perry revealed via Twitter that all profits raised from the sales of the single would be donated to MusiCares . The photograph by Mary Ellen Matthews that was used on the single cover was part of a photographic essay for Perry 's appearance in episode 710 of the television program Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Part of Me " is a dance @-@ pop and power pop song set to a house beat . It is composed in the key of D minor and set in a 4 / 4 time signature at a tempo of 130 beats per minute . The melody spans the tonal range of D4 to D5 , while the music follows the chord progression of Dm – F – Bb @-@ C. Production was done by Perry 's frequent collaborator , Dr. Luke . The song begins with Perry 's somber and emotional delivery of the line , " Days like this I want to drive away / Pack my bags and watch your shadow fade . " At the bridge , the beat amplifies and Perry 's lyrics become more aggressive as she commands " Now Look at Me ! " , signalling to her ex that she is still strong , regardless of what he tries to do to bring her down . The beat reaches a peak at the chorus , and Perry 's tone and the song 's lyrics become more aggressive and prominent as she sings , " This is the Part of me that you 're never gonna ever take away from me . " As the song continues , Perry 's lyrics become strong and empowered : " So you can keep the diamond ring / It don 't mean nothing anyway / In fact you can keep everything Yeah / Yeah Except for me " . Perry repeats the ending chorus as the beat fades . 
 James Dinh of MTV noted that " the pop star appears strong , bold and just a tad resentful after a breakup " on the track . His analysis of the lyrics observed that " The singer declares herself unbreakable after a breakup , evident in lines such as " Days like this I want to drive away / Pack my bags and watch your shadow fade / ' Cause you chewed me up and spit me out / Like I was poison in your mouth / You took my light , you drained me down / But that was then and this is now , now look at me . " Dinh pointed out similarities between " Part of Me " and Perry 's previous single " California Gurls " , noting that " the tune 's steady beat amplifies " as the chorus starts . Andrew Hampp of Billboard described the song as a " dance @-@ floor rave up " , and compared the song 's composition to Jessie J 's " Domino " . Edna Gundersen from USA Today stated : " Katy Perry could be addressing her ex or her detractors on this defiant <unk> , a gleaming " Firework " -like pop torpedo propelled by slick beats and a brazen chorus . " Chris Ryan , also of MTV , inferred that the song was aimed at Perry 's ex @-@ boyfriend Travie McCoy , while New York magazine journalist Amanda <unk> described it as " another break @-@ up anthem " . Fans and media noted differences in the lyrics between the demo and the single , and claimed that the changes redirected the song 's subject from McCoy to Perry 's ex @-@ husband Russell Brand , from whom she had recently divorced . Perry declared it was not about Brand , stating : 
 I wrote it two years ago , which is funny because everybody is like " God , it sounds so current , " and some people that I work with were like " You should just say you wrote it a couple of weeks ago . " I 'm like " I 'm not a dick , I 'm going to tell the truth . " I wrote it two years ago when I was writing and recording Teenage Dream , [ but ] it didn 't feel right on the record . I would 've had to take out one of my other songs that [ made the album ] a nice , complete package . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone gave the song three stars out of five , criticizing its generic topic but praising its production . Steven Hyden and Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club were positive of the song , with Hyden , giving it a B + , noted that , although the lyrics seemed " dopey " , the production and the chorus are " pretty damn sticky " , while Koski , giving the song a B , noted that the song follows a similar formula to several of Perry 's previous singles but went on to say that " the template works well in the context of a break @-@ up anthem " and positively remarked that it comes off as " a <unk> , 2012 version of ' Since U Been Gone . ' " 
 A reviewer from Plugged In criticized Perry 's decision to create an uplifting song about such a serious subject matter as divorce : " Framing the song in terms of her divorce from Brand , though ' Part of Me ' , puts a much more somber and serious spin on things . This is no mere breakup . It 's the demolition of a marital covenant . So no matter how bad things were in her relationship , no matter how much better she feels now , no matter how cathartic the pulsing beats ( courtesy of <unk> Max Martin and Dr. Luke ) might feel , the ultimate end here is a very sad one indeed . " Priya Elan of NME panned the song : ' This is the part of me , that you 're never going to take away from me , ' " she sings in that strange angry robot voice of hers . The sentiment , as ever , is punch you in face crystal clear and probably meant something to one of the ( probably ) 17 writers who wrote the song . As it stands , it 's another de @-@ humanised slab of radio pop from Perry INC . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Part of Me " debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and the U.S. Hot Digital Songs chart , with 411 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . It was the twentieth song to debut atop the Billboard Hot 100 . " Part of Me " became Perry 's her seventh number @-@ one song , and her sixth in the 2010s . The single debuted at number 36 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart , with 35 million radio impressions in its first week , and was Perry 's ninth song to top the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . It is Perry 's tenth single to be certified Platinum by the RIAA , for sales of over 1 million copies . As of January 2015 , the single has sold 2 @,@ 780 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 " Part of Me " debuted at number one on the Canadian Hot 100 , with sales of 46 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . In Brazil , it reached the top spot on the Brazil Pop 100 . In Mexico , the song peaked in the top 10 of the Mexican Hot 100 . It also peaked at number 1 in Venezuela . The song was Perry 's first single to debut at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and as her seventh to reach that spot , tied her with Mariah Carey as the artist with the most number @-@ one hits in New Zealand . It has received a Platinum certification by the RIANZ , with over 15 @,@ 000 copies sold . In Australia , " Part of Me " debuted at number 22 on the chart , and peaked at number 5 . The recording has been certified 2 × platinum by the ARIA , with 140 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at the top of the UK Singles Chart on March 25 , 2012 ― for the week ending date March 31 , 2012 ― selling 79 @,@ 079 copies in its first week and becoming Perry 's third number @-@ one single in Britain , following " I Kissed a Girl " in 2008 and " California Gurls " in 2010 . " Part of Me " was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry for sales of over 400 @,@ 000 . In the Republic of Ireland , " Part of Me " peaked at number five on the Irish Singles Chart and was Perry 's twelfth single to reach the top ten in the Irish Republic . In Italy , the song was certified Gold for sales of over 15 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The music video for " Part of Me " was directed by Ben Mor . Filming began on February 16 , 2012 , and took place over the course of three days at USMC Camp Pendleton in Oceanside , California . Perry announced the video shortly after the song 's release , tweeting , " Holy power of the Grammy 's , Part Of Me is already top 10 on <unk> ! U guys are killing it ! NICE ! Can 't wait to shoot this video ! # grateful . " Her preparation for the video shoot included vigorous training in military basics , including firepower , military etiquette , and combat training . 
 As filming began , pictures from the video set surfaced online , showing Perry with short hair and dressed in military clothing . The music video premièred on its announced date during the program MTV First : Katy Perry , in which she discussed her experiences filming the video and the background of the video 's plot : 
 Well , I actually had the idea , I wrote the story about what it is actually like to be in the Service , and it does take a lot of physical strength , but now that I 've been through it – and even just for the three days I was there , [ it 's ] a lot of mental strength . We used only Marines , no actors or actresses . We used all of the Marine 's equipment and they were so lovely to us , I always have fun even though it 's a lot of work . Even though I was sore and exhausted , I was so educated on people in the service , who I 've always respected but the stuff they go through , and the kind of loyalty they possess , it 's very communal , and community . Not to sound weird , but it seems like the heart of America . Seriously , the heart . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 As Perry sits in her car outside of her boyfriend 's job , she sees her boyfriend ( played by actor and model Lucas Kerr ) interacting flirtatiously with a woman ( Ashley Tisdale ) . She confronts him in his office , and ends their relationship . The title track begins as she drives to a gas station , where she buys a can of tea . After paying for her items , she sees a moto @-@ sticker on a notice board which reads , " All women are created equal , then some become Marines " . The increasingly emotional Perry gathers her possessions from her car trunk , enters a nearby restroom , and begins her change of identity . She cuts her hair short ( at this point bursting into tears ) , removes her bracelets , flattens her breasts , and changes into a hoodie and jeans . 
 Perry enlists in the United States Marine Corps , and after a brief scene of recruit training , reports to the School of Infantry for the Marine Corps ' rigorous basic combat instruction course . She reminisces over her experiences with her ex @-@ boyfriend , yet remains spiteful towards him . She then burns a love note from him and vents her frustration through the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program . The remainder of the video depicts Perry 's training , and shows her dancing beneath a large garrison flag . Perry ultimately transforms into a trained warrior , clad in Marine Pattern ( MARPAT ) camouflage utilities , body armor and camouflage face paint . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video garnered positive reviews from critics , who praised its self @-@ empowerment theme and its different approach in comparison to Perry 's previous music videos . Bruno Nessif of E ! Online compared the video to Demi Moore 's role in G.I. Jane . Ray Rahman from Entertainment Weekly echoed the similarity of the G.I. Jane influence in the video , and called it an " intense ride " . MTV 's James Montgomery praised the video and Perry 's role , saying : 
 " Over the years , Perry has been a California Gurl , a nerdy teenager , an alien and just about everything in between , but up until now , she 's never really been an actual person . " He went on to praise the video stating : " Part of Me " is unlike any pop video in recent memory . Rihanna did military chic in her " Hard " video ( she even straddled a tank ) , and just about every one of Perry 's pop contemporaries have ventured down the same path . But they were never really in the military ; they were just making it more fabulous . Perry takes the opposite tact [ sic ] : She cuts off her hair , she eschews makeup , she fights , crawls , suffers . It 's a commendable level of commitment . Your move , everybody else . " 
 Feminist author Naomi Wolf criticized the video as propaganda for the Marine Corps , stating " I really want to find out if she was paid by them for making it ..... it is truly shameful . I would suggest a boycott of this singer whom I really liked if you are as offended at this glorification of violence as I am . " Glenn Selig , founder of The Publicity Agency , responded to these claims on Fox News Live , stating , " In her efforts to boycott the video , Naomi Wolf has brought more attention to it , without her comments , most people would clearly have seen the military simply as a metaphor and not as an attempt by Katy Perry to glamorize the military or war . " Perry told MTV that she chose the military plot because it represented the song , saying , " It 's an affirmation of strength , so I wanted to go the strongest route I ever could . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Part of Me " was given its first live performance on February 12 , 2012 , at the 54th Grammy Awards . The performance began with " E.T. " with dancers and a singer who appeared to be Perry on a darkened stage . It ended partway through the chorus as electronic sound effects and the lights <unk> suddenly went out , implying technical difficulties . Wearing sunglasses and a metallic bodysuit with the appearance of golden armor , a blue @-@ haired Perry , slowly singing the first part of " Part of Me , " descended from the roof of the venue in a transparent cube , revealing the singer on the stage below to be a body double . Perry shattered the cube , fireworks went off around the stage , and Perry began " Part of Me " as the dancers present during " E.T. " reappeared , lifted her up , and performed a routine behind her . 
 On March 19 , 2012 , Perry performed " Part of Me " as part of a Live Lounge special for BBC Radio 1 , along with " The One That Got Away " ( 2011 ) , " Firework " ( 2011 ) , " Thinking of You " ( 2009 ) and a censored version of " Niggas in Paris " ( 2011 ) . The performances were closely similar , through their depiction of Perry as a superhero and their theme of self @-@ empowerment . Katie Brine of MTV commented that " Even when Katy is getting serious , there 's always fun to be had . " 
 On April 26 , 2012 , Perry performed the track for season 11 of American Idol . This was similar to her previous performances and the video , but was pre @-@ taped due to illness . After a short , introductory military @-@ style video , Perry made a simulated airdrop onto a military base peopled by female background dancers , all clad in military clothing . It was met with mixed reviews from critics and fans , who criticized Perry 's decisions to pre @-@ tape her performance and to lipsync . However , the complexity and originality of the performance were praised . Brian Mansfield , of USA Today , called it a " pretty impressive production " , but criticized Perry 's vocal abilities . 
 Perry included the song in the set list of her June 9 , 2012 performance at Capital FM 's Summertime Ball festival , during which she wore a fifties @-@ style black and white polka dot dress and a black fringe haircut . DJ Earworm had also made a mashup called " Fly " for the Summertime Ball and included " Part of Me " and Perry 's previous single , " The One That Got Away " in the mashup . On June 26 , 2012 Perry performed " Part of Me " in her set list at the premiere for her July 2012 , 3D autobiographical documentary @-@ concert film Katy Perry : Part of Me on Hollywood Boulevard as part of Pepsi 's " Summer Beats " concert series . During the performance , Perry emerged from a large box of popcorn , wearing a shirt that resembled a film reel with the stage decorated with life @-@ sized lollipops and neon lights . This was Perry 's final performance prior to her taking a musical hiatus after two years of continuous promotion for Teenage Dream . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 " Part of Me " was used in a national marketing campaign for The Sims 3 limited @-@ edition expansion pack , The Sims 3 : Showtime . Perry filmed a 30 @-@ second commercial , in which she performed the song onstage as a Sim version of herself . The expansion pack includes Katy Perry @-@ themed items , inspired by the concept and artwork of her album Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) , that players can use on their own Sims . In May 2012 , Perry signed a deal with Pepsi to promote Katy Perry : Part of Me . This deal was a part of Pepsi 's first global campaign titled , " Live For Now " which partners with entertainment artists and properties to promote their work . " Part of Me " was used in a series of trailers as part of this deal as well as various other media related campaigns to promote the film . The track is available as downloadable content for the video game Just Dance 2014 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = James Milner = 
 James Philip Milner ( born 4 January 1986 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for Premier League club Liverpool and the England national team . He has previously played for Leeds United , Swindon Town , Newcastle United , Aston Villa and Manchester City . Playing as a central midfielder with Aston Villa , Milner was named PFA Young Player of the Year and in the PFA Team of the Year for the 2009 – 10 Premier League season ; however , after his move to Manchester City , Milner was more often utilised as a winger . 
 Milner 's talent in football , cricket , and long @-@ distance running was recognised at a very young age . He represented his school in these sports and played football for amateur teams from Rawdon and Horsforth . He supported Leeds United from a young age and was a season ticket holder at the club . In 1996 , he joined the Leeds United youth academy . He made his debut for the first team in 2002 aged only 16 and gained prominence as the youngest player to score in the Premier League . 
 While at Leeds United , he spent time on loan at Swindon Town to gain experience as a first @-@ team player . Following his move to Newcastle United , he was loaned to Aston Villa for a season . He went on to establish himself as a regular starter in the Newcastle , and later Aston Villa and Manchester City first teams . He made more than 100 appearances for Newcastle , as well as making a record number of appearances for the England under @-@ 21 team . He made his debut for the full team against the Netherlands in August 2009 and also played at the 2010 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Wortley , Leeds , Milner played most of his childhood football for Westbrook Lane Primary School in Horsforth . He was later educated at Horsforth School . Graeme Coulson , a coach from Rawdon , recognised Milner 's talent and persuaded him to play for Rawdon in several tournaments , including a tournament at Rawdon Meadows , where Milner scored four goals in their victory in the final . 
 Milner was described as a " first class " student at his school ; he left with 11 GCSEs and an award for his performance in physical education . Milner also showed talent in cricket , sprinting and long @-@ distance running . He played for the Yorkshire Schools cricket team , was the cross @-@ country champion at his school for three consecutive years and was the district champion over 100 metres for two years in a row . He then completed his studies at Boston Spa School ; at which the sports college was a partner to the football club . 
 Milner supported his hometown club Leeds United from a young age . His earliest memory of the team was watching them win the FA Youth Cup in 1993 . He and his parents , Peter and Lesley , were season ticket holders and Milner later became a ball boy for the club . 
 When Milner was 10 years old , he joined the Leeds United Academy after being spotted by a scout while playing for Westbrook Juniors in Horsforth . At the academy , Milner played against contemporaries from other clubs in the north , including future Manchester United striker Wayne Rooney . His role model was Leeds @-@ born Alan Smith , who was then a Leeds United striker . Milner believed playing with Smith put him through a learning curve , as Smith had done what Milner aspired to do ; that is , to come through the academy and play for the first team . Having made good progress at the Academy , Milner was taken on as a trainee after leaving school . However , his father insisted that he attend college once a week to continue his education . Milner remarked later that he did not want to get excited and think that he " had already made it " . He also said he could hardly believe he was playing alongside first @-@ team Leeds players such as David Batty and Olivier Dacourt . He continued to excel in the youth team , and played for England at under @-@ 15 and − 17 levels . He helped the England under @-@ 17 team win the 2002 Nationwide summer tournament against Italy , Czech Republic and Brazil , scoring a goal against the latter . Milner claims to have never consumed alcohol throughout his life , despite pressures from those around him when he was growing up . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 Milner 's first @-@ team debut for Leeds came on 10 November 2002 , in a game against West Ham United , when he came on as a substitute for Jason Wilcox for the last six minutes . The appearance made him the second youngest player ever to play in the Premier League , at the age of 16 years and 309 days . On 26 December 2002 , he became at 16 years and 356 days the youngest player to score in the Premier League , with a goal in a 2 – 1 win against Sunderland . His record was broken by James Vaughan of Everton . 
 In a match against Chelsea a month later , Milner scored again , with a deft first touch of the ball and manoeuvre , in order to avoid a tackle from Chelsea defender Marcel Desailly , that won widespread praise from commentators . The manoeuvre created a yard of space for him to deliver a curling shot from 18 yards ( 16 m ) . Reporters were impressed by his overall performance in the game , especially by his desire , confidence , and ability with both feet . Chelsea manager Claudio Ranieri remarked after the game that Milner had performed like a much more experienced player . The performance prompted comparisons to England internationals Michael Owen and Wayne Rooney , who had also come to footballing prominence as teenagers . 
 After more appearances for Leeds , Milner signed a five @-@ year contract with them on 10 February 2003 . At the start of the 2003 – 04 season , Milner was sent on a one @-@ month loan to Second Division side Swindon Town to gain experience as a first @-@ team player . Before the stint , he saw it as a valuable experience as a player . He spent a month with Swindon , playing in six games and scoring two goals against Peterborough United and Luton Town . 
 However , Leeds ' fortunes were on the decline ; the team became the subject of numerous negative stories in the media , and several first @-@ team players were sold . Milner said he believed that this experience made him emotionally stronger and taught him how to deal with team problems . Leeds 's eventual relegation to the Championship led to speculation over Milner 's future at the club . Tottenham Hotspur , Aston Villa and Everton all expressed an interest in signing him . Ultimately , Villa and Everton did not make offers and Milner rejected an offer from Tottenham as they were based too far from his family home , where he still lived . Leeds insisted that he would not be sold and the chairman of the club at the time even referred to him as " the future of Leeds " . Nonetheless , financial problems eventually forced Leeds to sell Milner to Newcastle United for an initial price of £ 3 @.@ 6 million . Although Milner was not happy to be leaving the club he had supported as a child , he wished to do what was " in the club 's best interest " and in July 2004 , he agreed a five @-@ year contract with Newcastle . 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 Milner made his first appearance for Newcastle United during their pre @-@ season tour of Asia , scoring his first goal for the club in a 1 – 1 draw against Kitchee , in Hong Kong . During this tour , he took the opportunity to observe how Newcastle striker Alan Shearer dealt with attention from fans and the media . He said that his association with people like Shearer gave him a better idea of how to deal with the media . 
 Milner 's first Premier League game for Newcastle came against Middlesbrough on 18 August 2004 , in which he played on the extreme right of the field as a winger , despite having featured regularly on the left for Leeds . When asked about this after the match , Milner said he had no preference where on the pitch he played . A month later he made his debut in European competition , when Newcastle played in the UEFA Cup against Bnei Sakhnin from Israel , after coming on as a substitute for Shola Ameobi . In the same month , he scored his first competitive goal for the club , also as a substitute , in a 3 – 1 win against West Bromwich Albion . It looked probable he would soon start a game . 
 However , the situation changed for Milner after Newcastle manager Bobby Robson , whom Milner considered his mentor , was sacked and replaced by Graeme Souness . Under Souness , he started 13 league games , but did not play his first full Premier League game for Newcastle until April 2005 . By the end of the season , he had made 41 appearances in all competitions and scored once . Souness did not make Milner a regular in the Newcastle side and controversially remarked that the club would not win " with a team of James <unk> " . Milner 's response to this statement was reported as " mature " . He did however confirm that he was frustrated at not being used as a starter for most of the season . 
 At the start of the 2005 – 06 season , Milner scored in Newcastle 's 3 – 1 away win against FK <unk> <unk> in the UEFA Intertoto Cup , and also set up Alan Shearer for the team 's third goal . His good run of form in this competition continued when he scored in the next round against Deportivo La Coruña . Despite these goals , a clause in Newcastle 's purchase of <unk> Solano from Aston Villa resulted in Milner being loaned to Villa for the rest of the season . Villa manager David O 'Leary , who had managed Milner at Leeds , was happy to acquire Milner in this deal , saying that he believed Villa got the better of the deal and that he hoped to improve him as a player . 
 = = = = Aston Villa ( loan ) = = = = 
 Milner made his Villa debut on 12 September 2005 in a Premier League match against West Ham United . Five days later , he scored his first goal for the club in a 1 – 1 draw against Tottenham Hotspur . In a League Cup game less than a week later , he helped his side recover from being 3 – 1 down at half @-@ time to win 8 – 3 against Wycombe Wanderers , scoring two goals in the second half comeback . Throughout the season Milner was positive about his team . He remained confident that Villa would recover from a poor start to the season and praised the quality of the squad . 
 Milner was generally seen as a positive signing in a season that was disappointing for Villa . Milner himself also received the loan move positively , saying that he would like to join Villa permanently because of the probability of becoming a regular starter , but admitted that the possibility of this happening was beyond his control . Manager David O 'Leary confirmed during the season that he would like Milner to join the club permanently , but doubted he would be given the opportunity to sign him . He even pulled out of signing Robert Huth so that he would have the funds to sign Milner permanently if the opportunity arose . Shortly before the end of his loan period , negotiations between Villa and Newcastle began . 
 The newly appointed Newcastle manager Glenn Roeder appeared to appreciate Milner 's ability more than Souness and expressed a desire that he remain a Newcastle player . This , as well as the departure of O 'Leary and the shortage of transfer funds at Villa , meant that a deal to sign Milner permanently seemed unlikely . In June , it became even less likely when Villa rejected an offer of Milner as part of a trade for Gareth Barry . However , the deal was resurrected when Villa were taken over by American billionaire Randy Lerner , and Martin O 'Neill was appointed as new Villa manager . Villa made an improved offer on 30 August , which was accepted by Newcastle chairman Freddy Shepherd . Media sources quoted the transfer fee as being £ 4 million . A move to Villa appeared to have been agreed , but at the last moment Newcastle recalled Milner and the talks broke down . 
 = = = = Return to Newcastle United = = = = 
 Newcastle 's players and manager Glenn Roeder reacted positively to Milner 's return at the start of the 2006 – 07 season . Roeder praised Milner for the way he had handled the failed Villa transfer , although Roeder 's own handling of the negotiations was criticised . Roeder confirmed that he would play Milner in " plenty of games " during the season . This proved to be the case , as Milner was a starter in the Newcastle side for the entire season . 
 Newcastle made a poor start in the Premier League , but in European competition , Milner played a key role in helping Newcastle advance through the group stage of the UEFA Cup . Shortly after , rumours began to spread that he would be sold during the transfer window in January , although both Milner and Roeder dismissed these rumours . 
 On 1 January 2007 , Milner scored his first goal of the season in a 2 – 2 draw with Manchester United . The goal came from a " stunning " shot from 25 yards ( 23 m ) away . He scored two more goals during the next three weeks , against Birmingham City and then against West Ham United . Both of these were scored from at least 20 yards ( 20 m ) away . Later in the season , Roeder praised the progress Milner had made and said that he believed him to be the hardest @-@ training player at the club . Also during the season , Milner displayed his ability to play comfortably in a range of different positions by scoring and setting up goals with both feet from both sides . As a result , Milner signed a new contract at Newcastle in January , which secured his future at the club until 2011 . He signed another four @-@ year contract in May 2007 , when Sam Allardyce took over as manager of Newcastle . Milner said later in the year that he was happy about his future at the club and its new manager saying that the training sessions were " the best since I have been here " . Allardyce said during the season that Milner was so keen to play , that he was concerned he would " burn out mentally [ and ] physically " . As a result , Milner played mainly as a substitute in the early part of the season . 
 In late October , he scored Newcastle 's 500th home Premier League goal in a 3 – 1 win over Tottenham Hotspur . A second Premier League goal of the season came fortuitously in the Tyne – Wear derby from a shot intended as a cross . Allardyce praised Milner highly during the season , saying he was " a hugely experienced Premier League player " . 
 After missing the final nine games of the season due to a foot injury , it was rumoured in May 2008 that he would be part of a transfer between Newcastle and Liverpool . Despite starting the season for Newcastle and scoring in a League Cup win over Coventry City , it was revealed after the game that Milner had handed in a written transfer request the week before . 
 = = = Aston Villa = = = 
 Milner signed for Aston Villa on 29 August 2008 for a fee of £ 12 million , and signed a four @-@ year contract with the club . Milner made his debut for Villa on 31 August 2008 as a second @-@ half substitute against Liverpool . His first goals in his second spell at Villa came in a third round FA Cup tie against Gillingham at Priestfield Stadium on 4 January 2009 on his 23rd birthday , where he scored both goals in a 2 – 1 win for Villa . 
 On 9 January 2009 , Milner scored both goals as Villa beat Gillingham 2 – 1 in the third round of the FA Cup . Milner 's first Premier League goal in his second spell at Villa came on 17 January 2009 in a 2 – 1 win against Sunderland at the Stadium of Light . On 7 February 2009 , Milner was named to the England senior team squad for the first time , after a run at club level that had impressed England manager Fabio Capello . Milner continued to impress and scored his second league goal of the season against Blackburn Rovers on 7 February and scored a free @-@ kick from outside the penalty area at home against Everton as Villa came back from a 3 – 1 deficit to draw 3 – 3 on 12 April . He stated that his time at Villa is the " most settled " period of his career so far , having played under thirteen managers and caretakers despite being only 23 . 
 At the start of the 2009 – 10 season , Milner moved into the centre of midfield after the sale of captain Gareth Barry to Manchester City . On 28 February 2010 , he scored the opening goal in the 2010 League Cup Final with a penalty . However , Villa were eventually beaten 2 – 1 by Manchester United . Milner ended the season with 12 goals and was named Aston Villa 's Fan 's Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year . 
 On 19 May 2010 , Manchester City made a £ 20 million offer for Milner which was rejected . On 22 July 2010 , Villa manager Martin O 'Neill said that Milner had shown a desire to leave Villa for City , but would only be sold at Villa 's valuation . On 14 August despite being on the verge of a move to Manchester City , Milner played in Villa 's first game of the season against West Ham United , scoring Villa 's third goal . Milner was given a standing ovation when he was substituted near the end of the game . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 On 17 August 2010 , it was reported that Aston Villa had agreed a deal with Manchester City to sell Milner subject to a medical . The deal was reported to be worth around £ 26 million , including a player exchange of Stephen Ireland . Milner made his debut for City on 23 August 2010 in a 3 – 0 home win against Liverpool , where he set up the first goal for former Villa teammate Gareth Barry . Milner scored his first competitive goal for Manchester City in an FA Cup third @-@ round match at Leicester City which ended in a 2 – 2 draw . The Leicester match was the start of a cup run that saw Manchester City reach the 2011 FA Cup Final . Milner was an unused substitute as Manchester City beat Stoke City 1 – 0 to win the cup . 
 Milner scored his first Premier League goal for Manchester City against Everton on 24 September 2011 . Two matches later , he scored his second , against former club Aston Villa in a 4 – 1 win . The following week , Milner had a hand in two goals as Manchester City won the Manchester derby at Old Trafford 6 – 1 , inflicting Manchester United 's heaviest home league defeat since 1930 . On 3 January 2012 , Milner scored his third goal of the season , a penalty , against Liverpool . Manchester City won the match 3 – 0 . Over the course of the 2011 – 12 season , Milner made 26 Premier League appearances as Manchester City won the league title for the first time in 44 years . 
 On 6 October 2012 , Milner scored his first goal of the 2012 – 13 season from a free @-@ kick to seal a 3 – 0 win against Sunderland . On 20 October , he received his first Premier League red card in a 2 – 1 win at West Bromwich Albion . On 28 November , he scored away at Wigan Athletic in a 2 – 0 win for City . On 13 January 2013 , he scored City 's opening goal in a 2 – 0 away win at Arsenal , it was the first time a City player had scored away at Arsenal in the League since 2007 and City 's first win in the league at Arsenal since 1975 . On 8 April , he scored in the Manchester derby as City beat Manchester United 2 – 1 at Old Trafford . 
 On 10 December 2013 , Milner scored the winning goal in a 3 – 2 win against the reigning European champions Bayern Munich at the Allianz Arena in the UEFA Champions League , becoming the first English player to score for Manchester City in the competition that season . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 On 4 June 2015 , Milner agreed to join Liverpool on a free transfer from Manchester City . On 7 August 2015 , Milner was announced as the vice captain . Milner played his first competitive match for the club in 1 – 0 win over Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium . 
 Milner captained Liverpool for the first time on his third appearance for the club , a 0 – 0 draw at Arsenal . On 26 September 2015 , he scored his debut goal for Liverpool in a 3 – 2 win against his former club Aston Villa at Anfield . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 After representing England at the under @-@ 15 and under @-@ 17 levels , Milner was promoted to the under @-@ 20 level and called up for the 2003 World Youth Championship . Soon after this , under @-@ 21 manager Peter Taylor called him up to the England under @-@ 21 team and Milner made his debut against Sweden on 30 March 2004 . 
 Milner scored his first goal for the England under @-@ 21 side during the 2004 – 05 season in a qualification game for the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship , against Wales . During the game , in which he played in the centre of midfield , he also set up a scoring chance for Darren Bent as the Young Lions won 2 – 0 . Despite domestic club troubles , he continued to make progress at international level , scoring the winning goal for the England under @-@ 21 side in a 3 – 2 win over Switzerland . The win secured England a place in the playoff stage of the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualifiers . 
 In June , Milner competed for England at the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship . He played in all four of England 's matches and was booked in the semi @-@ final against the Netherlands , which meant he would have missed the final . The game was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out , in which Milner scored twice and England lost 13 – 12 . Milner was included in the under @-@ 21 squad for a friendly against Romania , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw . A month later , Milner set an England under @-@ 21 record by making his 30th appearance for the side in a 3 – 0 win against Montenegro . During this game , he set up the first goal from a corner . Historically , players with several England Under @-@ 21 appearances have not progressed to become regulars in the senior side , which has led some to doubt whether Milner would be able to successfully make the transition . In October , he scored his third goal for the under @-@ 21 side in a 3 – 0 win over Republic of Ireland . He scored again in the return game four months later that England also won 3 – 0 . 
 Milner continued to be a regular and was the only player , along with Joe Hart and captain Steven Taylor , to have played in all the qualifiers for the 2009 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 <unk> the summer of 2009 , he was in the final 23 @-@ man U21 squad for the 2009 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship in Sweden . He helped set up the winning goal for Micah Richards against Finland , and manager Stuart Pearce said after the match , " The modern @-@ day full @-@ back can get up and down the pitch and I knew [ Milner ] would be comfortable " . In England 's second match against Spain , Milner had a penalty well saved by Sergio <unk> , and scored England 's second goal in a 2 – 0 win . England faced the hosts Sweden in the semi @-@ finals . In the first minute of the match , Milner delivered a corner that was headed in by Martin <unk> to give England the lead . Another corner from Milner would set up England 's third goal , an own goal by Mattias <unk> . After the match ended in a 3 – 3 draw , it went to a penalty shoot @-@ out . Milner was the only England player to miss in the shoot @-@ out after he slipped just before kicking the ball , causing it to sail over the crossbar . England won the shoot @-@ out 5 – 4 to advance to the final for the first time in 25 years . England lost the final to Germany 4 – 0 and Milner said after the match that the team was " hurting " and that the way in which the team lost was " not good enough " . The final was his last game for the under @-@ 21 side . His 46 appearances at under @-@ 21 level are a national record . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 In August 2009 , Milner made his debut for the England senior team , when he came on as a substitute in a friendly match against the Netherlands for the final 23 minutes . The match ended in a 2 – 2 draw . He played twice more for England the following month against Slovenia in another friendly and made his competitive debut four days later in a 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Croatia , where he played the final nine minutes . England won the latter match 5 – 1 to secure qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . He was named in the final 23 @-@ man squad for the World Cup finals in South Africa and was selected in the starting eleven for England 's first match of the tournament against the United States , however he was substituted after 30 minutes . In England 's third match against Slovenia , he set up the only goal of the match with a cross for Jermain Defoe . He captained England for the first time for the final 10 minutes of the match in a 2 – 1 loss against France on 17 November 2010 , when both Rio Ferdinand and Steven Gerrard had been substituted . 
 Milner played in six matches during qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 , and was named in Roy Hodgson 's 23 @-@ man squad for the tournament . Milner started Hodgson 's first match in charge , a 1 – 0 friendly win against Norway . 
 On 7 September 2012 , Milner scored his first international goal in a 5 – 0 win away to Moldova during 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Milner is regarded as being a tenacious footballer . As a result , his main role on the team is as a wide midfielder who creates scoring opportunities , as well as taking the ball past defenders . He could be deemed a traditional English winger . While Milner does not score many goals , he does have a good record at providing assists . <unk> Solano , a former teammate , said that because of his ability , Milner would " become an important team player " . After his move to Newcastle , he began playing more as a winger . He has been described as " comfortable on either wing " . He has also been used occasionally as a central midfielder , a striker and as an emergency right @-@ back , generally during an injury crisis . Manuel Pellegrini , who managed Milner at Manchester City , described Milner as the most complete English player in the modern game praising his all round ability , commitment , performance level and versatility . 
 Milner has the ability to pass accurately and shoot from a great distance from goal . As a result , he usually goes forward for set pieces and is often a candidate to take corners and free kicks . Critical opinion is divided as to Milner 's crossing ability . While some commentators have been critical of his ability in this area , other journalists have said that Milner can produce accurate crosses . 
 Milner , in his time at the club , was described on the Newcastle United official website as " a good reader of the game " . One quality that is praised by commentators is Milner 's awareness of players around him . He is a very tactically aware player . This awareness allows him to pass the ball from a range of positions to teammates making forward runs , as well as giving him the confidence to take on defenders . His awareness and willingness to pass have been called mature for a player of his age . 
 Milner has expressed a willingness to play as much as possible and feels that Wayne Rooney 's move to Manchester United and success as a player has taken a lot of pressure off his own career , commenting , " I have been able to concentrate on football and ignore everything else " . During his career , Milner has been booked 15 times and been sent off once , against West Bromwich Albion on 20 October 2012 . 
 Despite being a winger by trade , Aston Villa manager Martin O 'Neill stated in November 2009 that he thought Milner 's versatility could lead to him becoming an accomplished central midfielder at some point in his career . Milner played in a number of different positions for Aston Villa , including both wings , in central midfield and even as a right back . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
