 Estimated numbers of Calusa at the beginning of the Spanish occupation ranged from 4 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 . The society declined in power and population ; by 1697 their number was estimated to be about 1 @,@ 000 . In the early 18th century , the Calusa came under attack from the Yamasee to the north . They asked the Spanish for refuge in Cuba , where almost 200 died of illness . Soon they were relocated again to the Florida Keys . 
 Second in power and number to the Calusa in South Florida were the Tequesta . They occupied the southeastern portion of the lower peninsula in modern @-@ day Dade and Broward counties . Like the Calusa , the Tequesta societies centered on the mouths of rivers . Their main village was probably on the Miami River or Little River . Spanish depictions of the Tequesta state that they were greatly feared by sailors , who suspected them of torturing and killing survivors of shipwrecks . Spanish priests attempted to set up missions in 1743 , but noted that the Tequesta were under assault from a neighboring tribe . When only 30 members were left , they were removed to Havana . A British surveyor in 1770 described multiple deserted villages in the region where the Tequesta lived . Common descriptions of Native Americans in Florida by 1820 used only the term " Seminoles " . 
 = = = = Seminole = = = = 
 Following the demise of the Calusa and Tequesta , Native Americans in southern Florida were referred to as " Spanish Indians " in the 1740s , probably due to their friendlier relations with Spain . The Creek invaded the Florida peninsula ; they conquered and assimilated what was left of pre @-@ Columbian societies into the Creek Confederacy . They were joined by remnant Indian groups and formed the Seminole , a new tribe , by ethnogenesis . The Seminole originally settled in the northern portion of the territory . In addition , free blacks and fugitive slaves made their way to Florida , where Spain had promised slaves freedom and arms if they converted to Catholicism and pledged loyalty to Spain . These African Americans gradually created communities near those of the Seminole , and became known as the Black Seminoles . The groups acted as allies . 
 In 1817 , Andrew Jackson invaded Florida to hasten its annexation to the United States , in what became known as the First Seminole War . After Florida became a U.S. territory in 1821 , conflicts between settlers and the Seminole increased as the former tried to acquire lands . The Second Seminole War lasted from 1835 to 1842 , and afterward , the US forcibly removed about 3 @,@ 000 Seminole and 800 Black Seminole to Indian Territory ( now Oklahoma ) , west of the Mississippi River . Many others died in the war . Conflict broke out again in the Third Seminole War from 1855 to 1859 , when a few hundred Seminole fought off US forces from the swamps of the Everglades . The US finally decided to leave them alone , as they could not dislodge them even after this protracted and expensive warfare . 
 By 1913 , the Seminole in the Everglades numbered no more than 325 . They made a living by hunting and trading with white settlers , and raised domesticated animals . The Seminole made their villages in hardwood hammocks or pinelands , had diets of hominy and coontie roots , fish , turtles , venison , and small game . Their villages were not large , due to the limited size of the hammocks . Between the end of the last Seminole War and 1930 , the people lived in relative isolation from the majority culture . 
 The construction of the Tamiami Trail , beginning in 1928 and spanning the region from Tampa to Miami , altered their ways of life . Some began to work in local farms , ranches , and souvenir stands . Some of the people who interacted more with European Americans began to move to reservations in the 1940s . These were their bases for reorganizing their government and they became federally recognized in 1957 as the Seminole Tribe of Florida . 
 People who kept more traditional ways had settlements along the Tamiami Trail and tended to speak the <unk> language . They later were federally recognized in 1962 as the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida . As metropolitan areas in South Florida began to grow , the two groups were closely associated with the Everglades . They struggled to maintain privacy while serving as tourist attractions . They earned money by wrestling alligators and selling <unk> . As of 2008 , the Seminole Tribe of Florida had five reservations , and the lands of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians were collectively considered a sixth reservation . The two tribes have each developed casino gaming on some of their properties to generate revenue for support , services and economic development . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 The military penetration of southern Florida offered the opportunity to map a poorly understood and largely unknown part of the country . An 1840 expedition into the Everglades offered the first printed account for the general public to read about the Everglades . The anonymous writer described the terrain the party was crossing : 
 " No country that I have ever heard of bears any resemblance to it ; it seems like a vast sea filled with grass and green trees , and expressly intended as a retreat for the rascally Indian , from which the white man would never seek to drive them " . 
 The land seemed to inspire extreme reactions of both wonder or hatred . During the Second Seminole War an army surgeon wrote , " It is in fact a most hideous region to live in , a perfect paradise for Indians , alligators , serpents , frogs , and every other kind of loathsome reptile . " In 1897 , explorer Hugh Willoughby spent eight days canoeing with a party from the mouth of the Harney River to the Miami River . He sent his observations to the New Orleans Times @-@ Democrat . Willoughby described the water as healthy and wholesome , with numerous springs , and 10 @,@ 000 alligators " more or less " in Lake Okeechobee . The party encountered thousands of birds near the Shark River , " killing hundreds , but they continued to return " . Willoughby pointed out that much of the rest of the country had been explored and mapped except for this part of Florida , writing , " ( w ) e have a tract of land one hundred and thirty miles long and seventy miles wide that is as much unknown to the white man as the heart of Africa . " 
 = = = Drainage = = = 
 A national push for expansion and progress in the United States occurred in the later part of the 19th century , which stimulated interest in draining the Everglades for agricultural use . According to historians , " From the middle of the nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth century , the United States went through a period in which wetland removal was not questioned . Indeed , it was considered the proper thing to do . " Draining the Everglades was suggested as early as 1837 , and a resolution in Congress was passed in 1842 that prompted Secretary of Treasury Robert J. Walker to request those with experience in the Everglades to give their opinion on the possibility of drainage . Many officers who had served in the Seminole Wars favored the idea . In 1850 Congress passed a law that gave several states wetlands within their state boundaries . The Swamp and <unk> Lands Act ensured that the state would be responsible for funding the attempts at developing wetlands into farmlands . Florida quickly formed a committee to consolidate grants to pay for any attempts , though the Civil War and Reconstruction halted progress until after 1877 . 
 After the Civil War , a state agency called the Internal Improvement Fund ( IIF ) , whose purpose was to improve Florida 's roads , canals , and rail lines , was discovered to be deeply in debt . The IIF found a Pennsylvania real estate developer named Hamilton Disston interested in implementing plans to drain the land for agriculture . Disston purchased 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land for $ 1 million in 1881 , and he began constructing canals near St. Cloud . At first the canals seemed to work in lowering the water levels in the wetlands surrounding the rivers . They were effective in lowering the groundwater , but it became apparent that their capacity was insufficient for the wet season . Though Disston 's canals did not drain well , his purchase primed the economy of Florida . It made news and attracted tourists and land buyers . Within four years property values doubled , and the population increased significantly . 
 The IIF was able to invest in development projects due to Disston 's purchase , and an opportunity to improve transportation arose when oil tycoon Henry Flagler began purchasing land and building rail lines along the east coast of Florida , as far south as Palm Beach in 1893 . Along the way he built resort hotels , transforming territorial outposts into tourist destinations . The land bordering the rail lines was developed as citrus farms . By 1896 the rail line had been extended to Biscayne Bay . Three months after the first train had arrived , the residents of Miami voted to incorporate the town . Miami became a prime destination for extremely wealthy people after the Royal Palm Hotel was opened . 
 During the 1904 gubernatorial race , the strongest candidate , Napoleon Bonaparte Broward , promoted draining the Everglades . He called the future of South Florida the " Empire of the Everglades " . Soon after his successful election , he began work to " drain that abominable pestilence @-@ ridden swamp " , and pushed the Florida legislature to form a group of commissioners to oversee reclamation of flooded lands . In 1907 they established the Everglades Drainage District and began to study how to build the most effective canals , and how to fund them . Governor Broward ran for the U.S. Senate in 1908 but lost . Broward was paid by land developer Richard J. Bolles to tour the state to promote drainage . Elected to the Senate in 1910 , Broward died before he could take office . Land in the Everglades was being sold for $ 15 an acre a month after Broward died . Meanwhile , Henry Flagler continued to build railway stations at towns as soon as the populations warranted them . 
 = = = Growth of urban areas = = = 
 With the construction of canals , newly reclaimed Everglades land was promoted throughout the United States . Land developers sold 20 @,@ 000 lots in a few months in 1912 . Advertisements promised within eight weeks of arrival , a farmer could be making a living , although for many it took at least two months to clear the land . Some tried burning off the sawgrass or other vegetation , only to learn that the peat continued to burn . Animals and tractors used for plowing got mired in the muck and were useless . When the muck dried , it turned to a fine black powder and created dust storms . Though initially crops sprouted quickly and lushly , they just as quickly wilted and died , seemingly without reason . 
 The increasing population in towns near the Everglades hunted in the area . Raccoons and otters were the most widely hunted for their skins . Hunting often went unchecked ; in one trip , a Lake Okeechobee hunter killed 250 alligators and 172 otters . Water birds were a particular target of plume hunting . Bird feathers were used in women 's hats in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 In 1886 , 5 million birds were estimated to be killed for their feathers . They were shot usually in the spring , when their feathers were colored for mating and nesting . The plumes , or <unk> , as they were called in the millinery business , sold for $ 32 an ounce in 1915 — the price of gold . <unk> was a $ 17 million a year industry that motivated plume harvesters to lay in watch of nests of egrets and many colored birds during the nesting season , shoot the parents with small @-@ bore rifles , and leave the chicks to starve . Plumes from Everglades wading birds could be found in Havana , New York City , London , and Paris . Hunters could collect plumes from a hundred birds on a good day . 
 Rum @-@ runners used the Everglades as a hiding spot during Prohibition ; it was so vast there were never enough law enforcement officers to patrol it . The arrival of the railroad , and the discovery that adding trace elements like copper was the remedy for crops sprouting and dying quickly , soon created a population boom . New towns such as Moore Haven , Clewiston , and Belle Glade sprouted like the crops . Sugarcane became the primary crop grown in South Florida . Miami experienced a second real estate boom that earned a developer in Coral Gables $ 150 million . Undeveloped land north of Miami sold for $ 30 @,@ 600 an acre . In 1925 , Miami newspapers published editions weighing over 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) , most of it in real estate advertising . Waterfront property was the most highly valued . Mangrove trees were cut down and replaced with palm trees to improve the view . Acres of South Florida slash pine were cleared . Some of the pine was for lumber , but most of the pine forests in Dade County were cleared for development . 
 = = = Flood control = = = 
 Two catastrophic hurricanes in 1926 and 1928 caused Lake Okeechobee to breach its levees , killing thousands of people . The government began to focus on the control of floods rather than drainage . The Okeechobee Flood Control District was created in 1929 , financed by both state and federal funds . President Herbert Hoover toured the towns affected by the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane and ordered the Army Corps of Engineers to assist the communities surrounding the lake . Between 1930 and 1937 a dike 66 miles ( 106 km ) long was built around the southern edge of the lake . Control of the Hoover Dike and the waters of Lake Okeechobee were delegated to federal powers : the United States declared legal limits of the lake to between 14 and 17 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 and 5 @.@ 2 m ) . A massive canal was also constructed 80 feet ( 24 m ) wide and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep through the Caloosahatchee River ; whenever the lake rose too high , the excess water left through the canal . More than $ 20 million was spent on the entire project . Sugarcane production soared after the dike and canal were built . The populations of the small towns surrounding the lake jumped from 3 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 after World War II . 
 Immediately the effects of the Hoover Dike were seen . An extended drought occurred in the 1930s ; with the wall preventing water from leaving Lake Okeechobee and canals and ditches removing other water , the Everglades became parched . Peat turned to dust . Salt ocean water intruded into Miami 's wells ; when the city brought in an expert to explain why , he discovered that the water in the Everglades was the area 's groundwater — here , it appeared on the surface . In 1939 , a million acres ( 4 @,@ 000 km ² ) of Everglades burned , and the black clouds of peat and sawgrass fires hung over Miami . Scientists who took soil samples before draining did not take into account that the organic composition of peat and muck in the Everglades make it prone to soil subsidence when it becomes dry . Naturally occurring bacteria in Everglades peat and muck assist with the process of decomposition under water , which is generally very slow , partially due to the low levels of dissolved oxygen . When water levels became so low that peat and muck were at the surface , the bacteria interacted with much higher levels of oxygen in the air , rapidly breaking down the soil . In some places , homes had to be moved to stilts and 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) of soil was lost . 
 = = = = Everglades National Park = = = = 
 The idea of a national park for the Everglades was pitched in 1928 when a Miami land developer named Ernest F. Coe established the Everglades Tropical National Park Association . It had enough support to be declared a national park by Congress in 1934 . It took another 13 years to be dedicated on December 6 , 1947 . One month before the dedication of the park , a former editor from The Miami Herald and freelance writer named Marjory Stoneman Douglas released her first book titled The Everglades : River of Grass . After researching the region for five years , she described the history and ecology of the South Florida in great detail . She characterized the Everglades as a river instead of a stagnant swamp . The last chapter was titled , " The Eleventh Hour " and warned that the Everglades were dying , although it could be reversed . 
 = = = = Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project = = = = 
 The same year the park was dedicated , two hurricanes and the wet season caused 100 inches ( 250 cm ) to fall on South Florida . Though there were no human casualties , agricultural interests lost approximately $ 59 million . In 1948 Congress approved the Central and Southern Florida Project for Flood Control and Other Purposes ( C & SF ) , which divided the Everglades into basins . In the northern Everglades were Water Conservation Areas ( WCAs ) , and the Everglades Agricultural Area ( EAA ) bordering to the south of Lake Okeechobee . In the southern Everglades was Everglades National Park . Levees and pumping stations bordered each WCA , and released water in dryer times or removed it and pumped it to the ocean in times of flood . The WCAs took up approximately 37 percent of the original Everglades . The C & SF constructed over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) of canals , and hundreds of pumping stations and levees within three decades . During the 1950s and 1960s the Miami metropolitan area grew four times as fast as the rest of the nation . Between 1940 and 1965 , 6 million people moved to South Florida : 1 @,@ 000 people moved to Miami every week . Developed areas between the mid @-@ 1950s and the late 1960s quadrupled . Much of the water reclaimed from the Everglades was sent to newly developed areas . 
 = = = = Everglades Agricultural Area = = = = 
 The C & SF established 470 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 900 km2 ) for the Everglades Agricultural Area — 27 percent of the Everglades prior to development . In the late 1920s , agricultural experiments indicated that adding large amounts of manganese sulfate to Everglades muck produced a profitable harvest for vegetables . The primary cash crop in the EAA is sugarcane , though sod , beans , lettuce , celery , and rice are also grown . Fields in the EAA are typically 40 acres ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) , bordered by canals on two sides , that are connected to larger canals where water is pumped in or out depending on the needs of the crops . The fertilizers used on vegetables , along with high concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus that are the byproduct of decayed soil necessary for sugarcane production , were pumped into WCAs south of the EAA . The introduction of large amounts of these chemicals provided opportunities for exotic plants to take hold in the Everglades . One of the defining characteristics of natural Everglades ecology is its ability to support itself in a nutrient @-@ poor environment , and the introduction of fertilizers began to alter the plant life in the region . 
 = = = = Jetport proposition = = = = 
 A turning point came for development in the Everglades at the proposition of an expanded airport after Miami International Airport outgrew its capacities . The new jetport was planned to be larger than O 'Hare , Dulles , JFK , and LAX airports combined , and the chosen location was 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Everglades National Park . The first sentence of the U.S. Department of Interior study of the environmental impact of the jetport read , " Development of the proposed jetport and its attendant facilities ... will inexorably destroy the south Florida ecosystem and thus the Everglades National Park " . When studies indicated the proposed jetport would create 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) of raw sewage a day and 10 @,@ 000 short tons ( 9 @,@ 100 t ) of jet engine pollutants a year , the project met staunch opposition . The New York Times called it a " blueprint for disaster " , and Wisconsin senator Gaylord Nelson wrote to President Richard Nixon voicing his opposition : " It is a test of whether or not we are really committed in this country to protecting our environment . " Governor Claude Kirk withdrew his support for the project , and Marjory Stoneman Douglas was persuaded at 79 years old to go on tour to give hundreds of speeches against it . Nixon instead established Big Cypress National Preserve , announcing it in the Special Message to the Congress Outlining the 1972 Environmental Program . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 = = = Kissimmee River = = = 
 The Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project 's final construction project was straightening the Kissimmee River , a meandering 90 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) -long river that was drained to make way for grazing land and agriculture . The C & SF started building the C @-@ 38 canal in 1962 and the effects were seen almost immediately . Waterfowl , wading birds , and fish disappeared , prompting conservationists and sport fishers to demand the region be restored before the canal was finished in 1971 . In general , C & SF projects had been criticized for being temporary fixes that ignored future consequences , costing billions of dollars with no end in sight . After Governor Bob Graham initiated the Save Our Everglades campaign in 1983 , the first section of the canal was backfilled in 1986 . Graham announced that by 2000 the Everglades would be restored as closely as possible to its pre @-@ drainage state . The Kissimmee River Restoration project was approved by Congress in 1992 . It is estimated that it will cost $ 578 million to convert only 22 miles ( 35 km ) of the canal . The entire project will be complete by 2011 . 
 = = = Water quality = = = 
 Further problems with the environment arose when a vast algal bloom appeared in one @-@ fifth of Lake Okeechobee in 1986 . The same year cattails were discovered overtaking sawgrass marshes in Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge . Scientists discovered that phosphorus , used as a fertilizer in the EAA , was flushed into canals and pumped back into the lake . When the lake drained , the phosphorus entered the water in the marshes , changing the nutrient levels . It kept periphyton from forming marl , one of two soils in the Everglades . The arrival of phosphorus allowed cattails to spread quickly . The cattails grew in dense mats — too thick for birds or alligators to nest in . It also dissolved oxygen in the peat , promoted algae , and prohibited growth of native invertebrates on the bottom of the food chain . 
 At the same time mercury was found in local fish at such high levels that consumption warnings were posted for fishermen . A Florida panther was found dead with levels of mercury high enough to kill a human . Scientists found that power plants and incinerators using fossil fuels were expelling mercury into the atmosphere , and it fell as rain or dust during droughts . The naturally occurring bacteria that reduce sulfur in the Everglades ecosystem were transforming the mercury into methylmercury , and it was bioaccumulating through the food chain . Stricter emissions standards helped lower mercury coming from power plants and incinerators , which in turn lowered mercury levels found in animals , though they continue to be a concern . 
 The Everglades Forever Act , introduced by Governor Lawton Chiles in 1994 , was an attempt to legislate the lowering of phosphorus in Everglades waterways . The act put the South Florida Water Management District ( SFWMD ) and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) in charge of testing and enforcing low phosphorus levels : 10 parts per billion ( ppb ) ( down from 500 ppb in the 1980s ) . The SFWMD built Stormwater Treatment Areas ( <unk> ) near sugarcane fields where water leaving the EAA flows into ponds lined with lime rock and layers of peat and calcareous periphyton . Testing has shown this method to be more effective than previously anticipated , bringing levels from 80 ppb to 10 ppb . 
 = = = Invasive species = = = 
 As a center for trade and travel between the U.S. , the Caribbean , and South America , South Florida is especially vulnerable to invasive species , or species of plants and animals that adapt aggressively to conditions in the Everglades , allowing them to reproduce faster and grow larger than they would naturally in their native environments . Approximately 26 % of all species of fish , reptiles , birds , and mammals in South Florida are exotic — more than in any other part of the U.S. — and the region hosts one of the highest numbers of exotic plant species in the world . Controlling invasive species in 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 900 km2 ) of infested land in South Florida costs authorities about $ 500 million a year . 
 The Everglades hosts 1 @,@ 392 exotic plant species actively reproducing in the region , outnumbering the 1 @,@ 301 species considered native to South Florida . The melaleuca tree ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ) takes water in greater amounts than other trees . <unk> grow taller and more densely in the Everglades than in their native Australia , making them unsuitable as nesting areas for birds with wide wingspans . They also choke out native vegetation . More than $ 2 million has been spent on keeping them out of Everglades National Park . 
 Brazilian pepper , or Florida holly ( Schinus terebinthifolius ) , has also wreaked havoc on the Everglades , exhibiting a tendency to spread rapidly and to crowd out native species of plants as well as to create inhospitable environments for native animals . It is especially difficult to eradicate and is readily propagated by birds , which eat its small red berries . The Brazilian pepper problem is not exclusive to the Everglades ; neither is the water hyacinth ( <unk> crassipes ) , which is a widespread problem in Florida 's waterways , a major threat to endemic species , and is difficult and costly to eradicate . The Old World climbing fern ( Lygodium microphyllum ) may be causing the most harm to restoration as it blankets areas thickly , making it impossible for animals to pass through . It also climbs up trees and creates " fire ladders " , allowing parts of the trees to burn that would otherwise remain unharmed . 
 Many pets have escaped or been released into the Everglades from the surrounding urban areas . Some find the conditions quite favorable and have established self @-@ sustaining populations , competing for food and space with native animals . Many tropical fish have been released , but blue <unk> ( Oreochromis aureus ) cause damage to shallow waterways by creating large nests and consuming aquatic plants that protect native young fish . 
 Native to southern Asia , the Burmese python ( Python molurus bivittatus ) is a relatively new invasive species in the Everglades . This species can grow up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long , and they compete with alligators for the top of the food chain . Florida wildlife officials speculate that escaped pythons have begun reproducing in an environment for which they are well @-@ suited . In Everglades National Park alone , agents removed more than 1 @,@ 200 Burmese pythons from the park as of 2009 , prompting federal authorities to ban four species of exotic snakes , including the Burmese python , in 2012 . The pythons are believed to be responsible for drastic decreases in the populations of some mammals within the park . 
 The invasive species that causes the most damage to bird populations is the cat ( Felis catus ) , both domestic and feral . Cats that are let outside live close to suburban populations and have been estimated to number 640 per square mile . In such close numbers in historic migratory areas , they have devastating effects on migratory bird populations . 
 = = = Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan = = = 
 Though scientists made headway in decreasing mercury and phosphorus levels in water , the natural environment of South Florida continued to decline in the 1990s , and life in nearby cities reflected this downturn . To address the deterioration of the Miami metropolitan area , Governor Lawton Chiles commissioned a report on the sustainability of the area . In 1995 , Chiles published the commission 's findings in a report that related the degradation of the Everglades ecosystems to the lower quality of life in urban areas . The report noted past environmental abuses that brought the state to a position to make a decision . Not acting to improve the South Florida ecosystem , the report predicted , would inevitably cause further and intolerable deterioration that would harm local tourism by 12 @,@ 000 jobs and $ 200 million annually , and commercial fishing by 3 @,@ 300 jobs and $ 52 million annually . Urban areas had grown beyond their capacities to sustain themselves . Crowded cities were facing problems such as high crime rates , traffic jams , severely overcrowded schools , and overtaxed public services ; the report noted that water shortages were ironic , given the 53 inches ( 130 cm ) of rain the region received annually . 
 In 1999 , an evaluation of the C & SF was submitted to Congress as part of the Water Development Act of 1992 . The seven @-@ year report , called the " Restudy " , cited indicators of harm to the ecosystem : a 50 percent reduction in the original Everglades , diminished water storage , harmful timing of water releases from canals and pumping stations , an 85 to 90 percent decrease in wading bird populations over the past 50 years , and the decline of output from commercial fisheries . Bodies of water including Lake Okeechobee , the Caloosahatchee River , St. Lucie estuary , Lake Worth Lagoon , Biscayne Bay , Florida Bay and the Everglades reflected drastic water level changes , hypersalinity , and dramatic changes in marine and freshwater ecosystems . The Restudy noted the overall decline in water quality over the past 50 years was due to loss of wetlands that act as filters for polluted water . It predicted that without intervention the entire South Florida ecosystem would deteriorate . Water shortages would become common and some cities would have annual water restrictions . 
 The Restudy came with a plan to stop the declining environmental quality , and this proposal was to be the most expensive and comprehensive ecological repair project in history . The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan ( CERP ) proposed more than 60 construction projects over 30 years to store water that was being flushed into the ocean , in reservoirs , underground aquifers , and abandoned quarries ; add more Stormwater Treatment Areas to filter water that flowed into the lower Everglades ; regulate water released from pumping stations into local waterways and improve water released to Everglades National Park and Water Conservation Areas ; remove barriers to sheetflow by raising the Tamiami Trail and destroying the Miami Canal , and reuse wastewater for urban areas . The cost estimate for the entire plan was $ 7 @.@ 8 billion , and in a bipartisan show of cooperation , CERP was voted through Congress with an overwhelming margin . It was signed by President Bill Clinton on December 11 , 2000 . 
 Since its signing , the State of Florida reports that it has spent more than $ 2 billion on the various projects . More than 36 @,@ 000 acres ( 150 km2 ) of Stormwater Treatment Areas have been constructed to filter 2 @,@ 500 short tons ( 2 @,@ 300 t ) of phosphorus from Everglades waters . An STA spanning 17 @,@ 000 acres ( 69 km2 ) was constructed in 2004 , making it the largest manmade wetland in the world . Fifty @-@ five percent of the land necessary to acquire for restoration has been purchased by the State of Florida , totaling 210 @,@ 167 acres ( 850 @.@ 52 km2 ) . A plan to hasten the construction and funding of projects was put into place , named " Acceler8 " , spurring the start of six of eight large construction projects , including that of three large reservoirs . However , federal funds have not been forthcoming ; CERP was signed when the U.S. government had a budget surplus , but since then deficits have renewed , and two of CERP 's major supporters in Congress retired . According to a story in The New York Times , state officials say the restoration is lost in a maze of " federal bureaucracy , a victim of ' analysis paralysis ' " . CERP still remains controversial as the projects slated for Acceler8 , environmental activists note , are those that benefit urban areas , and regions in the Everglades in desperate need of water are still being neglected , suggesting that water is being diverted to make room for more people in an already overtaxed environment . 
 A series of biennial reports from the U.S. National Research Council have reviewed the progress of CERP . The fourth report in the series , released in 2012 , found that little progress has been made in restoring the core of the remaining Everglades ecosystem ; instead , most project construction so far has occurred along its periphery . The report noted that to reverse ongoing ecosystem declines , it will be necessary to expedite restoration projects that target the central Everglades , and to improve both the quality and quantity of the water in the ecosystem . To better understand the potential implications of the current slow pace of progress , the report assessed the current status of ten Everglades ecosystem attributes , including phosphorus loads , peat depth , and populations of snail kites , birds of prey that are endangered in South Florida . Most attributes received grades ranging from C ( degraded ) to D ( significantly degraded ) , but the snail kite received a grade of F ( near irreversible damage ) . The report also assessed the future trajectory of each ecosystem attribute under three restoration scenarios : improved water quality , improved hydrology , and improvements to both water quality and hydrology , which helped highlight the urgency of restoration actions to benefit a wide range of ecosystem attributes and demonstrate the cost of inaction . Overall , the report concluded that substantial near @-@ term progress to address both water quality and hydrology in the central Everglades is needed to reverse ongoing degradation before it is too late . 
 = = = Air crashes = = = 
 At least three airplanes have crashed in the Everglades including : Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 705 ( in 1963 ) , Eastern Air Lines Flight 401 ( 1972 ) , and ValuJet Flight 592 ( 1996 ) . 
 = = = Future of the Everglades = = = 
 In 2008 , the State of Florida agreed to buy U.S. Sugar and all of its manufacturing and production facilities for an estimated $ 1 @.@ 7 billion . Florida officials indicated they intended to allow U.S. Sugar to process for six more years before dismissing its employees and dismantling the plant . The area , which includes 187 @,@ 000 acres ( 760 km2 ) of land , would then be rehabilitated and water flow from Lake Okeechobee would be restored . In November 2008 , the agreement was revised to offer $ 1 @.@ 34 billion , allowing sugar mills in Clewiston to remain in production . Critics of the revised plan say that it ensures sugarcane will be grown in the Everglades for at least another decade . Further research is being done to address the continuing production of sugarcane in the Everglades to minimize phosphorus runoff . 
 Everglades restoration received $ 96 million of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 . As a result of the stimulus package , a mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) bridge to replace the Tamiami Trail , a road that borders Everglades National Park to the north and has blocked water from reaching the southern Everglades , was begun by the Army Corps of Engineers in December 2009 . The next month work began to reconstruct the C @-@ 111 canal , east of the park that historically diverted water into Florida Bay . Governor Charlie Crist announced the same month that $ 50 million of state funds would be earmarked for Everglades restoration . In May 2010 , 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) of bridges were proposed to be added to the Tamiami Trail . 
 = A Woman Like Me ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " A Woman Like Me " is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé , originally written for and performed in the 2006 film The Pink Panther . It was written by <unk> Cofield , Ron Lawrence , and Beyoncé and produced by the latter two . It was recorded using multitrack recording where Beyoncé harmonized with herself several times over . " A Woman Like Me " is a moderate R & B song which samples the horn arrangement from Simon <unk> 's " Hammerhead " . 
 A performance video of the song appeared shortly on the film and the whole performance was included on the film 's DVD . It peaked at number three on the US Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart following its release due to digital sales . The song was remixed by Steve Austin and S @-@ ROC on their respective albums . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " A Woman Like Me " was written by <unk> Cofield , Ron Lawrence , and Beyoncé and produced by the latter two . It is performed in the 2006 film The Pink Panther in which Beyoncé stars as Xania . It was originally recorded for the soundtrack album for The Pink Panther but was eventually not used like Beyoncé 's other song " Check on It " . The song was initially written by the people involved in the film ; however Beyoncé partially rewrote some of the lyrics and its melodies and sent " A Woman Like Me " to her team who had to redo it . During an interview , Beyoncé said , " It had the strength of a Tina Turner song but the drama of a Bond tune . ... It definitely fit [ s ] the character . She 's talking a lot of noise in stuff like ' Do you think you can handle a woman like me ? Xania is like that . " It was recorded in New York City using multitrack recording where Beyoncé harmonized with herself several times over . Although the song was never released on an album or as a single , it was later remixed by Steve Austin in the album Hollywood Cole Presents : I 'm the Juggernaut Bitch ! . 
 " A Woman Like Me " samples the horn arrangement from Simon <unk> 's " Hammerhead " ( 1972 ) . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , " A Woman Like Me " is a moderate R & B song pacing in common time of 80 BPM . Beyoncé 's vocals range from the low musical note of Ab3 to the high note of Eb5 throughout the song . On May 12 , 2008 , S @-@ ROC included a remix of the song as the eleventh track on his 2008 album Roc and a Hard Place . American hip hop recording artist Ab @-@ Soul sampled " A Woman Like Me " on his song " Still a Regular Nigga " , taken from his mixtape <unk> 2 : Lifestyles of the Broke and Almost Famous ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During a review of the film 's DVD , Damon Smith of the UK @-@ based newspaper Manchester Evening News described the song as " sultry " . Writing for the American Jet magazine , Andrew Schwartz felt that the character Beyoncé portrayed sang an " iconic song " , referring to " A Woman Like Me " . He further noted the track was a " unique collaboration " between Beyoncé and the director of the movie , Shawn Levy , saying that it reflects the singer 's " style and taste " . For the chart issue dated July 1 , 2006 , " A Woman Like Me " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles which acts as a twenty five song extension to the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The DVD version of the film includes an exclusive complete performance of the song in the special features . The video shows Beyoncé , as Xania , in two scenes of the film singing on a small stage with two back @-@ up dancers . The entire video is set to look like Beyoncé is performing the song with no microphone . Three different shots were used from five takes for the visual performance of the song in the film . The video is only briefly shown in the film The Pink Panther as part of a scene and was officially fully released after the DVD release . Phil Bacharach of the website DVD Talk wrote that " The lovely Beyoncé takes center stage in two bonus features " in the film , referring to the music video of " Check on It " and the performance of " A Woman Like Me " . He further described the video of the performance of the song as " more interesting " than the music video for " Check on It " which was also included . 
 = Wiglaf of Mercia = 
 Wiglaf ( died 839 ) was King of Mercia from 827 to 829 and again from 830 until his death . His ancestry is uncertain : the 820s were a period of dynastic conflict within Mercia and the genealogy of several of the kings of this time is unknown . Wigstan , his grandson , was later recorded as a descendant of Penda of Mercia , so it is possible that Wiglaf was descended from Penda , one of the most powerful seventh @-@ century kings of Mercia . 
 Wiglaf succeeded Ludeca , who was killed campaigning against East Anglia . His first reign coincided with the continued rise of the rival Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom of Wessex under Egbert . Egbert drove Wiglaf from the throne in 829 , and ruled Mercia directly for a year . Wiglaf recovered the kingdom in 830 , probably by force although it may be that Wiglaf remained subject to Egbert 's overlordship . Mercia never regained the south @-@ eastern kingdoms , but Berkshire and perhaps Essex came back into Mercian control . The causes of the fluctuating fortunes of Mercia and Wessex are a matter of speculation , but it may be that Carolingian support influenced both Egbert 's ascendancy and the subsequent Mercian recovery . Although Wiglaf appears to have restored Mercia 's independence , the recovery was short @-@ lived , and later in the century Mercia was divided between Wessex and the Vikings . Wiglaf died in about 839 , and was eventually succeeded by Beorhtwulf , though one tradition records his son , Wigmund as having reigned briefly . Wiglaf is buried at Repton , near Derby . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Mercia had been the dominant Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom for most of the 8th century , with Offa , who died in 796 , the most powerful king of his time . Coenwulf , who took the Mercian throne shortly after Offa 's death , was able to retain Mercian influence in the kingdoms of Kent , East Anglia and Essex , and made frequent incursions across Offa 's Dyke into what is now Wales . However , Coenwulf 's death , in 821 , marked the beginning of a period in which the political map of England was dramatically redrawn . Although one eleventh @-@ century source claims that Coenwulf 's son , Cynehelm , briefly succeeded to the throne , it is more likely that Ceolwulf , Coenwulf 's brother , was the next king . He reigned for only two years before being deposed . 
 The next king , Beornwulf , was of no known royal line , though it has been conjectured on the basis of the common initial letter B that he was connected to the later kings Beorhtwulf and Burgred . It was probably Beornwulf whose defeat of the kingdom of Powys and destruction of the fortress of Deganwy are recorded in a Welsh chronicle , the Brut y Tywysogion , in 823 , and it is clear that Mercia was still a formidable military power at that time . However , in 825 Beornwulf was decisively defeated by Egbert of Wessex at the battle of Ellendun , and died the next year in an unsuccessful invasion of East Anglia . His successor , Ludeca , of unknown lineage , also invaded East Anglia , and like Beornwulf died while campaigning there , in 827 . These defeats , in rapid succession , are likely to have exacerbated the apparent dynastic contention for Mercian royal authority . Outside Mercia , the power of the kingdom of Wessex , to the south , was strong and growing when Wiglaf came to the throne . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Wiglaf 's ancestry is not known for certain . There are two main theories regarding the ancestry of Mercian kings of this period . One is that descendants of different lines of the royal family competed for the throne . In the mid @-@ 7th century , for example , Penda had placed royal kinsmen in control of conquered provinces . A Wigheard , who witnessed a charter in the late 7th century , was possibly a member of this line . The other theory is that a number of kin @-@ groups with local power @-@ bases may have competed for the succession . The sub @-@ kingdoms of the Hwicce , the Tomsæte , and the unidentified Gaini are examples of such power @-@ bases . Marriage alliances could also have played a part . Competing magnates , those called in charters " dux " or " princeps " ( that is , leaders ) , may have brought the kings to power . In this model , the Mercian kings are little more than leading noblemen . 
 A medieval tradition preserved at Evesham records that Wiglaf 's grandson Wigstan was a descendant of Coenred , who was a grandson of Penda . Wigstan 's grandfathers were Wiglaf and Ceolwulf I ; the tradition might be interpreted to mean that Wiglaf descended from Penda , but it might also be Wiglaf 's wife , Cynethryth , who was descended from Penda . Cynethryth 's name is known from two of Wiglaf 's charters , dated 831 and 836 , and historian Pauline Stafford notes that her name " seems to hark back to the kin of Coenwulf if not earlier royal lines " , but as with Wiglaf himself , nothing certain is known of her ancestry . A different connection is mentioned in the medieval Life of St. Wigstan , which asserts that the " B " and " W " families were related . 
 Known descendants of Wiglaf include his son , Wigmund , and his grandson , Wigstan , both of whom share the " <unk> " at the start of his name ; alliterative family names are frequent in Anglo @-@ Saxon dynasties and are often thought to suggest possible kinship . Other possible descendants of Wiglaf include the last Mercian king , Ceolwulf II . A large number of duces or <unk> ( ealdormen ) with similar names are found as witnesses in Mercian charters of the late 8th and early 9th centuries , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Wigheard , but there is no evidence that these nobles were related beyond the similarity of their names . 
 = = First reign and defeat by Wessex = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records Wiglaf 's accession in the entry for 827 ( erroneously recorded under the year 825 ) . The entry reads " Her <unk> <unk> cing 7 his <unk> <unk> mid him man <unk> , 7 Wiglaf feng to rice " , which means " Here Ludeca , King of Mercia , was killed , and his five ealdormen with him , and Wiglaf succeeded to the kingdom " . In 829 , Egbert of Wessex successfully invaded Mercia and drove Wiglaf from his throne . The immediate consequence of Egbert 's defeat of Beornwulf in 825 at the battle of Ellendun had been the loss of Mercian control over the south @-@ eastern kingdoms of Kent , Sussex , Essex and East Anglia ; Beornwulf 's and Ludeca 's disastrous military expeditions against East Anglia in 826 and 827 also confirmed Mercia 's loss of control of that kingdom . Egbert 's defeat of Wiglaf in 829 completed his domination of southern England , and Egbert went on to receive the submission of Eanred of Northumbria at Dore , on the northern border of Mercia , later that year . These events led the anonymous scribe who wrote the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle to describe Egbert as the eighth bretwalda , or ' Ruler of Britain ' . 
 Egbert remained in control of Wessex until some time in 830 . He was in power there long enough to issue coins ( struck in London ) bearing the title " Rex M " , for " Rex Merciorum " , or " King of Mercia " . 
 = = Second reign = = 
 The Chronicle reports that in 830 , Wiglaf " obtained the kingdom of Mercia again " . Wiglaf 's return to the throne has generally been taken by historians to indicate the end of Egbert 's overlordship of Mercia . In particular , historian Frank Stenton argued that the wording of the Chronicle makes it probable that Wiglaf recovered the kingdom by force , and that if Egbert had given the kingdom to Wiglaf this would have been recorded . A charter of 836 has also been cited as evidence that Wiglaf was acting as an independent ruler at that time ; it records a council at Croft , in Leicestershire , attended by the Archbishop of Canterbury and eleven bishops , including some from West Saxon sees . Wiglaf refers to the assembly as " my bishops , duces , and magistrates " , indicating not only a recovery of control over his own territory , but some level of authority over the southern church . It is significant that Wiglaf was still able to call together such a group of notables ; the West Saxons , even if they were able to do so , held no such councils . Essex , which had been a Mercian dependency , may have been brought back under Mercian overlordship : a King Sigeric of the East Saxons , described as a minister of Wiglaf 's , witnessed a charter in Hertfordshire at some point between 829 and 837 . London , where Egbert apparently lost control of the mint , remained a Mercian town through Wiglaf 's second reign and beyond . Berkshire also appears to have returned to Mercian control , though it is possible that this did not occur until after Wiglaf 's reign . Perhaps more surprisingly , given the new strength of Wessex , it appears that the territory along the middle Thames which had formed the heartland of the Gewisse ( the precursor people of the 9th @-@ century West Saxon state ) remained firmly in Mercian hands . In the west , either Wiglaf or his successor , Beorhtwulf , brought the Welsh back under Mercian control at some point prior to 853 , when a rebellion against Mercia is recorded . 
 A charter of 831 , which Wiglaf calls " the first year of my second reign " , was issued at <unk> near Droitwich ; it is significant that Wiglaf makes no reference to any overlordship of Egbert 's in this charter , issued within a year of his recovery of power , and that he acknowledges his temporary deposition . In East Anglia , King Æthelstan minted coins , possibly as early as 827 , but more likely c . 830 after Egbert 's influence was reduced with Wiglaf 's return to power in Mercia . This demonstration of independence on East Anglia 's part is not surprising , as it was probably Æthelstan who was responsible for the defeat and death of both Beornwulf and Ludeca . 
 Both Wessex 's sudden rise to power in the late 820s , and the subsequent failure to retain this dominant position , have been examined by historians looking for underlying causes . Dynastic uncertainty has been suggested as the reason for Mercia 's collapse ; the 820s were certainly years of instability in the royal line . The lack of detailed information about Mercian and Wessex administration makes other theories hard to evaluate : for example it has been suggested that the West Saxons had a stable tributary system that contributed to its success , or that Wessex 's mixed Saxon and British population , natural frontiers , and capable administrators were key factors . 
 Another proposed explanation for the events of these years is that Wessex 's fortunes were to some degree dependent on Carolingian support . The Rhenish and Frankish commercial networks collapsed at some time in the 820s or 830s , and in addition , a rebellion broke out in February 830 against Louis the Pious , the first of a series of internal conflicts that lasted through the 830s and beyond . These distractions may have reduced Louis 's ability to support Egbert . In this view , the withdrawal of Frankish influence would have left East Anglia , Mercia and Wessex to find a balance of power not dependent on outside aid . 
 Wiglaf 's recovery , however , was not complete . Egbert 's influence was certainly reduced after 830 , but Mercia never recovered control of the south @-@ east , except possibly for Essex ; and East Anglia remained independent . It appears that Wulfred , the archbishop of Canterbury at the time of Egbert 's victory , remained loyal to Mercia : his coinage terminates when Egbert 's Kentish coinage begins ; and since a charter of 838 shows Egbert agreeing to return property to the church in Canterbury it is evident that he had seized property from the church earlier . Æthelwulf , Egbert 's son , was king of Kent during his father 's reign , and fear of continuing Mercian influence in Kent may have been the reason he gave estates to Christ Church , Canterbury . 
 = = Coinage and charters = = 
 Coins from Wiglaf 's reign are very rare . They can be divided into portrait and non @-@ portrait types ; and of these , only the two non @-@ portrait coins may be from Wiglaf 's second reign . Other than these , there is no evidence of any Mercian coinage until the reign of Wiglaf 's successor , Beorhtwulf , which began in about 840 . This may show that Wiglaf remained subject to Egbert 's overlordship after 830 , though most historians consider Wiglaf to have recovered his independence at that time . 
 Charters survive from Wiglaf 's reign ; these were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen , and were witnessed by the kings who had power to grant the land . One such charter of Wiglaf 's , granting privileges to the monastery of Hanbury in 836 , does not exempt the monks from the duty of constructing ramparts , indicating a concern for defence . Wessex charters do not begin to show such exemptions until 846 . These clauses are explained by the increasing Viking presence throughout Britain : Viking raids had begun at least as early as 793 , Viking armies were in Kent by 811 , and from 835 Viking raids were a concern for the kings of Wessex . 
 The 836 charter also contains an early reference to the <unk> necessitas , the set of three obligations that kings of the era placed on their subjects . These duties were the building of royal residences , the obligation to pay <unk> , or food rent , to the king , and hospitality to the king 's servants . The privileges granted came at a cost : Wiglaf and one ealdorman received life interests in estates , and another ealdorman was paid six hundred shillings in gold . It is perhaps notable that in common with many other Mercian charters of the 9th century , this grant is of privileges rather than land : the chronicler Bede had commented a century earlier that excessive grants of land to monasteries were leaving kings without land to grant to the nobility , and the Mercian kings may have been responding to this problem . 
 = = Succession = = 
 The date of Wiglaf 's death is not given directly in any of the primary sources , but it can be determined from the known chronology of his successors . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that Burgred was driven out of Mercia by the Vikings in 874 , after a reign of twenty @-@ two years , and charter evidence indicates that Burgred succeeded in the first half of 852 . A regnal list credits his predecessor , Beorhtwulf , with a reign of thirteen years , which is consistent with date references in his charters . Hence it would appear that Wiglaf 's reign ended in 839 . A tradition records the death of Wigstan in 849 , and refers to Wigstan 's father , Wigmund , the son of Wiglaf , as having been king , but this is the only evidence for Wigmund having reigned and must be regarded with suspicion . The descent of Beorhtwulf is not known , but it appears that dynastic tension was a continuing factor in the Mercian succession , in contrast to Wessex , where Egbert established a dynasty that lasted with little disturbance throughout the 9th century . 
 Wiglaf was buried at Repton , in a crypt which still can be seen . The monastery church on the site at that time was probably constructed by Æthelbald of Mercia to house the royal mausoleum ; other burials there include that of Wigstan , Wiglaf 's grandson . The vault and columns in the crypt are not original and may date from Wiglaf 's time rather than Aethelbald 's . 
 = Frank Gatski = 
 Frank " Gunner " Gatski ( March 18 , 1921 – November 22 , 2005 ) was an American football center who played for the Cleveland Browns of the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and the National Football League ( NFL ) in the 1940s and 1950s . Gatski was one of the most heralded centers of his era . Known for his strength and consistency , he helped protect quarterback Otto Graham and open up running lanes for fullback Marion Motley as the Browns won seven league championships between 1946 and 1955 . Gatski won an eighth championship after he was traded to the Detroit Lions in 1957 , his final season . 
 Gatski was born in West Virginia to a coal @-@ mining family . He played for three years on his local high school team before attending Marshall University , where he continued to play football . He joined the U.S. Army in 1942 and went to fight in World War II . Upon his return in 1945 , he finished his collegiate studies at Auburn University in Alabama . After graduating , he tried out and made the roster for the Browns , a team under formation in the new AAFC . He played as a linebacker and backup center for most of his first two years before earning a spot as the starting center . He retained that position as Cleveland continued to dominate after the AAFC dissolved and the Browns were absorbed by the NFL in 1950 . He retired in 1958 , never having missed a game or practice in his career . 
 After leaving football , Gatski worked briefly as a scout for the Boston Patriots . He then joined a reform school in West Virginia as athletic director and head football coach , staying there until the school closed in 1982 . He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1985 . Marshall retired Gatski 's number 72 in 2005 . He died that year in a nursing home in West Virginia . In 2006 , the East End Bridge in Huntington , West Virginia was renamed the Frank Gatski Memorial Bridge in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gatski was born in 1921 and raised in Farmington , West Virginia . His father and grandfather were immigrants from Poland , and most of the men in his family worked at the nearby Number Nine Coal Mine Camp . Gatski started at center for three years on his Farmington High School football team , which played on a cow pasture with no scoreboard , bleachers or game clock . He worked in the coal mines during the summers , and went to work in the mines full @-@ time during his senior year in 1939 . Gatski was reserved and aloof , but he was also known as a graceful dancer . " I used to dance a lot in Farmington , " he said in 1949 . " But I like polkas better than <unk> . " 
 = = College and military career = = 
 In 1940 , Marshall University coach Cam Henderson offered Gatski a chance to attend the West Virginia school on a football scholarship . Gatski accepted . He joined the junior varsity team , where he was the starting center for a season before moving to Marshall 's varsity football team in 1941 . He started 17 games at center and linebacker beginning in 1941 , when Marshall posted a 7 – 1 record . The team faltered the following year , falling to 1 – 7 – 1 as its best players went to serve in the military . 
 Gatski signed up for an Army reserve unit after the 1942 season as America 's involvement in World War II intensified . Marshall canceled its football program in 1943 as Gatski entered his senior year , but his unit was activated and he was sent with an infantry division to fight in the European theater of World War II . He went to England and followed American troops as they landed in Normandy and marched further into Europe . " I wasn 't in any heavy fighting , " he later said . He was a Private First Class in the Army . Gatski returned from duty in 1945 , but Marshall had yet to resume its football program , so he enrolled at Auburn University in Alabama and finished out his studies , playing part of the season on the school 's football team . " Marshall hadn 't started back up , and I hadn 't played football for two years , " he later explained . " I didn 't want to sit around and do nothing , so I went to Auburn . " 
 = = Professional career = = 
 When Gatski graduated , Sam <unk> , a teammate at Marshall , helped get him a tryout with the Cleveland Browns after contacting John Brickels , an assistant coach with West Virginia ties . The Browns were a new team in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and were set to begin play in 1946 . Gatski , who was working in the mines after graduating from Auburn , hitchhiked to Bowling Green , Ohio for the team 's training camp . He did not consider a football career a certainty , and returning to the coal mines where his father had died in an accident was a distinct possibility . " I didn 't know what was going to happen , " he said later . " I just went up there to see what would happen . " 
 By the time Gatski arrived in Bowling Green , he had acquired the nickname " Gunner " for his strength and speed on the offensive line . Growing up in the rough surroundings of a West Virginia mining town had toughened him up , and he did not mind Cleveland coach Paul Brown 's overbearing perfectionism . As a professional , he later said , " you 're supposed to be able to take that crap . " Initially , Gatski 's prospects of making the team looked dim . Brown had brought in veteran center Mo Scarry to be the starter . But Gatski proved his value to the team with his reliability and work ethic . He made the team and signed a $ 3 @,@ 000 per year contract . 
 Gatski played mostly as a backup to Scarry and as a linebacker in his first and part of his second season . He became the full @-@ time starter at center in the 1948 season . The Browns , meanwhile , were an immediate success . The team won the AAFC championship every year from 1946 to 1949 , when the league dissolved . Gatski 's role on the offensive line was to help protect quarterback Otto Graham from defenders when he went back to pass . He also helped push away defenders and create space for fullback Marion Motley to run in . 
 The Browns merged into the more established National Football League ( NFL ) in 1950 . Aided by Gatski 's blocking , the offense and the team continued to succeed . Cleveland won the 1950 NFL championship , and reached the championship game in each of the following five seasons , winning again in 1954 and 1955 . By the time the Browns entered the NFL , Gatski had developed a reputation for consistency , durability and toughness . Brown began keeping only one center on the roster – Gatski . Centers today would complain about that , Walt Michaels , who played with Gatski in the early 1950s , said in later years . Gatski , however , did not mind . " He would take all the snaps , " Michaels said . 
 Gatski was a quiet man who liked to hunt . He practiced hitting targets with his bow and arrow at League Park in Cleveland , where the Browns trained during the season . He was one of the Browns " Filthy Five " players who did not wash their practice uniforms during the season . Brown called him one of the strongest men on the team 's roster . Graham thought of him as sure protection against opposing linemen . Teammates called him an " iron man " and a " Rock of Gibraltar " . He was named to All @-@ Pro lists in all but one year between 1951 and 1955 and made the Pro Bowl in 1954 and 1955 . 
 The Browns struggled after Graham retired in 1956 and ended the regular season at 5 – 7 , their first @-@ ever losing record . After the season , Brown traded the 35 @-@ year @-@ old Gatski to the Detroit Lions for a draft pick after Gatski asked for a raise . He only played in the 1957 season with the Lions . Detroit beat the Browns for the NFL championship that year . By the time he retired after the 1957 season , Gatski had played on eight championship teams , a professional football record . Gatski did not miss a practice or a game during his 12 seasons in football . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After retiring from football , Gatski was a scout for the Boston Patriots for two years before becoming head football coach and athletic director at the West Virginia Industrial School for Boys , a correctional facility for young offenders in Pruntytown , West Virginia . He worked there until the school shut down in 1982 . He hunted and fished in retirement , and was often difficult to reach . He lived on a mountain in West Virginia and did not have a telephone for many years . 
 Gatski was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1985 as part of a class that included Joe Namath , Pete Rozelle , O.J. Simpson , and Roger Staubach . Gatski said he had not expected to make it into the hall . He had not played for 28 years when he was selected by an old @-@ timers committee . Two decades later , Marshall University retired Gatski 's number 72 during a homecoming game against the University of Alabama at Birmingham . Gatski was the first and remains the only Marshall football player to be so honored . 
 Gatski died on November 22 , 2005 at a nursing home in Morgantown , West Virginia and was buried at the West Virginia National Cemetery in Grafton . He was married and had seven children . The following year , the East End Bridge in Huntington , West Virginia was renamed the Frank Gatski Memorial Bridge during halftime of a Marshall @-@ UTEP football game . 
 = Beaumont House = 
 Beaumont House , occasionally known as Claremont , is an eclectic Romanesque @-@ Classical brick residence located at 631 Glynburn Road in Beaumont , South Australia . Beaumont House was constructed for Augustus Short , the first Anglican bishop of Adelaide and founder of St Peter 's Cathedral . 
 Beaumont House was constructed on land initially owned by Sir Samuel Davenport , a wealthy Adelaide landlord . Following Short 's move back to England , Davenport purchased the house — the second of five eventual owners . Following three sales between 1907 and 1911 , the house was then transferred to the National Trust of South Australia in 1968 . 
 = = History = = 
 The suburb of Beaumont , in the City of Burnside , was founded as a purpose @-@ built village by Sir Samuel Davenport in 1848 . The location of Beaumont to Adelaide , a rapidly developing settlement at the time , made land in the area extremely expensive . Although Adelaide as a new settlement was prospering during the mid @-@ 19th century , still very few people could afford the exclusivity of Beaumont . 
 Bishop Augustus Short moved from England to Adelaide after the Archbishop of Canterbury offered him the choice of moving to Newcastle — on the coast of New South Wales — or Adelaide , both recently established dioceses . He chose the latter , and was consecrated at Westminster Abbey on St Peter 's Day , 29 June 1847 . He arrived in Adelaide by ship on 28 December 1847 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Short expressed his interest in residing in Beaumont , and was wealthy enough to buy a large allotment of land off the current landowner , Davenport . Between 1849 and 1851 , he had Beaumont House designed and built on a large allotment at the end of Glynburn Road , a major road which serviced the suburb of Beaumont , and linked to more major roads running west into the city of Adelaide along the Adelaide Plains . The Beaumont House estate was given the name ' Claremont ' by Short . The location , in the foothills of the Mount Lofty Ranges , was chosen to catch the cool breezes coming from the sea across the Adelaide Plains . 
 Bishop Short and his family moved into the house later in 1851 , and resided there until Bishop 's Court , North Adelaide , was ready to be occupied in 1856 . During the same year , Sir Samuel Davenport purchased the house and land from Bishop Short and lived in ' The Lodge ' , a small cottage at the entrance to what became the driveway to Beaumont House , until Short vacated Claremont . 
 Bishop Short later founded St Peter 's Cathedral , an Anglican church , in 1869 . However , a combination of declining health and disagreements of opinions over the next thirteen years saw him resign his precedence as bishop in 1872 and then as head of the diocese in 1881 . He returned to England on 7 January 1882 . At the time , the Claremont estate was valued at £ 8200 . 
 A cultivator of olives , Davenport had planted a limited number of olives around Beaumont House in 1852 after he purchased the land the year before . Davenport later expanded his groves by replanting trees and cuttings from Beaumont both in other areas of the allotment and at some of his other properties in the Adelaide Hills . He also planted mulberry trees for producing silk on the estate grounds . 
 Davenport resided in Beaumont House until his death on 3 September 1906 ; his wife having predeceased him on 6 February 1902 , and they had no children . He left his estate mainly to his nephew Howard Davenport after his death , and both Houses of Parliament in South Australia adjourned for his funeral as an <unk> to his legacy . 
 In 1907 the estate was sold to a new owner , Major Vincent , who made extensive alterations to the house . It was then bought by a third owner in five years , Mr Bennet , in 1911 . Upon his death the house was passed on to his widow . Beaumont House was then transferred to the National Trust of South Australia by Bennet 's widow , who had remarried , and her new partner on 24 August 1968 . 
 = = Architecture and alterations = = 
 Originally a five @-@ bedroom residence , the Beaumont House estate has been expanded greatly . Most of the structural expansion took place between 1907 and 1911 , when Maj. Vincent owned it ; it has not been expanded or notably altered at all since being donated to the National Trust . 
 The estate is strongly reminiscent of Romanesque architecture , mainly due to alterations made to the house and grounds by Davenport . A member of the National Trust , the current owner of Beaumont House , explains how Davenport 's travels influenced his styles : 
 Samuel Davenport was a great world traveller . He was very much involved in the world exposition movement . Every two years there were big world expos happening in different cities around the world . And he would travel to every one of these expos ... I 'm sure that the influences that he picked up in all of his travels are reflected here in Beaumont House . 
 The olive groves are no longer cultivated on the grounds of Beaumont House , but other notable additions by Davenport to the Romanesque style still remain . The house is occasionally described as ' Mediterranean ' , mostly due to the red Tuscan @-@ styled roof , the olive groves and pillared exterior . 
 = King Creole = 
 King Creole is a 1958 American musical drama film directed by Michael Curtiz and starring Elvis Presley , Carolyn Jones , and Walter Matthau . Produced by Hal B. Wallis and based on the 1952 novel A Stone for Danny Fisher by Harold Robbins , the film is about a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old who gets mixed up with crooks and involved with two women . 
 Presley later indicated that of all the characters he portrayed throughout his acting career , the role of Danny Fisher in King Creole was his favorite . To make the film , Presley was granted a 60 @-@ day deferment from January to March 1958 for beginning his military service . Location shooting in New Orleans was delayed several times by crowds of fans attracted by the stars , particularly Presley . 
 The film was released by Paramount Pictures on July 2 , 1958 , to both critical and commercial success . The critics were unanimous in their praise of Presley 's performance . King Creole peaked at number five on the Variety box office earnings charts . 
 The soundtrack song " Hard Headed Woman " reached number one on the Billboard pop singles chart , number two on the R & B chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , while the soundtrack album peaked at number two on the Billboard album chart . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Nineteen @-@ year @-@ old high school student Danny Fisher ( Elvis ) works before and after school to support his surviving family : his father ( Dean Jagger ) and sister Mimi ( Jan Shepard ) . After Danny 's mother died , his grieving father lost his job as a pharmacist , and moved his impoverished family to the French Quarter in New Orleans . 
 At work one morning , Danny rescues Ronnie ( Jones ) from her abusive date . After a taxi ride to Danny 's high school , Ronnie kisses him . Danny responds to witnessing schoolmates ' teasing by kissing Ronnie back and then punching one of them in the face when he makes a teasing remark . Danny 's reaction summons him to the principal 's office ; where Miss Pearson ( Helene Hatch ) , his teacher , tells Principal Evans ( Raymond Bailey ) that Danny will not graduate because of his poor attitude . Mr. Evans is sympathetic , but powerless to help ; so Danny decides to drop out of school to find work , against the wishes of his father , who tries to convince Danny to stay in school . 
 When Danny leaves the school grounds , three young men lure him into an alley . Their leader , Shark ( Vic Morrow ) , wants revenge for Danny hitting the teasing student at school , who turned out to be his brother . Danny defends himself so well that it impresses Shark , so Shark invites Danny to join his gang . Shark then has Danny to help the gang shoplift at a five @-@ and @-@ dime by singing " Lover Doll " to distract the customers and staff . 
 Only Nellie ( Dolores Hart ) , who works the snack bar , notices Danny 's complicity in the theft , but she does not turn him in . Danny then invites Nellie to a fictitious party in a hotel room ; finding nobody else there , Nellie starts crying in fear and leaves after admitting that she still wants to see Danny again , but not under those conditions . 
 Later that night , Danny meets Ronnie again at The Blue Shade nightclub , where Danny is now employed . At first , she pretends not to know him , as she is accompanied by her boyfriend and the club 's owner , Maxie Fields , aka " The Pig " ( Matthau ) . When Maxie does not believe her , she claims she heard Danny sing once . Maxie insists that Danny prove he can sing . His rendition of " Trouble " impresses Charlie LeGrand ( Paul Stewart ) , the honest owner of the King Creole nightclub , the only nightspot in the area not owned by Maxie ; impressed , LeGrand offers Danny a job as a singer at his club . 
 Meanwhile , Mr. Fisher finds employment as a pharmacist in a local drug store ; but his boss , Mr. Primont ( Gavin Gordon ) <unk> reluctantly hired Mr. Fisher after his boss made him do so — constantly demeans Mr. Fisher obviously out of retaliation , much to Danny 's embarrassment . That situation makes it easier for Danny to go against his father 's wishes and accept Charlie 's job offer . Danny does ; and when he becomes a hit at the King Creole , Maxie tries to hire him . Danny declines his offer out of loyalty to Charlie . 
 Shark , now working for Maxie , suggests to Danny they beat up Primont to help his father . One night when Mr. Fisher leaves the store dressed in Primont 's hat and coat ( lent due to a rainstorm ) , Shark recognizes him , but decides to mug him anyway , as that would be even better for Maxie 's purposes . Danny 's father is so badly injured that he needs expensive surgery ; so Maxie pays for a specialist to perform it . Maxie later blackmails Danny into signing with him by threatening to tell his father about his involvement in the mugging , and then does it anyway . Outraged , Danny pummels Maxie for the betrayal and helps Ronnie escape him . 
 Maxie sends his henchmen after Danny . Shark and another gang member trap him in an alley . Danny knocks out one of his pursuers . Then Shark stabs Danny , but kills himself in the struggle . Ronnie then finds a profusely bleeding Danny and takes him to her house on a bayou to recover . She asks him to forget her sordid past and pretend to love her . Danny replies that it would not be difficult and kisses her . Maxie drives up , accompanied by Dummy ( Jack <unk> ) , a member of Danny 's former gang . Maxie fatally shoots Ronnie . Dummy , who had been befriended by Danny , grapples with Maxie ; the gun goes off , killing its owner . 
 Danny returns to the King Creole . He sings the lines " Let 's think of the future , forget the past , you 're not my first love , but you 're my last " to Nellie in the audience . Mr Fisher also shows up to listen to his son sing . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Elvis Presley as Danny Fisher 
 Carolyn Jones as Ronnie , Maxie 's mistress 
 Walter Matthau as Maxie Fields , the local gangster 
 Dolores Hart as Nellie , a five @-@ and @-@ dime employee who falls for Danny 
 Dean Jagger as Mr. Fisher , Danny 's father 
 Liliane <unk> as Forty Nina , a stripper at the King Creole nightclub 
 Vic Morrow as Shark , Maxie 's lead thug 
 Paul Stewart as Charlie LeGrand , owner of the King Creole 
 Jan Shepard as Mimi Fisher , Danny 's sister 
 Brian G. Hutton as Sal , a member of Shark 's gang . 
 Jack <unk> as Dummy , a mute member of Shark 's gang . 
 Dick Winslow as Eddie Burton 
 Raymond Bailey as Mr. Evans , the school principal 
 Gavin Gordon as Mr. Primont , drug store manager and Mr. Fisher 's overbearing boss 
 = = Production = = 
 Hal Wallis acquired the rights to A Stone for Danny Fisher in February 1955 for $ 25 @,@ 000 , with the intention of giving the lead role of a New York boxer to either James Dean or Ben Gazzara . The role was originally written for Dean , but the project was cancelled after his death in 1955 . In January 1957 , following the success of an off @-@ Broadway stage version of the story , Presley was suggested as a possible replacement . After negotiations were completed , the character of Fisher was changed from a boxer to a singer and the location was moved from New York to New Orleans . 
 Wallis selected Michael Curtiz , a noted director of the Hollywood studio system whose works included The Adventures of Robin Hood , Yankee Doodle Dandy and Casablanca . Curtiz decided to shoot the film in black and white for dramatic ambiance and to give the streets a film noir appearance . He also selected an experienced cast to support Presley , including Walther Matthau and Carolyn Jones , as well as Dolores Hart , Presley 's co @-@ star in the 1957 film Loving You . Curtiz instructed a " taken aback " Presley to lose fifteen pounds and shave his sideburns for the role , both of which Presley did . 
 On December 20 , 1957 , a month before filming was due to begin , Presley received his draft notice . Presley and Paramount had to request special permission to defer Presley 's enlistment to allow him to finish the film . Both pointed out to the draft board that a delay in filming would cost them a large sum of money invested in the pre @-@ production of the film . On December 27 , Presley received a 60 @-@ day deferment . 
 Filming took place between January 20 and March 10 , 1958 , mostly at Paramount Studios in Los Angeles , California , and on location in the French Quarter in New Orleans , Louisiana , while the scene of the bayou was filmed at Lake Pontchartrain . During filming , Presley was constantly moved to avoid the crowds of fans who came to see him on location , which delayed the film @-@ making . Wallis had rented a house for Presley 's privacy , and a second one after one of his assistants noticed that the back of the houses in the block led to the back of the houses on the adjacent street . To escape from the crowds , Presley would climb to the roof of one house and cross over onto the roof of the other . After a fan discovered his path , he resided on the tenth floor of the Beverly Wilshire Hotel , which was rented for the whole cast . 
 Before filming began , Curtiz was convinced that Presley would be a " conceited boy " , but after a few weeks of working together , he described Presley as a " lovely boy " who would go on to be a " wonderful actor " . Presley , after seeing an early copy of the finished film , thanked Curtiz for giving him the opportunity to show his potential as an actor ; he would later cite Danny Fisher as his favorite role of his acting career . Fourteen days after the completion of King Creole , Presley was officially inducted into the U.S. Army . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film was first shown at Loew 's State Theater in New York City on July 2 , 1958 . During the opening week , it ranked number five in box office earnings on the Variety national survey . Billboard wrote : " Elvis Presley 's new film shapes up as a box @-@ office winner . It 's got plenty of action and characterisation and the star gives his best acting performance to date ... ( the ) Incidents and characters of the original novel are distorted , but the plot stands up well and the dialog is salty and emotion @-@ packed . As Danny , Presley exhibits improved histrionics and provides many moving and tense moments . Carolyn Jones is a knockout as a fallen thrush who would like to love him ; their aborted romance gives the pic its finest scenes . " 
 Variety declared that the film " Shows the young star [ Presley ] as a better than fair actor " . The New York Times also gave a favorable review : " Mr. Curtiz and his players have got it snugly draped around Mr. Presley 's shoulders . And there it stays , until a limp melodramatic home stretch , even with eight or so of those twitching , gyrating musical interludes . ... These also perfectly typify the Bourbon Street honky @-@ tonks that Mr. Curtiz and his fine photographer , Russ Harlan , have beguilingly drenched with atmosphere . Matching , or balancing , the tunes are at least seven characterizations that supply the real backbone and tell the story of the picture . ... for Mr. Presley , in his third screen attempt , it 's a pleasure to find him up to a little more than Bourbon Street <unk> ' and <unk> ' . Acting is his assignment in this shrewdly upholstered showcase , and he does it , so help us over a picket fence . " 
 The Spectator , however , criticized the relationship of Presley 's character with his love interests : " The girls in his ( Michael Curtiz 's ) latest film , King Creole , are both played by good , serious actresses : Carolyn Jones .. and Dolores Hart , ... both are shown to be hungrily , desperately , <unk> in love with him ( Presley 's character ) . They have no existence , except in him ; do nothing but wait for him ; hope for nothing but a little rough affection ... Instead of being kissed , they beg for kisses , which Mr. Presley <unk> and reluctantly hands out now and then , with the air of a small , fastidious boy being press to eat marshmallow and , though he feels a bit sick not quite knowing how to get out of it ... ( it ) really seems to suggest this is a god come down among us for a spell ; and when tender and infinitely patient in spite of the long past of infidelity , nonchalance , and what looks to an observer like plain indifference from him , her lips poised for the kiss that doesn 't come ... As the most extreme example of a contemporary idol , Mr. Presley is pretty fascinating , and , though you may be put off at first by his pale , puffy , bruised looking babyish face , by the weary cherubic decadence you might imagine in Nero , and the excessive <unk> of his excessively long , spiky locks , his films , however bad ( and King Creole is pretty low on his list ) , are well worth taking a look at . " 
 About Presley 's performance , Down Beat wrote : " Let it be noted that Elvis Presley 's latest , King Creole , is his best picture thus <unk> speaking , of course . Maybe about 10 more films ( and as many drama coaches ) from now Elvis might begin to get an inkling of what acting 's all about . " TV @-@ Radio Mirror magazine praised Presley 's acting over his past roles : " Elvis Presley does his strongest acting job so far . Two years ago , Presley on the screen was a laughing stock . But nobody is laughing now " . Meanwhile , The Monthly Film Bulletin criticized the violence depicted in the film and rated the movie a III , denoting poor , stating , " This entangled series of cliches , each with more unlikely motivation than the last , provides the most unattractive Presley vehicle so far . His numbers only offer intermittent relief from the calculated violence and viciousness , and he can do little to balance the disagreeable movie " . 
 Commonweal lamented the lack of punishment to the main character for his actions , but praised the director for his influence on Presley : " No doubt adults won 't be moved much by " King Creole " one way or the other , but unfortunately teenage audiences may be taken in , especially since Danny is supposed to be a sympathetic character and at the end goes unpunished by the police for his crimes ... It must be said in favor of Director Michael Curtiz that he does succeed in getting Presley to act every now and then , but the cards are stacked in such an obvious manner against Danny that even Montgomery Clift couldn 't have handled the role with conviction . " 
 Catholic World commented : " Playing a part — an underprivileged youth who , on and off , displays some dignity and honest aspirations — that requires some histrionic effort , Presley shows signs that he is getting the hang of acting . The picture itself , however , after a promising enough beginning turns into a lurid melodramatic hash composed in about equal part of juvenile delinquency , gangsterism and sex . These may be legitimate dramatic subjects but the script gives them an illegitimate viewpoint and leaves muddled moral issues dangling . " 
 The Florence Times wrote of Presley : " the fellow isn 't a bad actor . Of course , he 's nothing at all sensational and the Academy Award isn 't in danger , but there are Hollywood <unk> who 've gotten by for years with less ability . In fact , given the normal amount of the more painstaking type of direction , it is entirely possible that Mr. Wiggle @-@ hips could develop into a really competent actor . As long , however , as he can continue to attract audiences in present proportions there 's little need in worrying with drama schools . " Allrovi rated the movie with four stars out of five , stating : " The film 's highlight is a brief exchange of fisticuffs between Elvis and Walter Matthau . Together with Jailhouse Rock , King Creole is one of the best filmed examples of the untamed , pre @-@ army Elvis Presley " . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film was released on VHS by Paramount Pictures in 1986 . In 2000 , it was re @-@ released in DVD with remastered sound and image , featuring the original theatrical trailer . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = Solar System = 
 The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system comprising the Sun and the objects that orbit it , either directly or indirectly . Of those objects that orbit the Sun directly , the largest eight are the planets , with the remainder being significantly smaller objects , such as dwarf planets and small Solar System bodies . Of the objects that orbit the Sun indirectly , the moons , two are larger than the smallest planet , Mercury . 
 The Solar System formed 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a giant interstellar molecular cloud . The vast majority of the system 's mass is in the Sun , with most of the remaining mass contained in Jupiter . The four smaller inner planets , Mercury , Venus , Earth and Mars , are terrestrial planets , being primarily composed of rock and metal . The four outer planets are giant planets , being substantially more massive than the terrestrials . The two largest , Jupiter and Saturn , are gas giants , being composed mainly of hydrogen and helium ; the two outermost planets , Uranus and Neptune , are ice giants , being composed mostly of substances with relatively high melting points compared with hydrogen and helium , called ices , such as water , ammonia and methane . All planets have almost circular orbits that lie within a nearly flat disc called the ecliptic . 
 The Solar System also contains smaller objects . The asteroid belt , which lies between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter , mostly contains objects composed , like the terrestrial planets , of rock and metal . Beyond Neptune 's orbit lie the Kuiper belt and scattered disc , which are populations of trans @-@ Neptunian objects composed mostly of ices , and beyond them a newly discovered population of sednoids . Within these populations are several dozen to possibly tens of thousands of objects large enough that they have been rounded by their own gravity . Such objects are categorized as dwarf planets . Identified dwarf planets include the asteroid Ceres and the trans @-@ Neptunian objects Pluto and Eris . In addition to these two regions , various other small @-@ body populations , including comets , centaurs and interplanetary dust , freely travel between regions . Six of the planets , at least four of the dwarf planets , and many of the smaller bodies are orbited by natural satellites , usually termed " moons " after the Moon . Each of the outer planets is encircled by planetary rings of dust and other small objects . 
 The solar wind , a stream of charged particles flowing outwards from the Sun , creates a bubble @-@ like region in the interstellar medium known as the heliosphere . The heliopause is the point at which pressure from the solar wind is equal to the opposing pressure of interstellar wind ; it extends out to the edge of the scattered disc . The Oort cloud , which is thought to be the source for long @-@ period comets , may also exist at a distance roughly a thousand times further than the heliosphere . The Solar System is located in the Orion Arm , 26 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from the center of the Milky Way . 
 = = Discovery and exploration = = 
 For many thousands of years , humanity , with a few exceptions , did not recognize or understand the concept of the Solar System . Most people up to the Late Middle Ages – Renaissance believed Earth to be stationary at the centre of the universe and categorically different from the divine or ethereal objects that moved through the sky . Although the Greek philosopher Aristarchus of Samos had speculated on a heliocentric reordering of the cosmos , Nicolaus Copernicus was the first to develop a mathematically predictive heliocentric system . In the 17th century , Galileo Galilei , Johannes Kepler , and Isaac Newton developed an understanding of physics that led to the gradual acceptance of the idea that Earth moves around the Sun and that the planets are governed by the same physical laws that governed Earth . The invention of the telescope led to the discovery of further planets and moons . Improvements in the telescope and the use of unmanned spacecraft have enabled the investigation of geological phenomena , such as mountains , craters , seasonal meteorological phenomena , such as clouds , dust storms and ice caps on the other planets . 
 = = Structure and composition = = 
 The principal component of the Solar System is the Sun , a G2 main @-@ sequence star that contains 99 @.@ 86 % of the system 's known mass and dominates it gravitationally . The Sun 's four largest orbiting bodies , the giant planets , account for 99 % of the remaining mass , with Jupiter and Saturn together comprising more than 90 % . The remaining objects of the Solar System ( including the four terrestrial planets , the dwarf planets , moons , asteroids , and comets ) together comprise less than 0 @.@ 002 % of the Solar System 's total mass . 
 Most large objects in orbit around the Sun lie near the plane of Earth 's orbit , known as the ecliptic . The planets are very close to the ecliptic , whereas comets and Kuiper belt objects are frequently at significantly greater angles to it . All the planets and most other objects orbit the Sun in the same direction that the Sun is rotating ( counter @-@ clockwise , as viewed from above Earth 's north pole ) . There are exceptions , such as Halley 's Comet . 
 The overall structure of the charted regions of the Solar System consists of the Sun , four relatively small inner planets surrounded by a belt of mostly rocky asteroids , and four giant planets surrounded by the Kuiper belt of mostly icy objects . Astronomers sometimes informally divide this structure into separate regions . The inner Solar System includes the four terrestrial planets and the asteroid belt . The outer Solar System is beyond the asteroids , including the four giant planets . Since the discovery of the Kuiper belt , the outermost parts of the Solar System are considered a distinct region consisting of the objects beyond Neptune . 
 Most of the planets in the Solar System have secondary systems of their own , being orbited by planetary objects called natural satellites , or moons ( two of which are larger than the planet Mercury ) , and , in the case of the four giant planets , by planetary rings , thin bands of tiny particles that orbit them in unison . Most of the largest natural satellites are in synchronous rotation , with one face permanently turned toward their parent . 
 Kepler 's laws of planetary motion describe the orbits of objects about the Sun . Following Kepler 's laws , each object travels along an ellipse with the Sun at one focus . Objects closer to the Sun ( with smaller semi @-@ major axes ) travel more quickly because they are more affected by the Sun 's gravity . On an elliptical orbit , a body 's distance from the Sun varies over the course of its year . A body 's closest approach to the Sun is called its perihelion , whereas its most distant point from the Sun is called its aphelion . The orbits of the planets are nearly circular , but many comets , asteroids , and Kuiper belt objects follow highly elliptical orbits . The positions of the bodies in the Solar System can be predicted using numerical models . 
 Although the Sun dominates the system by mass , it accounts for only about 2 % of the angular momentum . The planets , dominated by Jupiter , account for most of the rest of the angular momentum due to the combination of their mass , orbit , and distance from the Sun , with a possibly significant contribution from comets . 
 The Sun , which comprises nearly all the matter in the Solar System , is composed of roughly 98 % hydrogen and helium . Jupiter and Saturn , which comprise nearly all the remaining matter , are also primarily composed of hydrogen and helium . A composition gradient exists in the Solar System , created by heat and light pressure from the Sun ; those objects closer to the Sun , which are more affected by heat and light pressure , are composed of elements with high melting points . Objects farther from the Sun are composed largely of materials with lower melting points . The boundary in the Solar System beyond which those volatile substances could condense is known as the frost line , and it lies at roughly 5 AU from the Sun . 
 The objects of the inner Solar System are composed mostly of rock , the collective name for compounds with high melting points , such as silicates , iron or nickel , that remained solid under almost all conditions in the protoplanetary nebula . Jupiter and Saturn are composed mainly of gases , the astronomical term for materials with extremely low melting points and high vapour pressure , such as hydrogen , helium , and neon , which were always in the gaseous phase in the nebula . <unk> , like water , methane , ammonia , hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide , have melting points up to a few hundred kelvins . They can be found as ices , liquids , or gases in various places in the Solar System , whereas in the nebula they were either in the solid or gaseous phase . Icy substances comprise the majority of the satellites of the giant planets , as well as most of Uranus and Neptune ( the so @-@ called " ice giants " ) and the numerous small objects that lie beyond Neptune 's orbit . Together , gases and ices are referred to as volatiles . 
 = = = Distances and scales = = = 
 The distance from Earth to the Sun is 1 astronomical unit ( 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) , or AU . For comparison , the radius of the Sun is 0 @.@ 0047 AU ( 700 @,@ 000 km ) . Thus , the Sun occupies 0 @.@ <unk> % ( 10 − 5 % ) of the volume of a sphere with a radius the size of Earth 's orbit , whereas Earth 's volume is roughly one millionth ( 10 − 6 ) that of the Sun . Jupiter , the largest planet , is 5 @.@ 2 astronomical units ( 780 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) from the Sun and has a radius of 71 @,@ 000 km ( 0 @.@ <unk> AU ) , whereas the most distant planet , Neptune , is 30 AU ( 4 @.@ 5 × 109 km ) from the Sun . 
 With a few exceptions , the farther a planet or belt is from the Sun , the larger the distance between its orbit and the orbit of the next nearer object to the Sun . For example , Venus is approximately 0 @.@ 33 AU farther out from the Sun than Mercury , whereas Saturn is 4 @.@ 3 AU out from Jupiter , and Neptune lies 10 @.@ 5 AU out from Uranus . Attempts have been made to determine a relationship between these orbital distances ( for example , the Titius – Bode law ) , but no such theory has been accepted . The images at the beginning of this section show the orbits of the various constituents of the Solar System on different scales . 
 Some Solar System models attempt to convey the relative scales involved in the Solar System on human terms . Some are small in scale ( and may be mechanical — called <unk> ) — whereas others extend across cities or regional areas . The largest such scale model , the Sweden Solar System , uses the 110 @-@ metre ( 361 @-@ ft ) Ericsson Globe in Stockholm as its substitute Sun , and , following the scale , Jupiter is a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 25 @-@ foot ) sphere at Arlanda International Airport , 40 km ( 25 mi ) away , whereas the farthest current object , Sedna , is a 10 @-@ cm ( 4 @-@ in ) sphere in Luleå , 912 km ( 567 mi ) away . 
 If the Sun – Neptune distance is scaled to 100 metres , then the Sun would be about 3 cm in diameter ( roughly two @-@ thirds the diameter of a golf ball ) , the giant planets would be all smaller than about 3 mm , and Earth 's diameter along with that of the other terrestrial planets would be smaller than a flea ( 0 @.@ 3 mm ) at this scale . 
 = = Formation and evolution = = 
 The Solar System formed 4 @.@ 568 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a region within a large molecular cloud . This initial cloud was likely several light @-@ years across and probably birthed several stars . As is typical of molecular clouds , this one consisted mostly of hydrogen , with some helium , and small amounts of heavier elements fused by previous generations of stars . As the region that would become the Solar System , known as the pre @-@ solar nebula , collapsed , conservation of angular momentum caused it to rotate faster . The centre , where most of the mass collected , became increasingly hotter than the surrounding disc . As the contracting nebula rotated faster , it began to flatten into a protoplanetary disc with a diameter of roughly 200 AU and a hot , dense protostar at the centre . The planets formed by accretion from this disc , in which dust and gas gravitationally attracted each other , coalescing to form ever larger bodies . Hundreds of protoplanets may have existed in the early Solar System , but they either merged or were destroyed , leaving the planets , dwarf planets , and leftover minor bodies . 
 Due to their higher boiling points , only metals and silicates could exist in solid form in the warm inner Solar System close to the Sun , and these would eventually form the rocky planets of Mercury , Venus , Earth , and Mars . Because metallic elements only comprised a very small fraction of the solar nebula , the terrestrial planets could not grow very large . The giant planets ( Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune ) formed further out , beyond the frost line , the point between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where material is cool enough for volatile icy compounds to remain solid . The ices that formed these planets were more plentiful than the metals and silicates that formed the terrestrial inner planets , allowing them to grow massive enough to capture large atmospheres of hydrogen and helium , the lightest and most abundant elements . Leftover debris that never became planets congregated in regions such as the asteroid belt , Kuiper belt , and Oort cloud . The Nice model is an explanation for the creation of these regions and how the outer planets could have formed in different positions and migrated to their current orbits through various gravitational interactions . 
 Within 50 million years , the pressure and density of hydrogen in the centre of the protostar became great enough for it to begin thermonuclear fusion . The temperature , reaction rate , pressure , and density increased until hydrostatic equilibrium was achieved : the thermal pressure equalled the force of gravity . At this point , the Sun became a main @-@ sequence star . The main @-@ sequence phase , from beginning to end , will last about 10 billion years for the Sun compared to around two billion years for all other phases of the Sun 's pre @-@ remnant life combined . Solar wind from the Sun created the heliosphere and swept away the remaining gas and dust from the protoplanetary disc into interstellar space , ending the planetary formation process . The Sun is growing brighter ; early in its main @-@ sequence life its brightness was 70 % that of what it is today . 
 The Solar System will remain roughly as we know it today until the hydrogen in the core of the Sun has been entirely converted to helium , which will occur roughly 5 billion years from now . This will mark the end of the Sun 's main @-@ sequence life . At this time , the core of the Sun will collapse , and the energy output will be much greater than at present . The outer layers of the Sun will expand to roughly 260 times its current diameter , and the Sun will become a red giant . Because of its vastly increased surface area , the surface of the Sun will be considerably cooler ( 2 @,@ 600 K at its coolest ) than it is on the main sequence . The expanding Sun is expected to vaporize Mercury and Venus and render Earth uninhabitable as the habitable zone moves out to the orbit of Mars . Eventually , the core will be hot enough for helium fusion ; the Sun will burn helium for a fraction of the time it burned hydrogen in the core . The Sun is not massive enough to commence the fusion of heavier elements , and nuclear reactions in the core will dwindle . Its outer layers will move away into space , leaving a white dwarf , an extraordinarily dense object , half the original mass of the Sun but only the size of Earth . The ejected outer layers will form what is known as a planetary nebula , returning some of the material that formed the Sun — but now enriched with heavier elements like carbon — to the interstellar medium . 
 = = Sun = = 
 The Sun is the Solar System 's star and by far its most massive component . Its large mass ( 332 @,@ 900 Earth masses ) produces temperatures and densities in its core high enough to sustain nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium , making it a main @-@ sequence star . This releases an enormous amount of energy , mostly radiated into space as electromagnetic radiation peaking in visible light . 
 The Sun is a G2 @-@ type main @-@ sequence star . Hotter main @-@ sequence stars are more luminous . The Sun 's temperature is intermediate between that of the hottest stars and that of the coolest stars . Stars brighter and hotter than the Sun are rare , whereas substantially dimmer and cooler stars , known as red dwarfs , make up 85 % of the stars in the Milky Way . 
 The Sun is a population I star ; it has a higher abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium ( " metals " in astronomical parlance ) than the older population II stars . Elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were formed in the cores of ancient and exploding stars , so the first generation of stars had to die before the Universe could be enriched with these atoms . The oldest stars contain few metals , whereas stars born later have more . This high metallicity is thought to have been crucial to the Sun 's development of a planetary system because the planets form from the accretion of " metals " . 
 = = Interplanetary medium = = 
 The vast majority of the Solar System consists of a near @-@ vacuum known as the interplanetary medium . Along with light , the Sun radiates a continuous stream of charged particles ( a plasma ) known as the solar wind . This stream of particles spreads outwards at roughly 1 @.@ 5 million kilometres per hour , creating a tenuous atmosphere that permeates the interplanetary medium out to at least 100 AU ( see § Heliosphere ) . Activity on the Sun 's surface , such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections , disturb the heliosphere , creating space weather and causing geomagnetic storms . The largest structure within the heliosphere is the <unk> current sheet , a spiral form created by the actions of the Sun 's rotating magnetic field on the interplanetary medium . 
 Earth 's magnetic field stops its atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind . Venus and Mars do not have magnetic fields , and as a result the solar wind is causing their atmospheres to gradually bleed away into space . Coronal mass ejections and similar events blow a magnetic field and huge quantities of material from the surface of the Sun . The interaction of this magnetic field and material with Earth 's magnetic field funnels charged particles into Earth 's upper atmosphere , where its interactions create aurorae seen near the magnetic poles . 
 The heliosphere and planetary magnetic fields ( for those planets that have them ) partially shield the Solar System from high @-@ energy interstellar particles called cosmic rays . The density of cosmic rays in the interstellar medium and the strength of the Sun 's magnetic field change on very long timescales , so the level of cosmic @-@ ray penetration in the Solar System varies , though by how much is unknown . 
 The interplanetary medium is home to at least two disc @-@ like regions of cosmic dust . The first , the zodiacal dust cloud , lies in the inner Solar System and causes the zodiacal light . It was likely formed by collisions within the asteroid belt brought on by gravitational interactions with the planets . The second dust cloud extends from about 10 AU to about 40 AU , and was probably created by similar collisions within the Kuiper belt . 
 = = Inner Solar System = = 
 The inner Solar System is the region comprising the terrestrial planets and the asteroid belt . Composed mainly of silicates and metals , the objects of the inner Solar System are relatively close to the Sun ; the radius of this entire region is less than the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn . This region is also within the frost line , which is a little less than 5 AU ( about 700 million km ) from the Sun . 
 = = = Inner planets = = = 
 The four terrestrial or inner planets have dense , rocky compositions , few or no moons , and no ring systems . They are composed largely of refractory minerals , such as the silicates , which form their crusts and mantles , and metals , such as iron and nickel , which form their cores . Three of the four inner planets ( Venus , Earth and Mars ) have atmospheres substantial enough to generate weather ; all have impact craters and tectonic surface features , such as rift valleys and volcanoes . The term inner planet should not be confused with inferior planet , which designates those planets that are closer to the Sun than Earth is ( i.e. Mercury and Venus ) . 
 = = = = Mercury = = = = 
 Mercury ( 0 @.@ 4 AU from the Sun ) is the closest planet to the Sun and the smallest planet in the Solar System ( 0 @.@ 055 Earth masses ) . Mercury has no natural satellites ; besides impact craters , its only known geological features are lobed ridges or rupes that were probably produced by a period of contraction early in its history . Mercury 's very tenuous atmosphere consists of atoms blasted off its surface by the solar wind . Its relatively large iron core and thin mantle have not yet been adequately explained . Hypotheses include that its outer layers were stripped off by a giant impact ; or , that it was prevented from fully accreting by the young Sun 's energy . 
 = = = = Venus = = = = 
 Venus ( 0 @.@ 7 AU from the Sun ) is close in size to Earth ( 0 @.@ 815 Earth masses ) and , like Earth , has a thick silicate mantle around an iron core , a substantial atmosphere , and evidence of internal geological activity . It is much drier than Earth , and its atmosphere is ninety times as dense . Venus has no natural satellites . It is the hottest planet , with surface temperatures over 400 ° C ( 752 ° F ) , most likely due to the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere . No definitive evidence of current geological activity has been detected on Venus , but it has no magnetic field that would prevent depletion of its substantial atmosphere , which suggests that its atmosphere is being replenished by volcanic eruptions . 
 = = = = Earth = = = = 
 Earth ( 1 AU from the Sun ) is the largest and densest of the inner planets , the only one known to have current geological activity , and the only place where life is known to exist . Its liquid hydrosphere is unique among the terrestrial planets , and it is the only planet where plate tectonics has been observed . Earth 's atmosphere is radically different from those of the other planets , having been altered by the presence of life to contain 21 % free oxygen . It has one natural satellite , the Moon , the only large satellite of a terrestrial planet in the Solar System . 
 = = = = Mars = = = = 
 Mars ( 1 @.@ 5 AU from the Sun ) is smaller than Earth and Venus ( 0 @.@ 107 Earth masses ) . It has an atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide with a surface pressure of 6 @.@ 1 millibars ( roughly 0 @.@ 6 % of that of Earth ) . Its surface , peppered with vast volcanoes , such as Olympus Mons , and rift valleys , such as Valles Marineris , shows geological activity that may have persisted until as recently as 2 million years ago . Its red colour comes from iron oxide ( rust ) in its soil . Mars has two tiny natural satellites ( Deimos and Phobos ) thought to be captured asteroids . 
 = = = Asteroid belt = = = 
 Asteroids except for the largest , Ceres , are classified as small Solar System bodies and are composed mainly of refractory rocky and metallic minerals , with some ice . They range from a few metres to hundreds of kilometres in size . Asteroids smaller than one meter are usually called meteoroids and micrometeoroids ( grain @-@ sized ) , depending on different , somewhat arbitrary definitions . 
 The asteroid belt occupies the orbit between Mars and Jupiter , between 2 @.@ 3 and 3 @.@ 3 AU from the Sun . It is thought to be remnants from the Solar System 's formation that failed to coalesce because of the gravitational interference of Jupiter . The asteroid belt contains tens of thousands , possibly millions , of objects over one kilometre in diameter . Despite this , the total mass of the asteroid belt is unlikely to be more than a thousandth of that of Earth . The asteroid belt is very sparsely populated ; spacecraft routinely pass through without incident . 
 = = = = Ceres = = = = 
 Ceres ( 2 @.@ 77 AU ) is the largest asteroid , a protoplanet , and a dwarf planet . It has a diameter of slightly under 1 @,@ 000 km , and a mass large enough for its own gravity to pull it into a spherical shape . Ceres was considered a planet when it was discovered in 1801 , and was reclassified to asteroid in the 1850s as further observations revealed additional asteroids . It was classified as a dwarf planet in 2006 when the definition of a planet was created . 
 = = = = Asteroid groups = = = = 
 Asteroids in the asteroid belt are divided into asteroid groups and families based on their orbital characteristics . Asteroid moons are asteroids that orbit larger asteroids . They are not as clearly distinguished as planetary moons , sometimes being almost as large as their partners . The asteroid belt also contains main @-@ belt comets , which may have been the source of Earth 's water . 
 Jupiter trojans are located in either of Jupiter 's L4 or L5 points ( gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing a planet in its orbit ) ; the term " trojan " is also used for small bodies in any other planetary or satellite Lagrange point . Hilda asteroids are in a 2 : 3 resonance with Jupiter ; that is , they go around the Sun three times for every two Jupiter orbits . 
 The inner Solar System also contains near @-@ Earth asteroids , many of which cross the orbits of the inner planets . Some of them are potentially hazardous objects . 
 = = Outer Solar System = = 
 The outer region of the Solar System is home to the giant planets and their large moons . The centaurs and many short @-@ period comets also orbit in this region . Due to their greater distance from the Sun , the solid objects in the outer Solar System contain a higher proportion of volatiles , such as water , ammonia , and methane than those of the inner Solar System because the lower temperatures allow these compounds to remain solid . 
 = = = Outer planets = = = 
 The four outer planets , or giant planets ( sometimes called Jovian planets ) , collectively make up 99 % of the mass known to orbit the Sun . Jupiter and Saturn are together over 400 times the mass of Earth and consist overwhelmingly of hydrogen and helium ; Uranus and Neptune are far less massive ( < 20 Earth masses each ) and are composed primarily of ices . For these reasons , some astronomers suggest they belong in their own category , " ice giants " . All four giant planets have rings , although only Saturn 's ring system is easily observed from Earth . The term superior planet designates planets outside Earth 's orbit and thus includes both the outer planets and Mars . 
 = = = = Jupiter = = = = 
 Jupiter ( 5 @.@ 2 AU ) , at 318 Earth masses , is 2 @.@ 5 times the mass of all the other planets put together . It is composed largely of hydrogen and helium . Jupiter 's strong internal heat creates semi @-@ permanent features in its atmosphere , such as cloud bands and the Great Red Spot . Jupiter has 67 known satellites . The four largest , Ganymede , Callisto , Io , and Europa , show similarities to the terrestrial planets , such as volcanism and internal heating . Ganymede , the largest satellite in the Solar System , is larger than Mercury . 
 = = = = Saturn = = = = 
 Saturn ( 9 @.@ 5 AU ) , distinguished by its extensive ring system , has several similarities to Jupiter , such as its atmospheric composition and magnetosphere . Although Saturn has 60 % of Jupiter 's volume , it is less than a third as massive , at 95 Earth masses . Saturn is the only planet of the Solar System that is less dense than water . The rings of Saturn are made up of small ice and rock particles . Saturn has 62 confirmed satellites composed largely of ice . Two of these , Titan and Enceladus , show signs of geological activity . Titan , the second @-@ largest moon in the Solar System , is larger than Mercury and the only satellite in the Solar System with a substantial atmosphere . 
 = = = = Uranus = = = = 
 Uranus ( 19 @.@ 2 AU ) , at 14 Earth masses , is the lightest of the outer planets . Uniquely among the planets , it orbits the Sun on its side ; its axial tilt is over ninety degrees to the ecliptic . It has a much colder core than the other giant planets and radiates very little heat into space . Uranus has 27 known satellites , the largest ones being Titania , Oberon , Umbriel , Ariel , and Miranda . 
 = = = = Neptune = = = = 
 Neptune ( 30 @.@ 1 AU ) , though slightly smaller than Uranus , is more massive ( equivalent to 17 Earths ) and hence more dense . It radiates more internal heat , but not as much as Jupiter or Saturn . Neptune has 14 known satellites . The largest , Triton , is geologically active , with geysers of liquid nitrogen . Triton is the only large satellite with a retrograde orbit . Neptune is accompanied in its orbit by several minor planets , termed Neptune trojans , that are in 1 : 1 resonance with it . 
 = = = Centaurs = = = 
 The centaurs are icy comet @-@ like bodies whose orbits have semi @-@ major axes greater than Jupiter 's ( 5 @.@ 5 AU ) and less than Neptune 's ( 30 AU ) . The largest known centaur , <unk> <unk> , has a diameter of about 250 km . The first centaur discovered , 2060 Chiron , has also been classified as comet ( <unk> ) because it develops a coma just as comets do when they approach the Sun . 
 = = Comets = = 
 Comets are small Solar System bodies , typically only a few kilometres across , composed largely of volatile ices . They have highly eccentric orbits , generally a perihelion within the orbits of the inner planets and an aphelion far beyond Pluto . When a comet enters the inner Solar System , its proximity to the Sun causes its icy surface to sublimate and <unk> , creating a coma : a long tail of gas and dust often visible to the naked eye . 
 Short @-@ period comets have orbits lasting less than two hundred years . Long @-@ period comets have orbits lasting thousands of years . Short @-@ period comets are thought to originate in the Kuiper belt , whereas long @-@ period comets , such as Hale – Bopp , are thought to originate in the Oort cloud . Many comet groups , such as the Kreutz Sungrazers , formed from the breakup of a single parent . Some comets with hyperbolic orbits may originate outside the Solar System , but determining their precise orbits is difficult . Old comets that have had most of their volatiles driven out by solar warming are often categorised as asteroids . 
 = = Trans @-@ Neptunian region = = 
 Beyond the orbit of Neptune lies the area of the " trans @-@ Neptunian region " , with the doughnut @-@ shaped Kuiper belt , home of Pluto and several other dwarf planets , and an overlapping disc of scattered objects , which is tilted toward the plane of the Solar System and reaches much further out than the Kuiper belt . The entire region is still largely unexplored . It appears to consist overwhelmingly of many thousands of small worlds — the largest having a diameter only a fifth that of Earth and a mass far smaller than that of the Moon — composed mainly of rock and ice . This region is sometimes described as the " third zone of the Solar System " , enclosing the inner and the outer Solar System . 
 = = = Kuiper belt = = = 
 The Kuiper belt is a great ring of debris similar to the asteroid belt , but consisting mainly of objects composed primarily of ice . It extends between 30 and 50 AU from the Sun . Though it is estimated to contain anything from dozens to thousands of dwarf planets , it is composed mainly of small Solar System bodies . Many of the larger Kuiper belt objects , such as Quaoar , Varuna , and Orcus , may prove to be dwarf planets with further data . There are estimated to be over 100 @,@ 000 Kuiper belt objects with a diameter greater than 50 km , but the total mass of the Kuiper belt is thought to be only a tenth or even a hundredth the mass of Earth . Many Kuiper belt objects have multiple satellites , and most have orbits that take them outside the plane of the ecliptic . 
 The Kuiper belt can be roughly divided into the " classical " belt and the resonances . Resonances are orbits linked to that of Neptune ( e.g. twice for every three Neptune orbits , or once for every two ) . The first resonance begins within the orbit of Neptune itself . The classical belt consists of objects having no resonance with Neptune , and extends from roughly 39 @.@ 4 AU to 47 @.@ 7 AU . Members of the classical Kuiper belt are classified as cubewanos , after the first of their kind to be discovered , ( 15760 ) 1992 QB1 , and are still in near primordial , low @-@ eccentricity orbits . 
 = = = = Pluto and Charon = = = = 
 The dwarf planet Pluto ( 39 AU average ) is the largest known object in the Kuiper belt . When discovered in 1930 , it was considered to be the ninth planet ; this changed in 2006 with the adoption of a formal definition of planet . Pluto has a relatively eccentric orbit inclined 17 degrees to the ecliptic plane and ranging from 29 @.@ 7 AU from the Sun at perihelion ( within the orbit of Neptune ) to 49 @.@ 5 AU at aphelion . Pluto has a 3 : 2 resonance with Neptune , meaning that Pluto orbits twice round the Sun for every three Neptunian orbits . Kuiper belt objects whose orbits share this resonance are called plutinos . 
 Charon , the largest of Pluto 's moons , is sometimes described as part of a binary system with Pluto , as the two bodies orbit a barycentre of gravity above their surfaces ( i.e. they appear to " orbit each other " ) . Beyond Charon , four much smaller moons , Styx , Nix , Kerberos , and Hydra , orbit within the system . 
 = = = = Makemake and Haumea = = = = 
 Makemake ( 45 @.@ 79 AU average ) , although smaller than Pluto , is the largest known object in the classical Kuiper belt ( that is , a Kuiper belt object not in a confirmed resonance with Neptune ) . Makemake is the brightest object in the Kuiper belt after Pluto . It was named and designated a dwarf planet in 2008 . Its orbit is far more inclined than Pluto 's , at 29 ° . 
 Haumea ( 43 @.@ 13 AU average ) is in an orbit similar to Makemake except that it is in a 7 : 12 orbital resonance with Neptune . It is about the same size as Makemake and has two natural satellites . A rapid , 3 @.@ 9 @-@ hour rotation gives it a flattened and elongated shape . It was named and designated a dwarf planet in 2008 . 
 = = = Scattered disc = = = 
 The scattered disc , which overlaps the Kuiper belt but extends much further outwards , is thought to be the source of short @-@ period comets . Scattered @-@ disc objects are thought to have been ejected into erratic orbits by the gravitational influence of Neptune 's early outward migration . Most scattered disc objects ( SDOs ) have perihelia within the Kuiper belt but aphelia far beyond it ( some more than 150 AU from the Sun ) . SDOs ' orbits are also highly inclined to the ecliptic plane and are often almost perpendicular to it . Some astronomers consider the scattered disc to be merely another region of the Kuiper belt and describe scattered disc objects as " scattered Kuiper belt objects " . Some astronomers also classify centaurs as inward @-@ scattered Kuiper belt objects along with the outward @-@ scattered residents of the scattered disc . 
 = = = = Eris = = = = 
 Eris ( 68 AU average ) is the largest known scattered disc object , and caused a debate about what constitutes a planet , because it is 25 % more massive than Pluto and about the same diameter . It is the most massive of the known dwarf planets . It has one known moon , Dysnomia . Like Pluto , its orbit is highly eccentric , with a perihelion of 38 @.@ 2 AU ( roughly Pluto 's distance from the Sun ) and an aphelion of 97 @.@ 6 AU , and steeply inclined to the ecliptic plane . 
 = = Farthest regions = = 
 The point at which the Solar System ends and interstellar space begins is not precisely defined because its outer boundaries are shaped by two separate forces : the solar wind and the Sun 's gravity . The limit of the solar wind 's influence is roughly four times Pluto 's distance from the Sun ; this heliopause , the outer boundary of the heliosphere , is considered the beginning of the interstellar medium . The Sun 's Hill sphere , the effective range of its gravitational dominance , is thought to extend up to a thousand times farther and encompasses the theorized Oort cloud . 
 = = = Heliosphere = = = 
 The heliosphere is a stellar @-@ wind bubble , a region of space dominated by the Sun , which radiates at roughly 400 km / s its solar wind , a stream of charged particles , until it collides with the wind of the interstellar medium . 
 The collision occurs at the termination shock , which is roughly 80 – 100 AU from the Sun upwind of the interstellar medium and roughly 200 AU from the Sun downwind . Here the wind slows dramatically , condenses and becomes more turbulent , forming a great oval structure known as the <unk> . This structure is thought to look and behave very much like a comet 's tail , extending outward for a further 40 AU on the upwind side but tailing many times that distance downwind ; evidence from Cassini and Interstellar Boundary Explorer spacecraft has suggested that it is forced into a bubble shape by the constraining action of the interstellar magnetic field . 
 The outer boundary of the heliosphere , the heliopause , is the point at which the solar wind finally terminates and is the beginning of interstellar space . Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are reported to have passed the termination shock and entered the <unk> , at 94 and 84 AU from the Sun , respectively . Voyager 1 is reported to have crossed the heliopause in August 2012 . 
 The shape and form of the outer edge of the heliosphere is likely affected by the fluid dynamics of interactions with the interstellar medium as well as solar magnetic fields prevailing to the south , e.g. it is bluntly shaped with the northern hemisphere extending 9 AU farther than the southern hemisphere . Beyond the heliopause , at around 230 AU , lies the bow shock , a plasma " wake " left by the Sun as it travels through the Milky Way . 
 Due to a lack of data , conditions in local interstellar space are not known for certain . It is expected that NASA 's Voyager spacecraft , as they pass the heliopause , will transmit valuable data on radiation levels and solar wind to Earth . How well the heliosphere shields the Solar System from cosmic rays is poorly understood . A NASA @-@ funded team has developed a concept of a " Vision Mission " dedicated to sending a probe to the heliosphere . 
 = = = Detached objects = = = 
 90377 Sedna ( 520 AU average ) is a large , reddish object with a gigantic , highly elliptical orbit that takes it from about 76 AU at perihelion to 940 AU at aphelion and takes 11 @,@ 400 years to complete . Mike Brown , who discovered the object in 2003 , asserts that it cannot be part of the scattered disc or the Kuiper belt because its perihelion is too distant to have been affected by Neptune 's migration . He and other astronomers consider it to be the first in an entirely new population , sometimes termed " distant detached objects " ( <unk> ) , which also may include the object 2000 CR105 , which has a perihelion of 45 AU , an aphelion of 415 AU , and an orbital period of 3 @,@ 420 years . Brown terms this population the " inner Oort cloud " because it may have formed through a similar process , although it is far closer to the Sun . Sedna is very likely a dwarf planet , though its shape has yet to be determined . The second unequivocally detached object , with a perihelion farther than Sedna 's at roughly 81 AU , is 2012 VP113 , discovered in 2012 . Its aphelion is only half that of Sedna 's , at 400 – 500 AU . 
 = = = Oort cloud = = = 
 The Oort cloud is a hypothetical spherical cloud of up to a trillion icy objects that is thought to be the source for all long @-@ period comets and to surround the Solar System at roughly 50 @,@ 000 AU ( around 1 light @-@ year ( ly ) ) , and possibly to as far as 100 @,@ 000 AU ( 1 @.@ 87 ly ) . It is thought to be composed of comets that were ejected from the inner Solar System by gravitational interactions with the outer planets . Oort cloud objects move very slowly , and can be perturbed by infrequent events , such as collisions , the gravitational effects of a passing star , or the galactic tide , the tidal force exerted by the Milky Way . 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 Much of the Solar System is still unknown . The Sun 's gravitational field is estimated to dominate the gravitational forces of surrounding stars out to about two light years ( 125 @,@ 000 AU ) . Lower estimates for the radius of the Oort cloud , by contrast , do not place it farther than 50 @,@ 000 AU . Despite discoveries such as Sedna , the region between the Kuiper belt and the Oort cloud , an area tens of thousands of AU in radius , is still virtually unmapped . There are also ongoing studies of the region between Mercury and the Sun . Objects may yet be discovered in the Solar System 's uncharted regions . 
 Currently , the furthest known objects , such as Comet West have aphelia around 70 @,@ 000 AU from the Sun , but as the Oort cloud becomes better known , this may change . 
 = = Galactic context = = 
 The Solar System is located in the Milky Way , a barred spiral galaxy with a diameter of about 100 @,@ 000 light @-@ years containing about 200 billion stars . The Sun resides in one of the Milky Way 's outer spiral arms , known as the Orion – Cygnus Arm or Local Spur . The Sun lies between 25 @,@ 000 and 28 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from the Galactic Centre , and its speed within the Milky Way is about 220 km / s , so that it completes one revolution every 225 – 250 million years . This revolution is known as the Solar System 's galactic year . The solar apex , the direction of the Sun 's path through interstellar space , is near the constellation Hercules in the direction of the current location of the bright star Vega . The plane of the ecliptic lies at an angle of about 60 ° to the galactic plane . 
 The Solar System 's location in the Milky Way is a factor in the evolutionary history of life on Earth . Its orbit is close to circular , and orbits near the Sun are at roughly the same speed as that of the spiral arms . Therefore , the Sun passes through arms only rarely . Because spiral arms are home to a far larger concentration of supernovae , gravitational instabilities , and radiation that could disrupt the Solar System , this has given Earth long periods of stability for life to evolve . The Solar System also lies well outside the star @-@ crowded environs of the galactic centre . Near the centre , gravitational tugs from nearby stars could perturb bodies in the Oort cloud and send many comets into the inner Solar System , producing collisions with potentially catastrophic implications for life on Earth . The intense radiation of the galactic centre could also interfere with the development of complex life . Even at the Solar System 's current location , some scientists have speculated that recent supernovae may have adversely affected life in the last 35 @,@ 000 years , by flinging pieces of expelled stellar core towards the Sun , as radioactive dust grains and larger , comet @-@ like bodies . 
 = = = Neighbourhood = = = 
 The Solar System is in the Local Interstellar Cloud or Local Fluff . It is thought to be near the neighbouring G @-@ Cloud but it is not known if the Solar System is embedded in the Local Interstellar Cloud , or if it is in the region where the Local Interstellar Cloud and G @-@ Cloud are interacting . The Local Interstellar Cloud is an area of denser cloud in an otherwise sparse region known as the Local Bubble , an hourglass @-@ shaped cavity in the interstellar medium roughly 300 light @-@ years ( ly ) across . The bubble is suffused with high @-@ temperature plasma , that suggests it is the product of several recent supernovae . 
 There are relatively few stars within ten light @-@ years of the Sun . The closest is the triple star system Alpha Centauri , which is about 4 @.@ 4 light @-@ years away . Alpha Centauri A and B are a closely tied pair of Sun @-@ like stars , whereas the small red dwarf , Proxima Centauri , orbits the pair at a distance of 0 @.@ 2 light @-@ year . The stars next closest to the Sun are the red dwarfs Barnard 's Star ( at 5 @.@ 9 ly ) , Wolf 359 ( 7 @.@ 8 ly ) , and Lalande 21185 ( 8 @.@ 3 ly ) . 
 The largest nearby star is Sirius , a bright main @-@ sequence star roughly 8 @.@ 6 light @-@ years away and roughly twice the Sun 's mass and that is orbited by a white dwarf , Sirius B. The nearest brown dwarfs are the binary Luhman 16 system at 6 @.@ 6 light @-@ years . Other systems within ten light @-@ years are the binary red @-@ dwarf system Luyten 726 @-@ 8 ( 8 @.@ 7 ly ) and the solitary red dwarf Ross 154 ( 9 @.@ 7 ly ) . The closest solitary Sun @-@ like star to the Solar System is Tau Ceti at 11 @.@ 9 light @-@ years . It has roughly 80 % of the Sun 's mass but only 60 % of its luminosity . The closest confirmed exoplanet to the Sun orbits the red dwarf Gliese 674 , 15 light years away . It has a mass similar to that of Uranus and an orbital period of just five days . The closest known free @-@ floating planetary @-@ mass object to the Sun is WISE 0855 − 0714 , an object with a mass less than 10 Jupiter masses roughly 7 light @-@ years away . 
 = = = Comparison with other planetary systems = = = 
 Compared to other planetary systems the Solar System stands out in lacking planets interior to the orbit of Mercury . The known Solar System also lacks super @-@ Earths ( Planet Nine could be a super @-@ Earth beyond the known Solar System ) . Uncommonly , it has only small rocky planets and large gas giants ; elsewhere planets of intermediate size are typical — both rocky and gas — so there is no " gap " as seen between the size of Earth and of Neptune ( with a radius 3 @.@ 8 times as large ) . Also , these super @-@ Earths have closer orbits than Mercury . This led to hypothesis that all planetary systems start with many close @-@ in planets , and that typically a sequence of their collisions causes consolidation of mass into few larger planets , but in case of the Solar System the collisions caused their destruction and ejection . 
 The orbits of Solar System planets are nearly circular . Compared to other systems , they have smaller orbital eccentricity . Although there are attempts to explain it partly with a bias in the radial @-@ velocity detection method and partly with long interactions of a quite high number of planets , the exact causes remain undetermined . 
 = = Visual summary = = 
 This section is a sampling of Solar System bodies , selected for size and quality of imagery , and sorted by volume . Some omitted objects are larger than the ones included here , notably Eris , because these have not been imaged in high quality . 
 = Gerald Zahorchak = 
 Gerald L. Zahorchak is an American educator and the former Secretary of Education for the Pennsylvania Department of Education , a position he held from 2006 to 2010 . Throughout the 1980s and 1990s , Zahorchak worked at various Pennsylvania public school districts in a number of positions , including teacher , football coach , principal , federal programs director , strategic planning coordinator and personnel director . Zahorchak worked as superintendent of the Greater Johnstown School District in Cambria County from 1997 to 2003 , when he was chosen to be Deputy Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education for the state . Governor Ed Rendell appointed him Secretary of Education in 2005 . 
 During his tenure as secretary , Zahorchak implemented state funding for pre @-@ kindergarten and full @-@ day kindergarten , developed a new school funding formula , helped increase education funding for school districts , and established the Keystone Exams and the state 's Standards Aligned System . In 2010 , Zahorchak announced he would leave the Secretary of Education position , coinciding with Rendell 's pending departure from the governorship . On April 22 , 2010 , Zahorchak was selected to be superintendent of the Allentown School District in Allentown , Pennsylvania , where he vowed to establish regular updates to families about their students education , improve safety in schools and implement incentives to attract qualified minorities and top education students into teaching positions . 
 = = Early career = = 
 A native of Johnstown , Pennsylvania , Zahorchak received a bachelor 's degree master in 1980 from Saint Francis University in Loretto , Pennsylvania , and a master of education degree from Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 1986 . In 1994 , Zahorchak received his doctorate in education from Pennsylvania State University , where he wrote his doctoral dissertation on state policy @-@ making . Zahorchak began his educational career in 1980 at the Greater Johnstown School District in Cambria County , Pennsylvania , where he spent two years an elementary school teacher . In 1985 , he became a middle school reading and language arts in the North Star School District in Somerset County , where he also coached varsity high school football . Zahorchak taught at North Star until 1989 , when he started working at the Shanksville @-@ Stonycreek School District , also in Somerset County . During his three years in the district , he worked as an elementary and secondary principal , as well as a federal programs director . In 1992 , he returned to the North Star School District as a principal and strategic planning coordinator . Zahorchak also previously served as an elected member of the Greater Johnstown School Board , and was a Johnstown city councilman , the Johnston deputy major and president of the Johnstown Rotary in 2003 . 
 Zahorchak returned to the Greater Johnstown School District in 1996 as a federal programs and personnel director . In 1997 , he was promoted to superintendent , a position he held for six years . During his tenure as superintendent , Zahorchak implemented full @-@ day kindergarten , pre @-@ kindergarten and tutoring programs . He also pursued high school reform and hired reading and math coaches to boost student learning . 
 = = Early state career = = 
 In March 2003 , Pennsylvania Secretary of Education Vicki Phillips hired Zahorchak as Deputy Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education , where he oversaw the education of more than 1 @.@ 8 million children public school children in the state . Zahorchak helped implement the release of Pennsylvania 's first Academic Achievement Reports , and led the development and implementation of support systems for public schools trying to meet No Child Left Behind targets . By 2005 , Zahorchak was making a yearly salary of $ 124 @,@ 458 . 
 Zahorchak served as acting education secretary from August 2004 , when Phillips left the position , to September 2004 , when Francis Barnes was hired . During the Barnes administration , Governor Ed Rendell encouraged local Pennsylvania school boards to participate in Act 72 , a state property tax @-@ relief program . Act 72 used proceeds from slot @-@ machine gambling to finance property tax cuts from homeowners , and included with spending restrictions in exchange for the tax cuts . Barnes himself did not support the program , and most school boards rejected it because of the spending restrictions . Zahorchak , however voiced support for Act 72 and helped Rendell lobby local school districts to support it , which increased his visibility statewide . Zahorchak claimed Act 72 " includes real property tax relief that shifts more of the responsibility for school funding back to the state " . When Barnes resigned in September 2005 , Zahorchak was again tapped to serve as acting secretary and was widely considered the most qualified candidate for the permanent position , although Governor Ed Rendell engaged in a thorough search for other potential candidates around the state . 
 = = Secretary of Education = = 
 Zahorchak was appointed state Secretary of Education on October 5 , 2005 , by Governor Ed Rendell , following the resignation of former Secretary Francis Barnes . He was considered highly regarded by both Democratic and Republican lawmakers involved in education issues . During his Pennsylvania State Senate confirmation hearing in December 2005 , Zahorchak said he supported the state 's $ 44 million Educational Improvement Tax Credit , which provides tax breaks for businesses that support public education programs and private school scholarships . Zahorchak also said he believed basic education should be the state 's primary fiscal educational investment , rather than special education or higher education . The Pennsylvania State Senate Education Committee unanimously approved Zahorchak during his confirmation hearing on December 13 , 2005 , and the full senate unanimously confirmed him on February 7 , 2006 . 
 Zahorchak was a steady supporter of Rendell 's education proposals . However , he maintained that he could still be an independent voice within the administration , and claimed , " I happen to agree with the outcomes because I 'm in the mix of making determinations of our policy decisions . " In addition to Act 72 , Zahorchak supported a Rendell proposal to require superintendents and principals in struggling school districts to improve math and reading test scores in order to keep their jobs , an idea that was not embraced by the Pennsylvania Legislature . In 2006 , Zahorchak said he supported requiring high @-@ school students to pass exit exams before they could graduate , although he acknowledged implementing such a testing program would be a long and difficult effort . At the time , the state required students to demonstrate proficiency in math and reading before they could graduate , but allowed local districts to decide whether that should entail passing the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment math and reading tests or alternative tests in the subjects . Zahorchak said , " I think it 's a real disservice to graduate a student who 's fundamentally not at the standard level . " However , Zahorchak also said students should be given alternative ways to demonstrate they are ready for college or the work force besides exams . 
 As secretary , Zahorchak implemented state funding for pre @-@ kindergarten and full @-@ day kindergarten , training for principals , and easier ways to transfer college credits from one school to another . He has managed $ 200 million in Accountability Block Grants that were used for tutoring , math and literacy coaching , and led the development of Pennsylvania Inspired Leadership , a legislative initiative to develop and support educational leaders in the state . In 2008 , Rendell and Zahorchak unveiled the first new school funding formula in about two decades , which set out to more fair than previous formulas and better meet the specific needs of individual school districts . The formula would give more money to districts with large numbers of children living in poverty . Other factors considered under the formula were cost of living , district size , enrollment growth and the amount of students learning to speak English . The formula originally called for increasing Pennsylvania education spending by $ 2 @.@ 6 billion over the next six years , starting with an additional $ 291 million in 2008 – 09 , although the final budget passed by the state reduced that expenditure to $ 274 million . 
 Zahorchak spearheaded the establishment of the Keystone Exams , state @-@ created math , science and social studies tests that high school students would be required to pass a majority of in order to graduate . The measure was met with criticism by the Pennsylvania School Boards Association and others who felt the plan would be expensive and would undermine local school boards ' authority to set graduation requirements . The <unk> agreed to support the Keystone Exams under a compromise that schools might not have to give the tests if their own final exams are rigorous enough . The Keystone Exams were approved in 2009 and will first take effect starting with the class of 2015 . Zahorchak also established the state 's Standards Aligned System , which created a standardized set of diagnostic tests and curriculum guides for local school districts . The standards were aligned to six components : a curriculum framework , assessment systems , best teaching practices , emotional support practices , proven research resources and best interventions for accommodations for children who struggle . Within two years , most public school districts within Pennsylvania were using Standards Aligned System in some form . 
 In December 2009 , Zahorchak received an honorary doctor of laws degree from Indiana University of Pennsylvania , making him one of about only 50 people to receive the distinction . In 2010 , Zahorchak helped lead the application for federal funding through Race to the Top , a competitive grant program that encourages innovation and reform throughout public education . Zahorchak said the plan he drafted would double the number of students meeting math and reading proficiency targets by 2014 . About 120 school districts and 59 charter schools representing roughly 650 @,@ 000 students signed on for the application , which could have brought the state $ 400 million . However , Pennsylvania was not included among the states to receive money in the first round of Race to the Top , where funds were awarded only to Delaware and Tennessee for their reform measures . Zahorchak said feedback from the rejected application would be used to strengthen another application in the second round . 
 Zahorchak announced he would resign as education secretary on May 7 , 2010 . His decision to leave was spurred by the pending end of the Rendell administration , with the governor leaving the office by January 2011 . At the time of his departure , there were no public school districts in the state with more than half of their students testing below basic levels in state standardized tests , although 14 districts fit that criterion before Zahorchak took the job . 
 = = Post @-@ Secretary career = = 
 Zahorchak was unanimously selected to be superintendent of the Allentown School District in Allentown , Pennsylvania on April 22 , 2010 . His five @-@ year contract began on July 1 , 2010 , with a starting yearly salary of $ 195 @,@ 000 . Zahorchak is the 16th superintendent of the district , which serves about 18 @,@ 300 students and is the fourth largest public school district in Pennsylvania . He was chosen over four potential candidates , including former Harrisburg School District Superintendent Gerald Kohn , deputy superintendent of St. Louis Public Schools <unk> Purcell and School District of Philadelphia Regional Superintendent Lucy D. Feria . The Allentown position was the only job Zahorchak sought as he considered leaving the Secretary of Education position . 
 Zahorchak said he plans to install a system that would provide regular updates to families on the academic performance of their children and push them toward tangible improvement goals . In response to recent student violence problems at the William Allen High School , Zahorchak identified one of his priorities as strengthening the district 's code of conduct and citizenship programs . He also announced he would seek to replace retiring teachers with highly skilled minority candidates , and would create incentive programs to lure top students into teaching positions if they agreed to spend at least five years teaching in Allentown schools . 
 Shortly after it was announced that all four Allentown School District middle schools failed to meet PSSA standards in 2009 @-@ 10 , Zahorchak proposed a major overhaul that would effectively eliminate all the district 's middle schools and change elementary schools to a kindergarten through eighth grade model . On August 26 , 2010 , the school board approved a study of the district 's facilities which would look into that proposal , or an alternative of building a fifth middle school in East Allentown to reduce the district 's middle school student population per building . The Morning Call said if approved , Zahorchak 's proposal would be " the biggest overhaul of the city 's educational landscape in 30 years " . 
 On October 14 , the Allentown School Board Education Committee signed off on Zahorchak 's proposed five @-@ year leadership and curriculum plans " Pathways to Success " . The full board will determine whether to adopt it on October 28 . Among the elements of the plan were social supports to help students transition from one grade level to the next , as well as the introduction to students of college information and career choices as early as elementary school , to ensure they understand their options after high school . The plan would also align programs and curricula across the district , establish a network to provide students better access to college courses and tutoring , and a push for more students to take advanced placement courses . Additionally , the plan would require high schoolers to pass mandatory , internationally recognized exit exams to graduate from high school . 
 The committee signed off on all of Zahorchak 's proposals except for his call to remove four principals in exchange for up to $ 15 million in federal grants that mandate leadership or staff changes as a condition for receiving the money . Zahorchak proposed transferring the principals from the Allen and <unk> high schools , Central Elementary and Harrison @-@ Morton Middle School to the district 's nonprofit foundation , then use the federal grant money to open a special school for advanced placement and honors students . The committee did not vote or comment on the matter on October 14 . Zahorchak said he still planned to pursue the plan but apologized for speaking to the media about it on October 12 before discussing it with the district and staff , a move that caused angst among the staff and some members of the public . 
 On March 24 , Zahorchak 's proposal for district wide reform will be put before the Allentown School Board . The plan for reform is based primarily on financial expectations within the district . While the plan calls for the hiring of new teachers who will not be full @-@ time and not on district payroll , it also calls for the termination of 300 + teachers . Staff members from each of the Allentown School District 's schools will attend the meeting in order to overhaul the plan . 
 By July 1 , 2011 , the school board approved a budget that saw less than 60 professionals educators being furloughed . The budget continued to endorse the Pathways to Success Program . 
 On August 17 , 2011 , Zahorchak resigned as superintendent and was retained as Director of Strategic Initiatives . Cost savings was cited by the ASD board as the reason for the resignation . Other issues with Zahorchak 's management style , initiatives , and actions were also reported as contributing to the mutually accepted resignation . 
 = Tree = 
 In botany , a tree is a perennial plant with an elongated stem , or trunk , supporting branches and leaves in most species . In some usages , the definition of a tree may be narrower , including only woody plants with secondary growth , plants that are usable as lumber or plants above a specified height . Trees are not a taxonomic group but include a variety of plant species that have independently evolved a woody trunk and branches as a way to tower above other plants to compete for sunlight . In looser senses , the taller palms , the tree ferns , bananas and bamboos are also trees . Trees tend to be long @-@ lived , some reaching several thousand years old . The tallest known tree , a coast redwood named Hyperion , stands 115 @.@ 6 m ( 379 ft ) high . Trees have been in existence for 370 million years . It is estimated that there are just over 3 trillion mature trees in the world . 
 A tree typically has many secondary branches supported clear of the ground by the trunk . This trunk typically contains woody tissue for strength , and vascular tissue to carry materials from one part of the tree to another . For most trees it is surrounded by a layer of bark which serves as a protective barrier . Below the ground , the roots branch and spread out widely ; they serve to anchor the tree and extract moisture and nutrients from the soil . Above ground , the branches divide into smaller branches and shoots . The shoots typically bear leaves , which capture light energy and convert it into sugars by photosynthesis , providing the food for the tree 's growth and development . Flowers and fruit may also be present , but some trees , such as conifers , instead have pollen cones and seed cones ; others , such as tree ferns , produce spores instead . 
 Trees play a significant role in reducing erosion and moderating the climate . They remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store large quantities of carbon in their tissues . Trees and forests provide a habitat for many species of animals and plants . Tropical rainforests are one of the most biodiverse habitats in the world . Trees provide shade and shelter , timber for construction , fuel for cooking and heating , and fruit for food as well as having many other uses . In parts of the world , forests are shrinking as trees are cleared to increase the amount of land available for agriculture . Because of their longevity and usefulness , trees have always been revered , with sacred groves in various cultures , and they play a role in many of the world 's mythologies . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Although " tree " is a term of common parlance , there is no universally recognised precise definition of what a tree is , either botanically or in common language . In its broadest sense , a tree is any plant with the general form of an elongated stem , or trunk , which supports the photosynthetic leaves or branches at some distance above the ground . Trees are also typically defined by height , with smaller plants from 0 @.@ 5 to 10 m ( 1 @.@ 6 to 32 @.@ 8 ft ) being called shrubs , so the minimum height of a tree is only loosely defined . Large herbaceous plants such as papaya and bananas are trees in this broad sense . 
 A commonly applied narrower definition is that a tree has a woody trunk formed by secondary growth , meaning that the trunk thickens each year by growing outwards , in addition to the primary upwards growth from the growing tip . Under such a definition , herbaceous plants such as palms , bananas and papayas are not considered trees regardless of their height , growth form or stem girth . Certain monocots may be considered trees under a slightly looser definition ; while the Joshua tree , bamboos and palms do not have secondary growth and never produce true wood with growth rings , they may produce " pseudo @-@ wood " by <unk> cells formed by primary growth . 
 Aside from structural definitions , trees are commonly defined by use , for instance as those plants which yield lumber . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The tree growth habit is an evolutionary adaptation found in different groups of plants : by growing taller , trees are able to compete better for sunlight . Trees tend to be long @-@ lived , some reaching several thousand years old , as well as tall . Trees have modified structures such as thicker stems composed of specialized cells that add structural strength and durability , allowing them to grow taller than non @-@ woody plants and to spread out their foliage . They differ from shrubs , which are also woody plants , by usually growing larger and having a single main stem ; but the distinction between a small tree and a large shrub is not always clear , made more confusing by the fact that trees may be reduced in size under harsher environmental conditions such as on mountains and subarctic areas . The tree form has evolved separately in unrelated classes of plants in response to similar environmental challenges , making it a classic example of parallel evolution . With an estimated 100 @,@ 000 species , the number of trees worldwide might total twenty @-@ five percent of all living plant species . The greatest number of these grow in tropical regions and many of these areas have not yet been fully surveyed by botanists , making tree diversity and ranges poorly known . 
 Trees exist in two different groups of vascular or higher plants , the gymnosperms and the angiosperms . The gymnosperm trees include conifers , cycads , <unk> and <unk> ; they produce seeds which are not enclosed in fruits , but in open structures such as pine cones , and many have tough waxy leaves , such as pine needles . Most angiosperm trees are <unk> , the " true dicotyledons " , so named because the seeds contain two cotyledons or seed leaves . There are also some trees among the old lineages of flowering plants called basal angiosperms or <unk> ; these include <unk> , Magnolia , nutmeg and avocado , while trees such as bamboo , palms and bananas are monocots . 
 Wood gives structural strength to the trunk of a tree ; this supports the plant as it grows larger . The vascular system of trees allows water , nutrients and other chemicals to be distributed around the plant , and without it trees would not be able to grow as large as they do . Trees , as relatively tall plants , need to draw water up the stem through the xylem from the roots by the suction produced as water evaporates from the leaves . If insufficient water is available the leaves will die . The three main parts of trees include the root , stem , and leaves ; they are integral parts of the vascular system which interconnects all the living cells . In trees and other plants that develop wood , the vascular cambium allows the expansion of vascular tissue that produces woody growth . Because this growth ruptures the epidermis of the stem , woody plants also have a cork cambium that develops among the phloem . The cork cambium gives rise to thickened cork cells to protect the surface of the plant and reduce water loss . Both the production of wood and the production of cork are forms of secondary growth . 
 Trees are either evergreen , having foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year , or deciduous , shedding their leaves at the end of the growing season and then having a dormant period without foliage . Most conifers are evergreens but <unk> ( Larix and <unk> ) are deciduous , dropping their needles each autumn , and some species of cypress ( <unk> , Metasequoia and Taxodium ) shed small leafy shoots annually in a process known as <unk> . The crown is a name for the spreading top of a tree including the branches and leaves , while the uppermost layer in a forest , formed by the crowns of the trees , is known as the canopy . A sapling is a young tree . 
 Many tall palms are herbaceous monocots ; these do not undergo secondary growth and never produce wood . In many tall palms , the terminal bud on the main stem is the only one to develop , so they have unbranched trunks with large spirally arranged leaves . Some of the tree ferns , order <unk> , have tall straight trunks , growing up to 20 metres ( 66 ft ) , but these are composed not of wood but of rhizomes which grow vertically and are covered by numerous adventitious roots . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The number of trees in the world , according to a 2015 estimate , is 3 @.@ 04 trillion , of which 1 @.@ 39 trillion ( 46 % ) are in the tropics or sub @-@ tropics , 0 @.@ 61 trillion ( 20 % ) in the temperate zones , and 0 @.@ 74 trillion ( 24 % ) in the coniferous boreal forests . The estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates , and is based on tree densities measured on over 400 @,@ 000 plots . It remains subject to a wide margin of error , not least because the samples are mainly from Europe and North America . The estimate suggests that about 15 billion trees are cut down annually and about 5 billion are planted . In the 12 @,@ 000 years since the start of human agriculture , the number of trees worldwide has decreased by 46 % . 
 In suitable environments , such as the Daintree Rainforest in Queensland , or the mixed podocarp and broadleaf forest of Ulva Island , New Zealand , forest is the more @-@ or @-@ less stable climatic climax community at the end of a plant succession , where open areas such as grassland are colonised by taller plants , which in turn give way to trees that eventually form a forest canopy . 
 In cool temperate regions , conifers often predominate ; a widely distributed climax community in the far north of the northern hemisphere is moist taiga or northern coniferous forest ( also called boreal forest ) . Taiga is the world 's largest land biome , forming 29 % of the world 's forest cover . The long cold winter of the far north is unsuitable for plant growth and trees must grow rapidly in the short summer season when the temperature rises and the days are long . Light is very limited under their dense cover and there may be little plant life on the forest floor , although fungi may abound . Similar woodland is found on mountains where the altitude causes the average temperature to be lower thus reducing the length of the growing season . 
 Where rainfall is relatively evenly spread across the seasons in temperate regions , temperate broadleaf and mixed forest typified by species like oak , beech , birch and maple is found . Temperate forest is also found in the southern hemisphere , as for example in the Eastern Australia temperate forest , characterized by Eucalyptus forest and open acacia woodland . 
 In tropical regions with a monsoon or monsoon @-@ like climate , where a drier part of the year alternates with a wet period as in the Amazon rainforest , different species of broad @-@ leaved trees dominate the forest , some of them being deciduous . In tropical regions with a drier savanna climate and insufficient rainfall to support dense forests , the canopy is not closed , and plenty of sunshine reaches the ground which is covered with grass and scrub . Acacia and baobab are well adapted to living in such areas . 
 = = Parts and function = = 
 = = = Roots = = = 
 The roots of a tree serve to anchor it to the ground and gather water and nutrients to transfer to all parts of the tree . They are also used for reproduction , defence , survival , energy storage and many other purposes . The radicle or embryonic root is the first part of a seedling to emerge from the seed during the process of germination . This develops into a taproot which goes straight downwards . Within a few weeks lateral roots branch out of the side of this and grow horizontally through the upper layers of the soil . In most trees , the taproot eventually withers away and the wide @-@ spreading laterals remain . Near the tip of the finer roots are single cell root hairs . These are in immediate contact with the soil particles and can absorb water and nutrients such as potassium in solution . The roots require oxygen to respire and only a few species such as the mangrove and the pond cypress ( Taxodium <unk> ) can live in permanently waterlogged soil . 
 In the soil , the roots encounter the hyphae of fungi . Many of these are known as mycorrhiza and form a mutualistic relationship with the tree roots . Some are specific to a single tree species , which will not flourish in the absence of its mycorrhizal associate . Others are generalists and associate with many species . The tree acquires minerals such as phosphorus from the fungus while it obtains the carbohydrate products of photosynthesis from the tree . The hyphae of the fungus can link different trees and a network is formed , transferring nutrients from one place to another . The fungus promotes growth of the roots and helps protect the trees against predators and pathogens . It can also limit damage done to a tree by pollution as the fungus accumulate heavy metals within its tissues . Fossil evidence shows that roots have been associated with mycorrhizal fungi since the early Paleozoic , four hundred million years ago , when the first vascular plants colonised dry land . 
 Some trees such as the alders ( Alnus species ) have a symbiotic relationship with Frankia species , a filamentous bacterium that can fix nitrogen from the air , converting it into ammonia . They have <unk> root nodules on their roots in which the bacteria live . This process enables the tree to live in low nitrogen habitats where they would otherwise be unable to thrive . The plant hormones called <unk> initiate root nodule formation , in a process closely related to mycorrhizal association . 
 It has been demonstrated that some trees are interconnected through their root system , forming a colony . The interconnections are made by the <unk> process , a kind of natural grafting or welding of vegetal tissues . The tests to demonstrate this networking are performed by injecting chemicals , sometimes radioactive , into a tree , and then checking for its presence in neighboring trees . 
 The roots are , generally , an underground part of the tree , but some tree species have evolved roots that are aerial . The common purposes for aerial roots may be of two kinds , to contribute to the mechanical stability of the tree , and to obtain oxygen from air . An instance of mechanical stability enhancement is the red mangrove that develops prop roots that loop out of the trunk and branches and descend vertically into the mud . A similar structure is developed by the Indian banyan . Many large trees have buttress roots which flare out from the lower part of the trunk . These brace the tree rather like angle brackets and provide stability , reducing sway in high winds . They are particularly prevalent in tropical rainforests where the soil is poor and the roots are close to the surface . 
 Some tree species have developed root extensions that pop out of soil , in order to get oxygen , when it is not available in the soil because of excess water . These root extensions are called <unk> , and are present , among others , in black mangrove and pond cypress . 
 = = = Trunk = = = 
 The main purpose of the trunk is to raise the leaves above the ground , enabling the tree to reach the light and survive : the tree can overtop other plants and shade them out . It also performs the task of transporting water and nutrients from the roots to the aerial parts of the tree and to distribute the food produced by the leaves to all other parts including the roots . 
 In the case of angiosperms and gymnosperms , the outermost layer of the trunk is the bark and is mostly composed of dead cells . It provides a thick , waterproof covering to the living inner tissue . It protects the trunk against the elements , disease , animal attack and fire . It is perforated by a large number of fine breathing pores called lenticels , through which oxygen diffuses . Bark is continually replaced by a living layer of cells called the cork cambium . The London plane ( Platanus × <unk> ) periodically sheds its bark in large flakes . Similarly , the bark of the silver birch ( Betula pendula ) peels off in strips . As the tree 's girth expands , newer layers of bark are larger in circumference , and the older layers develop fissures in many species . In some trees such as the pine ( Pinus species ) the bark exudes sticky resin which deters attackers whereas in rubber trees ( Hevea brasiliensis ) it is a milky latex that oozes out . The quinine bark tree ( Cinchona officinalis ) contains bitter substances to make the bark unpalatable . Large tree @-@ like plants with lignified trunks in the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> such as the tree ferns , palms , cycads and bamboos have no true bark , but they do have an outer protective covering of some form . 
 Although the bark functions as a protective barrier , it is itself attacked by boring insects such as beetles . These lay their eggs in crevices and the larvae chew their way through the cellulose tissues leaving a gallery of tunnels . This may allow fungal spores to gain admittance and attack the tree . Dutch elm disease is caused by a fungus ( Ophiostoma species ) carried from one elm tree to another by various beetles . The tree reacts to the growth of the fungus by blocking off the xylem tissue carrying sap upwards and the branch above , and eventually the whole tree , is deprived of nourishment and dies . In Britain in the 1990s , 25 million elm trees were killed by this disease . 
 The innermost layer of bark is known as the phloem and this is involved in the transport of the sap containing the sugars made by photosynthesis to other parts of the tree . It is a soft spongy layer of living cells , some of which are arranged end to end to form tubes . These are supported by parenchyma cells which provide padding and include fibres for strengthening the tissue . Inside the phloem is a layer of undifferentiated cells one cell thick called the vascular cambium layer . The cells are continually dividing , creating phloem cells on the outside and wood cells known as xylem on the inside . 
 The newly created xylem is the sapwood . It is composed of water @-@ conducting cells and associated cells which are often living , and is usually pale in colour . It transports water and minerals from the roots to the upper parts of the tree . The oldest , inner part of the sapwood is progressively converted into heartwood as new sapwood is formed at the cambium . The conductive cells of the heartwood are blocked in some species , and the surrounding cells are more often dead . <unk> is usually darker in colour than the sapwood . It is the dense central core of the trunk giving it rigidity . Three quarters of the dry mass of the xylem is cellulose , a polysaccharide , and most of the remainder is lignin , a complex polymer . A transverse section through a tree trunk or a horizontal core will show concentric circles or lighter or darker wood - tree rings . These rings are the annual growth rings There may also be rays running at right angles to growth rings . These are vascular rays which are thin sheets of living tissue permeating the wood . Many older trees may become hollow but may still stand upright for many years . 
 = = = Buds and growth = = = 
 Trees do not usually grow continuously throughout the year but mostly have spurts of active expansion followed by periods of rest . This pattern of growth is related to climatic conditions ; growth normally ceases when conditions are either too cold or too dry . In readiness for the inactive period , trees form buds to protect the meristem , the zone of active growth . Before the period of dormancy , the last few leaves produced at the tip of a twig form scales . These are thick , small and closely wrapped and enclose the growing point in a waterproof sheath . Inside this bud there is a rudimentary stalk and neatly folded miniature leaves , ready to expand when the next growing season arrives . Buds also form in the axils of the leaves ready to produce new side shoots . A few trees , such as the eucalyptus , have " naked buds " with no protective scales and some conifers , such as the Lawson 's cypress , have no buds but instead have little pockets of meristem concealed among the scale @-@ like leaves . 
 When growing conditions improve , such as the arrival of warmer weather and the longer days associated with spring in temperate regions , growth starts again . The expanding shoot pushes its way out , shedding the scales in the process . These leave behind scars on the surface of the twig . The whole year 's growth may take place in just a few weeks . The new stem is <unk> at first and may be green and downy . The Arecaceae ( palms ) have their leaves spirally arranged on an unbranched trunk . In some tree species in temperate climates , a second spurt of growth , a Lammas growth may occur which is believed to be a strategy to compensate for loss of early foliage to insect predators . 
 Primary growth is the elongation of the stems and roots . Secondary growth consists of a progressive thickening and strengthening of the tissues as the outer layer of the epidermis is converted into bark and the cambium layer creates new phloem and xylem cells . The bark is inelastic . Eventually the growth of a tree slows down and stops and it gets no taller . If damage occurs the tree may in time become hollow . 
 = = = Leaves = = = 
 Leaves are structures specialized for photosynthesis and are arranged on the tree in such a way as to maximise their exposure to light without shading each other . They are an important investment by the tree and may be thorny or contain <unk> , lignins , tannins or poisons to discourage herbivory . Trees have evolved leaves in a wide range of shapes and sizes , in response to environmental pressures including climate and predation . They can be broad or needle @-@ like , simple or compound , lobed or entire , smooth or hairy , delicate or tough , deciduous or evergreen . The needles of coniferous trees are compact but are structurally similar to those of broad @-@ leaved trees . They are adapted for life in environments where resources are low or water is scarce . Frozen ground may limit water availability and conifers are often found in colder places at higher altitudes and higher latitudes than broad leaved trees . In conifers such as fir trees , the branches hang down at an angle to the trunk , enabling them to shed snow . In contrast , broad leaved trees in temperate regions deal with winter weather by shedding their leaves . When the days get shorter and the temperature begins to decrease , the leaves no longer make new chlorophyll and the red and yellow pigments already present in the blades become apparent . Synthesis in the leaf of a plant hormone called auxin also ceases . This causes the cells at the junction of the petiole and the twig to weaken until the joint breaks and the leaf floats to the ground . In tropical and subtropical regions , many trees keep their leaves all year round . Individual leaves may fall intermittently and be replaced by new growth but most leaves remain intact for some time . Other tropical species and those in arid regions may shed all their leaves annually , such as at the start of the dry season . Many deciduous trees flower before the new leaves emerge . A few trees do not have true leaves but instead have structures with similar external appearance such as <unk> – modified stem structures – as seen in the genus <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Tree forms are found in a wide range of plants and their reproductive strategies are substantially the same as shrub or herbaceous plant forms . Many trees are wind pollinated which may be an evolutionary adaptation to take advantage of increased wind speeds high above the ground , particularly in the case of those that produce pollen before the leaves emerge . A vast quantity of pollen is produced because of the low likelihood of any particular grain landing on an appropriate female flower . Wind @-@ pollinated flowers of broad @-@ leaved trees are characterised by a lack of showy parts , no scent and a copious production of pollen , often with separate male and female flowers , or separate male and female trees . The male flowers may be high up in the tree , often in the form of dangling catkins . The female flowers may be lower down the tree . The pollen of pine trees contains air sacs which give it buoyancy and it has been known to travel as far as 800 kilometres ( 500 mi ) . Tree pollen can cause allergies and hay fever . 
 = = = Seeds = = = 
 Seeds are the primary way that trees reproduce and their seeds vary greatly in size and shape . Some of the largest seeds come from trees , but the largest tree , Sequoiadendron giganteum , produces one of the smallest tree seeds . The great diversity in tree fruits and seeds reflects the many different ways that tree species have evolved to disperse their offspring . 
 The single extant species of <unk> ( Ginkgo biloba ) has fleshy seeds produced at the ends of short branches on female trees , and Gnetum , a tropical and subtropical group of gymnosperms produce seeds at the tip of a shoot axis . The seeds of conifers , the largest group of gymnosperms , are enclosed in a cone and most species have seeds that are light and papery that can be blown considerable distances once free from the cone . Sometimes the seed remains in the cone for years waiting for a trigger event to liberate it . Fire stimulates release and germination of seeds of the jack pine , and also enriches the forest floor with wood ash and removes competing vegetation . Similarly , a number of angiosperms including Acacia cyclops and Acacia <unk> have seeds that germinate better after exposure to high temperatures . 
 For a tree seedling to grow into an adult tree it needs light and space . If seeds only fell straight to the ground , competition among the concentrated saplings and the shade of the parent would likely prevent it from flourishing . Many seeds such as birch are small and have papery wings to aid dispersal by the wind . Ash trees and maples have larger seeds with blade shaped wings which spiral down to the ground when released . The kapok tree has cottony threads to catch the breeze . The flame tree does not rely on fire but shoots its seeds through the air when the two sides of its long pods crack apart explosively on drying . The miniature cone @-@ like catkins of Alder trees produce seeds that contain small droplets of oil that help disperse the seeds on the surface of water . Mangroves often grow in water and some species have propagules , which are buoyant fruits with seeds that start germinating before becoming detached from the parent tree . These float on the water and may become lodged on emerging <unk> and successfully take root . Other seeds , such as apple pips and plum stones , have fleshy receptacles and smaller fruits like hawthorns have seeds enclosed in edible tissue ; animals including mammals and birds eat the fruits and either discard the seeds , or swallow them so they pass through the gut to be deposited in the animal 's droppings well away from the parent tree . The germination of some seeds is improved when they are processed in this way . Nuts may be gathered by animals such as squirrels that cache any not immediately consumed . Many of these caches are never revisited , the nut @-@ casing softens with rain and frost , and the seed germinates in the spring . Pine cones may similarly be hoarded by red squirrels , and grizzly bears may help to disperse the seed by raiding squirrel caches . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 The earliest tree @-@ like organisms were tree ferns , horsetails and <unk> , which grew in forests in the Carboniferous period . The first tree may have been <unk> , fossils of which have been found in New York State in 2007 dating back to the Middle Devonian ( about 385 million years ago ) . Prior to this discovery , <unk> was the earliest known tree . Both of these reproduced by spores rather than seeds and are considered to be links between ferns and the gymnosperms which evolved in the Triassic period . The gymnosperms include conifers , cycads , <unk> and <unk> and these may have appeared as a result of a whole genome duplication event which took place about 319 million years ago . <unk> was once a widespread diverse group of which the only survivor is the maidenhair tree Ginkgo biloba . This is considered to be a living fossil because it is virtually unchanged from the fossilised specimens found in Triassic deposits . 
 During the Mesozoic ( 245 to 66 million years ago ) the conifers flourished and became adapted to live in all the major terrestrial habitats . Subsequently the tree forms of flowering plants evolved during the Cretaceous period . These began to dominate the conifers during the Tertiary era ( 66 to 2 million years ago ) when forests covered the globe . When the climate cooled 1 @.@ 5 million years ago and the first of four ice ages occurred , the forests retreated as the ice advanced . In the interglacials , trees recolonised the land that had been covered by ice , only to be driven back again in the next ice age . 
 = = Tree ecology = = 
 Trees are an important part of the terrestrial ecosystem , providing essential habitats including many kinds of forest for communities of organisms . <unk> plants such as ferns , some mosses , liverworts , orchids and some species of parasitic plants ( e.g. , mistletoe ) hang from branches ; these along with arboreal lichens , algae , and fungi provide micro @-@ habitats for themselves and for other organisms , including animals . Leaves , flowers and fruits are seasonally available . On the ground underneath trees there is shade , and often there is undergrowth , leaf litter , fallen branches and / or decaying wood that provide other habitat . Trees stabilise the soil , prevent rapid run @-@ off of rain water , help prevent desertification , have a role in climate control and help in the maintenance of biodiversity and ecosystem balance . 
 Many species of tree support their own specialised invertebrates . In their natural habitats , 284 different species of insect have been found on the English oak ( Quercus robur ) and 306 species of invertebrate on the Tasmanian oak ( Eucalyptus obliqua ) . Non @-@ native tree species provide a less biodiverse community , for example in the United Kingdom the sycamore ( Acer pseudoplatanus ) , which originates from southern Europe , has few associated invertebrate species , though its bark supports a wide range of lichens , bryophytes and other epiphytes . 
 In ecosystems such as mangrove swamps , trees play a role in developing the habitat , since the roots of the mangrove trees reduce the speed of flow of tidal currents and trap water @-@ borne sediment , reducing the water depth and creating suitable conditions for further mangrove colonisation . Thus mangrove swamps tend to extend seawards in suitable locations . Mangrove swamps also provide an effective buffer against the more damaging effects of cyclones and tsunamis . 
 = = Uses = = 
 <unk> is the practice of controlling the establishment , growth , composition , health , and quality of forests , which are areas that have a high density of trees . Cultivated trees are planted and tended by humans , usually because they provide food ( fruits or nuts ) , ornamental beauty , or some type of wood product that benefits people . A small wooded area , usually with no undergrowth , is called a grove and a small wood or thicket of trees and bushes is called a coppice or copse . A large area of land covered with trees and undergrowth is called woodland or forest . An area of woodland composed primarily of trees established by planting or artificial seeding is known as a plantation and an area of land planted with fruit or nut trees is an orchard . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 Trees are the source of many of the world 's best known fleshy fruits . Apples , pears , plums , cherries and citrus are all grown commercially in temperate climates and a wide range of edible fruits are found in the tropics . Other commercially important fruit include dates , figs and olives . Palm oil is obtained from the fruits of the oil palm ( Elaeis guineensis ) . The fruits of the cocoa tree ( Theobroma cacao ) are used to make cocoa and chocolate and the berries of coffee trees , Coffea arabica and Coffea <unk> , are processed to extract the coffee beans . In many rural areas of the world , fruit is gathered from forest trees for consumption . Many trees bear edible nuts which can loosely be described as being large , oily kernels found inside a hard shell . These include coconuts ( Cocos nucifera ) , Brazil nuts ( <unk> excelsa ) , pecans ( Carya <unk> ) , hazel nuts ( Corylus ) , almonds ( Prunus dulcis ) , walnuts ( Juglans regia ) , pistachios ( <unk> vera ) and many others . They are high in nutritive value and contain high @-@ quality protein , vitamins and minerals as well as dietary fibre . Walnuts are particularly beneficial to health and contain a higher level of antioxidants than do other nuts . A variety of nut oils are extracted by pressing for culinary use ; some such as walnut , pistachio and hazelnut oils are prized for their distinctive flavours , but they tend to spoil quickly . 
 Many trees have flowers rich in nectar which are attractive to bees . The production of forest honey is an important industry in rural areas of the developing world where it is undertaken by small @-@ scale beekeepers using traditional methods . The flowers of the elder ( <unk> ) are used to make elderflower cordial and petals of the plum ( Prunus spp . ) can be candied . 
 The leaves of trees are widely gathered as fodder for livestock and some can be eaten by humans but they tend to be high in tannins which makes them bitter . Leaves of the curry tree ( <unk> <unk> ) are eaten , those of <unk> lime Citrus × hystrix ( e.g. , Thai food ) Ailanthus ( e.g. , in Korean dishes such as <unk> ) and those of the European bay tree ( <unk> nobilis ) and the California bay tree ( <unk> californica ) are used for flavouring food . Camellia sinensis , the source of tea , is a small tree but seldom reaches its full height , being heavily pruned to make picking the leaves easier . 
 In temperate climates there is a sudden movement of sap at the end of the winter as trees prepare to burst into growth . In North America , the sap of the sugar maple ( Acer saccharum ) is most often used in the production of a sweet liquid , maple syrup . About 90 % of the sap is water , the remaining 10 % being a mixture of various sugars and certain minerals . The sap is harvested by drilling holes in the trunks of the trees and collecting the liquid that flows out of the inserted spigots . It is piped to a <unk> where it is heated to concentrate it and improve its flavour . One litre of maple syrup is obtained from every forty litres of sap and has a sugar content of exactly 66 % . Similarly in northern Europe the spring rise in the sap of the silver birch ( Betula pendula ) is tapped and collected , either to be drunk fresh or fermented into an alcoholic drink . In Alaska , the sap of the sweet birch ( Betula lenta ) is made into a syrup with a sugar content of 67 % . Sweet birch sap is more dilute than maple sap ; a hundred litres are required to make one litre of birch syrup . 
 Various parts of trees are used as spices . These include cinnamon , made from the bark of the cinnamon tree ( Cinnamomum zeylanicum ) and allspice , the dried small fruits of the <unk> tree ( <unk> dioica ) . Nutmeg is a seed found in the fleshy fruit of the nutmeg tree ( <unk> <unk> ) and cloves are the unopened flower buds of the clove tree ( Syzygium <unk> ) . Sassafras oil is an important flavouring obtained from distilling bark from the roots of the white sassafras tree ( Sassafras albidum ) . 
 = = = Fuel = = = 
 Wood has traditionally been used for fuel , especially in rural areas . In less developed nations it may be the only fuel available and collecting firewood is often a time consuming task as it becomes necessary to travel further and further afield in the search for fuel . It is often burned inefficiently on an open fire . In more developed countries other fuels are available and burning wood is a choice rather than a necessity . Modern wood @-@ burning stoves are very fuel efficient and new products such as wood pellets are available to burn . 
 Charcoal can be made by slow pyrolysis of wood by heating it in the absence of air in a kiln . The carefully stacked branches , often oak , are burned with a very limited amount of air . The process of converting them into charcoal takes about fifteen hours . Charcoal is used as a fuel in barbecues and by blacksmiths and has many industrial and other uses . 
 Wood smoke can be used to preserve food . In the hot smoking process the food is exposed to smoke and heat in a controlled environment . The food is ready to eat when the process is complete , having been <unk> and flavoured by the smoke it has absorbed . In the cold process , the temperature is not allowed to rise above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . The flavour of the food is enhanced but raw food requires further cooking . If it is to be preserved , meat should be cured before cold smoking . 
 = = = Timber = = = 
 Timber , " trees that are grown in order to produce wood " is cut into lumber ( sawn wood ) for use in construction . Wood has been an important , easily available material for construction since humans started building shelters . Engineered wood products are available which bind the particles , fibres or veneers of wood together with adhesives to form composite materials . Plastics have taken over from wood for some traditional uses . 
 Wood is used in the construction of buildings , bridges , trackways , piles , poles for power lines , masts for boats , pit props , railway sleepers , fencing , hurdles , shuttering for concrete , pipes , scaffolding and pallets . In housebuilding it is used in joinery , for making joists , roof trusses , roofing shingles , thatching , staircases , doors , window frames , floor boards , parquet flooring , panelling and cladding . 
 Wood is used to construct carts , farm implements , boats , dugout canoes and in shipbuilding . It is used for making furniture , tool handles , boxes , ladders , musical instruments , bows , weapons , matches , clothes pegs , brooms , shoes , baskets , turnery , carving , toys , pencils , rollers , cogs , wooden screws , barrels , coffins , skittles , veneers , artificial limbs , oars , skis , wooden spoons , sports equipment and wooden balls . 
 Wood is pulped for paper and used in the manufacture of cardboard and made into engineered wood products for use in construction such as fibreboard , hardboard , chipboard and plywood . The wood of conifers is known as softwood while that of broad @-@ leaved trees is hardwood . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Besides inspiring artists down the centuries , trees have been used to create art . Living trees have been used in bonsai and in tree shaping , and both living and dead specimens have been sculpted into sometimes fantastic shapes . 
 = = = = Bonsai = = = = 
 Bonsai ( <unk> , lit . The art of growing a miniature tree or trees in a low @-@ sided pot or tray ) is the practice of <unk> non <unk> originated in China and spread to Japan more than a thousand years ago , there are similar practices in other cultures like the living miniature landscapes of Vietnam <unk> non <unk> . The word bonsai is often used in English as an umbrella term for all miniature trees in containers or pots . 
 The purposes of bonsai are primarily contemplation ( for the viewer ) and the pleasant exercise of effort and ingenuity ( for the grower ) . Bonsai practice focuses on long @-@ term cultivation and shaping of one or more small trees growing in a container , beginning with a cutting , seedling , or small tree of a species suitable for bonsai development . Bonsai can be created from nearly any perennial woody @-@ stemmed tree or shrub species that produces true branches and can be cultivated to remain small through pot confinement with crown and root pruning . Some species are popular as bonsai material because they have characteristics , such as small leaves or needles , that make them appropriate for the compact visual scope of bonsai and a miniature deciduous forest can even be created using such species as Japanese maple , Japanese zelkova or hornbeam . 
 = = = = Tree shaping = = = = 
 Tree shaping is the practice of changing living trees and other woody plants into man made shapes for art and useful structures . There are a few different methods of shaping a tree . There is a gradual method and there is an instant method , the gradual method slowly guides the growing tip along predetermined path ways over time where as the instant method bends and weaves saplings 2 to 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long into a shape that becomes more rigid as they thicken up . Most artists use grafting of living trunks , branches , and roots , for art or functional structures and there are plans to grow " living houses " with the branches of trees knitting together to give a solid , weatherproof exterior combined with an interior application of straw and clay to provide a stucco @-@ like inner surface . 
 Tree shaping has been practised for at least several hundred years , the oldest known examples being the living root bridges built and maintained by the Khasi people of Meghalaya , India using the roots of the rubber tree ( Ficus <unk> ) . 
 = = = Bark = = = 
 Cork is produced from the thick bark of the cork oak ( Quercus suber ) . It is harvested from the living trees about once every ten years in an environmentally sustainable industry . More than half the world 's cork comes from Portugal and is largely used to make stoppers for wine bottles . Other uses include floor tiles , bulletin boards , balls , footwear , cigarette tips , packaging , insulation and joints in woodwind instruments . 
 The bark of other varieties of oak has traditionally been used in Europe for the tanning of hides though bark from other species of tree has been used elsewhere . The active ingredient , tannin , is extracted and after various preliminary treatments , the skins are immersed in a series of vats containing solutions in increasing concentrations . The tannin causes the hide to become supple , less affected by water and more resistant to bacterial attack . 
 At least 120 drugs come from plant sources , many of them from the bark of trees . Quinine originates from the cinchona tree ( Cinchona ) and was for a long time the remedy of choice for the treatment of malaria . Aspirin was synthesized to replace the sodium salicylate derived from the bark of willow trees ( Salix ) which had unpleasant side effects . The anti @-@ cancer drug <unk> is derived from taxol , a substance found in the bark of the Pacific yew ( Taxus brevifolia ) . Other tree based drugs come from the paw @-@ paw ( <unk> papaya ) , the cassia ( Cassia spp . ) , the cocoa tree ( Theobroma cacao ) , the tree of life ( <unk> acuminata ) and the downy birch ( Betula pubescens ) . 
 The papery bark of the white birch tree ( Betula papyrifera ) was used extensively by Native Americans . <unk> were covered by it and canoes were constructed from it . Other uses included food containers , hunting and fishing equipment , musical instruments , toys and sledges . Nowadays , bark chips , a by @-@ product of the timber industry , are used as a mulch and as a growing medium for epiphytic plants that need a soil @-@ free compost . 
 = = = Ornamental trees = = = 
 Trees create a visual impact in the same way as do other landscape features and give a sense of maturity and permanence to park and garden . They are grown for the beauty of their forms , their foliage , flowers , fruit and bark and their siting is of major importance in creating a landscape . They can be grouped informally , often surrounded by plantings of bulbs , laid out in stately avenues or used as specimen trees . As living things , their appearance changes with the season and from year to year . 
 Trees are often planted in town environments where they are known as street trees or amenity trees . They can provide shade and cooling through evapotranspiration , absorb greenhouse gasses and pollutants , intercept rainfall and reduce the risk of flooding . It has been shown that they are beneficial to humans in creating a sense of well @-@ being and reducing stress . Many towns have initiated tree @-@ planting programmes . In London for example , there is an initiative to plant 20 @,@ 000 new street trees and to have an increase in tree cover of 5 % by 2025 , equivalent to one tree for every resident . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Latex is a sticky defensive secretion that protects plants against herbivores . Many trees produce it when injured but the main source of the latex used to make natural rubber is the Pará rubber tree ( Hevea brasiliensis ) . Originally used to create bouncy balls and for the waterproofing of cloth , natural rubber is now mainly used in tyres for which synthetic materials have proved less durable . The latex exuded by the <unk> tree ( <unk> bidentata ) is used to make golf balls and is similar to gutta @-@ percha , made from the latex of the " <unk> <unk> " tree <unk> . This is also used as an insulator , particularly of undersea cables , and in dentistry , walking sticks and gun butts . It has now largely been replaced by synthetic materials . 
 Resin is another plant exudate that may have a defensive purpose . It is a viscous liquid composed mainly of volatile terpenes and is produced mostly by coniferous trees . It is used in varnishes , for making small castings and in ten @-@ pin bowling balls . When heated , the terpenes are driven off and the remaining product is called " rosin " and is used by stringed instrumentalists on their bows . Some resins contain essential oils and are used in incense and aromatherapy . Fossilized resin is known as amber and was mostly formed in the Cretaceous ( 145 to 66 million years ago ) or more recently . The resin that oozed out of trees sometimes trapped insects or spiders and these are still visible in the interior of the amber . 
 The camphor tree ( Cinnamomum camphora ) produces an essential oil and the eucalyptus tree ( Eucalyptus globulus ) is the main source of eucalyptus oil which is used in medicine , as a fragrance and in industry . 
 = = Care = = 
 Dead trees pose a safety risk , especially during high winds and severe storms , and removing dead trees involves a financial burden , whereas the presence of healthy trees can clean the air , increase property values , and reduce the temperature of the built environment and thereby reduce building cooling costs . During times of drought , trees can fall into water stress , which may cause a tree to become more susceptible to disease and insect problems , and ultimately may lead to a tree 's death . <unk> trees during dry periods can reduce the risk of water stress and death . Irrigation can be accomplished by use of a garden hose , <unk> hose , sprinkler , or modified five @-@ gallon bucket . 
 = = Mythology = = 
 Trees have been venerated since time immemorial . To the ancient Celts , certain trees , especially the oak , ash and thorn , held special significance as providing fuel , building materials , ornamental objects and weaponry . Other cultures have similarly revered trees , often linking the lives and fortunes of individuals to them or using them as oracles . In Greek mythology , <unk> were believed to be shy nymphs who inhabited trees . 
 The Oubangui people of west Africa plant a tree when a child is born . As the tree flourishes , so does the child but if the tree fails to thrive , the health of the child is considered at risk . When it flowers it is time for marriage . Gifts are left at the tree periodically and when the individual dies , their spirit is believed to live on in the tree . 
 Trees have their roots in the ground and their trunk and branches extended towards the sky . This concept is found in many of the world 's religions as a tree which links the underworld and the earth and holds up the heavens . In Norse mythology , Yggdrasil is a central cosmic tree whose roots and branches extend to various worlds . Various creatures live on it . In India , Kalpavriksha is a wish @-@ fulfilling tree , one of the nine jewels that emerged from the primitive ocean . Icons are placed beneath it to be worshipped , tree nymphs inhabit the branches and it grants favours to the devout who tie threads round the trunk . Democracy started in North America when the Great Peacemaker formed the Iroquois Confederacy , inspiring the warriors of the original five American nations to bury their weapons under the Tree of Peace , an eastern white pine ( Pinus strobus ) . In the creation story in the Bible , the tree of life and the knowledge of good and evil was planted by God in the Garden of Eden . 
 Sacred groves exist in China , India , Africa and elsewhere . They are places where the deities live and where all the living things are either sacred or are companions of the gods . Folklore lays down the supernatural penalties that will result if desecration takes place for example by the felling of trees . Because of their protected status , sacred groves may be the only relicts of ancient forest and have a biodiversity much greater than the surrounding area . Some Ancient Indian tree deities , such as <unk> , the Tamil deity of the tamarind tree , or <unk> , associated with the <unk> tree were seen as manifestations of a goddess who offers her blessings by giving fruits in abundance . 
 = = <unk> trees = = 
 Trees have a theoretical maximum height of 130 m ( 430 ft ) , but the tallest known specimen on earth is believed to be a coast redwood ( Sequoia sempervirens ) at Redwood National Park , California . It has been named Hyperion and is 115 @.@ 6 metres ( 379 ft ) tall . The tallest known broad @-@ leaved tree is a mountain ash ( Eucalyptus regnans ) growing in Tasmania with a height of 99 @.@ 8 m ( 327 ft ) . 
 The largest tree by volume is believed to be a giant sequoia ( Sequoiadendron giganteum ) known as the General Sherman Tree in the Sequoia National Park in Tulare County , California . Only the trunk is used in the calculation and the volume is estimated to be 1 @,@ 487 m3 ( 52 @,@ 500 cu ft ) . 
 The oldest living tree with a verified age is also in California . It is a Great Basin bristlecone pine ( Pinus <unk> ) growing in the White Mountains . It has been dated by drilling a core sample and counting the annual rings . It was estimated to be 5060 years old in 2012 . 
 A little further south , at Santa Maria del Tule , Oaxaca , Mexico , is the tree with the broadest trunk . It is a Montezuma cypress ( Taxodium <unk> ) known as Árbol del Tule and its diameter at breast height is 11 @.@ 62 m ( 38 @.@ 1 ft ) giving it a girth of 36 @.@ 2 m ( 119 ft ) . The tree 's trunk is far from round and the exact dimensions may be misleading as the circumference includes much empty space between the large buttress roots . 
 = Mahanoy Creek = 
 Mahanoy Creek is a 51 @.@ 6 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 83 @.@ 0 km ) tributary of the Susquehanna River in Northumberland and Schuylkill counties , Pennsylvania . There are at least 35 sources of acid mine drainage in the creek 's watershed . Anthracite was mined in the upper part of the Mahanoy Creek watershed in the 19th and 20th centuries . Mahanoy Creek 's tributaries include Schwaben Creek , Zerbe Run , Little Mahanoy Creek , Shenandoah Creek , and North Mahanoy Creek . Little Mahanoy Creek and Schwaben Creek are two streams in the watershed that are unaffected by acid mine drainage . Schwaben Creek has a higher number and diversity of fish species than the main stem . 
 There are two passive treatment systems in the Mahanoy Creek watershed by the Mahanoy Creek Watershed Association . Coal mining has been done in the watershed since the 19th century and continues to some extent in the 21st century . The watershed is in the Western Middle Anthracite Coal Field . 
 = = Course = = 
 Mahanoy Creek 's source is in strip mines in the eastern part of Schuylkill County , near Buck Mountain . It heads west for a short distance before crossing under Pennsylvania Route 54 and entering Mahanoy City , where it picks up the tributary North Mahanoy Creek . Mahanoy Creek continues westward , heading into Mahanoy Township again , and goes through more strip mines . It begins paralleling Bear Ridge for several miles , passing the communities of St. Nicholas and Boston Run before entering Gilberton . In Gilberton , the creek passes under Pennsylvania Route 924 and goes through by the former Mahanoy Plane . Upon leaving Mahanoy Township , the creek enters Butler Township . Soon after entering this township , the creek passes through Girardville , picking up Shenandoah Creek . It parallels Pennsylvania Route 54 for some distance into Ashland . Upon leaving Ashland , the creek stops paralleling Pennsylvania Route 54 and turns south through a gap in Ashland Mountain , leaving behind the strip mines . At Gordon , it picks up Little Mahanoy Creek and then turns west again , meandering out of Butler Township . The creek then briefly meanders through Barry Township before passing into Eldred Township . It flows on the northern side of a mountain in Weiser State Forest . Upon leaving Eldred Township , the creek enters Northumberland County . 
 Mahanoy Creek enters Northumberland County in East Cameron Township . It flows westward for a number of miles through a valley with Line Mountain to the south and Mahanoy Mountain to the north . The creek passes under Pennsylvania Route 125 in this valley . The creek passes into West Cameron Township , flowing west and goes through the township for several miles . It then flows into Little Mahanoy Township . After a short distance , it leaves behind the Line Mountain / Mahanoy Mountain valley and picks up Zerbe Run . Mahanoy Creek then turns southwest and passes by <unk> before cutting through a gap between Little Mountain and Line Mountain and exiting Little Mahanoy Township . At this point , the creek enters Jackson Township and picks up Schwaben Creek , its last tributary , after some distance . Mahanoy Creek then meanders west to its mouth on the Susquehanna River north of Herndon and ten miles south of Sunbury . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Mahanoy Creek 's tributaries include Little Mahanoy Creek , Schwaben Creek , Shenandoah Creek , Waste House Run , North Mahanoy Creek , and Zerbe Run . There are also several unofficially named tributaries with local names , such as " Big Run " and " Big Mine Run " . Only Schwaben Creek and Little Mahanoy Creek are unaffected by acid mine drainage . 
 North Mahanoy Creek starts in unpolluted springs on Locust Mountain and meets the main stem in Mahanoy City . There are strip mines in this tributary 's watershed . Shenandoah Creek , whose tributaries include <unk> Run and Lost Creek , also begins on Locust Mountain and its watershed has an area of 11 @.@ 6 square miles . Shenandoah Creek is contaminated by sewage and mine drainage . The tributary Little Mahanoy Creek starts in <unk> and its watershed has an area of 11 @.@ 6 square miles . No mining has been done in this watershed . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 There are large quantities of dissolved iron and aluminum in the waters of Mahanoy Creek . Additionally , there are trace amounts of various metals , including cobalt , nickel , copper , zinc , and lead , sulfates , manganese , and beryllium . There are traces of numerous other metals in the waters , but their concentrations conform to drinking water standards . 
 Out of the 35 or more acid mine drainage sources in the Mahanoy Creek watershed , the four most significant ones are the Locust Gap Tunnel , the Packer # 5 Breach , the Packer # 5 <unk> , and the Girard Mine seepage . The 15 most significant sources have discharges of between 29 @,@ 200 liters per minute and 680 liters per minute . The pHs of the sources range from 3 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 7 . The iron concentrations at these sites ranges from 2 @.@ 1 to 18 milligrams per liter . The concentrations of manganese ranges from 0 @.@ 95 to 6 @.@ 4 milligrams per liter . 
 The pH of the stream itself ranges from 3 @.@ 6 to 8 @.@ 4 , while the pH of the abandoned mine drainage ranges from 2 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 4 . The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Mahanoy Creek ranges from 2 @.@ 5 to 13 @.@ 1 milligrams per liter , while the concentration in the watershed 's abandoned mine drainage ranges from 0 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter . The dissolved iron concentration in the stream ranges from under 0 @.@ 01 milligrams per liter to 6 @.@ 8 milligrams per liter . The dissolved iron concentration in the abandoned mine drainage ranges from 0 @.@ 01 to 33 milligrams per liter . The amount of dissolved aluminum in the creek ranges from 0 @.@ 01 to 8 @.@ 9 milligrams per liter and the concentration in the abandoned mine drainage ranges from under 0 @.@ 01 to 17 milligrams per liter . The dissolved manganese concentration in the stream water ranges from 0 @.@ 01 to 9 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter and in the abandoned mine drainage it ranges from under 0 @.@ 01 to 9 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of dissolved sulfates in the waters of Mahanoy Creek ranges from 4 to 597 milligrams per liter . In the abandoned mine drainage in the creek 's watershed , it ranges from 18 to 787 milligrams per liter . The dissolved nitrates concentration in the stream waters ranges from less than 0 @.@ 01 to 6 milligrams per liter . The concentration in the abandoned mine drainage ranges from less than 0 @.@ 01 to 0 @.@ 4 milligrams per liter . In the stream water , the concentration of dissolved phosphorus ranges from less than 0 @.@ 01 to 0 @.@ 3 milligrams per liter . In the abandoned mine drainage , the range is 0 to 139 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of arsenic is above 0 @.@ 2 micrograms per liter at most sites in the Mahanoy Creek watershed . The maximum concentration is 7 micrograms per liter . The concentration of barium is above 10 micrograms per liter at all sites in the watershed , and the maximum concentration is 75 micrograms per liter . The beryllium concentration is above 0 @.@ 05 micrograms per liter at most sites in the watershed , and in some places is as high as 16 micrograms per liter . The cadmium concentration is above 0 @.@ 02 micrograms per liter in most sites and can be up to 4 micrograms per liter . The maximum chromium concentration is 9 micrograms per liter . Most sites have a concentration of at least 0 @.@ 02 micrograms per liter of cobalt , with a maximum concentration of 530 micrograms per liter . Most sites have a concentration of at least 0 @.@ 5 micrograms per liter of copper , with a maximum concentration of 150 micrograms per liter . The lead concentration is above 0 @.@ 05 micrograms per liter in most sites and can be up to 6 @.@ 4 micrograms per liter . 
 The maximum nickel concentration in Mahanoy Creek is 895 micrograms per liter and the maximum silver concentration is 0 @.@ 9 micrograms per liter . The concentration of thallium does not exceed 0 @.@ 02 micrograms per liter and the concentration of vanadium does not exceed 1 microgram per liter . The maximum concentration of zinc is 3 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter . 
 Some water from the Shamokin Creek watershed enters the Mahanoy Creek watershed via various mine tunnels , mainly the <unk> , Helfenstein , the Locust Gap , and the Centralia Mine discharges . Water from Mahanoy Creek also flows through mine tunnels into Shamokin Creek . The discharge of the creek at various locations ranges from 0 to 320 cubic feet per second . The discharge of acid mine drainage in the creek ranges from 0 to 17 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second . In 2001 , the discharge was typically found to be higher in March than in August . 
 While there are sewage @-@ treatment plants in the larger communities in the Mahanoy Creek watershed , there are also leaky sewage disposal systems that discharge sewage into the stream 's tributaries . The creek experiences atmospheric disposition , a type of runoff . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 The watershed of Mahanoy Creek is in the Ridge and Valley Appalachians . The lower part of the creek 's watershed is in the Northern Shale Valleys and Slopes <unk> . The Mahanoy Creek watershed is part of a <unk> that runs from the northeast to the southwest , running between Hunter and Shenandoah . Rock formations in the watershed include the Pottsville Group and the Llewellyn Formation . These are found on the northern side of the creek 's valley . 
 There are 24 coal beds from the Pennsylvanian subperiod , which are part of the Llewellyn Formation and the Pottsville Formation . The coal beds are 0 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 18 m ) to 8 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) thick . Mining of these coal beds has been done at depths of over 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) underground . There are significant silt deposits on the creek downstream of Ashland . In the watershed , there are a number of close @-@ to @-@ parallel ridges and valleys . These tend to be oriented in the same direction as the creek itself , east to west . The highest elevation in the Mahanoy Creek watershed is 2 @,@ 090 feet ( 640 m ) above sea level in the eastern part of the watershed , not far from Delano . The lowest elevation in the watershed is 420 feet ( 130 m ) at the mouth . The elevations of the ridges tend to be between 1 @,@ 400 feet ( 430 m ) and 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) above sea level , while the valleys are between 600 feet ( 180 m ) and 800 feet ( 240 m ) lower . 
 The stream bed of Mahanoy Creek has an iron crust near Girardville , but some fish live in that area . 
 Minerals in the acid mine drainage areas of the Mahanoy Creek watershed include goethite , <unk> , <unk> , amorphous aluminum @-@ <unk> , quartz , muscovite , kaolinite , and gypsum . Red shale of the Mauch Chunk Formation is found in a substantial part of the watershed . The main rock types in the watershed are interbedded sedimentary rock , which occupies 70 percent of the watershed , and sandstone , which occupies 30 percent . 
 A number of seeps , boreholes , and mine tunnels contribute water to Mahanoy Creek throughout large sections of the watershed . Mined areas in the upper part of the watershed have been said to " resemble a moonscape " . There are numerous large spoil piles in the upper one @-@ third of the watershed . Some buildings the Mahanoy Creek valley are damaged by subsidence due to underground mining . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The area of Mahanoy Creek 's watershed is 157 square miles ( 407 square kilometers ) . The watershed is in Schuylkill , Northumberland , and Columbia County . 42 square miles ( 109 square kilometers ) are located in the Western Middle Anthracite Field . There are at least 35 sources of acid mine drainage in the watershed . The watershed has a population of close to 45 @,@ 000 people as of July 2009 . A tract of land in the Mahanoy Creek watershed has been converted by the Mahanoy Creek Watershed Association into a wetland known as " The Swamp " . It serves as a passive treatment system . This organization has also performed cleanups of the creek at Ashland , Girardville , and Helfenstein . The main stem of the creek is divided into several basins . One basin is the Upper Basin , which is drained by Mahanoy Creek and its tributaries upstream of Shenandoah Creek . It has an area of 21 @.@ 8 square miles . Another basin is the Ashland Basin , which is drained by Mahanoy Creek and its tributaries between Shenandoah Creek and Big Run , not including the Little Mahanoy Creek watershed . The Ashland basin has an area of 17 @.@ 7 square miles . The next basin downstream is the Middle Basin , which drains the area where the creek flows between Mahanoy Mountain and Line Mountain , ending at Zerbe Run . This basin has an area of 38 @.@ 7 square miles . The final basin of Mahanoy Creek is the Lower Basin , which is drained by Mahanoy Creek downstream of Zerbe Run . This basin has an area of 42 @.@ 7 square miles . 
 The Mahanoy Creek watershed is 66 percent forested land , 21 percent agricultural land , 9 percent barren mined land , and 4 percent developed land . However , the upper part of Mahanoy Creek is 50 percent forested land , 44 percent mined land , 5 percent developed land , and less than 1 percent agricultural land . There are six boroughs in the upper part of the watershed . There are a total of 28 municipalities in the watershed . 
 The eastern edge of the Mahanoy Creek watershed is marked by Locust Mountain and Vulcan Hill . The southern edge is formed by Broad Mountain , Fisher Ridge , and Line Mountain . The northern edge is formed by Little Mountain , Locust Mountain , and Mahanoy Mountain . The drainage system of the watershed is a trellis pattern , a <unk> pattern , or an angular drainage pattern . 
 The streams in the Mahanoy Creek watershed tend to meander relatively little , but the main creek meanders somewhat between Gordon and Lavelle and near its mouth . 
 Mahanoy Creek 's headwaters are close to the edge of the Susquehanna River watershed , near the Schuylkill River watershed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history and naming = = = 
 Mahanoy Creek 's name comes from a corruption of the Delaware Indian word " <unk> " or " <unk> " . The former word means " lick " . The area was owned by the Iroquois before European settlers arrived . The community of Mahanoy City is named after Mahanoy Creek . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Nathan Beach and several other people filed an application for 34 lots at the headwaters of Mahanoy Creek in 1794 . 
 The Danville and Pottsville Railroad had a terminus in Girardville , a community of Mahanoy Creek , by 1834 . The Mahanoy Creek Navigation Company formed on March 22 , 1827 . The Mahanoy Creek Canal ran from the Susquehanna River to the coal mines in the upper part of Mahanoy Creek . A canal running from Chester County and Lancaster County to Pittsburgh with a course going through Mahanoy Creek was planned by 1832 . 
 In the late 19th century , a company piped waste from the production of illuminating gas ( for gas lighting ) into Mahanoy Creek . In Gilberton , Mahanoy Creek used to be underground , but surfaced before 1940 . 
 Anthracite was mined in the upper part of the Mahanoy Creek watershed from 1840 until 1950 . However , farming was also done in the western part of the watershed in the early 20th century . Most of the deep mines ceased operation by 1960 . Surface mines instead continued mining operations in the watershed . A total of 12 million short tons of anthracite were mined in the creek 's watershed in 1917 . This was 12 % of the anthracite yield of the state of Pennsylvania in that year . In the 1910s , there were 40 <unk> and collieries that drained into the creek . Large amounts of culm also flowed into it during this time . The layer of coal silt on the banks of the creek was 40 feet ( 12 m ) by 1940 . Several mines remain active in the 21st century , but they mostly reprocess coal waste . 
 At least one covered bridge crosses Mahanoy Creek . It is called the Mahanoy Creek Bridge . It was built in 1940 in Northumberland County and is 152 @.@ 9 feet ( 46 @.@ 6 m ) in length . Two passive treatment systems have been installed in the creek 's watershed by the Mahanoy Creek Watershed Association . They are the Mahanoy Creek Aerobic Wetlands , which were created in 2000 ; and the <unk> Property Wetlands , which were created in 2006 . 
 = = Biology = = 
 In the fall of 2000 , twelve species of fish were observed during electrofishing . They included black @-@ nosed dace , northern <unk> suckers , shiners , small @-@ mouthed bass , and rock bass . 
 An October 2001 survey of Mahanoy Creek identified two species of fish each at Ashland and Girardville . There were 20 individuals at the latter location and 22 at the former . There were also 13 species and 134 individuals at Gowen City , and 14 species and 545 individuals at the creek 's mouth . Additionally , 1003 individuals and 20 species of fish were observed at the mouth of the tributary Schwaben Creek . White Suckers were found at each of the aforementioned sites . Other fish species found on Mahanoy Creek and Schwaben Creek include the swallowtail shiner , the <unk> shiner , the river chub , the banded darter , and the shield darter . Brown trout , longnose dace , and blacknose dace have also been observed in the watershed . Historically , deer came to the creek to consume salt . 
 There are second @-@ growth forests near <unk> Run , a tributary of Mahanoy Creek . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Pennsylvania State Game Land Number 84 is located immediately south of Mahanoy Creek between Helfenstein and <unk> . The Sen. James J. Rhoades Nature Trail is a walking trail along the creek in Barry Township . It was dedicated to James J. Rhoades on May 8 , 2010 . Catch and release fishing of smallmouth bass and largemouth bass is permitted on the creek . 
 = Inflow ( meteorology ) = 
 Inflow is the flow of a fluid into a large collection of that fluid . Within meteorology , inflow normally refers to the influx of warmth and moisture from air within the Earth 's atmosphere into storm systems . Extratropical cyclones are fed by inflow focused along their cold front and warm fronts . Tropical cyclones require a large inflow of warmth and moisture from warm oceans in order to develop significantly , mainly within the lowest 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) of the atmosphere . Once the flow of warm and moist air is cut off from thunderstorms and their associated tornadoes , normally by the thunderstorm 's own rain @-@ cooled outflow boundary , the storms begin to dissipate . Rear inflow jets behind squall lines act to erode the broad rain shield behind the squall line , and accelerate its forward motion . 
 = = Thunderstorms = = 
 Cool air , carried to the ground by thunderstorm downdraft , cuts off the inflow of the thunderstorm , destroying its updraft and causing its dissipation . Tornadoes , which form within stronger thunderstorms , grow until they reach their mature stage . This is when the rear flank downdraft of the thunderstorm , fed by rain @-@ cooled air , begins to wrap around the tornado , cutting off the inflow of warm air which previously fed the tornado . When thunderstorms are able to organize into squall lines , a feature known as a rear inflow jet develops to the south of the mid @-@ level circulation associated with its northern bookend vortex . This leads to an erosion of rain within the broad rain shield behind the squall line , and may lead to acceleration of the squall line itself . 
 = = Tropical cyclones = = 
 While an initial warm core system , such as an organized thunderstorm complex , is necessary for the formation of a tropical cyclone , a large flux of energy is needed to lower atmospheric pressure more than a few millibars ( 0 @.@ 10 inch of mercury ) . Inflow of warmth and moisture from the underlying ocean surface is critical for tropical cyclone strengthening . A significant amount of the inflow in the cyclone is in the lowest 1 kilometre ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) of the atmosphere . 
 = = Extratropical cyclones = = 
 Polar front theory is attributed to Jacob Bjerknes , and was derived from a coastal network of observation sites in Norway during World War I. This theory proposed that the main inflow into a cyclone was concentrated along two lines of convergence , one ahead ( or east ) of the low and another trailing equatorward ( south in the Northern Hemisphere and north in the Southern Hemisphere ) and behind ( or west ) of the low . The convergence line ahead of the low became known as either the steering line or the warm front . The trailing convergence zone was referred to as the squall line or cold front . Areas of clouds and rainfall appeared to be focused along these convergence zones . A conveyor belt , also referred to as the warm conveyor belt , is a term describing the flow of a stream of warm moist air originating within the warm sector ( or generally equatorward ) of an extratropical cyclone in advance of the cold front which slopes up above and poleward ( north in the Northern Hemisphere and south in the Southern Hemisphere ) of the surface warm front . The concept of the conveyor belt originated in 1969 . 
 The left edge of the conveyor belt is sharp due to higher density air moving in from the west forcing a sharp slope to the cold front . An area of stratiform precipitation develops poleward of the warm front along the conveyor belt . Active precipitation poleward of the warm front implies potential for greater development of the cyclone . A portion of this conveyor belt turns to the right ( left in the Southern Hemisphere ) , aligning with the upper level westerly flow . However , the western portion of this belt wraps around the northwest ( southwest in the Southern Hemisphere ) side of the cyclone , which can contain moderate to heavy precipitation . If the air mass is cold enough , the precipitation falls in the form of heavy snow . Theory from the 1980s talked about the presence of a cold conveyor belt originating north of the warm front and flowing along a clockwise path ( in the northern hemisphere ) into the main belt of the westerlies aloft , but there has been conflicting evidence as to whether or not this phenomenon actually exists . 
 = Preston Leslie = 
 Preston Hopkins Leslie ( March 8 , 1819 – February 7 , 1907 ) was the 26th Governor of Kentucky from 1871 to 1875 and territorial governor of Montana from 1887 to 1889 . He ascended to the office of governor by three different means . First , he succeeded Kentucky governor John W. Stevenson upon the latter 's resignation to accept a seat in the United States Senate in 1871 . Later that year , he was elected to a full term as governor , defeating John Marshall Harlan in the general election . Finally , he was appointed territorial governor by President Grover Cleveland . 
 Leslie was a Confederate sympathizer during the Civil War , but began to adopt a more progressive position during his gubernatorial campaign against Harlan . Though he opposed ratification of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments , he used his influence as governor to effect passage of laws admitting the testimony of blacks in court and providing for an educational system for recently freed slaves . He also helped quell violence perpetrated by the Ku Klux Klan in many areas of the state . 
 As territorial governor of Montana , Leslie quickly drew the ire of the press for his pro @-@ temperance position . The territory 's political machinery also turned against him , and he was removed from office by President Benjamin Harrison . When Grover Cleveland succeeded Harrison for a second term in office , he appointed Leslie district attorney for Montana . Leslie continued to practice law well into his eighties , and was being considered for a district court judgeship in Montana when he fell ill with pneumonia and died on February 7 , 1907 , at the age of 87 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Preston Leslie was born in Clinton County , Kentucky ( then a part of Wayne County ) , on March 8 , 1819 . He was the second son of Vachel H. and Sarah Hopkins Leslie . He was educated in the public schools , then studied law under Judge Rice Maxey . He worked with his father on the family farm until 1835 , and supported himself by doing odd jobs including driving a stagecoach , running a ferry , and being store clerk . Leslie was admitted to the bar on October 10 , 1840 , and served as the deputy clerk of the Clinton County courts . In 1841 , he relocated to Tompkinsville , Kentucky , where he worked as a farmer . He became county attorney of Monroe County in 1842 . 
 On November 11 , 1841 , Leslie married Louisa Black ; they had seven children . Louisa died on August 9 , 1858 . Leslie married the widowed Mary Maupin Kuykendall on November 17 , 1859 , fathering three more children . Mary Leslie died September 3 , 1900 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Leslie began his political career by being elected as a Whig to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1844 . He was defeated for a seat in the state Senate in 1846 by a single vote . He continued serving in the House until 1850 , when he won election to the Senate representing Monroe and Barren counties . He then served in the Senate until 1855 . In the 1850s , the Whig Party gradually faded in Kentucky , and Leslie became a Democrat . He declined nominations for a seats in the United States Congress and on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , preferring instead to work on his farm . In 1859 , he moved to Glasgow , Kentucky , in Barren County . 
 By 1861 , Leslie had built up a prosperous estate and added a plot of land in Texas to his holdings in Kentucky . In December of that year , he and his eldest son traveled to the property with 26 slaves and a large part of the family 's possessions . After establishing his household , Leslie returned to Kentucky and left the Texas estate in the care of his son . 
 Leslie 's feelings were mixed on the issues central to the Civil War . Known as a " strong Union man " prior to the war , his sympathies switched to the southern cause once the war began . Nevertheless , he believed the South should solve its differences with the North through diplomatic means , and did not favor the idea of secession . He kept a low political profile and refused military service for either side . He returned to the state Senate from 1867 to 1871 , serving as president of that body from 1869 to 1871 . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 On February 13 , 1871 , Governor John W. Stevenson resigned his post to accept a seat in the U.S. Senate . Stevenson had ascended to the governorship on the death of John L. Helm , and had no lieutenant governor . As president of the Senate , Leslie was the ex @-@ officio lieutenant governor , and next in line to succeed Stevenson . A gubernatorial election was already scheduled later in 1871 , and Leslie was among several nominees put forward by the Democrats . Because of Leslie 's opposition to the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments , his candidacy was opposed by Henry Watterson , founder of the powerful Louisville Courier @-@ Journal . Despite this , Leslie emerged from a field of Democratic candidates that included future governors John Y. Brown and J. Proctor Knott and former Confederate governor Richard Hawes . John G. Carlisle was chosen as Leslie 's running mate , and was declared by one commentator to be " by odds , the ablest man on the ticket " . Leslie 's opposition to the Southern Railroad bill while serving in the state senate proved a liability with some voters in his own party . Because of his southern sympathies , he was also opposed by the more progressive " New Departure " wing of his party . Nevertheless , he enjoyed support from the Bourbon Democrats in the state , as well as the state 's tobacco interests and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . 
 During the campaign , Leslie 's opponent Republican John Marshall Harlan was blasted as a " political weathercock " for having changed his stance on many issues . In one joint debate , Leslie quoted an antebellum speech wherein Harlan had called the Republican platform " revolutionary , and if carried out , would result in the destruction of our free government . " Harlan admitted his inconsistent stands , declaring that he would rather be right than consistent . Meanwhile , Leslie began moving closer to the " New Departure " wing of his party during the course of the campaign . Ultimately , Leslie 's supporters deemed him " sober , conservative , and safe " , and this perception enabled him to defeat Harlan by a considerable margin in the first election in which blacks were allowed to vote . 
 Leslie laid out an aggressive legislative agenda in his inaugural address to the General Assembly on September 5 , 1871 , but legislators were more concerned with passing the Southern Railroad bill that would create a connection between the railroads of Cincinnati , Ohio , and those of the Southern United States . The line would pass through central Kentucky , opening up trade to the region . It would be funded primarily by capital from Ohio , and would provide competition to the Louisville and Nashville Railroad 's monopoly in the state . Though Leslie wasn 't particularly supportive of the bill , he refused to veto it because of the potential economic benefits to the state . Leslie was also faced with the issue of post @-@ war violence by the Ku Klux Klan . The legislature had refused to pass a law against mob violence in 1871 . In his address to the legislature on December 6 , 1871 , Leslie endorsed legislation that made it illegal to write or post threatening notices and to band together and wear disguises . This proposal enjoyed favorable public opinion , and was passed during the legislature 's next session . With the railroad and violence issues resolved , Governor Leslie urged the legislature to improve the status of blacks in the state , including the creation of an educational system for blacks and the approval of the testimony of blacks in the state 's courts . He commissioned a new geological survey , appointing native Kentuckian Nathaniel Southgate Shaler to head the work . An advocate of the temperance movement , he secured additional regulations on the sale of liquor . Also during Leslie 's tenure , the penal system was improved . 
 Devout Baptists and teetotalers , Governor and Mrs. Leslie did not serve alcohol in the governor 's mansion and were given a silver service set at the expiration of his term by the Good Templars of Kentucky for their charity to the needy . Following his term in office , Leslie was elected to serve on the Glasgow circuit court , a position he held for six years , beginning in 1881 . He failed in a re @-@ election bid in 1886 by four votes . 
 = = = Governor of Montana = = = 
 In 1887 , President Grover Cleveland appointed Leslie to be the Territorial Governor of Montana . Cleveland made the appointment on the recommendation of John Marshall Harlan , Leslie 's opponent in the Kentucky gubernatorial election of 1871 , who was now serving as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court . Leslie soon ran afoul of the local press , who labeled him the " Coldwater Governor " for his stands in favor of temperance . The press 's opinion of him further dimmed when he pardoned a prostitute convicted of grand larceny because the penitentiary was not equipped to accommodate women . He urged the territorial legislature to enact fiscal reforms and improve facilities for the insane and the incarcerated , but he was no match for the political machinery in Montana Territory . His 1889 pocket veto of an appointment bill supported by the legislature was the final straw ; under pressure from Republicans , President Benjamin Harrison replaced Leslie as territorial governor . 
 Meanwhile , in Kentucky , the state treasurer , " Honest Dick " Tate , had absconded with nearly $ 250 @,@ 000 of the state 's money in 1888 . During the investigation that followed , it was discovered that Leslie , along with several other state officials , had procured personal loans from the state treasury through Tate . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his removal from office , Leslie opened a legal practice in Helena , Montana , partnering with A. J. Craven . President Cleveland in his second term appointed Leslie U.S. district attorney of Montana . He served from 1894 to 1898 . 
 During his final years practicing law in Helena , Leslie gained widespread acclaim and served as president of the Montana State Bar Association . On a return visit to Kentucky in 1906 , he addressed the legislature , noting how he had helped the state adjust to the " new order " following the Civil War . Montana governor Joseph Toole was circulating a petition to have Leslie named a district court judge when Leslie fell ill with pneumonia . He died February 7 , 1907 and was buried at <unk> Cemetery in Helena . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Leslie County , Kentucky , was formed in 1878 and was named in his honor . 
 = <unk> of Peter the Great = 
 The <unk> of Peter the Great ( also called St. Nicholas ) was a miniaturized scaled @-@ down warship discovered by Peter the Great at the Royal <unk> Estate in 1688 . It was restored by <unk> Brandt , and Peter learned to sail using the boat on waters near Moscow . It was stored in the Kremlin of Moscow by Peter and later enshrined in St. Petersburg . Peter continued to use it in state ceremonies and ordered that the boat be sailed down the Neva River on 30 August of every year . It was used in state ceremonies of later Russian monarchs , including the wedding of Catherine the Great and Peter III of Russia , as well as the centennial celebration of St. Petersburg . Catherine built a boathouse in the 1760s to store it . 
 The boat became less important under Soviet rule , along with other objects from the Russian Empire ; however , patriotism during the outbreak of the Second World War led to a renewal of the importance of Peter the Great and the botik along with him . The boat was moved by the Soviets to the Central Naval Museum where it remains today . In 1997 , the boat left Russia for the first time to be displayed at the World Financial Center . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 The botik ( small boat ) was constructed , either in England or by Danes in Russia using an English design , in the 1640s , and was then called the St. Nicholas . The boat originally belonged to Peter the Great 's grandfather ; an earlier theory held that the boat was a gift from Queen Elizabeth to Ivan the Terrible in the 1580s . It is the last remnant of the fleet of wooden boats maintained by Peter 's father , Alexis ; the rest rotted from neglect or were destroyed during the rebellion of <unk> <unk> . 
 The boat has a shallow draft and a single mast ; it measures 7 metres ( 23 ft ) by 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) . It was steered using a tiller connected to a rudder attached to the sternpost . It also has four miniature cannons . Unlike Russian vessels of the time , the boat was designed with the ability to sail against the wind . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The boat was rediscovered at the Royal <unk> Estate in 1688 by Peter the Great , then aged about sixteen . The derelict boat was pulled from a pile of debris in either a barn or a storeroom . Peter asked Franz Timmerman , a Dutch seaman , what advantage the newly discovered boat had over Russian boats . Timmerman responded that the boat could sail with or against wind and at Peter 's direction sought out another Dutch seaman , <unk> Brandt , to restore it . Peter learned to sail the ship on waters near Moscow . 
 = = = Peter the Great = = = 
 In 1701 , Peter had the botik stored in the Kremlin 's Dormition Cathedral . Peter referenced the boat in a draft preface to his 1720 Naval Statute . The published preface was written by Archbishop <unk> Prokopovich who wrote that " the botik served him not only as a childhood pastime , but became the cause of his building a navy , as we now see with wonder " and illustrated this with the metaphor , " great oaks from little acorns grow " . In September of the same year , Prokopovich gave a " Sermon in Praise of the Russian Fleet " where he stated that the boat was " to the navy what the seed is to the tree " and that the boat was " worthy of being clad in gold " . 
 Peter the Great ordered that the boat be displayed in the Kremlin in 1722 in honor of the Peace of Nystad . It was moved from there to the Alexander Nevsky Monastery in May 1723 . Peter sailed the boat down the Neva River on his birthday , 30 May 1723 , along with a convoy of yachts and other ships of the Admiralty . In August of the same year , Peter sailed the boat in a regatta of the Baltic Fleet from St. Petersburg to Kronshtadt . The boat was placed in the <unk> of the Peter and Paul Fortress on a plinth , inscribed with the words " From the amusement of the child came the triumph of the man " . After the boat took part in ceremonies on the third anniversary of the Peace of Nystad , 30 August 1724 , Peter ordered that it be sailed or rowed to the Alexander Nevsky Monastery every year on 30 August . 
 = = = Later Russian monarchs = = = 
 The botik was used in many state ceremonies by later Russian monarchies . The boat appeared in a regatta during the 1745 wedding of Peter III of Russia and Catherine the Great . Wearing naval uniform , Empress Elizabeth escorted the botik . Catherine had a boathouse built inside the fortress to house the botik in the 1760s . The boathouse became a major tourist attraction . In 1803 , during the centennial celebration of St. Petersburg under Alexander I , the boat was featured in a flotilla on the Neva ; it was referred to as the " grandfather of the Russian navy " a name originally given to it by Peter I. 
 In 1872 , the boat was brought to Moscow in a cortege led by a brother of Alexander II of Russia for the bicentennial celebration of Peter 's birth . It was received by a 101 @-@ gun salute and displayed in the great Moscow fair . 
 = = = Soviet era = = = 
 The importance of the boat , like most other memorials from Imperial Russia , was reduced in the early Soviet era . Guidebooks to Leningrad at the time did not reference the boat . The boat was moved to Peterhof in 1928 and remained there until World War II . During the outbreak of World War II , patriotism related to Peter the Great resurfaced . He was referenced as conqueror of Germans and the founder of what became the Soviet Navy . The importance of the boat increased with him , and it was moved to the Central Naval Museum of the St. Petersburg Bourse in September 1940 . 
 = = = Post @-@ Soviet era = = = 
 The boat made its first foray outside Russia in 1997 when it was displayed in the Winter Garden Atrium of the World Financial Center in New York City . While being displayed as part of the " St. Petersburg : A Cultural Celebration " festival , the boat was attended to by two preservationists . The preservationists attempted to identify the species of oak used in the boat so that the country of origin could be determined in addition to scraping off dirt and patching cracks . 
 = Marshall Field and Company Building = 
 Marshall Field and Company Building or Macy 's at State Street , in Chicago , Illinois , built in 1891 @-@ 1892 , was the flagship location of the Marshall Field and Company , also known as Marshall Field 's chain of department stores and , since 2006 , is the main Chicago mid @-@ western location of the Macy 's ( formerly as the R. H. Macy and Company of New York City , now nationwide chain ) . The building is located in the Chicago " Loop " area of the downtown central business district in Cook County , Illinois , U.S.A. , and it takes up the entire city block bounded clockwise from the west by North State Street , East Randolph Street , North Wabash Avenue , and East Washington Street . Marshall Field 's established numerous important business " firsts " in this building and in a long series of previous elaborate decorative structures on this site for the last century and a half , and it is regarded as one of the three most influential establishments in the nationwide development of the department store and in the commercial business economic history of the United States . Both the building name and the name of the stores formerly headquartered at this building changed names on September 9 , 2006 as a result of the merger of the previous May 's Department Stores ( Marshall Field 's former owner and parent ) with the Federated Department Stores which led to the integration of the Marshall Field 's stores into the Macy 's now nationwide retailing network . 
 The building , which is the third largest store in the world , was both declared a National Historic Landmark and listed on the National Register of Historic Places on June 2 , 1978 , and it was designated a Chicago Landmark on November 1 , 2005 . The building architecture is known for its multiple atria ( several balconied atrium - " Great Hall " ) and for having been built in stages over the course of more than two decades . Its ornamentation includes a Louis Comfort Tiffany , ( 1848 @-@ 1933 ) , ( later Tiffany & Co. studios of New York City ) mosaic vaulted ceiling and a pair of well @-@ known outdoor street @-@ corner clocks at State and Washington , and later at State and Randolph Streets , which serve as symbols of the store since 1897 . 
 = = Business history = = 
 Although the official corporate name of the retail entity based in this building had been Marshall Field & Company ( nicknamed Marshall Field 's ) from 1881 until 2006 , the store has had five different names since its inception in 1852 as P. Palmer & Co . In 1868 , after bowing out of involvement in day @-@ to @-@ day operations with his new partners of Field , Palmer & Leiter , Potter Palmer convinced Marshall Field and Levi Leiter to move the Field , Leiter & Co. store to a building Palmer owned on State Street at the corner of Washington Street . After being consumed by the " Great Chicago Fire " and splitting the wholesale business from the retail operations , the store resumed operations at State and Washington in a rebuilt structure , now leased from the Singer Sewing Machine Company . In 1877 another fire consumed this building , and when a new Singer Building was built to replace it at the same location in 1879 , Field then put together the financing to purchase it . The business has remained there ever since , and it has added four subsequent buildings to form the integrated structure that is now called the " Marshall Field and Company Building " . 
 Chicago 's retailing center was State Street in the famous downtown " Loop " after the " Great Chicago Fire " of 1871 , and this center has been anchored by Marshall Field 's and its predecessor companies in this building complex . However , commuter suburbs began to have significant retail districts by the 1920s . In the 1920s , the store created new suburban locations such as Marshall Field and Company Store to remain competitive . After 1950 , with the booming post @-@ World War II economic / social climate with increasing suburban residential and commercial development , saw the construction of first " strip " shopping centers , followed by regional enclosed shopping malls along major thoroughfares and interstate highways such as the " Magnificent Mile " reduced the role of the " Loop " ' s daily significance to many Chicagoans as downtown retail sales slipped and gradually additional business moved outward following first the streetcar lines and then the automobile . Eventually , there was an influx of stores from other parts of the country as the pace of commercial retailing merged , consolidating , and spreading first regionally then nationwide . Nonetheless , the Marshall Field and Company Building has survived at this location . However , with the merger and conversion to Macy 's the emphasis of the store changed and store @-@ branded lines replaced many designer labels , such as Dolce & Gabbana , Prada , Miu Miu and Jimmy Choo , which led to the disassembly of several designer departments of the former Field 's ( see picture below ) . 
 On September 9 , 2006 , at the time of the stores merger and conversion , the name of the building was officially changed to " Macy 's at State Street " . Around this time of the conversion of Marshall Field 's to Macy 's the building was also the location of vociferous and outraged picketing and protesting by opponents of the merger / conversion and the growth in general of massive business mergers and economic consolidation across the country . After buying out his various partners over the early post @-@ Civil War era , Marshall Field founded the Marshall Field & Company corporate entity that survived 152 years and had arranged before his death , to have this building constructed . The sentimental objections to the conversion that both eliminated the existence of the corporate entity bearing his name and renaming the building bearing his name were widely reported in the national media of newspapers , radio and television . 
 = = = Business legend = = = 
 The store housed a business that established new retailing standards and broke many retailing conventions of the day . The company quickly became successful , and by the 1880s it was one of the three largest retailers in the country . Before Marshall Field 's death in 1906 , his company became the largest wholesale and retail dry goods enterprise in the world . The Marshall Field & Company offered the first bridal registry , provided the first in @-@ store dining facilities and established the first European buying office . The former store also was the first to provide personal shopping assistants . In the early 1900s , annual sales topped $ 60 million , and buying branches were located in New York City , London , Paris , Tokyo , Stockholm and Berlin . 
 The building has hosted the first escalators built in a department store and continues to be the second largest store in the world . Marshall Field took over the operations of the store in 1881 and became the first merchant to post the price of the goods in plain sight , which eliminated the common practice of haggling and charging whatever the buyer would pay . On top of that , Field stood behind his product with his famous slogan that symbolized his willingness to refund the full price of all merchandise ( a policy inherited from early mentor and partner Potter Palmer ) purchased in his store : 
 = = Building details = = 
 The 12 @-@ story granite building was constructed in stages between 1891 @-@ 1892 and 1914 on a partitioned block with sections that were added to the building in 1902 , 1906 , 1907 , and 1914 . Although he died before they were constructed , Charles B. Atwood , ( 1849 @-@ 1895 ) , of the D. H. Burnham & Company ( from original 1891 @-@ 1892 structure 's architect Daniel H. Burnham , ( 1846 @-@ 1912 ) , later firm ) , designed the two primary additional sections along State Street ( The north building built in 1902 and the south in 1907 ) . For a time , the building was the largest store in the world at 73 acres ( 300 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floorspace , with the largest book , china , shoe , and toy departments of all the world 's department stores . 
 The current building has several atria : A Louis Comfort Tiffany , ( 1848 @-@ 1933 ) , ( later Tiffany & Co. studios of New York City ) mosaic vaulted ceiling dome caps a 5 @-@ story balconied atrium in the southwest corner ; the northwest section has a 13 @-@ story skylit atrium , and a newer atrium with a fountain in the center is bridged by double escalator banks . The Tiffany Ceiling is over 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) , and it is the first iridescent glass dome and it continues to be the largest glass mosaic of its kind . Only Egypt 's 3 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old Temple of Karnak , with its 70 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) columns rivals the four 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) Ionic @-@ style capped granite columns on the State Street façade . 
 The building is known for its two exterior clocks , which weigh about 7 @.@ 5 short tons ( 6 @.@ 7 long tons ) each , on its northwest and southwest corners along State Street at both Randolph and Washington Streets . The southwest clock at the original Washington Street intersection , known as --- " The Great Clock " , was installed on November 26 , 1897 . Marshall Field envisioned the clock as a beacon for his store which he viewed as a meeting place . The clock was installed after the southwest corner of the store had become a popular meeting place and people began leaving notes for one another on the Marshall Field 's windows . The clock was an attempt to end this practice , and encourage punctuality . 
 Today , the building is located at 111 North State Street , between Washington and Randolph Streets , within the designated " Loop " Retail Historic District of the Chicago " Loop " , across State Street from the " Block 37 " future construction project , across Randolph Street from the Joffrey Tower , and across Wabash Avenue from The Heritage at Millennium Park . An underground public concourse connects the basement to 25 East Washington Street , which formerly housed the Marshall Field 's Men 's Store . The building is a major hub for the " Chicago Pedway " . 
 = = Traditions and popular culture = = 
 The building has several Christmas traditions : it is known as the former production site of " Frango " and for the Walnut Room Christmas tree . It also hosts an ornate decorated display windows series at the street level . The windows display includes thirteen themed windows along State Street that in recent years have displayed the themes of the unfolding of stories of Snow White , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , Paddington Bear , The Night Before Christmas , Harry Potter , and Cinderella . Annually a three @-@ story tall conifer Christmas tree is brought in for the Holidays season . In an effort to quell opposition to the merger / conversion , Macy 's made a formal statement of its intent to continue the traditions of a 45 @-@ foot ( 13 @.@ 716 m ) Christmas tree , a seventh floor " Frango " viewing kitchen , and animated holiday window displays . 
 On November 3 , 1945 , American illustrator Norman Rockwell drew a picture of one of the Marshall Field 's Building clocks on the cover of the famous " Saturday Evening Post " magazine , entitled " The Clock Mender " . The Rockwell painting shows a man perched atop a ladder and adjusting one of the Marshall Field 's clock to correspond with his own pocket watch . The old Oriental Theatre in the background proves this depicts the matching " Great Clock " at the northwest corner of the building at State & Randolph Streets . In 1948 , Rockwell donated the original painting , " The Clock Mender " , to the store , where it had hung on the seventh floor ever since . After Target Corporation sold Field 's to the May Department Stores , which later merged with Federated Department Stores in 2005 , the Federated officials discovered a reproduction copy on display . Federated removed the fake copy and asked Target to return the original . The painting has since been donated to the Chicago Historical Society , which had from February 26 , 2000 to May 21 , 2000 been the second stop of the seven @-@ city national tour of " Pictures for the American People " , the first comprehensive Rockwell career exhibition that had been organized by the High Museum of Art of Atlanta and the Norman Rockwell Museum of Stockbridge , Massachusetts and that had also visited the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City , Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , San Diego Museum of Art and Phoenix Art Museum . 
 In John Dos Passos ' novel The 42nd Parallel ( 1930 ) , character Eric <unk> is employed at this Marshall Field 's building . 
 Authors G. K. Chesterton and Sinclair Lewis met in the Field 's department store building 's book department , which resulted in their collaboration on the unpublished play " Mary Queen of Scotch . " 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = 2002 West Bengal cyclone = 
 The 2002 West Bengal cyclone ( JTWC designation : 04B , officially known as Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 04 ) was a deadly tropical cyclone that affected India and Bangladesh in November 2002 . The sixth tropical cyclone and fourth cyclonic storm of the 2002 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , it developed in the Bay of Bengal northeast of Sri Lanka on November 10 , as a tropical depression . After tracking northeast , the system strengthened into a cyclonic storm on November 11 , as maximum sustained winds exceeded 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . On November 12 , it further intensified into a severe cyclonic storm . Later that day , the storm made landfall on Sagar Island in West Bengal with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . After moving inland , it rapidly weakened and dissipated over Bangladesh on November 12 . 
 Rough seas offshore Odisha caused two fishing trawlers to collide , resulting in 18 fatalities , while two additional trawlers were reported missing . In West Bengal , the storm uprooted trees and dropped heavy rainfall . Throughout India , 124 deaths were confirmed . Strong winds and heavy rainfall in Bangladesh impacted many cities and villages , including the capital city of Dhaka , forcing thousands to evacuate . Ten wooden trawlers carrying 150 men sank offshore Bangladesh , with only 11 reaching safety . Eight additional boats with 60 occupants were reported missing . One death was reported in Bangladesh after a man attempted to cross a swollen river . Overall , there were 49 fatalities in Bangladesh . The storm was attributed to at least 173 fatalities in India , Bangladesh , and offshore areas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Around 0300 UTC on November 10 , a depression developed in the southwestern Bay of Bengal . Three hours later , a bulletin from the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) indicated that BOB 04 formed about 265 km ( 165 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Chennai , India . The system steadily intensified and headed northeastward . At 1200 UTC on November 11 , the depression reached gale force and was upgraded to Cyclonic Storm BOB 04 . At that time , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated warnings on Tropical Cyclone 03B . Further strengthening briefly slowed later on November 11 . However , early on the following day , the storm resumed intensification . 
 At 0600 UTC on November 12 , BOB 04 became a severe cyclonic storm and reached its maximum sustained wind speed of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , in addition to an estimated minimum barometric pressure of 984 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . However , the Regional Meteorological Centre ( RMC ) in Kolkata , India bulletin at 0530 UTC on November 12 , reported maximum sustained winds of only 55 @-@ 75 km / h ( 35 @-@ 45 mph ) . At 0900 UTC on November 12 , it made landfall near Sagar Island , West Bengal with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Shortly after moving inland , the storm rapidly weakened to a depression . The JTWC issued their final advisory on the storm at 1200 UTC on November 12 , while it was centered about 200 km ( 125 mi ) northeast of Kolkata . However , the IMD tracked the cyclone until about six hours later , at which time it dissipated over eastern India . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As the storm approached , residents of low @-@ lying areas were advised to seek shelter . According to the Odisha State Disaster Management Authority , the communication system had been activated and collectors in coastal districts were given satellite telephones . Additionally , district authorities collected food , water , and other essential emergency supplies . Offshore Odisha , rough seas caused two trawlers to collide , resulting in 18 fatalities ; their bodies were later found floating <unk> Port in the <unk> district of Odisha . Two additional trawlers were reported missing . Nine fishing trawlers sank offshore West Bengal , with only 66 fishermen accounted for . Initially , as many as 600 were estimated to have been missing , though 250 people swam back to <unk> , where most of them received treatment at either a medical clinic or a hospital . According to the Chief Minister of West Bengal , 111 people were still missing offshore West Bengal by late on November 12 . Forty @-@ nine fatalities were confirmed offshore India , while two deaths occurred inland in West Bengal . Later , the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters raised the death toll to 124 . 
 Prime Minister of Bangladesh Khaleda Zia urged senior officials in Dhaka and coastal districts to prepare for the storm . Officials in Chittagong asked that all 24 ships be moved out of the harbor and river channel . In coastal areas , thousands of Red Crescent volunteers reported for duty in order to assist vulnerable villages in preparation of the storm . Winds destroyed bamboo huts , uprooted trees , and disrupted road transport between towns and villages on the shore of the Bay of Bengal . Torrential rainfall in the area flooded dozens of villages , forcing thousands to evacuate . Heavy precipitation also lashed the capital city of Dhaka , inundating streets , which caused a shutdown of electricity and interrupting public transportation . One death was reported after a man drowned while attempting to cross a river in southern Bhola Island . Ten wooden trawlers carrying 150 men sank near Cox 's Bazar ; only 11 of them were known to have survived . An additional eight fishing boats transporting 60 people was reported missing off of Barisal Division . By November 15 , 47 fishing vessels were still unaccounted for . A navy motor boat also sunk near <unk> , though its six crew members swam ashore . In the aftermath of the storm , the number of deaths in Bangladesh rose to 49 . 
 Overall , the storm resulted in 173 confirmed fatalities . Officials in West Bengal accused the meteorological offices of issuing warnings too late , as most of the fishermen were already in deep sea areas . Immediately following the storm , the Indian Red Cross Society and the Participating National Societies began to assess the situation and plan . At a warehouse in Salt Lake City , Kolkata , the Indian Red Cross Society prepared to distribute 2 @,@ 000 tarpaulins , 2 @,@ 000 blankets , 200 kitchen sets , and 20 @,@ 000 mosquito nets . 
 = David Meerman Scott = 
 David Meerman Scott ( born March 25 , 1961 ) is an American online marketing strategist , and author of several books on marketing , most notably The New Rules of Marketing and PR with over 350 @,@ 000 copies in print in more than 25 languages . 
 The book was inspired by an accidental discovery ( made when he was vice president of marketing at NewsEdge ) that creating useful content oneself and publishing it on @-@ line at virtually no cost was consistently more effective than expensive professional public relations programs . Subsequent books draw from his experience as a real @-@ time bond trader , and his observations about innovative marketing by organizations as diverse as IBM and the rock band The Grateful Dead . Based in Boston , he is also a speaker at conferences and corporate events and he runs seminars about marketing around the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scott graduated from Kenyon College in 1983 with a BA in economics . After early jobs as a clerk on several Wall Street bond trading desks , he worked in the online news and information business from 1985 to 2002 . He held executive positions in an electronic information division of Knight @-@ Ridder , at the time one of the world 's largest newspaper companies from 1989 to 1995 . He was based in Tokyo from 1987 to 1993 and in Hong Kong from 1993 to 1995 . 
 He moved to the Boston area in 1995 and joined Desktop Data , which became NewsEdge Corporation . In his most recent corporate position he was vice president of marketing at NewsEdge until the business was sold to Thomson Corporation in 2002 . 
 He says " I didn 't plan on becoming a marketing strategist ... I came upon it accidentally ... " At NewsEdge he and his team found that do @-@ it @-@ yourself programs based on creating useful content and publishing it on @-@ line at virtually no cost consistently generated more interest from qualified buyers than expensive profession public relations programs . However , the Thomson Corporation terminated his employment after acquiring NewsEdge . " My ideas were a little too radical for my new bosses . So I started my own business ... " he says . 
 Since 2001 , he has used Meerman , his middle name , to distinguish himself from other notable people called David Scott such as the David Scott who walked on the moon as the commander of Apollo 15 ( and whom he has met ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Thought = = = 
 Scott 's ideology " the new rules of marketing & PR " is that marketing and public relations is vastly different on the Web than in mainstream media . He says that the " old rules " of mainstream media ( which he asserts do not work on the Web ) are about " controlling a message " and the only ways to get the message into the public domain using mainstream media is to buy expensive advertising or beg the media to write about you . He says that the rules of marketing and PR on the Web are completely different . Instead of buying or begging your way in , Scott says anybody can earn attention by " publishing their way in " using the tools of social media such as , blogs , podcasts , online news releases , online video , viral marketing , and online media . He believes that , with few exceptions , marketers gain the best return on their investment in content creation when they choose " <unk> " publication . 
 Writing for Forbes , Nick Morgan notes that " David is one of those select few people who saw and understood the social media phenomenon as it began ... " 
 = = = Speaking engagements = = = 
 Scott gives over fifty keynote speeches a year all over the world . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Scott is the author of ten books , most notably The New Rules of Marketing and PR : How to Use Social Media , Online Video , Mobile Applications , Blogs , News Releases , and Viral Marketing to Reach Buyers Directly . The fifth edition was published in October 2015 and adds a chapter on aligning sales with this type of marketing and information on the use of Periscope , Meerkat , and Snapchat . It is published in more than 25 languages with more than 350 @,@ 000 copies sold . Writing for The New York Times Magazine , Virginia Heffernan recommended the book " For practical P.R. in the age of Twitter , ... " In an interview on Marketing Update , Scott stated that besides the fast pace of change in marketing , another motivation for the new edition was that the book had been incorporated into the curriculum of many universities . As a result , he plans to publish a new edition in summer every other year . The second edition won praise in The New York Times and Computerworld reviews . The first edition was featured in the BusinessWeek Best Seller List . Related to the book , Scott developed a one @-@ day seminar called New Rules of Marketing , which he teaches to corporate groups around the world . 
 Other books include <unk> : How to inject your ideas into a breaking news story and generate tons of media coverage , ( 2011 , <unk> , ePub ) , Real @-@ Time Marketing and PR : How to Instantly Engage Your Market , Connect With Your Customers , and Create Products that Grow Your Business Now ( 2010 ) , Marketing Lessons from the Grateful Dead : What Every Business Can Learn from the Most Iconic Band in History ( 2010 ) , Marketing the Moon : The Selling of the Apollo Lunar Program ( 2014 ) . and The New Rules of Sales and Service : How to Use Agile Selling , Real @-@ Time Customer Engagement , Big Data , Content , and Storytelling to Grow Your Business 
 Writing about <unk> for Forbes Magazine , Nick Morgan notes that Scott and his publisher , Wiley , " point the way forward " by publishing this book only in electronic formats . He summarizes the idea of <unk> as the timely creation of material for " the second paragraph " of a news story for journalists to incorporate . The first paragraph is for the basic facts : who @-@ what @-@ why @-@ where @-@ when . The second paragraph is about the implications of the story . Unlike hijacking , <unk> is not a pejorative term . Kristi Hedges , also writing for Forbes , observes that Scott ' answers [ the question ] " Should I be on Twitter ? " once and for all ' , citing its instantaneous nature and widespread use by journalists . Writing for Fast Company , Wendy Marx cautions those who might be tempted to take the idea too far , " Don 't ... spam reporters ... That will only backfire " . 
 Real @-@ Time Marketing and PR draws on Scott 's earlier career as an up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ second Wall Street trader , this book highlights how the timely creation of heart felt content can be more important than long <unk> polished pieces . Examples include the Dave Carroll United Breaks Guitars phenomenon . Writing in <unk> Magazine , Christopher <unk> quotes Scott as saying , " The idea of real @-@ time communication ... is the most interesting thing going on in <unk> marketing right now " . 
 Marketing Lessons from the Grateful Dead was coauthored with Brian Halligan , CEO of HubSpot . Scott <unk> , reviewing the book in the Boston Globe , mentions that the authors say they were inspired in part by an article in the Atlantic by Joshua Green . 
 Reviewing Marketing the Moon for The Boston Globe , Carolyn Y. Johnson writes that the book documents NASA 's success in placing the Apollo mission at front @-@ of @-@ mind of ordinary people and The Wall Street Journal found the " <unk> surge of public interest in all things lunar " remarkable . Reviewing the book for The New Yorker magazine , Joshua Rothman contrasts the usual " derring @-@ do " presentation of the Apollo program by observing : " Scott and Jurek see it as ... an attempt to convince America , and the world , of its own competence , intelligence , and courage . " In an essay based on the coverage of astronaut celebrity in their book , Scott and Jurek link it to that of aviation predecessors such as Charles Lindbergh . A particularly important facet of the Apollo mission was live television broadcast of the landing . Scott calls this " one of the best decisions ever made . " The book 's foreword is by Captain Eugene Cernan , the twelfth and ( so far ) last man to walk on the moon . 
 Dan <unk> interviewed the author about The New Rules of Sales and Service for Forbes magazine . Scott published a free summary of the main points of the book on <unk> . 
 In addition Scott has published : 
 World Wide Rave ( 2009 ) . 
 To promote this book Scott created several videos including one evocative of the joyous Matt Harding Where is Matt ? series and a series of three in the workplace mockumentary style of both Ricky Gervais 's The Office and the Art of the Sale videos . Comedian Tim Washer plays in two of these series : as victim in the Art of the Sale , but switching roles to oppressor in Riding the Rave . 
 Tuned In ( 2008 ) 
 Cashing In With Content ( 2005 ) 
 Eyeball Wars : A Novel of Dot @-@ com Intrigue ( 2001 ) 
 Scott also wrote the foreword sections in The New Rules of Social Media , a series of books that he edits for John Wiley & Sons . The first six books in the series are : 
 Inbound Marketing : Get Found Using Google , Social Media , and Blogs by Brian Halligan and Dharmesh Shah 
 Get Seen : Online Video Secrets to Building Your Business by Steve Garfield 
 Social Media Metrics : How to Measure and <unk> Your Marketing Investment by Jim Sterne 
 Beyond Viral : How to Promote and Sustain Your Brand with Online Video by Kevin Nalty 
 Content Rules : How to Create Killer Blogs , Podcasts , Videos , <unk> , <unk> ( and More ) That Engage Customers and Ignite Your Business by Ann Handley and C.C. Chapman 
 Go Mobile : Location @-@ Based Marketing , Apps , Mobile <unk> Ad Campaigns , 2D Codes and Other Mobile Strategies to Grow Your Business by Jeanne Hopkins and Jamie Turner 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 2015 , Robert Stone announced that a documentary film entitled The Men Who Sold the Moon , based in part on Scott 's book Marketing the Moon , is in production . 
 = = = Online publications and social media = = = 
 Scott also generates content on @-@ line : 
 Several E @-@ books 
 A blog , Web Ink Now , which was ranked in the now defunct <unk> Power 150 as one of the top marketing blogs 
 Articles in Huffington Post 
 He is very active on selected social media sites : Facebook , Twitter , and Google Plus . For example , on July 6 , 2011 Twitter hosted an online town hall at the White House where President Obama answered selected questions from members of Twitter . Scott 's question was the second one of only twenty selected from over 119 @,@ 000 tweets . 
 = = = Corporate governance = = = 
 Scott serves on the board of advisors of HubSpot , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , the Massachusetts Air and Space Museum , and Grateful Dead Archive at UC Santa Cruz . He was formerly on the board of directors of <unk> ( now merged with Sant ) and <unk> ( acquired by Yahoo ! Japan ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Scott is married to Yukari Watanabe Scott . They have one daughter . Scott 's hobbies include collecting space artifacts , attending rock concerts , and surfing . 
 = Historia Plantarum ( Theophrastus ) = 
 Theophrastus 's Enquiry into Plants or Historia Plantarum ( Greek : Περὶ φυτῶν <unk> , Peri <unk> historia ) was , along with Pliny the Elder 's Natural History and Dioscorides 's De Materia Medica , one of the most important books of natural history written in ancient times , and like them it was influential in the Renaissance . Theophrastus looks at plant structure , reproduction and growth ; the varieties of plant around the world ; wood ; wild and cultivated plants ; and their uses . Book 9 in particular , on the medicinal uses of plants , is one of the first herbals , describing juices , gums and resins extracted from plants , and how to gather them . 
 Historia Plantarum was written some time between c . 350 BC and c . 287 BC in ten volumes , of which nine survive . In the book , Theophrastus described plants by their uses , and attempted a biological classification based on how plants reproduced , a first in the history of botany . He continually revised the manuscript , and it remained in an unfinished state on his death . The condensed style of the text , with its many lists of examples , indicate that Theophrastus used the manuscript as the working notes for lectures to his students , rather than intending it to be read as a book . 
 Historia Plantarum was first translated into Latin by Theodore Gaza ; the translation was published in 1483 . Johannes <unk> published a frequently cited folio edition in Amsterdam in 1644 , complete with commentaries and woodcut illustrations . The first English translation was made by Sir Arthur Hort and published in 1916 . 
 = = Book = = 
 The Enquiry into Plants is in Hort 's parallel text a book of some 400 pages of original Greek , consisting of about 100 @,@ 000 words . It was originally organised into ten books , of which nine survive , though it is possible the surviving text represents all the material , rearranged into nine books rather than the original ten . Along with his other surviving botanical work , On the Causes of Plants , Enquiry into Plants was an important influence on science in the middle ages . On the strength of these books , the first scientific inquiries into plants and one of the first systems of plant classification , Linnaeus called Theophrastus " the father of botany " . 
 Theophrastus 's two plant books have similar titles to two books on animals by his mentor Aristotle ; Roger French concludes that he was effectively " doing a peripatetic exercise " in identifying regularities in and differences between plants , in the manner of Aristotle with animals . However , he went beyond Aristotle in describing seeds as parts of the plant ; Aristotle , French argues , would never have described semen or embryos as parts of an animal . 
 Theophrastus made use of a variety of sources for the book , including Diocles on drugs and medicinal plants . Theophrastus claims to have gathered information from drug @-@ sellers ( <unk> ) and root @-@ cutters ( <unk> ) . Plants described include poppy ( <unk> ) , hemlock , ( <unk> ) , wild lettuce ( <unk> ) , and mandrake ( <unk> ) . 
 The surviving texts are the notes that Theophrastus used in teaching , and they were continually revised . He referred to earlier books in the Lyceum library including Democritus , sometimes preserving fragments of books otherwise lost . He mentions about 500 species of plant . 
 = = Translations = = 
 The Enquiry into Plants ( along with the Causes of Plants ) was first translated into Latin by Theodore Gaza by 1454 , circulated in manuscript , and then published at Treviso in 1483 . In its original Greek it first appeared from the press of Aldus Manutius at Venice , 1495 – 98 , from a single corrupt manuscript which has since been lost . Wimmer identified two manuscripts of first quality , the Codex <unk> in the Vatican Library , which was not made known to Johann Gottlob Schneider , who with H. F. Link made the first modern critical edition , Leipzig 1818 – 1821 , and the excerpts in the Codex <unk> in the Bibliothèque nationale de France . 
 A good and often @-@ cited edition is that of Johannes <unk> , published in Amsterdam in 1644 . This folio edition has the Greek and Latin texts printed in parallel , along with commentaries on the text by Julius Caesar Scaliger and Robert Constantine , and woodcut illustrations of plants . Sir William <unk> @-@ Dyer described the commentary as " botanically monumental and fundamental " . 
 The first translation into English , with an introduction and parallel Greek and English texts , was made by Sir Arthur Hort ( 1864 – 1935 ) . It was published simultaneously by William Heinemann in London and G. P. Putnam 's Sons in New York , as a two @-@ volume book Theophrastus Enquiry into Plants and minor works on odours and weather signs in 1916 . 
 Three older German editions with commentaries are described by Hort as indispensable : Schneider and Link 's 1818 – 1821 edition already mentioned ; Kurt Polycarp Joachim Sprengel 's 1822 edition from Halle ; and Christian Friedrich Heinrich Wimmer 's 1842 edition from Breslau . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Enquiry into Plants classifies plants according to how they reproduce , their localities , their sizes , and their practical uses including as foods , juices , and herbs . 
 The books describe the natural history of plants as follows : 
 = = = Book 1 : Plant anatomy = = = 
 Theophrastus tours plant anatomy , including leaves ( <unk> ) , flowers , catkins , fruits ( <unk> ) , seeds , roots ( <unk> ) , and wood . 
 Plants are classified as trees , shrubs , herbaceous perennials , and annual herbs ( <unk> ) ; these divisions are acknowledged to be rough and ready , as is the division into wild or cultivated , whereas the aquatic / terrestrial division appeared to be natural . Theophrastus notes that some plants are irregular , while the silver fir has branches always opposite each other and other plants have branches equally spaced or in rows . Figs have the longest roots , while the banyan sends roots down from the shoots , forming a circle of roots at a distance all round the trunk . 
 = = = Book 2 : Tree and plant propagation = = = 
 Theophrastus writes that plants can grow spontaneously , from seed , or from vegetative parts of the plant . Plants with bulbs grow from those . Soil and climate influence growth . Some plants change into others unless care is taken , so bergamot turns into mint , and wheat turns into <unk> . He reports that if celery is trodden after sowing , it will become curly , and that figs are the easiest trees to propagate , whereas date palms have to be grown from several seeds together , and they like irrigation , dung , salt ( at the age of one year ) and being transplanted . Other kinds of palm have different habits and fruits . He notes that gall insects come out of wild figs and make the cultivated figs swell , which helps to prevent premature shedding of the fruit . The male spathe of the date palm is cut off and brought to the female , and its dust is shaken over the female tree to make it fruit . 
 = = = Book 3 : Wild trees = = = 
 Theophrastus asserts that all wild trees grow from seed or from roots . He mentions that the philosophers spoke of spontaneous generation , as when Anaxagoras claims the air contains the seeds of every plant , whereas Diogenes believed plants arose when water mixed with earth . In places like Crete , Theophrastus writes that native plants spring up if the ground is simply disturbed , and that wild trees are generally more vigorous than cultivated ones , give fruit later , and like cold and hilly terrain . He asserts that trees which can grow both on hill and plain grow better and taller when grown on the plain . 
 The book offers numerous examples of Theophrastus 's note @-@ like style , with lists of species interspersed among the general explanations . For example , " Now among wild trees those are evergreen which were mentioned before , silver @-@ fir fir ' wild pine ' box <unk> yew Phoenician cedar terebinth <unk> hybrid <unk> bay holm @-@ oak holly cotoneaster kermes @-@ oak tamarisk ; but all the others shed their leaves ... " 
 = = = Book 4 : Trees and shrubs from abroad = = = 
 Theophrastus describes trees and shrubs from different places and habitats , as for instance a sheltered part of the Arcadia region near Krane in a deep valley where the sun never reaches , and the silver @-@ fir trees are exceptionally tall . He looks into the plants of Egypt , Libya , Asia , northern regions , and then aquatic plants from the Mediterranean , wetlands especially in Egypt , reeds and rushes . He also considers factors that limit the life of plants including diseases and weather damage . 
 = = = Book 5 : Wood = = = 
 Theophrastus describes the wood of different trees , the effects of climate on wood , of knots and ' coiling ' in timber and other differences in quality . He discusses which woods to use for specific purposes such as for carpentry , shipbuilding and for building houses , and the making of charcoal . The most useful trees are said to be silver @-@ fir and fir , and they have the best wood in the largest sizes ; the silver @-@ fir is softer than the fir , and its wood has layers like an onion , and is made entirely of these layers . The strongest and most attractive wood is smooth , without knots . In Syria , terebinth wood is dark and close @-@ grained , Theophrastus reports , and used both for the handles of daggers and , turned on the lathe , for making cups . He claims that the hardest timber is of oak and holm oak , while elm warps the least , so it is used for the pivots and sockets of doors , which must be straight . The wood of palms is light and soft like cork @-@ oak , but is tougher and less brittle , so it is good for carving images . Timber from the cedar , ebony , box , olive , oak and sweet chestnut keeps well and resists decay . He asserts that Tamarisk wood from Greece is weak , but from the Arabian island of Tylos it is as strong as kermes @-@ oak . The wood of oak and the knotted parts of fir and silver @-@ fir are described as the hardest to work . Ships are generally made of silver @-@ fir , fir , and Syrian cedar ; in Cyprus they use Aleppo pine which is better than the fir that grows there . Theophrastus records that in the lowlands of Italy ( the country of the Latins ) they grow bay , myrtle and excellent beech trees long enough for the whole length of a ship . 
 = = = Book 6 : <unk> , with thorns or without = = = 
 Theophrastus classifies undershrubs as spiny , such as thistle , <unk> and safflower , and spineless , such as marjoram , savory , sage , <unk> , and balm . He notes that some have a hollow stem , such as deadly nightshade and hemlock . Roses , he writes , vary in number of petals , roughness of bark , colour and scent ; they have five , twelve , twenty or more petals , and those with the sweetest scent come from Cyrene , and are used for making perfume . The times of flowering of different species are listed . 
 = = = Book 7 : Pot @-@ herbs = = = 
 Theophrastus reports that cabbage , radish and turnip are sown in July after the summer solstice , along with beet , lettuce , mustard and coriander . <unk> , celery , onion and orache are sown in January . Cucumber , gourds , basil , purslane and savory , in contrast , he writes , are sown in April . Ripe seeds do not germinate at once but wait for the right time . He asserts that all the herbs can be grown from seed , while rue , marjoram and basil can be raised from cuttings , and garlic , onion and other bulbs are grown from their roots . All the flowers of a herb appear at one time , except for basil which puts out a series of flowers starting low on the plant . <unk> has the most fruits , but it is said you have to curse and insult the plant to get a good crop . Theophrastus describes varieties of some herbs , for instance that the white lettuce is sweetest and tenderest , while there are many kinds of onion , with <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> varieties from those regions . Garlic is said to be planted close to the solstice ; the Cyprian variety is largest and is used in salads . All herbs except rue are said to like dung . Of the wild herbs , Theophrastus reports that some such as cat 's ear are edible , whereas others like dandelion are too bitter to be worth eating . 
 = = = Book 8 : Cereals and legumes = = = 
 Theophrastus groups together the cereals and the legumes ( peas and beans ) , and includes millet and other many @-@ seeded plants like sesame also . These can only be grown from seed . They can be sown early , as with wheat , barley and beans , or in spring after the equinox , for plants like lentils , <unk> and peas . Vetch and chickpeas can , he reports , be sown at either season . When sprouting , beans form a shape like a penis , from which the root grows down and the leafy stem upwards . Wheat and barley flower for four or five days , whereas the legumes flower for much longer . Theophrastus reports that these plants grow differently according to the region , so for instance crops in Salamis appear earlier than those elsewhere in Attica . Wheat varieties are recorded as being named for their localities ; they differ in colour , size , growth habit and food value . In a place near <unk> in Asia the wheat grains are said to grow as big as the stone of an olive , whereas pulses do not in Theophrastus 's view vary to the same extent . 
 = = = Book 9 : Medicinal uses of plants = = = 
 This book is one of the first herbals , admittedly much simpler than those of Nicander , Dioscorides or Galen . Theophrastus covers juices ( <unk> ) , gums , and resins , the uses of some hundreds of plants as medicines , and how to gather them . 
 Resin is gathered by tapping trees including silver @-@ fir and Aleppo pine ; the best resin is from the terebinth . On Mount Ida in Crete the people gather pitch from Corsican pine and Aleppo pine . Gums such as frankincense , myrrh and balsam of Mecca are gathered either by cutting the plant or naturally . <unk> and myrrh are gathered into the closely guarded temple of the <unk> . Cassia and cinnamon also come from the Arabian peninsula . 
