 Drug collectors have certain traditions which may be accurate or may be exaggerated . Precautions are rightly taken when gathering hellebore , and men cannot dig it up for long ; whereas the story that the peony must be dug up at night for fear that a woodpecker will watch and cause the man a rectal prolapse is a mere superstition . Similarly the idea that you must mark three circles around a mandrake plant with a sword , and speak of the mysteries of love while cutting it , is just far @-@ fetched . 
 Apart from Greece itself , medicinal plants are produced in Italy in <unk> , as Aeschylus records , and Latium ; and in Egypt , which as Homer mentions is the source of the drug <unk> that makes men forget sorrow and passion . The best hemlock comes from Susa , while <unk> , useful in childbirth , comes only from Crete . Wolfsbane comes from Crete and Zakynthos ; it can be made into a poison that causes death a year or more after taking it , and there is no antidote . Hemlock is a poison which brings a painless death ; pepper and frankincense are antidotes for it . <unk> causes madness , but oleander root in wine makes people gentle and cheerful . <unk> has many uses including for bruises on the head , snakebite , and prolapse of the uterus . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ancient = = = 
 Pliny the Elder made frequent use of Theophrastus , including his books on plants , in his Natural History ; the only authors he cited more often were Democritus and Varro . 
 John Scarborough comments that " The list of herbals assembled in Historia Plantarum IX became the direct ancestor of all later drug treatises in antiquity , and many traces of Theophrastus 's ( and Diocles 's ) original observations survive in the Materia Medica of Dioscorides . The analysis of the various plants and plant derivatives shows that the Greek <unk> and drug @-@ vendors had collected much valuable information on the medical employment of plants , and Theophrastus invented a format for this type of information that would be followed after his own time . " 
 = = = Mediaeval and Renaissance = = = 
 Theophrastus was barely known in the Middle Ages ; his writings were rediscovered only in the fifteenth century , when Greek manuscripts were uncovered in the Vatican , and the pope Nicholas V asked Theodorus Gaza to translate them into Latin . The effect was to stimulate Renaissance scholars to restart the exploration of plant taxonomy . The science of botany was founded as these scholars engaged with the accounts of plants , and especially of their medicinal uses , together with a newly critical reaction to mediaeval pharmacology , which was based on unthinking acceptance of the Natural History of Pliny the Elder and the De Materia Medica of Dioscorides . By the same token , however , Theophrastus ( and Aristotle ) fell abruptly out of use around 1550 , as classical botany and zoology were effectively assimilated into Renaissance thought in the form of illustrated encyclopedias — which were still heavily based on classical writings . Andrea <unk> made use of Theophrastus in his philosophical book on plants , De Plantis ( 1583 ) . The Italian scholar Julius Caesar Scaliger 's accurate and detailed commentaries on the Historia Plantarum were published in Leyden in 1584 , after his death . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The Chicago Botanic Garden describes Historia Plantarum as the " first great botanical work " of Theophrastus , " the first real botanist " ; it states of the 1483 edition printed by Bartolomeo <unk> in Treviso that " all taxonomy of plants starts with this modest book " , centuries before the modern taxonomy of Linnaeus . Anna <unk> observes in her 2005 book The Naming of Names that Theophrastus made the first ever classification of plants , and Pliny the Elder , now much better known , used much of his material . 
 = = = Text = = = 
 Hort , Arthur ; Theophrastus ( 1916 ) . Theophrastus : Enquiry into Plants ( Loeb Classical Library ed . ) . London and New York : William Heinemann and G.P. Putnam 's Sons . 
 = = = Commentary = = = 
 Einarson , Benedict ( January 1976 ) . " The Manuscripts of Theophrastus ' Historia Plantarum " . Classical Philology 71 ( 1 ) : 67 – 76 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library ( 2014 ) . " Theophrastus and the nature of plants " . University of Toronto . Retrieved 2 June 2014 . 
 French , Roger ( 1994 ) . Ancient Natural History : Histories of Nature . Routledge. pp. 92 – 99 . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Grafton , Anthony ; Most , Glenn W. ; Settis , Salvatore ( editors ) ( 2010 ) . The Classical Tradition . Harvard University Press . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Scarborough , John ( 1978 ) . " Theophrastus on Herbals and Herbal Remedies " . Journal of the History of Biology 11 ( 2 ) : 353 – 385 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Schmitt , Charles B. ( 1971 ) . " Theophrastus in the Middle Ages " . <unk> 2 : 257 – 270 . 
 <unk> , Peter v. " First Scientific Descriptions " . University of Hamburg . Retrieved 2 June 2014 . 
 = Don 't Rush ( song ) = 
 " Don 't Rush " is a song by American pop recording artist Kelly Clarkson , from her first greatest hits album , Greatest Hits – Chapter One ( 2012 ) . Written by Blu Sanders , Natalie Hemby , and Lindsay Chapman , and produced by Dann Huff , it features country music singer Vince Gill on backing vocals . The song premiered on WSIX @-@ FM radio station on October 29 , 2012 , and was made available for purchase on iTunes store on the following day . It was officially sent to country radio stations on November 15 , 2012 . Musically , " Don 't Rush " is a country song with influences of country soul and soft rock . It is Clarkson 's second country single as a main act . 
 " Don 't Rush " received critical acclaim from music critics who praised its production for resonating the sound of country songs from the early 1970s and 1980s . Despite that , some critics felt the song is not as powerful as " Don 't You Wanna Stay " , Clarkson 's country duet with Jason Aldean . It was nominated at various music industry awards , including a Grammy Award nomination for Best Country Duo / Group Performance at the 56th Grammy Awards . Commercially , the single enjoyed a moderate success in the United States , peaking at number 23 on the Hot Country Songs and at number 87 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It is Clarkson 's fifth country chart entry , and Gill 's biggest country hit since " The Reason Why " in 2006 . The song 's first live performance was on the 46th Annual Country Music Association Awards on November 1 , 2012 . The song 's accompanying music video is composed of the live footage from the Country Music Association awards which was directed by Paul Miller . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Don 't Rush " was originally written by Natalie Hemby and Blu Sanders in 2008 . The idea of writing the song came from Hemby . She explained " My friend Blu Sanders and I were together , and he goes , ‘ Have you ever met Lindsay <unk> ? ’ And I was like , ‘ Nope ! ’ Basically he was like , ‘ Why don ’ t we write with her ? She has an absolutely gorgeous R & B voice . ’ He was like ‘ Let ’ s get together and see what we can develop . " Hemby also admitted that the song was written for Lindsay Chapman because the song 's genre fit Chapman 's musical direction at that time . She added , " It had an Al Green @-@ ish feel with a ' 70s throwback kind of vibe , and that 's kind of what we were going for with her sound . " Once the collaboration was completed , the song was never recorded and Hemby said that it " just kind of fell by the wayside " . Being a good friend with Clarkson , Sanders decided to take the initiative to send the song with a few other songs to the singer . 
 According to Clarkson , when she first heard the song in March 2012 , she decided to put it on hold . She explained , " My goal as a singer is to capture the sentiment of a song and emote what the feeling is . I 'm in a relationship and super happy , and I don 't think I would have been able to sing this song eight months ago . Love should be celebrated , and this is a great description of where I 'm at in my life . This is a couple 's skate , not an all skate song . " " Don 't Rush " is one of the three new tracks ( the other two being " Catch My Breath " and " People Like Us " ) that Clarkson recorded for her first greatest hits album , Greatest Hits – Chapter One . In an interview with Billboard , Clarkson expressed her excitement of recording the song , saying 
 People have been wanting me to release something specifically for country radio for years , but I didn 't want to just release something that has a steel guitar on it [ ... ] I wanted to release something I 'm proud of , and we finally found that song . It 's my favorite kind of country music ; it 's like 1980s , 1990s country music , that throwback , two @-@ steppin ' style . And I 'm freakin ' stoked I got Vince Gill to sing on it with me , so I win ' cause he 's like one of my favorite people . 
 " Don 't Rush " is Clarkson 's second country single as a main act and her fourth overall . Her first solo country single was the country remix version of " Mr. Know It All " . It is also her fourth country duet with other artists . She first collaborated with Reba McEntire on the 2007 country version of " Because of You " , followed by a collaboration with Jason Aldean on " Don 't You Wanna Stay " , and another duet with Blake Shelton on a song entitled " There ’ s a New Kid in Town " . The song premiered on WSIX @-@ FM radio station on October 29 , 2012 . It was made available for purchase on iTunes Store the following day , on October 30 , 2012 , as the second single of the album . It received an immediate response from fans and an overwhelming demand from radio stations following Clarkson 's performance of the song on Country Music Association Awards on November 1 , 2012 . The song was officially sent to country radio stations on November 15 , 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Don 't Rush " is a country song written by Blu Sanders , Natalie Hemby and Lindsay Dawn Chapman , and produced by Dann Huff . It features American country singer @-@ songwriter Vince Gill . The song is set in a " drowsy , take @-@ it @-@ easy beat " which is composed of a layer of Clarkson 's and Gill 's soulful harmonies . The song begins with a breezy soft @-@ rock tune . In the first verse , Clarkson sings " I see the way you ’ re looking at me / Baby know I ’ m feeling it too / We can just light up every candle / Move from room to room " which was ensued by the sound of Gill 's guitar . As the song launches into the chorus , both Clarkson and Gill are heard singing " Stopping every minute just because you 're in it / Wishing everyday was Sunday , you 're right next to me / It 's how it 's supposed to be " , a vocal chorus deemed as " slightly awkward " by Will Hermes of Rolling Stone . In the final chorus , the pair pauses before the key changes at minute three . 
 Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine praised the production of the song for its light @-@ handed approach which resonates the early- ' 80s work of artists like Barbara Mandrell and Ronnie Milsap . Mark Blankenship of Logo also opined that the song " sounds like an easy listening hit from the 1970s or 1980s , with gently groovy music underneath a laid @-@ back vocal . " It is noted that the sound of Hammond organ is instrumental in resonating the vibe of early 1980s in the song . Zara Golden of VH1 called the instrumentation of the song as " bright and breezy " and remarked that it is more soft @-@ rock @-@ y than " Don 't You Wanna Stay " . Sam Lansky of Idolator noted that Clarkson 's restrained vocals are imbued with a country twang which is suitable for the song 's country instrumentation . She also added that having a duet partner in the song " brings Clarkson 's impressively emotive vocals to life " . 
 Lyrically , the song finds Clarkson taking her time in love , and crooning about praising her lover . Sam Wilbur of AOL Radio is contented with the song 's central theme , writing " It 's a simple , laid back love song that is a nice change of pace for Clarkson who , along with ' Catch My Breath , ' is singing more about love and happiness , instead of break @-@ ups and heartbreak . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Don 't Rush " has generally received critical acclaim from music critics . Rachel Brodsky of MTV gave a positive review towards the song , writing " It 's true -- we 're not totally used to hearing Kelly exploring her country side ( though she is from Texas , so go figure ) , but judging by the vocals on " Don 't Rush , " we think we could get used to Country Kelly " . Sam Wilbur of AOL Radio complimented the song for being " a feel @-@ good track with a nostalgic , classic country feel " . Billy Dukes of Taste of Country gave the song four stars and a half , writing " It ’ s difficult for a female vocalist to sound sexy without drawing criticism . Clarkson ’ s voice is a wine and roses romance , instead of the wanton yearn of a beauty in a too @-@ short skirt . The original ‘ American Idol ’ may have found her niche . " Michaelangelo Matos of New York Post gave the song three stars out of five and praised Clarkson for " getting completely into character " and successfully delivering the emotion of the song . Mark Blankenship of Logo complimented Clarkson for embracing her country side . Calling the song as " a good song " , he concluded his review by writing " Even better , it ’ s a flirty , seductive love song , not a furious break @-@ up anthem , which is a nice change after ten years of Kelly ’ s heartbroken rage . " Chuck Dauphin of Billboard ranked " Don 't Rush " at number eight in his list of Top 10 Country Songs of 2012 , writing " One of the most luscious sounding love songs I have heard in a while . It 's the definition of ' Ear Candy . ' If you ’ re not in love , you 'll want to be after hear it . " 
 The song was nominated for Vocal Event of the Year at the 2013 Academy of Country Music Awards , Musical Event of the Year at the 2013 Country Music Association Awards , and a Grammy Award for Best Country Duo / Group Performance at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Following Clarkson 's performance of the song in the Country Music Association Awards , " Don 't Rush " sold 41 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads and debuted at number 35 on the Hot Digital Songs as well as at number 97 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending November 17 , 2012 . The following week , the song jumped to a new peak on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 89 . It also debuted on the Hot Country Songs at number 25 on the week ending November 17 , 2012 and becomes Clarkson 's fifth country hit on the chart , following " A Moment Like This " , " Because of You " , " Don 't You Wanna Stay " and " Mr. Know It All " . With " Don 't Rush " debuting at number 25 , it also becomes Gill 's highest debuting song on the Hot Country Songs and it is his biggest hit since his song " Building Bridges " , peaked at number four on the chart on September 2006 . The song has since peaked at number 23 on the Hot Country Songs on the week ending November 24 , 2012 . As of March 20 , 2013 , " Don 't Rush " has sold 215 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . In Canada , " Don 't Rush " entered the Canadian Hot 100 at number 53 on the week ending November 24 , 2012 . On April 18 , 2013 , the song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at a new peak of 87 , following Clarkson 's performance on the ACM Awards . By May , 2013 " Don 't Rush " has sold over 346 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 Clarkson and Gill performed the song for the first time on the 46th Annual Country Music Association Awards on November 1 , 2012 . Their performance earned positive reviews ; Grady Smith of Entertainment Weekly deemed it as " smoky , smooth , soulful , and understated " . Natalie Finn of E ! noted that their performance of " Don 't Rush " reminisces " Islands in the Stream " , and welcomed Clarkson 's venture to country music . Story Gilmore of Neon Limelight remarked , " The two stars dazzled by simply singing , and singing well for their performance . Kelly sang flawlessly alongside Vince as the country icon strummed on his guitar while adding smooth vocals . " The song 's accompanying music video is composed of the live footage from the Country Music Association awards which was directed by Glenn Weiss . On February 28 , 2013 , Clarkson took the stage to perform the single during the Country Radio Seminar concert . Wearing a T @-@ shirt with the logo of Drug Abuse Resistance Education , she was joined by Jason Sellers who sang Gill 's part . Clarkson also performed the song on the Academy of Country Music Awards on April 7 , 2013 , again with Sellers singing Gill 's part . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded by Steve Marcantonio at Sound Stage Studios , Nashville , Tennessee ; mixed by Justin Niebank at Blackbird Studios , Nashville , Tennessee . 
 Personnel 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! = 
 Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! ( <unk> ！ ！ , Sūpā Panchi @-@ Auto ! ! ) is a boxing video game developed and published by Nintendo for the SNES . It was released on September 14 , 1994 in North America and again in the same region in 1996 . It was released in Europe on January 26 , 1995 for the same console and in Japan in 1998 for the Nintendo Power flash RAM cartridge series and the Super Famicom . The game was released for the Wii 's Virtual Console in Europe on March 20 , 2009 , in North America on March 30 , 2009 , and in Japan on July 7 , 2009 . The game was also released on the New Nintendo 3ds eShop on May 5 , 2016 . It is the fourth game in the Punch @-@ Out ! ! series , taking place after the Punch @-@ Out ! ! game for the NES . 
 In Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! the player controls Little Mac , as he fights his way to become the World Video Boxing Association champion . Players , fighting from a " behind the back " perspective , must knockout their opponent in three minutes to win . Players can launch jabs , hooks , and uppercuts against their opponents as well as block , dodge , and duck opponents ' attacks . Nintendo Integrated Research and Development , led by Genyo Takeda , Minoru Arakawa and Makoto Wada , developed the game . It also featured voice acting by Charles Martinet . 
 The game received praise from reviewers for its cartoon @-@ like style , its colorful , outlandish opponents , simple gameplay controls , and replay value . The game also featured colorful , detailed graphics , which included the usage of transparency that facilitates the game 's " behind the back " perspective . Other reviewers had said that this game lacked the overall appeal , gameplay , or audience of its predecessor . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay in Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! is similar to that of its arcade and NES / FC predecessors . The player controls a nameable boxer as he fights his way to become <unk> Champion . The player controls the boxer from a third @-@ person perspective , with him being translucent on the screen . Players can attack their opponents with jabs to the face or with body blows from either hand . The opponent can deflect punches , so players must aim at the opponent 's open spot ( where the gloves are not ) to connect . Depending on the opponents ' stances , they will guard themselves differently , so players need to use the correct punches . 
 As in the first two arcade games of the series , players have a power meter , located on the bottom of the screen . The meter fills up as the player lands punches against the opponent , and it goes down as the player gets hit . When the power meter fills up completely , the player will be able to launch knockout punches such as uppercuts , hooks , and rapid punches . These punches have a slight delay in execution , but they cause more damage to the opponent . Players can also build power as the match progresses , as indicated by the background color behind the player 's face on the upper left corner of the screen , which goes from blue to green to yellow to red . The player reaches " Power @-@ Up " status when the background color reaches red . During this status , the player 's punch speed and power increase . They lose their Power @-@ Up status if they are knocked down . 
 Players can avoid attacks from their opponents by dodging to the left or right or by ducking , but players cannot punch while dodging or ducking , nor can they duck body blows . They can also block attacks to either the head or the body , but they cannot block strong punches ; strong punches must be avoided by dodging or ducking . Depending on the situation , the player must strategically block , dodge , or duck in order to avoid an opponent 's attack . Players can also capitalize on the opponent 's attacks by launching counter @-@ punches immediately after avoiding an attack . 
 Both the player and the opponent have stamina meters , both displayed on the top of the screen . The meters decrease when either boxer gets hit by a punch . Boxers will get knocked down if their stamina meter runs out . Faster knockdowns will cause that boxer to recover less stamina upon getting up ; the same happens if a boxer is knocked down by a knockout punch . Either boxer will lose if they cannot stand up before the count of ten after being knocked down ( resulting in a knockout or KO ) or if they are knocked down three times in the match ( resulting in a technical knockout or TKO ) . The player can also recover some stamina while the opponent is down by pressing the buttons on the controller . 
 The player has three minutes to knock out the opponent . After three minutes , the match ends , and the player loses ; the player cannot win by a decision . After losing , the player can use a continue and fight a rematch . The game ends after all continues have been used ; the player must fight all opponents in the current circuit again . The game consists of four circuits in which the player must become the champion . The player can retry any circuit that has already been beaten . The game has a battery – backed memory in which players can save their data and records for future play . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! was released in North America October 1994 and in Europe on January 26 , 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 01 @-@ 26 ) . It was rereleased in North America in 1996 , and it was released in Japan as part of the Nintendo Power flash RAM cartridge series on March 1 , 1998 . In addition , Electronic Arts included the game as an unlockable bonus item along with its protagonist as an unlockable boxer in the Nintendo GameCube version of Fight Night Round 2 as part of Nintendo 's deal of featuring Nintendo characters in the Nintendo GameCube versions of some EA Sports titles . The game was later released for the Wii 's Virtual Console service in Europe and Australia on March 20 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 03 @-@ 20 ) , in North America on March 30 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 03 @-@ 30 ) and in Japan on March 30 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 03 @-@ 30 ) . Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! is the fourth game in the Punch @-@ Out ! ! series and was developed by Nintendo Integrated Research and Development and was produced by Minoru Arakawa , Genyo Takeda and Makoto Wada . Voice actor Charles Martinet was credited for providing the voices of the boxers , the referee and the announcer . Nintendo IRD was developing this game simultaneously with <unk> 's Revenge : <unk> II . The game is the closest arcade @-@ to @-@ home console translation of the Punch @-@ Out ! ! and Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! arcades ; however , like the NES titles , the SNES title is not a direct port . Shortly before the game was finished and released , some screenshots and video footage of the prototype were shown in a video preview of the game , as well as in an issue of Nintendo Power magazine and two official television commercials , which all showed the protagonist of the game with a different look as well as the announcer having a different voice compared to the ones in the final version seen in the finished and released version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! received a rave review in GamePro . The reviewer praised the game 's good controls , " deceptive challenge " , sprite layouts , animations , and sounds which " juice the game 's intensity level " . He stated the game 's one flaw was " the lack of an easy @-@ to @-@ use two @-@ player mode . " The magazine ran alternate reviews by Fred Doughty and Mark Guinane , winners of the 1994 Blockbuster Video World Game Championship . They also gave the game positive assessments , praising the easy @-@ to @-@ learn controls , high challenge level , and artistic design of the characters . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's two sports game reviewers criticized the game 's unrealistic style , but nonetheless acknowledged that " it still has fantastic game play . " 
 Several reviewers praised Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! overall for not trying to be realistic , for the originality of its different opponents , and for its simple controls . Chris Scullion from Official Nintendo Magazine praises the game for its outlandish characters , addictive gameplay , and simple controls . He adds that Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! is " superb way to prepare for the upcoming Wii [ Punch @-@ Out ! ! ] title " . Scullion states that " the thing that makes Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! interesting ( along with the rest of the games in the series ) is that it 's not a realistic boxing game " . He adds that the opponents in the game are " the real stars of the show " , with each opponent having a unique personality , traits , and boxing styles . Skyler Miller from Allgame , like Scullion , praised the game for its simple , responsive controls , for its colorful , detailed opponents , and for its usage of the Super NES 's transparent color palette for the fighter , which facilitates the " behind the back " perspective . He also appreciates the game 's sound and music , in particular the usage of real voice for the announcer . Game Players magazine applauded the game 's " large , colorful graphics and easy @-@ to @-@ learn controls " . 
 Reviewers have praised Super Punch @-@ Out ! ! for its other unique features and for its rewarding difficulty . Game Informer magazine praised the game for its time attack mode , which recorded and kept track of the fastest knockouts for each opponent . Miller also commended the time attack mode , adding to the game 's replay value . Another review from VideoGames & Computer Entertainment magazine lauded the game for a fair difficulty curve , stating that it " is a really tough game , but it 's one in which repeated playing ( and you will be playing it a lot ) really pays off " . Lucas Thomas from IGN , while praising the game overall , says that the game lacks the overall appeal that the NES version had and that he recommends the NES version over this version . He notes that the sound is " Not as memorable as the music from the NES game , but [ is ] more varied " . He says that many people who are familiar with the NES version have to relearn new attack patterns from different opponents . Thomas also notes that the game did not have as large an audience as the NES version enjoyed . 
 = Guy Fawkes = 
 Guy Fawkes ( / <unk> <unk> / ; 13 April 1570 – 31 January 1606 ) , also known as Guido Fawkes , the name he adopted while fighting for the Spanish , was a member of a group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . 
 Fawkes was born and educated in York . His father died when Fawkes was eight years old , after which his mother married a recusant Catholic . Fawkes converted to Catholicism and left for the continent , where he fought in the Eighty Years ' War on the side of Catholic Spain against Protestant Dutch reformers in the Low Countries . He travelled to Spain to seek support for a Catholic rebellion in England without success . He later met Thomas Wintour , with whom he returned to England . 
 Wintour introduced Fawkes to Robert Catesby , who planned to assassinate King James I and restore a Catholic monarch to the throne . The plotters leased an undercroft beneath the House of Lords , and Fawkes was placed in charge of the gunpowder they stockpiled there . Prompted by the receipt of an anonymous letter , the authorities searched Westminster Palace during the early hours of 5 November , and found Fawkes guarding the explosives . Over the next few days , he was questioned and tortured , and eventually he confessed . Immediately before his execution on 31 January , Fawkes fell from the scaffold where he was to be hanged and broke his neck , thus avoiding the agony of the mutilation that followed . 
 Fawkes became synonymous with the Gunpowder Plot , the failure of which has been commemorated in Britain since 5 November 1605 . His effigy is traditionally burned on a bonfire , commonly accompanied by a fireworks display . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Guy Fawkes was born in 1570 in Stonegate , York . He was the second of four children born to Edward Fawkes , a proctor and an advocate of the consistory court at York , and his wife , Edith . Guy 's parents were regular communicants of the Church of England , as were his paternal grandparents ; his grandmother , born Ellen Harrington , was the daughter of a prominent merchant , who served as Lord Mayor of York in 1536 . Guy 's mother 's family were recusant Catholics , and his cousin , Richard Cowling , became a Jesuit priest . Guy was an uncommon name in England , but may have been popular in York on account of a local notable , Sir Guy Fairfax of Steeton . 
 The date of Fawkes 's birth is unknown , but he was baptised in the church of St. Michael le <unk> on 16 April . As the customary gap between birth and baptism was three days , he was probably born about 13 April . In 1568 , Edith had given birth to a daughter named Anne , but the child died aged about seven weeks , in November that year . She bore two more children after Guy : Anne ( b . 1572 ) , and Elizabeth ( b . 1575 ) . Both were married , in 1599 and 1594 respectively . 
 In 1579 , when Guy was eight years old , his father died . His mother remarried several years later , to the Catholic <unk> <unk> ( or Denis Bainbridge ) of Scotton , Harrogate . Fawkes may have become a Catholic through the <unk> family 's recusant tendencies , and also the Catholic branches of the <unk> and Percy families of Scotton , but also from his time at St. Peter 's School in York . A governor of the school had spent about 20 years in prison for recusancy , and its headmaster , John <unk> , came from a family of noted Yorkshire recusants , the <unk> of <unk> . In her 1915 work The <unk> of Yorkshire , author Catharine <unk> suggested that Fawkes 's Catholic education came from his Harrington relatives , who were known for harbouring priests , one of whom later accompanied Fawkes to Flanders in 1592 – 1593 . Fawkes 's fellow students included John Wright and his brother Christopher ( both later involved with Fawkes in the Gunpowder Plot ) and Oswald Tesimond , Edward Oldcorne and Robert Middleton , who became priests ( the latter executed in 1601 ) . 
 After leaving school Fawkes entered the service of Anthony Browne , 1st Viscount Montagu . The Viscount took a dislike to Fawkes and after a short time dismissed him ; he was subsequently employed by Anthony @-@ Maria Browne , 2nd Viscount Montagu , who succeeded his grandfather at the age of 18 . At least one source claims that Fawkes married and had a son , but no known contemporary accounts confirm this . 
 = = = Military career = = = 
 In October 1591 Fawkes sold the estate in Clifton that he had inherited from his father . He travelled to the continent to fight in the Eighty Years War for Catholic Spain against the new Dutch Republic and , from 1595 until the Peace of Vervins in 1598 , France . Although England was not by then engaged in land operations against Spain , the two countries were still at war , and the Spanish Armada of 1588 was only five years in the past . He joined Sir William Stanley , an English Catholic and veteran commander in his mid @-@ fifties who had raised an army in Ireland to fight in Leicester 's expedition to the Netherlands . Stanley had been held in high regard by Elizabeth I , but following his surrender of Deventer to the Spanish in 1587 he , and most of his troops , had switched sides to serve Spain . Fawkes became an <unk> or junior officer , fought well at the siege of Calais in 1596 , and by 1603 had been recommended for a captaincy . That year , he travelled to Spain to seek support for a Catholic rebellion in England . He used the occasion to adopt the Italian version of his name , Guido , and in his memorandum described James I as " a heretic " , who intended " to have all of the Papist sect driven out of England . " He denounced Scotland , and the King 's favourites among the Scottish nobles , writing " it will not be possible to reconcile these two nations , as they are , for very long " . Although he was received politely , the court of Philip III was unwilling to offer him any support . 
 = = Gunpowder Plot = = 
 In 1604 Fawkes became involved with a small group of English Catholics , led by Robert Catesby , who planned to assassinate the Protestant King James and replace him with his daughter , third in the line of succession , Princess Elizabeth . Fawkes was described by the Jesuit priest and former school friend Oswald Tesimond as " pleasant of approach and cheerful of manner , opposed to quarrels and strife ... loyal to his friends " . Tesimond also claimed Fawkes was " a man highly skilled in matters of war " , and that it was this mixture of piety and professionalism which endeared him to his fellow conspirators . The author Antonia Fraser describes Fawkes as " a tall , powerfully built man , with thick reddish @-@ brown hair , a flowing moustache in the tradition of the time , and a bushy reddish @-@ brown beard " , and that he was " a man of action ... capable of intelligent argument as well as physical endurance , somewhat to the surprise of his enemies . " 
 The first meeting of the five central conspirators took place on Sunday 20 May 1604 , at an inn called the Duck and Drake , in the fashionable Strand district of London . Catesby had already proposed at an earlier meeting with Thomas Wintour and John Wright to kill the King and his government by blowing up " the Parliament House with gunpowder " . Wintour , who at first objected to the plan , was convinced by Catesby to travel to the continent to seek help . Wintour met with the Constable of Castile , the exiled Welsh spy Hugh Owen , and Sir William Stanley , who said that Catesby would receive no support from Spain . Owen did , however , introduce Wintour to Fawkes , who had by then been away from England for many years , and thus was largely unknown in the country . Wintour and Fawkes were contemporaries ; each was militant , and had first @-@ hand experience of the unwillingness of the Spaniards to help . Wintour told Fawkes of their plan to " doe some whatt in Ingland if the pece with Spaine healped us nott " , and thus in April 1604 the two men returned to England . Wintour 's news did not surprise Catesby ; despite positive noises from the Spanish authorities , he feared that " the deeds would nott answere " . 
 One of the conspirators , Thomas Percy , was promoted in June 1604 , gaining access to a house in London that belonged to John Whynniard , Keeper of the King 's Wardrobe . Fawkes was installed as a caretaker and began using the pseudonym John Johnson , servant to Percy . The contemporaneous account of the prosecution ( taken from Thomas Wintour 's confession ) claimed that the conspirators attempted to dig a tunnel from beneath Whynniard 's house to Parliament , although this story may have been a government fabrication ; no evidence for the existence of a tunnel was presented by the prosecution , and no trace of one has ever been found ; Fawkes himself did not admit the existence of such a scheme until his fifth interrogation , but even then he could not locate the tunnel . If the story is true , however , by December 1604 the conspirators were busy tunnelling from their rented house to the House of Lords . They ceased their efforts when , during tunnelling , they heard a noise from above . Fawkes was sent out to investigate , and returned with the news that the tenant 's widow was clearing out a nearby undercroft , directly beneath the House of Lords . 
 The plotters purchased the lease to the room , which also belonged to John Whynniard . Unused and filthy , it was considered an ideal hiding place for the gunpowder the plotters planned to store . According to Fawkes , 20 barrels of gunpowder were brought in at first , followed by 16 more on 20 July . On 28 July however , the ever @-@ present threat of the plague delayed the opening of Parliament until Tuesday , 5 November . 
 = = = Overseas = = = 
 In an attempt to gain foreign support , in May 1605 Fawkes travelled overseas and informed Hugh Owen of the plotters ' plan . At some point during this trip his name made its way into the files of Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , who employed a network of spies across Europe . One of these spies , Captain William Turner , may have been responsible . Although the information he provided to Salisbury usually amounted to no more than a vague pattern of invasion reports , and included nothing which regarded the Gunpowder Plot , on 21 April he told how Fawkes was to be brought by Tesimond to England . Fawkes was a well @-@ known Flemish mercenary , and would be introduced to " Mr Catesby " and " honourable friends of the nobility and others who would have arms and horses in readiness " . Turner 's report did not , however , mention Fawkes 's pseudonym in England , John Johnson , and did not reach Cecil until late in November , well after the plot had been discovered . 
 It is uncertain when Fawkes returned to England , but he was back in London by late August 1605 , when he and Wintour discovered that the gunpowder stored in the undercroft had decayed . More gunpowder was brought into the room , along with firewood to conceal it . Fawkes 's final role in the plot was settled during a series of meetings in October . He was to light the fuse and then escape across the Thames . Simultaneously , a revolt in the Midlands would help to ensure the capture of Princess Elizabeth . Acts of regicide were frowned upon , and Fawkes would therefore head to the continent , where he would explain to the Catholic powers his holy duty to kill the King and his retinue . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 A few of the conspirators were concerned about fellow Catholics who would be present at Parliament during the opening . On the evening of 26 October , Lord Monteagle received an anonymous letter warning him to stay away , and to " <unk> <unk> self into <unk> <unk> whence yow <unk> expect the event in <unk> for ... they shall <unk> a terrible <unk> this <unk> " . Despite quickly becoming aware of the letter – informed by one of Monteagle 's servants – the conspirators resolved to continue with their plans , as it appeared that it " was clearly thought to be a hoax " . Fawkes checked the undercroft on 30 October , and reported that nothing had been disturbed . Monteagle 's suspicions had been aroused , however , and the letter was shown to King James . The King ordered Sir Thomas Knyvet to conduct a search of the cellars underneath Parliament , which he did in the early hours of 5 November . Fawkes had taken up his station late on the previous night , armed with a slow match and a watch given to him by Percy " <unk> he should <unk> <unk> the time went away " . He was found leaving the cellar , shortly after midnight , and arrested . Inside , the barrels of gunpowder were discovered hidden under piles of firewood and coal . 
 = = = Torture = = = 
 Fawkes gave his name as John Johnson and was first interrogated by members of the King 's Privy chamber , where he remained defiant . When asked by one of the lords what he was doing in possession of so much gunpowder , Fawkes answered that his intention was " to blow you Scotch beggars back to your native mountains . " He identified himself as a 36 @-@ year @-@ old Catholic from <unk> in Yorkshire , and gave his father 's name as Thomas and his mother 's as Edith Jackson . Wounds on his body noted by his questioners he explained as the effects of pleurisy . Fawkes admitted his intention to blow up the House of Lords , and expressed regret at his failure to do so . His steadfast manner earned him the admiration of King James , who described Fawkes as possessing " a Roman resolution " . 
 James 's admiration did not , however , prevent him from ordering on 6 November that " John Johnson " be tortured , to reveal the names of his co @-@ conspirators . He directed that the torture be light at first , referring to the use of manacles , but more severe if necessary , authorising the use of the rack : " the gentler Tortures are to be first used unto him et sic per gradus ad ima <unk> [ and so by degrees proceeding to the worst ] " . Fawkes was transferred to the Tower of London . The King composed a list of questions to be put to " Johnson " , such as " as to what he is , For I can never yet hear of any man that knows him " , " When and where he learned to speak French ? " , and " If he was a Papist , who brought him up in it ? " The room in which Fawkes was interrogated subsequently became known as the Guy Fawkes Room . 
 Sir William Waad , Lieutenant of the Tower , supervised the torture and obtained Fawkes 's confession . He searched his prisoner , and found a letter , addressed to Guy Fawkes . To Waad 's surprise , " Johnson " remained silent , revealing nothing about the plot or its authors . On the night of 6 November he spoke with Waad , who reported to Salisbury " He [ Johnson ] told us that since he undertook this action he did every day pray to God he might perform that which might be for the advancement of the Catholic Faith and saving his own soul " . According to Waad , Fawkes managed to rest through the night , despite his being warned that he would be interrogated until " I had <unk> the inwards secret of his thoughts and all his <unk> " . His composure was broken at some point during the following day . 
 The observer Sir Edward Hoby remarked " Since Johnson 's being in the Tower , he <unk> to speak English " . Fawkes revealed his true identity on 7 November , and told his interrogators that there were five people involved in the plot to kill the King . He began to reveal their names on 8 November , and told how they intended to place Princess Elizabeth on the throne . His third confession , on 9 November , implicated Francis Tresham . Following the Ridolfi plot of 1571 prisoners were made to dictate their confessions , before copying and signing them , if they still could . Although it is uncertain if he was tortured on the rack , Fawkes 's scrawled signature bears testament to the suffering he endured at the hands of his interrogators . 
 = = = Trial and execution = = = 
 The trial of eight of the plotters began on Monday 27 January 1606 . Fawkes shared the barge from the Tower to Westminster Hall with seven of his co @-@ conspirators . They were kept in the Star Chamber before being taken to Westminster Hall , where they were displayed on a purpose @-@ built scaffold . The King and his close family , watching in secret , were among the spectators as the Lords Commissioners read out the list of charges . Fawkes was identified as Guido Fawkes , " otherwise called Guido Johnson " . He pleaded not guilty , despite his apparent acceptance of guilt from the moment he was captured . 
 The outcome was never in doubt . The jury found all of the defendants guilty , and the Lord Chief Justice Sir John Popham proclaimed them guilty of high treason . The Attorney General Sir Edward Coke told the court that each of the condemned would be drawn backwards to his death , by a horse , his head near the ground . They were to be " put to death halfway between heaven and earth as unworthy of both " . Their genitals would be cut off and burnt before their eyes , and their bowels and hearts removed . They would then be decapitated , and the dismembered parts of their bodies displayed so that they might become " prey for the fowls of the air " . Fawkes 's and Tresham 's testimony regarding the Spanish treason was read aloud , as well as confessions related specifically to the Gunpowder Plot . The last piece of evidence offered was a conversation between Fawkes and Wintour , who had been kept in adjacent cells . The two men apparently thought they had been speaking in private , but their conversation was intercepted by a government spy . When the prisoners were allowed to speak , Fawkes explained his not guilty plea as ignorance of certain aspects of the indictment . 
 On 31 January 1606 , Fawkes and three others – Thomas Wintour , Ambrose Rookwood , and Robert Keyes – were dragged ( i.e. drawn ) from the Tower on wattled hurdles to the Old Palace Yard at Westminster , opposite the building they had attempted to destroy . His fellow plotters were then hanged and quartered . Fawkes was the last to stand on the scaffold . He asked for forgiveness of the King and state , while keeping up his " crosses and idle ceremonies " ( Catholic practices ) . Weakened by torture and aided by the hangman , Fawkes began to climb the ladder to the noose , but either through jumping to his death or climbing too high so the rope was incorrectly set , he managed to avoid the agony of the latter part of his execution by breaking his neck . His lifeless body was nevertheless quartered and , as was the custom , his body parts were then distributed to " the four corners of the kingdom " , to be displayed as a warning to other would @-@ be traitors . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 5 November 1605 Londoners were encouraged to celebrate the King 's escape from assassination by lighting bonfires , " always provided that ' this <unk> of joy be <unk> done without any danger or disorder ' " . An Act of Parliament designated each 5 November as a day of thanksgiving for " the joyful day of deliverance " , and remained in force until 1859 . Although he was only one of 13 conspirators , Fawkes is today the individual most associated with the failed plot . 
 In Britain , 5 November has variously been called Guy Fawkes Night , Guy Fawkes Day , Plot Night and Bonfire Night ; the latter can be traced directly back to the original celebration of 5 November 1605 . Bonfires were accompanied by fireworks from the 1650s onwards , and it became the custom to burn an effigy ( usually the pope ) after 1673 , when the heir presumptive , James , Duke of York , made his conversion to Catholicism public . Effigies of other notable figures who have become targets for the public 's ire , such as Paul Kruger and Margaret Thatcher , have also found their way onto the bonfires , although most modern effigies are of Fawkes . The " guy " is normally created by children , from old clothes , newspapers , and a mask . During the 19th century , " guy " came to mean an oddly dressed person , but in American English it lost any pejorative connotation , and was used to refer to any male person . 
 William Harrison Ainsworth 's 1841 historical romance Guy Fawkes ; or , The Gunpowder Treason portrays Fawkes in a generally sympathetic light , and transformed him in the public perception into an " acceptable fictional character " . Fawkes subsequently appeared as " essentially an action hero " in children 's books and penny dreadfuls such as The Boyhood Days of Guy Fawkes ; or , The Conspirators of Old London , published in about 1905 . According to historian Lewis Call , Fawkes is now " a major icon in modern political culture " , whose face has become " a potentially powerful instrument for the articulation of postmodern anarchism " in the late 20th century , exemplified by the mask worn by V in the comic book series V for Vendetta , who fights against a fictional fascist English state . 
 Guy Fawkes is sometimes toasted as " the last man to enter Parliament with honest intentions " . 
 = The Road to Total Freedom = 
 The Road to Total Freedom : A Sociological Analysis of Scientology is a non @-@ fiction book about Scientology by sociologist Roy Wallis . Originally published in 1976 by Heinemann , it was republished in 1977 by Columbia University Press . The original manuscript was the product of Wallis 's doctoral research at Oxford under the tutelage of Bryan Wilson . Wallis , after a review of the original manuscript by Scientology leaders , made edits to about 100 passages before publication . 
 In the book , Wallis first analyzes the degree to which the Church of Scientology views itself as legitimate , as well as to what degree external society regarded the organization as " respectable " or " deviant " . Furthermore , he provides a contextual history of the organization , including a discussion of the Dianetics movement founded by L. Ron Hubbard . Next , Wallis discusses the appeal of the Scientology practice of Auditing , and compares this to <unk> therapy . And finally , he examines how Scientology shifted from a cult to a sect in structure , and analyzes the authoritarian nature of the management of the organization . 
 While Wallis was researching the book , the Guardian 's Office , Scientology 's intelligence agency , investigated him . They assigned an individual as an undercover agent who pretended to be a student at Stirling University , where he was teaching . The agent inquired if Wallis was involved with illegal drugs . Wallis later discovered forged letters purportedly sent by him and designed to implicate him in controversial acts . Wallis assumed this was a reaction by the Guardian 's Office to The Road to Total Freedom . 
 The Road to Total Freedom received generally positive reception in book reviews and media coverage . The Encyclopedia of Religion and Society acknowledged Wallis " displayed characteristic skill " in bringing a large amount of information together in an analysis of Scientology . Similarly , Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries described the author 's research as " substantively important " , and Library Journal called it " a sociological analysis for the serious student , with all the appropriate scholarly apparatus " . 
 = = Research = = 
 Wallis completed his doctoral studies under Bryan Wilson at the University of Oxford . The author 's research into new religious movements began in the 1970s with study of the Church of Scientology . He had performed research on the subject of Scientology for his doctoral thesis ; this was later printed as The Road to Total Freedom in 1976 . Wallis ' study of Scientology also led to an article by Wallis in the Sociological Yearbook of Religion in Britain . 
 The research began with an attempt at participant observation : Wallis enrolled at a " Communications Course " in Scientology 's facility at Saint Hill Manor , but left after two days because he was not willing to lie about his reaction to the course content . To collect further data , Wallis circulated a survey by post and reviewed Scientology 's extensive published material . He also interviewed current and former members , including Helen Parsons Smith , a former sister @-@ in @-@ law of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard . 
 After Wallis had finished the initial manuscript for The Road to Total Freedom , he provided representatives of Scientology leadership with a copy . Wallis negotiated with the Scientology leaders , and it was agreed upon that certain sections of the book would be edited . In total , approximately 100 sections of the book were edited due to input from Scientology leaders . This fact was not made public at the time of the book 's publication . 
 = = Content = = 
 In the book , Wallis brings together a significant amount of information and presents an analysis of the church @-@ sect structure which simultaneously exhibited a denomination @-@ cult pattern . The book presents a critical analysis of Scientology . Wallis introduces an argument that individuals were intrigued by the Church of Scientology for two reasons : the level with which the organization viewed itself as a sincere structure , and the degree to which the external society saw Scientology as " respectable " as opposed to " deviant " in nature . 
 The Road to Total Freedom begins with a history of Scientology , then explores it within a context of a belief system , organizational structure , and form of social control . Wallis then describes how Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard " asserted the originality of the entire theory and practice and acknowledges having been influenced only in a most general way by other writers " . He next compares the Scientology practice of Auditing to that of <unk> therapy – a process where repressed memories are unearthed , usually through hypnosis , to aid improving the mental well @-@ being of a patient . 
 The author goes on to explain how individuals were attracted to Dianetics , the precursor to Scientology . Wallis notes , " [ Dianetics ] offered a rationale for failure in social mobility and in social interaction . It provided an explanation in terms of traumatic incidents in which the individual had been unwittingly involved , and thereby relieved him of responsibility for his failure . " Scientologists who participated in a questionnaire for Wallis ' research identified areas of their life that they hoped Scientology would improve , including : loneliness , financial difficulties , marital issues , other interpersonal relationships , psychological problems , and physical illness . Wallis describes Hubbard 's thought process to turn his methodology of Dianetics into a religion , noting , " Hubbard 's theory and techniques had been moving increasingly in this direction " . Wallis notes how Scientology became a focus for those previously involved in the Dianetics movement . Wallis points out that Hubbard instructed members of Scientology not to immediately tell new followers about methodologies that might be less familiar to some , such as belief in the existence of prior lives . 
 Wallis then continues his argument regarding the transitional period the organization underwent , and describes how Scientology has transformed from a cult to a sect , and explains patterns of membership and leaving the group . He delves into the structure of authoritarian managerial control of the organization , which is seen to have developed as a result of perceived problems in society . He characterizes the " Org " management system in Scientology as " an elaborate and imposing bureaucratic structure " . Wallis describes a process referred to as " deviance amplification " , and analyzes how individuals maintain perceptions of reality within a deviant belief system . He notes that individual believers in Scientology methodologies are kept within the organization by management techniques which shield members from external society . Wallis posits that exposure of members of the Church of Scientology to a reality external to the organization presents " a major challenge to the legitimacy or validity of their definition of reality " . 
 Unusually for a sociological study , the book features a rebuttal from a believing member of the organisation ; a fellow sociologist called J. L. Simmons . He criticises many of Wallis ' procedures and conclusions , saying that these alleged errors are " indicative of either a decline in scholastic method or are deliberate and malicious . " Simmons invites the reader to compare The Road to Total Freedom against Hubbard 's Dianetics : The Modern Science of Mental Health , asking which is more " alive and hopeful and scientifically objective " . 
 = = Scientology 's response = = 
 Author Stewart Lamont writes in Religion Inc. that while Wallis was researching the book , individuals from the Scientology intelligence agency called the Guardian 's Office investigated the author . Alan E. Aldridge notes in his book Religion in the Contemporary World : A Sociological Introduction , " Roy Wallis gave graphic accounts of attempts by members of the Church of Scientology to discredit him personally and professionally , and to subvert or suppress his research findings . " 
 An undercover agent for Scientology went to Stirling University , where Wallis was a teacher . The individual pretended to be a student , and asked Wallis if he was involved with illegal drugs . Wallis recognized the individual from the Scientology facility Saint Hill Manor , and the agent switched his cover and then asserted that he was actually a defector from Scientology . In a 1977 article in Doing Sociological Research titled " The Moral Career of a Research Project " , Wallis details what occurred after this incident , " In the weeks following his visit a number of forged letters came to light , some of which were supposedly written by me . These letters sent to my university employers , colleagues and others , implicated me in a variety of acts from a homosexual love affair to spying for the drug squad . Because I had few enemies and because this attention followed so closely upon the receipt of my paper by the Church of Scientology organization , it did not seem too difficult to infer the source of these attempts to inconvenience me . " According to Lamont , as of the publication of Religion Inc. in 1986 , " the book is now accepted by the Public Affairs office of the Church of Scientology as reasonable and fair " , and he was provided a copy of the book from the organization itself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his book The Social Dimensions of Sectarianism : Sects and New Religious Movements in Contemporary Society , Wallis ' former mentor Bryan R. Wilson described The Road to Total Freedom as " A thorough study of the early development and organization of Scientology " . The Encyclopedia of Religion and Society noted that Wallis " displayed characteristic skill in assimilating and simplifying a large amount of diverse material into a parsimonious reworking of the classic church @-@ sect typology " . Writing in The Future of Religion : Secularization , Revival and Cult Formation , authors Rodney Stark and William Sims Bainbridge characterized the book as " the first major scholarly study of Scientology " . 
 A review in Religious Studies describes the book as " a convenient and in many respects convincing account of the history of Scientology . " However , it comments that Wallis " does not really succeed in the formidable task of giving the reader a rounded picture of what it is like to be a believing member of the Org [ <unk> ] . His analysis , like its subject matter , is rather mechanical and follows a particular pattern . " The review observes that Wallis did not explore the parallels between Dianetics and B. F. Skinner 's psychological theories , nor between the screening processes used in Scientology and in Communist China . It recommends that the book would have been more interesting if it had compared its subject with initiation rites , including those of Freemasonry . It dismisses as " facile " the book 's background material on secularization and religious schisms . 
 Choice : Current Reviews for Academic Libraries noted of the book 's research , " The study is substantively important and theoretically grounded " . The review noted the book had a " good bibliography " , and concluded that the book be " recommended for academic libraries . " Library Journal compared the book to Scientology by author George Malko , but commented that The Road to Total Freedom is " a much more scholarly , documented work " . Library Journal concluded , " The record – often a chilling one – speaks for itself . Not a polemic nor a popular treatment , this is a sociological analysis for the serious student , with all the appropriate scholarly apparatus . " 
 A review in The Times Literary Supplement commented , " this is a most informative , candid and valuable book " . Writing in Quill , published by the Society of Professional Journalists , Robert Vaughn Young commented , " Perhaps because this is a sociological study of Scientology , this is a cold , calm , academic dissection of the subject and Hubbard . " The California Court of Appeal cited the book as a reference in a decision relating to a criminal defendant who was a member of Scientology . When Wallis died in 1990 , his obituary in The Independent noted that The Road to Total Freedom " still stands as a classic of good field research " . 
 = 1947 Cleveland Browns season = 
 The 1947 Cleveland Browns season was the team 's second in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Coached by Paul Brown , Cleveland finished with a 12 – 1 – 1 win – loss – tie record , winning the western division and the AAFC championship for the second straight year . As in 1946 , quarterback Otto Graham led an offensive attack that featured fullback Marion Motley and ends Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie . 
 After a number of coaching changes and roster moves in the offseason , including signing punter Horace Gillom and fullback Tony Adamle , the Browns began with a 30 – 14 win over the Buffalo Bills , the first of a string of five victories . The team lost its only game of the season to the Los Angeles Dons in October . Five more wins followed before a come @-@ from @-@ behind tie in November with the New York Yankees , the team Cleveland defeated in the 1946 AAFC championship . The Browns won their last two games , including a 42 – 0 shutout against the Baltimore Colts in the finale , to set up a championship game rematch with the Yankees in December . Cleveland beat the Yankees 14 – 3 in New York on an icy field to win its second championship in a row . 
 Graham was named the AAFC 's most valuable player after leading the league in passing yards , with 2 @,@ 753 , and passing touchdowns , with 25 . Speedie led the league in receiving , and several other Cleveland players were named to sportswriters ' All @-@ Pro lists . Brown was named the league 's coach of the year by Pro Football Illustrated . The Browns played all their home games in Cleveland Stadium , attracting an average crowd of 55 @,@ 848 , the best home attendance record in both the AAFC and the competing National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 = = Offseason and roster moves = = 
 Cleveland finished with a 12 – 2 regular @-@ season record and won the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) championship in 1946 , the league 's first year of play . Despite the team 's strength , however , head coach Paul Brown made a number of roster moves before the beginning of 1947 . He signed Tony Adamle , a fullback and linebacker who joined the team even though he had two years of college eligibility left at Ohio State University , and guard Bob Gaudio , another Ohio State player . Guard Weldon Humble , who Brown recruited out of Rice University in Texas , also joined the team . 
 In the Browns ' biggest trade of the offseason , Brown sent end John Harrington to the Chicago Rockets for Bill Boedeker , a halfback . Perhaps the most significant signing , however , was punter Horace Gillom , who had played for Brown at Massillon Washington High School and who Brown had recruited to Ohio State before World War II . Gillom could kick the ball further than most punters of his era . He changed the way teams approached punting by lining up 15 yards behind the center instead of the customary 10 yards to give himself more space and time to make his kicks . Gillom was also the third black player to sign with the Browns at a time when many teams did not employ African @-@ Americans . Cleveland chose fullback Dick Hoerner in the AAFC draft , but he signed instead with the Los Angeles Rams of the National Football League . 
 The Browns also made a number of changes to the coaching staff before the season . Bob Voigts , the tackles coach in 1946 , left to become head football coach at Northwestern University . Bill Edwards , a former schoolmate of Brown 's at Massillon , was hired to replace him . Red <unk> , the end and center coach in 1946 , left for an assistant coaching job with the Buffalo Bills ; he was replaced by Dick Gallagher . Creighton Miller , meanwhile , who had served as a backfield coach , left the Browns staff to get a law degree . 
 = = Roster and coaching staff = = 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Cleveland held its training camp at Bowling Green University , as it did the year before . The Browns played one preseason game in late August against the Baltimore Colts , a new AAFC team formed to replace the Miami Seahawks after the Seahawks folded . The Browns scored their first points on a drive in the second period . A 14 @-@ yard run by fullback Marion Motley set up a 25 @-@ yard touchdown throw by quarterback Otto Graham to end Mac Speedie . Cleveland scored three more touchdowns in the game , all of them following Colts passes the Browns intercepted . One of them was a pass by Graham to end Dante Lavelli in the third quarter , and another was a rush by halfback Edgar Jones . Paul Brown pulled most of the Browns ' starters from the game as the team built up a three @-@ touchdown lead . Backup end Bob Cowan scored a fourth Cleveland touchdown in the final quarter on a pass from backup quarterback <unk> Allen , and the Browns won 28 – 0 . Following the victory , the Browns faced the Buffalo Bills in the regular @-@ season opener at Cleveland Stadium to begin their defense of the AAFC championship . 
 = = Regular season results = = 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 1 : vs. Buffalo Bills = = = 
 Cleveland began the season with a 30 – 14 win over the Buffalo Bills . The Browns got out to a fast start , scoring two touchdowns in the first quarter and adding two more in the second while holding the Bills scoreless . Buffalo came back in the third quarter , scoring two touchdowns of its own , but Cleveland held its lead . Browns coach Paul Brown criticized the performance after the game , saying the team had failed to keep pace in the second half after he rotated in some of his younger players . " We got a good head of steam and took a commanding lead in the first half and then let down and looked bad in the last two periods , " he said . Buffalo quarterback George Ratterman felt pressure from Cleveland 's defense the whole game , and said the Browns were better than the Chicago Bears , who had won the 1946 NFL Championship Game the previous season . " Their line rushed me all night long and I didn 't have much of a chance to get the ball away accurately , " Ratterman said . " I think the Browns are much better than the Bears , especially their line . " Placekicker Lou Groza had his extra point blocked after the Browns ' first touchdown . It was his first missed extra point since Cleveland started play in 1946 . 
 = = = Week 2 : vs. Brooklyn Dodgers = = = 
 Cleveland next faced the Brooklyn Dodgers , winning 55 – 7 . The Browns scored three touchdowns in five minutes during the first quarter . Cleveland added five more touchdowns in the second half and held a comfortable lead to the end . Fullback Marion Motley ran for 111 yards on five carries and scored two touchdowns , including a 50 @-@ yard run at the beginning of the second half . Tommy Colella scored a touchdown on an 82 @-@ yard punt return , and Bill Lund ran back an interception 28 yards for another . It was in this game that the Draw play was accidentally invented when Otto Graham tripped while dropping back for a pass . As he went down , sensing <unk> about to wallop him , he stuck the ball in Motley 's stomach who scampered for a sizable gain . Liking the effect , Brown added it to the playbook during halftime . By the next game the play became a staple of the offense with several versions for different situations . As Cleveland 's lead increased in the second half , Brown put in second @-@ string players . Quarterback Otto Graham was replaced by <unk> Allen , who threw for two of the Browns ' touchdowns and intercepted a pass while playing on defense . Cliff Lewis , Graham 's primary backup , also played in the game . Brooklyn 's only score came in the second quarter on a Bob Hoernschemeyer rush . The Dodgers were hurt by short punts from Mickey Colmer and a poor passing game . The team was held to 39 yards of passing . Edgar Jones , Cleveland 's primary halfback suffered an elbow injury during the game . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs. Baltimore Colts = = = 
 Cleveland shut out the Colts 28 – 0 in the third game of the regular season . The team scored three of its four touchdowns in the first quarter in a span of 12 plays . Two of those touchdowns came on runs , one by Motley and the other by Bill Boedeker ; the third was a Colella interception returned for a score . The Browns ' fourth touchdown , a short run by Bob Cowan , came at the end of the second quarter . Cleveland was helped by strong punting from Horace Gillom , who had a 55 @.@ 7 @-@ yard average for the game , including punts of 85 and 80 yards . Graham was taken out of the game in the first half along with most of the team 's first @-@ string players . Bud Schwenk substituted at quarterback later in the game , but the team did not score in the second half . Baltimore had two opportunities to score , once reaching the Browns ' four @-@ yard line , but the Cleveland defense held . The victory made the Browns the only undefeated team in the AAFC after the San Francisco 49ers lost to the New York Yankees 
 = = = Week 4 : vs. Chicago Rockets = = = 
 Cleveland beat the Chicago Rockets 41 – 21 at Chicago 's Soldier Field to extend the team 's winning streak to four games . The Browns scored a touchdown in the first quarter and two more in the second . The team led 27 – 0 at the half . Chicago , however , started to come back in the third quarter after Cleveland coach Paul Brown took out most of his first @-@ string players . Graham , Colella , Lew Mayne and Ed <unk> sat out most of the game . Chicago quarterback Sam Vacanti threw three touchdown passes in the second half to give the Rockets 21 points , but a score by Cleveland 's Boedeker and a fumble return for a touchdown by Spiro <unk> kept the game out of reach . The Rockets ' Bill <unk> intercepted one of Graham 's passes in the first quarter , ending Graham 's streak of 91 straight pass attempts without an interception , a professional football record at the time . Chicago had the best passing performance against the Browns of any team the Browns had faced in 1947 as Vacanti threw for 195 yards on 11 completions . Groza kicked through two field goals and five extra points in the game , putting him in third place in scoring in the AAFC behind Motley and New York 's Spec Sanders . Motley suffered a head injury during a pileup in the second quarter and was taken to the locker room . 
 = = = Week 5 : vs. New York Yankees = = = 
 Cleveland next faced the Yankees at home in a rematch of the previous year 's title game . The crowd of 80 @,@ 067 was the second @-@ largest in professional football history at the time . More people were turned away at the gates because Cleveland Stadium was filled to capacity . New York scored first in the first quarter on a 47 @-@ yard field goal by Harvey Johnson , but Cleveland came back in the second quarter , putting up 17 points to lead 17 – 3 at halftime . New York came back and tied the game 17 – 17 in the third quarter . Graham responded with a touchdown throw to Speedie in the third quarter . The Yankees threatened a comeback in the final minutes when Lou <unk> blocked a Groza field goal try and New York recovered , advancing the ball to Cleveland 's 25 @-@ yard line . Cleveland , however , took over on downs and ran down the clock to three minutes with a series of running plays , reaching New York 's 35 @-@ yard line . Groza then attempted a field goal that fell short , but the Yankees were called offside , and Groza successfully booted his next try through , giving Cleveland a 26 – 17 victory . The Browns had 14 first downs to New York 's 11 and rushed for 212 yards , compared to 111 for the Yankees . Graham had 11 completions for 161 passing yards despite being sacked five times for 72 yards of losses . 
 = = = Week 6 : vs. Los Angeles Dons = = = 
 Cleveland lost its first game of the season to the Dons , 13 – 10 . The Browns opened the scoring with a Groza field goal in the first quarter followed by a touchdown run from Motley , his sixth of the season , to go up 10 – 0 . Los Angeles , however , scored a touchdown in the second quarter to come within three points of the Browns . Dons kicker Ben Agajanian then kicked field goals in the third and fourth quarters to win the game . The final field goal came in the closing seconds of the game after the Dons reached the Browns ' 28 @-@ yard line . Agajanian missed on his first attempt , but Cleveland were penalized five yards for having 12 men on the field . Agajanian made his second attempt , giving Los Angeles the victory . Cleveland was hurt by three fumbles that set up scores , including the winning field goal . Lavelli suffered bruises to his ribs during the game , and center Mike Scarry had an ankle injury . The loss put the Browns in a virtual tie with the 49ers at 5 – 1 – the 49ers had the same record , but with an additional tie . 
 = = = Week 7 : vs. Chicago Rockets = = = 
 Cleveland rebounded from its first loss of the season with a 31 – 28 victory over the Rockets . The game started slow ; Groza 's 21 @-@ yard field goal was the only score in the first quarter . The Rockets then went ahead by scoring a touchdown on a long pass from quarterback Vacanti to end Elroy Hirsch . Cleveland , however , piled on the points as Motley ran for a touchdown in the second quarter and Speedie caught a pass from Graham in the third . Jones added two touchdown runs in the fourth quarter , giving Cleveland a 31 – 14 lead . Chicago almost caught up at the end of the game , scoring two touchdowns , but the Browns held on to win . Cleveland 's third @-@ string players were on the field in the closing minutes when Chicago made its final push . Rockets rookie Ray Ramsey had three touchdowns in the game . Graham had 239 passing yards on 10 completions . Speedie caught half of them , gaining 166 yards . His touchdown came after he dropped to the ground to grab a 17 @-@ yard pass from Graham . He faked a backward lateral while on the ground , which drew Chicago 's defense away from him , and then got up and ran into the end zone . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs. San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 The Browns next faced the San Francisco 49ers , one of the AAFC 's stronger teams . San Francisco 's record was 5 – 1 – 1 ; its only loss came in a close game against the Yankees , another top team . The 49ers were built around a group of players including quarterback Frankie Albert , end Alyn Beals and back Norm Standlee . The game was played in a heavy fog at Kezar Stadium before a crowd of more than 54 @,@ 000 people . Cleveland received the opening kickoff , and Graham drove the team to San Francisco 's 7 @-@ yard line . Jones , however , fumbled the ball and the 49ers took over . After forcing a punt , Cleveland got the ball back and scored on a pass to Lavelli set up by a Motley run and two completions to Speedie . Cleveland scored another touchdown in the second quarter on a long pass to Speedie , and the Browns were ahead by two touchdowns at the half . San Francisco came back on the first drive of the second half , which was capped by a Standlee run for a touchdown from one yard out . Cleveland came close to scoring again in the fourth quarter , but a fumble by Motley ended the drive . The Browns , however , held on to win 14 – 7 . Speedie was the league 's leading receiver by the eighth week , having surpassed Alyn Beals and Lavelli . He had 10 catches for 141 yards against San Francisco ; the 10 receptions in a single game set an AAFC record . 
 = = = Week 9 : vs. Buffalo Bills = = = 
 A crowd of 43 @,@ 167 people was on hand to watch the Browns play the Bills , Buffalo 's biggest @-@ ever home attendance figure . Cleveland scored a touchdown in each of the game 's four quarters , winning 28 – 7 . The first score followed several completions by Graham that set up a 12 @-@ yard touchdown run by Jones . In the second period , Cleveland tied a professional football record when Graham , pinned at his own one @-@ yard line , threw a screen pass to Speedie . Speedie caught the ball and ran for a 99 @-@ yard touchdown , setting an AAFC record and tying the National Football League record for longest completed pass . The Browns scored again in the third quarter on a diving catch by Lavelli , who rolled into the end zone , and in the fourth quarter on a pass to John Yonakor . Buffalo scored its only points in the fourth period when George Ratterman connected with Al Baldwin for the quarterback 's 16th touchdown of the season . Graham threw 13 completions for 246 yards as passing accounted for most of the team 's 392 yards of total offense . Cleveland 's defense was also strong , preventing the Bills from scoring on several drives that ventured deep into Browns territory . The win was the eighth for Cleveland in nine games and preserved its spot at the top of the AAFC standings . 
 = = = Week 10 : vs. Brooklyn Dodgers = = = 
 The Browns were expected to win their November 9 game against the Brooklyn Dodgers by a wide margin ; the Dodgers had just one win , and the Browns scored eight touchdowns when the teams played in September . The Dodgers , however , drove 80 yards on their first possession for a touchdown . Placekicker Phil <unk> missed the extra point . Cleveland responded as Graham passed to Lavelli for a 72 @-@ yard touchdown on the second play from scrimmage on its ensuing possession . Groza kicked through the extra point to give the Browns a 7 – 6 lead . Cleveland scored again on its next possession , this time a 15 @-@ yard pass from Graham to Lew Mayne . After the second touchdown , Graham threw two interceptions and the Browns did not advance the ball past the Brooklyn 42 @-@ yard line . The Dodgers , meanwhile , threatened to score numerous times , advancing deep into Cleveland territory . One Brooklyn touchdown by Bob <unk> was called back because of a holding penalty . <unk> contributed to the frustration by missing four field goal tries . He also missed the extra point when the Dodgers did score in the fourth quarter on a long Monk Gafford rush . The Dodgers ' missteps gave the Browns a 13 – 12 victory , extending their lead over the 49ers for the best record in the AAFC after San Francisco lost to the Yankees . 
 = = = Week 11 : vs. San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 Cleveland next faced San Francisco at home , winning 37 – 14 before one of the biggest crowds of the season . Chet Adams opened the scoring for the Browns with a 44 @-@ yard field goal ; he and Lou Saban shared kicking duties in the game after Groza pulled his leg muscle during pre @-@ game warmups . On the ensuing possession , Albert had the ball stripped by Cleveland 's Weldon Humble , and the Browns took over and scored their first touchdown on a Graham pass to Lavelli . San Francisco scored a touchdown near the beginning of the second quarter , but Cleveland dominated the scoring thereafter . Lavelli caught seven passes for a total of three touchdowns , setting an AAFC single @-@ game record . Graham also rushed for a one @-@ yard touchdown and threw for 222 yards . His touchdown passes made him the league leader in that category , with 18 on the season . It was the biggest margin of victory the Browns had ever recorded against the 49ers . Cleveland was helped by an adjustment Paul Brown made in his receivers ' routes ; the coach had Lavelli and Speedie run toward the middle of the field instead of trying to get open near the sidelines , as they had done in past games . The victory clinched the AAFC 's western division for the Browns and assured the team a spot in the championship game . 
 = = = Week 12 : vs. New York Yankees = = = 
 Cleveland 's next game was against the Yankees , who had the best record in the AAFC 's eastern division and were a likely opponent in the championship game . New York took an early lead as Spec Sanders scored two rushing touchdowns in the first quarter and added a third in the second . Sanders , called " Spectacular Spec " by New York sportswriters , was having a career season . By the end of the year , he had compiled 1 @,@ 432 rushing yards and 1 @,@ 442 passing yards ; his 18 touchdowns set a professional football record that was not surpassed until the 1960s . After Sanders ' three touchdowns , New York 's Buddy Young added a fourth in the second quarter , widening the Yankees ' lead to 28 – 0 . Cleveland 's Bill Boedeker scored a touchdown on a pass from Graham at the end of the period , but the game appeared out of reach for Cleveland at the half . The Browns , however , came back in the second half . Motley rushed for two touchdowns in the third quarter and Jim Dewar ran for a score in the fourth . The game ended in a tie . At halftime , Yankees players had hurled insults at the Browns . " They got us upset , got us angry , " Graham later said . " Finally we got mad as a team and we said , ' We 'll show these guys , ' and we started playing football . " More than 70 @,@ 000 fans came to watch the game , a record for a New York pro football game that stood until 1958 . Attendance was boosted by the presence of about 25 @,@ 000 black fans who came in part to watch the four black players in the game : Buddy Young of the Yankees and Motley , Bill Willis and Horace Gillom of the Browns . Groza was injured during the game and was not able to play . 
 = = = Week 13 : vs. Los Angeles Dons = = = 
 Cleveland next faced the Dons in Los Angeles . The Dons , who had handed the Browns their only loss of the season in October , scored a field goal and touchdown in the first quarter . The Browns responded with a touchdown run from Motley later in the quarter and led by four points at halftime after Tommy Colella caught a pass from Graham for another touchdown in the second period . Cleveland built on the lead in the third quarter with a long touchdown pass to Lew Mayne . Speedie sealed the victory for the Browns when he intercepted a backward lateral pass by Dons quarterback Chuck <unk> and ran it back 12 yards for a touchdown with four minutes left in the game . Los Angeles threatened to score numerous times , but Cleveland 's defense held . The Browns forced the Dons to punt three times from within their own 10 @-@ yard line . Graham had 240 yards of passing . His two touchdown passes added to his league @-@ leading total of 22 on the season . Tackle Lou Saban continued to handle placekicking duties for the Browns as Groza sat out with an injury . 
 = = = Week 14 : vs. Baltimore Colts = = = 
 Cleveland 's final regular @-@ season game was a shutout victory over the Baltimore Colts . The Browns amassed 559 passing and rushing yards against the Colts , winning 42 – 0 and ending the season with a 12 – 1 – 1 record . Graham threw for three touchdowns , boosting his season total to 25 , and raised his total passing yards to 2 @,@ 752 . Backup quarterback Cliff Lewis threw another touchdown in the third quarter as Graham and most of the other starters were pulled from the game . Groza returned to the lineup after sitting out several weeks because of an injury . He kicked all four of the Browns ' extra points and played a bigger role than usual as an offensive and defensive tackle because of an injury to Ernie Blandin in the second quarter . Cleveland 's defense held Baltimore to 186 yards of total offense . The Yankees beat the Bills 35 – 13 the same week as Sanders scored three touchdowns . New York ended with an 11 – 2 – 1 record , winning the eastern division and a spot in the championship game against the Browns . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = AAFC championship game = = 
 For the second year in a row , the Cleveland Browns and the New York Yankees faced off in the AAFC championship game , this time on a cold December day at Yankee Stadium . The crowd of 61 @,@ 879 was the largest ever to watch a professional football championship game . The Browns and Yankees had played to a 28 – 28 tie the previous month , but the championship game did not feature much scoring because of an icy field . The Browns scored a touchdown in the first quarter on a short run by Graham set up by a 51 @-@ yard run up the middle of the field by Motley . New York scored a field goal in the second quarter , but Jones ran for another touchdown in the third , and the Browns won 14 – 3 . The slippery field made longer passes dangerous , and Graham instead relied on shorter routes , ending the game with 14 completions and 112 passing yards . Motley was a key performer for the Browns , running for 109 yards on 13 carries , including his touchdown . The Browns ' defense , meanwhile , kept Spec Sanders and New York 's offense in check . New York had just 13 first downs in the game and 212 total yards . A stop by the defense in the second quarter as the Yankees reached the Browns ' five @-@ yard line forced New York to kick its lone field goal . Tommy Colella added an interception in the third quarter to stop another New York drive . Sanders had just 40 yards of rushing on 12 attempts and 89 yards of passing . Gillom 's booming punts – his five kicks averaged 45 yards – also helped the Browns stop New York 's dangerous return game . The Yankees had a 4 @.@ 7 @-@ yard punt return average . 
 = = Season leaders and awards = = 
 Graham led the AAFC in passing and was voted the league 's most valuable player . Pro Football Illustrated named Brown the AAFC coach of the year . Speedie and Lavelli were the AAFC 's top two receivers in receptions and receiving yards . Colella tied for the AAFC lead with six interceptions on the year . Motley was the AAFC 's third @-@ leading rusher , with 889 yards , and Gillom came in second in punting average , with 44 @.@ 6 yards . Speedie , Lou Rymkus , Graham and Motley were chosen unanimously by sportswriters for an all @-@ AAFC team . Lavelli and Bill Willis were also selected by some of the writers . Graham and Speedie were named first @-@ team selections when the Associated Press put together a combined AAFC and NFL All @-@ Pro list . 
 Cleveland 's success drew large crowds both at home and away in 1947 . The team 's average home attendance was 55 @,@ 848 people during the season , slightly lower than in 1946 but still the best in either the AAFC or NFL . Including away games , a total of 666 @,@ 017 people saw the Browns play , a professional football record . Although the team was a major success on the field , the following season was even better for Cleveland . The team won all of its games in 1948 and a third straight AAFC championship . 
 = James C. Marshall = 
 Brigadier General James Creel Marshall ( 15 October 1897 – 19 July 1977 ) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who was initially in charge of the Manhattan Project to build an atomic bomb during World War II . 
 A member of the June 1918 class of the United States Military Academy at West Point that graduated early due to World War I , Marshall saw service on the Mexican border . Between the wars he worked on engineering projects in the United States and the Panama Canal Zone . In January 1942 , shortly after the United States entered World War II , he became District Engineer of the Syracuse District , and oversaw the construction of the Rome Air Depot . 
 In June 1942 , Marshall was placed in charge of the Manhattan Project , then known as the Laboratory Development of Substitute Materials . Although superseded as head of the project by Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , in September , he was Manhattan District engineer from 13 August 1942 to 13 August 1943 . In November 1943 he became Assistant Chief of Staff ( G @-@ 4 ) of the United States Army Services of Supply ( USASOS ) in the Southwest Pacific Area , serving in Australia , New Guinea and the Philippines . 
 Marshall left the Army in 1947 , and moved to Riverside , Connecticut , where he worked for M. W. Kellogg . He later joined Koppers , building a coal loading facility in Turkey , and worked on mining projects in Africa . He was Commissioner of Highways in Minnesota from 1961 to 1965 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 James Creel Marshall was born in Plattsburg , Missouri , on 14 October 1897 , the son of Walter Scott Marshall and his wife Cora <unk> née Creel . He was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1915 . His classmates included Hugh John Casey and Lucius D. Clay . The entire class graduated early on 12 June 1918 due to World War I , and Marshall , who was ranked 24th in the class , was commissioned as a substantive first lieutenant and temporary captain in the United States Army Corps of Engineers . He was posted to Camp A. A. Humphreys from 8 to 15 July 1918 , and then was sent to the Engineer Officers ' Training School at Camp Lee , Virginia , for additional training . While there , he married Mabel Estelle Wolff from Brooklyn . They had two children , Beryl , born in 1919 , and Robert Creel , born in 1921 . 
 On 24 August 1918 , Marshall joined the 8th Engineers at Fort Bliss , Texas . He returned to Camp A. A. Humphreys as a student officer from 10 February 1919 to 12 June 1919 . Young officers like Marshall who had not served overseas during the war were sent on battlefield tours . From 20 June to 30 August 1919 , he toured the battlefields of World War I , visiting Britain , France , Belgium and Germany , before returning to Camp A. A. Humphreys on 10 September 1919 . After service at Camp A. A. Humphreys with the Reserve Officers ' Training Corps , Marshall was posted to the 13th Engineers as its adjutant on 10 February 1921 , but attended the Engineer School Basic Course from 6 June 1921 , graduating on 15 August 1921 , after which he became an instructor there . On 25 June 1922 he became Assistant District Engineer of the 2nd District , based in New York City . 
 Like many of his fellow officers , Marshall was reduced to his substantive rank of first lieutenant on 18 November 1922 . On 4 August 1923 he took charge of the Engineer Office of the 3rd New York District , located in Fort Hancock , New Jersey . He then served in the Panama Canal Zone as a company commander in the 11th Engineers from 9 April 1926 to 14 June 1928 . He became an instructor in the Department of Engineering at West Point on 24 August 1928 . He was posted to Fort Belvoir , Virginia , on 10 August 1932 , where he was promoted to captain again on 1 June 1933 . There followed duty in the Office of the Chief Of Engineers in Washington , DC , as Assistant Chief of the River and Harbor Section from 21 January 1937 to 3 September 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Marshall attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , from 11 September 1939 to 3 February 1940 . He then became executive officer of the 1st Engineers . With the outbreak of World War II in Europe , promotion accelerated , and he was promoted to major on 1 March 1940 . He became District Engineer of the <unk> District on 25 May 1940 , with the rank of lieutenant colonel in the Army of the United States from 12 June 1941 . On 31 January 1942 , he became District Engineer of the Syracuse District , which covered New York and part of Pennsylvania , with the rank of colonel from 1 February 1942 . At Binghamton and Syracuse was responsible for a number of major projects , including ammunition and explosive plants , and the construction of the Rome Air Depot . He also had to attend to flood control measures on the upper Delaware River . 
 On 18 June 1942 Marshall was called to Washington to take over the reorganised atomic bomb project , then known as the DSM ( Laboratory Development of Substitute Materials ) . Marshall read the 13 June 1942 report from Vannevar Bush and James Conant and recalled that : 
 I spent the night without sleep trying to figure out what this was all about . I had never heard of nuclear fission , but I did know that you could not build much of a plant , much less four of them , for ninety million dollars . At the moment among other construction projects in the Syracuse district , I had one for a TNT plant in Pennsylvania estimated to cost one hundred twenty eight million dollars . 
 In a report to Colonel Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the head of the Construction Branch in the Office of the Chief of Engineers , on 11 August 1942 , Marshall called for the creation a new district without territorial limits to administer the DSM project . His proposal was approved on 13 August . As district engineer of the new district , Marshall reported directly to Groves , and not the Chief of Engineers . He established the district headquarters on the 18th floor of 270 Broadway in New York City , with the innocuous name of the Manhattan Engineer District , following the usual practice of naming engineer districts after the city in which their headquarters area were located . He selected the Boston firm of Stone & Webster as the project 's principal contractor . 
 Marshall and his deputy district engineer , Kenneth Nichols , visited Tennessee on 30 June 1942 to examine the proposed location for the production plants in the Clinch River area , but Marshall chose to delay the actual purchase of the land until it was needed . Nichols felt that Marshall 's desire for orderly procedures ultimately told against him . By September , Bush was expressing dissatisfaction with slow progress and the lack of the highest priority for the project , going to the United States Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , and then directly to the President , Franklin D. Roosevelt . Groves was appointed to head the project on 17 September 1942 . Groves was also a colonel , and ranked below Marshall on the permanent list , although Groves was promoted to brigadier general before assuming command on 23 September . According to Nichols , Groves and Marshall " disagreed in a major way on how to handle personnel " , and Nichols " did witness several confrontations " . 
 Major General Wilhelm D. Styer , the Chief of Staff of the Army Service Forces , decided that Marshall would be replaced by Nichols . Marshall would be replaced given an overseas posting . He was informed by Nichols on June ; to him it seemed he was " getting fired " , although he had previously expressed a desire to Groves for just such an overseas assignment . Indeed , when first assigned to the project , both Nichols and Groves had also have expressed a preference for an overseas combat assignment . Nichols had " liked working for him and was happy to have him as a buffer between Groves and myself " , because Groves was " abrasive and often very critical " . Marshall asked Nichols to transfer his secretary , Virginia Olsson , to Oak Ridge when the Manhattan District headquarters moved there , leaving Nichols 's own secretary , Anne Phillips , in the New York office . " This concern for personnel " , Nichols noted , " was typical of Marshall " . Since the Manhattan District had been officially created on 13 August 1942 , Marshall chose to formally leave on 13 August 1943 , so that he had held the job for exactly one year . 
 Groves 's account says that : 
 shortly after , Nichols replaced Marshall as District Engineer ... the Chief of Engineers asked me if I could relieve Marshall for a key overseas assignment , which would mean his promotion to brigadier . Since the project was by that time well organized , I did not feel I should refuse , and appointed Nichols in his stead . This was an excellent choice and one I have never regretted . 
 Marshall was awarded the Legion of Merit for his service with the Manhattan District . He was posted to Camp Sutton , North Carolina , as commander of the Engineer Replacement Training Center there until 26 November 1943 . He then had his sought @-@ after overseas service , in the Southwest Pacific Area , where he became Assistant Chief of Staff ( G @-@ 4 ) of the United States Army Services of Supply ( USASOS ) . He saw service in Australia , New Guinea and the Philippines . He was promoted to brigadier general on 10 November 1944 , and awarded the Bronze Star Medal . He returned to the United States for medical reasons on 12 February 1945 . His final command was of the Boston Port of Embarkation , for which he received the Army Commendation Medal . On 29 January 1946 he became head of the Engineer Research and Development Laboratory at Fort Belvoir . He reverted to his permanent rank of colonel on 5 March 1946 , and retired from the Army on a disability on 31 March 1947 . On 29 June 1948 , he was promoted to brigadier general on the retired list . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After leaving the Army , he moved to Riverside , Connecticut , where he worked for M. W. Kellogg . He eventually tired of commuting to New York City , and took a job with Koppers , building a coal loading facility in Turkey . He then worked for the United Nations Korean Relief at the UN Building in New York . He was also involved in mining projects in Africa . He made his home in Skaneateles , New York , while working on various projects around the world . In January 1961 he accepted an offer from the Governor of Minnesota , Elmer L. Andersen , to become that state 's Commissioner of Highways . His four @-@ year term was marred by a change of government in the state in 1963 , and his final years saw a series of clashes with the new governor , Karl F. Rolvaag , and his attorney @-@ general Walter Mondale . 
 When his term as Commissioner of Highways ended in 1965 , Marshall returned to Skaneateles , where he became an engineering consultant and a professional engineering arbitrator . He served as mayor of Skaneateles for six years . His contributions included the addition of an ambulance squad to the fire department and the construction of an indoor ice skating rink . His wife Mabel died of cancer in 1976 . On 18 July 1977 , Marshall also died from cancer . The two are buried together in the West Point Cemetery . 
 Marshall 's son Robert Creel Marshall graduated from West Point with the class of 1943 , and served in Europe during World War II . He later served in Vietnam , and became Deputy Chief of Engineers in 1976 , with the rank of major general . 
 = Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball = 
 Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball , also known as The Misses Williams @-@ Wynn , is a 173 by 150 cm ( 68 by 59 in ) oil on canvas by English artist William Etty , first exhibited in 1835 and currently in the York Art Gallery . Although Etty was then known almost exclusively for history paintings featuring nude figures , he was commissioned in 1833 by Welsh Conservative politician Charles Watkin Williams @-@ Wynn to paint a portrait of two of his daughters . Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball shows Williams @-@ Wynn 's daughters , Charlotte and Mary , in lavish Italian @-@ style costume : Charlotte , the eldest , is shown standing , helping the seated Mary decorate her hair with a ribbon and a rose . Etty put a good deal of effort into the piece and took much longer than usual to finish it . 
 The painting was completed for and exhibited at the 1835 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition . It was generally well received , even by critics usually hostile to Etty and his work . Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball demonstrated that Etty was both capable of high @-@ quality work and deserving of patronage by the English elite , and the success led to further commissions . The painting remained in the collection of Mary Williams @-@ Wynn 's descendants , and other than an 1849 retrospective exhibition , was not shown publicly for 160 years . A private collector purchased the piece from the Williams @-@ Wynn family in 1982 , where it remained until its 2009 acquisition by the York Art Gallery . It now forms part of a major collection of Etty 's work there . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty , the son of a York baker and miller , began as an apprentice printer in Hull . On completing his seven @-@ year apprenticeship he moved to London at the age of 18 , with the intention of becoming a history painter in the tradition of the Old Masters . Strongly influenced by the works of Titian and Rubens , he submitted paintings to the Royal Academy of Arts and the British Institution , all of which were either rejected or received scant attention when exhibited . 
 In 1821 the Royal Academy accepted and exhibited one of Etty 's works , The Arrival of Cleopatra in Cilicia ( also known as The Triumph of Cleopatra ) . The painting was extremely well received , and many of Etty 's fellow artists greatly admired him . He was elected a full Royal Academician in 1828 , ahead of John Constable . He became well respected for his ability to capture flesh tones accurately in painting and for his fascination with contrasts in skin tones . Following the exhibition of Cleopatra , Etty tried over the next decade to replicate its success by painting nude figures in biblical , literary and mythological settings . Between 1820 and 1829 Etty exhibited 15 paintings , of which 14 depicted nude figures . 
 Some nudes by foreign artists were held in private English collections , but Britain had no tradition of nude painting , and the display and distribution of nude material to the public had been suppressed since the 1787 Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice . Etty was the first British artist to specialise in the nude , and the reaction of the lower classes to these paintings caused concern throughout the 19th century . Many critics condemned his repeated depictions of female nudity as indecent , although his portraits of male nudes were generally well received . ( Etty 's male nude portraits were primarily of mythological heroes and classical combat , genres in which the depiction of male nudity was considered acceptable in England . ) From 1832 onwards , needled by repeated attacks from the press , Etty remained a prominent painter of nudes but made conscious efforts to try to reflect moral lessons in his work . 
 = = = Elizabeth Potts = = = 
 Although he was almost exclusively known at the time for painting nudes , Etty was commissioned in 1833 by Thomas Potts of Clapham Common to paint a portrait of his daughter Elizabeth . Potts paid him 65 guineas ( £ 68 @.@ 25 ; about £ 5 @,@ 800 in 2016 terms ) for the piece . Etty exhibited Elizabeth Potts at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition of 1834 under the title of A Portrait , as the subject 's mother requested her identity be kept secret . As he had been too ill to paint for much of the period preceding the exhibition he only exhibited one other picture there , The Cardinal . 
 Elizabeth Potts was poorly received by critics . Etty 's admirers were angered by his apparent abandonment of history painting for the then poorly regarded field of portrait painting , while Etty 's critics felt he had demonstrated that he did not have the technical skills to produce high quality portraits , and was simply trying to use his name to make money in the more lucrative field of portraiture . History paintings were generally sold at exhibition for no less than the asking price , and as a consequence often remained unsold . Portraits were commissioned by the subject or their family , providing a guaranteed source of income to the artist . History painting was much more highly regarded as an art form ; portrait painting was seen as reflecting nature whereas history painting involved more creativity and also gave the artist the opportunity to tell moral lessons . 
 Etty retained close connections with York throughout his life . After Jonathan Martin 's arson attack on York Minster in 1829 caused major damage , Etty was prominent in the effort to restore the building to its original state . One of his colleagues in that campaign was Welsh politician Charles Watkin Williams @-@ Wynn , the long @-@ serving Conservative Member of Parliament for Montgomeryshire . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In late 1833 Etty was commissioned by Williams @-@ Wynn to paint a portrait of two of his seven children . Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball depicts Williams @-@ Wynn 's daughters Charlotte and Mary , dressing up in lavish Italian @-@ style costume . Although their dress is generally described as Italian , Dennis Farr 's 1958 biography of Etty speculates that elements of the costumes were possibly intended to be Russian , based on Charlotte 's headdress . The Italian @-@ style clothing likely represents the high level of interest in Italian culture in early 19th @-@ century England . The popularity of the style of music now known as bel canto , widely associated with Italy , was at its peak ; likewise , the Italian plays of William Shakespeare had become extremely popular in the period . Etty , who had spent a good deal of time in Venice and other Italian cities , would have been very familiar with Italian clothing designs , and the costumes worn by the Williams @-@ Wynn sisters closely resemble those of women in Venetian scenes painted by Etty , such as 1831 's Window in Venice , During a Fiesta . As art historian Leonard Robinson points out , despite the title the sisters are not in fact shown preparing for the ball , but are fully dressed . The style of the work reflects that of Thomas Lawrence , who had been Etty 's teacher in 1807 – 08 , as well as that of Joshua Reynolds , of whom Etty was a great admirer and of whose works Etty had often made copies as an exercise . 
 The sisters are depicted in three @-@ quarter length portrait ; Charlotte , the eldest , stands and helps Mary , who is seated , to decorate her hair with a ribbon and a rose . Their arrangement is similar to the positioning of the central female figures of Etty 's The Lute Player , painted around the same time , and Farr views Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball as a direct continuation of the theme of that work . ( The Lute Player was exhibited at the British Institution in early 1835 alongside Turner 's The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons , and was somewhat overshadowed by it . The Spectator commented that in comparison to the vibrant colours of the Turner , The Lute Player looked " as if mud had been the vehicle of the pigment " . ) 
 The painting 's depiction of preparation for a fancy dress party would have been familiar to Etty 's generally wealthy audience . In both London and the English provincial cities , such balls and parties had become extremely fashionable by the 1830s . Though conservative in comparison to some costumes worn at contemporary fancy dress events , the richness of the design of the sisters ' dress indicates the high status of the Williams @-@ Wynn family in fashionable circles . 
 Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball took Etty some time to complete in comparison to his usual work , and he apologized to the sisters for his " inability to render [ repeated sittings for him ] less tedious " . He justified the slowness of the process by saying that he was not simply trying to capture the Williams @-@ Wynn sisters ' appearance , but " to make a fine work of Art as well as a resemblance " . 
 I can only regret I had it not in my power to render it less tedious . A mere " likeness " may be manufactured in a few sittings . If it is desirable to make a fine work of Art as well as a resemblance , it becomes another affair . This has led me to extend my attention to it , beyond the limits usually assigned to Portrait . I am sure , if rightly viewed , the time will not be deemed uselessly employed . " What is worth doing at all , is worth doing well . " — " Whatsoever thy hand <unk> to do , do it with all thy might ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball was one of eight works exhibited by Etty at the 1835 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition , the others being The Bridge of Sighs , <unk> and <unk> on the Idle Lake , Study from a Young Lady : A York Beauty , Study of the Head of a Youth , Venus and her Satellites , The Warrior Arming and Wood Nymphs Sleeping : Satyr Bringing Flowers . Art historian Sarah Burnage believes Etty 's choice of Venus and her Satellites may have been to draw attention to similarities with Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball and possibly to link the Williams @-@ Wynn sisters ' beauty with the legendary Venus . 
 Reviewers , even those usually hostile to Etty , were generally positive about the work , and towards Etty 's demonstration of his ability to paint a major piece depicting visual matter that did not depend on nudity or sensuality . Leigh Hunt 's London Journal noted that they were " glad to see him turn his abilities into a channel <unk> more profitable than others are apt to be , and we heartily wish him success in it " ; the same reviewer did , however , savagely criticise Venus and her Satellites for its gratuitous nudity and a " total absence of soul " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Etty painted many private portraits of his friends and acquaintances , he produced very few publicly exhibited portraits , fewer than 30 of which were shown during his lifetime . Portraiture was seen as a vulgar and generally worthless form of painting throughout much of the 19th century , and portrait painters continued to be disparaged as a greedy and unimaginative group who survived by feeding the vanity of the emerging middle class . Other than Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball , critics generally disliked his portraits , preferring his history paintings in spite of reservations over his depictions of nudity . Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball did , however , serve as an indication that Etty could successfully paint works as commissions for the English elite , boosting his status and leading to further commissions . Etty died in November 1849 and soon fell from fashion ; by the late 19th century the cost of all his paintings had fallen below their original prices . Charlotte Williams @-@ Wynn became a noted letter writer and diarist ; Mary Williams @-@ Wynn married Member of Parliament James Milnes Gaskell . Both Charlotte and Mary died in April 1869 . 
 Preparing for a Fancy Dress Ball was exhibited in a major retrospective of Etty 's works at the Royal Society of Arts in June 1849 , but after that was not exhibited publicly for 160 years . Charlotte Williams @-@ Wynn had died childless , and the painting was inherited by the family of Mary Williams @-@ Wynn . In 1982 it was sold to a private collector by Mary Williams @-@ Wynn 's great @-@ granddaughter Mrs Lewis Motley . The York Art Gallery purchased the work in 2009 for £ 120 @,@ 000 with the assistance of the Art Fund and the V & A / MLA Purchase Grant Fund , and it formed part of a major exhibition of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery in 2011 – 12 . 
 = Dwellers of the Forbidden City = 
 Dwellers of the Forbidden City is an adventure module , or pre @-@ packaged adventure booklet , ready for use by Dungeon Masters in the Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) fantasy role @-@ playing game . The adventure was first used as a module for tournament play at the 1980 Origins Game Fair , and was later published by TSR in 1981 for use with the first edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules . The module was written by game designer David " Zeb " Cook , who partly ascribes his hiring by TSR to his work on this module . In the adventure , the characters are hired to find an object taken to a lost oriental @-@ style city , which has been taken over by a cult of snake @-@ worshipers , the yuan @-@ ti , and their servants , the mongrelmen and tasloi . The module was ranked as the 13th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine for the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game in 2004 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The adventure begins when the player characters hear reports of bandits <unk> and attacking caravans in a jungle region . Most of the ambushed merchants and guards have been killed , but the few who have returned alive tell fantastic stories about deformed plants and deadly beasts in the jungle . The stolen goods taken from the caravans provide an impetus for the characters to enter the jungles in search of this lost treasure . 
 After a long and perilous journey , the player characters encounter some friendly native people and are invited to stay in their village . The characters learn from the village 's chief about the dangers of creatures called the yuan @-@ ti and their servants , the tasloi , and that these creatures recently kidnapped the chief 's son , taking him into the jungle . The chief and village shaman tell the player characters about a " forbidden city " in the jungle which they believe houses the ghosts of their dead enemies , and they supply the characters with guides to show the party the way to this forbidden city . 
 The adventuring environment in this module allows for both action and intrigue . The player characters can recruit allies from the various power groups and factions within the city , namely the bugbears , mongrelmen , and <unk> , or else help pit these factions against each other for their own benefit . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Dwellers of the Forbidden City was first used in Dungeons & Dragons tournament play at the Origins Game Fair in 1980 . The module was published in 1981 by TSR for the first edition of the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules , and consisted of a thirty @-@ two page booklet with an outer folder . The module was written by David " Zeb " Cook , with cover art by Erol Otus and interior art by James Holloway , Jim <unk> , Harry Quinn , and Stephen D. Sullivan . 
 Dwellers of the Forbidden City is the first of the mostly unrelated and unconnected Intermediate series ( I @-@ series ) of modules designed for characters at between 4th and 8th levels . The module was originally intended to bear the code S4 , but the code was reassigned to Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth before Dwellers was published . As published , the adventure bears the code I1 . It was one of the first adventures written by Cook , and he attributed an early version of the module to his being hired at TSR . Cook would become the lead designer for the second edition of the AD & D rules , which debuted in 1989 , and years later , he became the lead designer on the City of Villains MMORPG . 
 The adventure was instrumental in introducing the yuan @-@ ti as a new species of antagonists . Much like the drow from the Queen of the Spiders Series , the yuan @-@ ti have been featured in a number of 1st , 2nd and 3rd Edition books for the D & D game , and are one of the few species that Wizards of the Coast did not keep open for the Open Game License . The yuan @-@ ti have also been expanded from their introduction in this module to other game worlds , in particular the Forgotten Realms campaign setting . Other new monsters introduced to the game through this module include the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , tasloi , and yellow musk creeper . 
 The module was set in the World of Greyhawk campaign setting , and was later used to add detail to the continent of <unk> in Greyhawk supplements . In the Greyhawk accessory The Scarlet Brotherhood , by Sean K. Reynolds , the Forbidden City was named <unk> , and the mountains wherein it lies are called the <unk> Mountains . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While Different Worlds described it as " a good buy " , RPGnet gave it a slightly more favorable rating of nearly 6 @.@ 8 ( " Good " ) . Latter day D & D writer James Wyatt described it as the first " Super adventure " , and lamented that with another hundred pages of fleshing out , it could have been as memorable as the landmark Temple of Elemental Evil . 
 Jim Bambra of White Dwarf reviewed the adventure in the magazine 's " Open Box " feature and gave it an overall rating of 5 out of 10 , commenting that while presentation of the module was quite good ( 8 / 10 ) , it seemed to be " hastily thrown together " . Bambra gave the adventure playability and enjoyment ratings of 5 / 10 , and skill and complexity ratings of 6 / 10 . He felt the adventure was " very mundane " and " lacks any real cohesion " . Bambra noted that parts of the adventure were created for tournament play . The tournament section deals with getting into the city , and he felt the rest of the module seemed to be tacked on to that . He did like the mini @-@ campaign included in the adventure , and the ideas included on how to expand on it . However , he felt that any Dungeon Master who used Dwellers of the Forbidden City would have to expend so much effort to make it more than " just a series of encounters , " that they were better off " starting from scratch " . Bambra concluded that this adventure was " just not worth considering " with all the other better quality modules available from TSR . 
 Dwellers of the Forbidden City was ranked the 13th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine for the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game in 2004 . Judge Eric L. Boyd described it as a " classic adventure " in which Cook created a " lost city jungle in the great tradition of Edgar Rice Burroughs " . The players " battle their way into the city through a labyrinth of traps and monsters or find their own way into the sprawling , jungle @-@ cloaked ruins ... Cook provides a host of backgrounds to motivate exploration of the city , but the map itself is motivation enough . " Judge Wolfgang Baur , editor of Dungeon magazine , described the adventures thus : " This adventure may be best remembered for its monsters — it was from Forbidden City that D & D gained the <unk> , the mongrel @-@ man , the tasloi , and the yuan @-@ ti . The <unk> that guarded one of the entrances to the city was worshipped by the local mongrelmen as a god . " 
 = Jayne Mansfield = 
 Jayne Mansfield ( born Vera Jayne Palmer ; April 19 , 1933 – June 29 , 1967 ) was an American actress in film , theatre , and television . Mansfield became a major Broadway star in 1955 , a major Hollywood star in 1956 , and a leading celebrity in 1957 . She was also a nightclub entertainer , a singer , and one of the early Playboy Playmates . She was a major Hollywood sex symbol of the 1950s and early 1960s and 20th Century Fox 's main sex symbol actress , alongside Marilyn Monroe . She was also known for her well @-@ publicized personal life and publicity stunts , such as wardrobe malfunctions . 
 While Mansfield 's film career was short lived , she had several box @-@ office successes and won a Theatre World Award and a Golden Globe . She enjoyed success in the role of fictional actress Rita Marlowe , both in the 1955 – 1956 Broadway version and the 1957 Hollywood film version of Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? . Her other major movie performances were for The Girl Can 't Help It ( 1956 ) , The Wayward Bus ( 1957 ) , and Too Hot to Handle ( 1960 ) . In the sexploitation film Promises ! Promises ! ( 1963 ) , she became the first major American actress to have a nude starring role in a Hollywood motion picture . Mansfield 's professional name came from her first husband , public relations professional Paul Mansfield . In 1967 , Mansfield was killed in a car crash at the age of 34 , along with two others . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Jayne Mansfield was born Vera Jayne Palmer on April 19 , 1933 , in Bryn Mawr , Pennsylvania . She was the only child of Herbert William Palmer ( 1904 – 1936 ) , who was of German and English ancestry , and Vera ( Jeffrey ) Palmer ( 1903 – 2000 ) , of English origin . She inherited more than $ 90 @,@ 000 from her maternal grandfather Thomas ( $ 738 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) and more than $ 36 @,@ 000 from her maternal grandmother , Beatrice Mary Palmer , in 1958 ( $ 295 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 She spent her early childhood in Phillipsburg , New Jersey , where her father was an attorney practising with future New Jersey governor Robert B. Meyner . In 1936 , her father Herbert William Palmer died of a heart attack while driving a car with his wife and daughter . In 1939 Vera married sales engineer Harry Lawrence Peers , and the family moved to Dallas , Texas , where she was known as Vera Jayne Peers . 
 As a child she wanted to be a Hollywood star like Shirley Temple , as did many other young girls of her time . She graduated from Highland Park High School in 1950 . At the age of 12 , she took lessons in ballroom dance . While in high school , Palmer took lessons in violin , piano and viola . She also studied Spanish and German . She consistently received high B 's in school , including mathematics . 
 She married Paul James Mansfield on May 10 , 1950 . Their daughter , Jayne Marie Mansfield , was born on November 8 , 1950 . After marriage , Mansfield and her husband enrolled in Southern Methodist University to study acting . In 1951 , she moved to Austin , Texas , with her husband , and studied dramatics at the University of Texas at Austin , until her junior year . There she worked as a nude model for art classes , sold books door to door , and worked as a receptionist of a dance studio . She also joined the Curtain Club , a popular campus theatrical society that featured Tom Jones , Harvey Schmidt , Rip Torn , and Pat Hingle among its members of that time . 
 In 1952 , she moved back to Dallas and for several months was a student of actor Baruch Lumet , father of director Sidney Lumet and founder of Dallas Institute of Performing Arts . Lumet called Mansfield and Rip Torn his " kids " , and provided her private lessons . Then she spent a year at Camp Gordon , Georgia ( a US Army training facility ) when Paul Mansfield served in the United States Army Reserve in the Korean War . 
 They moved to Los Angeles in 1954 , where Mansfield studied Theater Arts at University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) during the summer , and returned to Texas to spend the fall quarter at Southern Methodist University . She managed to maintain a B grade average , between a variety of odd jobs , including selling popcorn at the Stanley Warner Theatre , teaching dance , vending candy at a movie theater , modeling part @-@ time at the Blue Book Model Agency , and working as a photographer at Esther Williams ' Trails Restaurant . 
 = = Early career = = 
 While attending The University of Texas at Austin , Mansfield won several beauty contests , including : Miss <unk> , Miss Magnesium Lamp , and Miss Fire Prevention Week . The only title she refused was Miss Roquefort Cheese , because she believed it " ... just didn 't sound right . " Mansfield accepted a bit part in a B @-@ grade film titled Prehistoric Women ( produced by Alliance Productions , alternatively titled The Virgin Goddess ) in 1950 . In 1952 , while in Dallas , she and Paul Mansfield participated in small local @-@ theater productions of The Slaves of Demon Rum and Ten Nights in a Barroom , and Anything Goes in Camp Gordon , Georgia . After Paul Mansfield left for military service , Mansfield first appeared on stage in a production of Arthur Miller 's Death of a Salesman on October 22 , 1953 , with the players of the Knox Street Theater , headed by Lumet . 
 While at UCLA , she entered the Miss California contest ( hiding her marital status ) , and won the local round before withdrawing . She also won many small and local beauty pageants , including Miss <unk> , Miss Magnesium Lamp , Miss Fire Prevention Week , Gas Station Queen , Miss <unk> , Cherry Blossom Queen , Miss Third Platoon , Miss Blues Bonnet of Austin , Miss Direct Mail , Miss Electric Switch , Miss Fill @-@ er @-@ up , Miss <unk> , Nylon Sweater Queen , Miss One for the Road , Miss Freeway , Hot Dog Ambassador , Miss Geiger Counter , Best Dressed Woman of Theater , Miss 100 % Pure Maple Syrup , Miss July Fourth , Miss Texas Tomato , Miss Standard Foods , Miss Orchid , Miss Potato Soup , Miss Lobster , Miss United Dairies and Miss Chihuahua Show . 
 Early in her career , her prominent breasts were considered problematic , and led to her losing her first professional assignment — an advertising campaign for General Electric that depicted young women in bathing suits relaxing around a pool . Emmeline Snively , head of the Blue Book Model Agency , sent her to photographer Gene Lester , which led to her short @-@ lived assignment in the General Electric commercial . In 1954 , she auditioned at both Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros. for a part in The Seven Year Itch , but failed to impress . She also auditioned at Paramount for Joan of Arc — a project that was never completed — and failed again . That year , she landed her first acting assignment in Lux Video Theatre , a series on CBS ( An Angel Went AWOL , October 21 , 1954 ) . In the show , she sat at the piano and delivered a few lines of dialogue for $ 300 ( $ 3 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 She posed nude for the February 1955 issue of Playboy , modelling in pajamas raised so that the bottoms of her breasts showed . This increased the magazine 's circulation and helped launch Mansfield 's career . Playboy had begun publishing from publisher – editor Hugh Hefner 's kitchen in 1953 , but became popular in the first decade of publication — riding on the popularity of its early Playmates like Mansfield , Marilyn Monroe , Bettie Page and Anita Ekberg . Beginning in February 1955 , she formed a long @-@ standing relationship with Playboy . Shortly afterward , she posed for the Playboy calendar covering her breasts with her hands . Playboy featured Jayne every February from 1955 to 1958 , and again in 1960 . 
 In August 1956 , Paul Mansfield claimed custody of their daughter , claiming Jayne was an unfit mother because she appeared nude in Playboy . In 1964 , the magazine repeated the pictorial . Photos from that pictorial were reprinted in a number of Playboy issues , including : December 1965 ( " The Playboy Portfolio of Sex Stars " ) , January 1979 ( " 25 Beautiful Years " ) , January 1984 ( " 30 Memorable Years " ) , January 1989 ( " Women of the Fifties " ) , January 1994 ( " Remember Jayne " ) , November 1996 ( " Playboy Gallery " ) , August 1999 ( " Playboy 's Sex Stars of the Century " ; Special edition ) , and January 2000 ( " <unk> of the Century " ) . In the week following her first Playboy appearance , Mansfield caught Hollywood and media attention by dropping her bikini @-@ top at a press junket for the Jane Russell film Underwater ! ( RKO , 1955 ) . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Career beginnings ( 1954 – 1955 ) = = = 
 Mansfield 's first film part was a supporting role in Female Jungle , a low @-@ budget drama completed in ten days while she was still a student at UCLA . Her part was filmed over a span of just a few days , and she was paid $ 150 ( $ 1 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . The film was released unofficially in early 1955 . In February 1955 , James Byron , her manager and publicist , negotiated a seven @-@ year contract with Warner Brothers , who were intrigued by her publicity antics . The contract initially paid her $ 250 a week ( $ 2 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) and landed her two films — one for an insignificant role and another unreleased for two years . She filed for separation from Paul Mansfield that January . Mansfield was given bit parts in Pete Kelly 's Blues ( 1955 ) , starring Jack Webb , and Hell on Frisco Bay ( 1955 ) , starring Alan Ladd . She acted in one more movie with Warner Brothers — another small , but significant role opposite Edward G. Robinson in the courtroom @-@ drama Illegal ( 1955 ) . Dissatisfied with the Warner contract , she hired attorney Greg Bautzer to get out of it . 
 Then her agent , William Shiffrin , signed her to play fictional film star Rita Marlowe in the Broadway play Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? with Orson Bean and Walter Matthau . It became her first major performance , garnering her critical attention , although not always positive , and public popularity . After securing the part in the show , she accepted producer Louis W. Kellman 's offer to play a dramatic role in The Burglar ( 1957 ) , director Paul <unk> 's film adaptation of David Goodis ' novel . The film was done in film noir style , and Mansfield appeared alongside Dan Duryea and Martha Vickers . The Burglar was released two years later , when Mansfield 's fame was at its peak . She was successful in this straight dramatic role , though most of her subsequent film appearances were either comedic or capitalized on her sex appeal . It was Kellman 's first major venture , and he claimed to have " discovered " Mansfield . 
 = = = Film stardom ( 1955 – 1958 ) = = = 
 Mansfield returned to Hollywood on May 3 , 1956 , wearing a $ 20 @,@ 000 mink coat ( $ 174 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) but without any work . Twentieth Century @-@ Fox immediately signed a six @-@ year contract with her in an effort to mold her as a successor to the increasingly difficult Marilyn Monroe , their resident blonde bombshell , who was separated from the studio at the time . Mansfield was still under contract to Broadway and continued playing Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? on the stage . 
 Mansfield received her first starring film role as Jerri Jordan in the Frank Tashlin 's The Girl Can 't Help It ( 1956 ) . The film , originally titled Do @-@ Re @-@ Mi , featured a high @-@ profile cast of contemporary Rock @-@ n @-@ Roll and R & B artists including Gene Vincent , Eddie Cochran , Fats Domino , The Platters , and Little Richard . The Girl Can 't Help It was released in December 1956 and became one of the year 's biggest successes , both critically and financially . Fox thereby bought Mansfield out of her Broadway contract for $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 870 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) and shut the production of Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? down after 444 performances . Soon afterwards , Fox started promoting Mansfield as " Marilyn Monroe king @-@ sized " , in an effort to threaten Monroe to return to the studio and finish the contract she had committed to . 
 Mansfield then played a dramatic role in The Wayward Bus ( 1957 ) adapted from John Steinbeck 's novel . In this film , she attempted to move away from her " blonde bombshell " image and establish herself as a serious actress . It enjoyed moderate success at the box office , and Mansfield won a Golden Globe in 1957 for New Star of the Year ( beating Carroll Baker and Natalie Wood ) for her performance as a " wistful derelict " . It was " generally conceded to have been her best acting " , according to The New York Times , in a fitful career hampered by her flamboyant image , distinctive voice ( " a soft @-@ voiced coo punctuated with squeals " ) , voluptuous figure and limited acting range . 
 In 1957 , Tashlin cast Mansfield in the film version of the Broadway show Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? reprising her role of Rita Marlowe alongside co @-@ stars Tony Randall and Joan Blondell . Fox launched their new blonde bombshell with a forty @-@ day sixteen @-@ country tour of Europe for the studio . She attended the premiere of film ( released as Oh ! For a man in the UK ) in London , and met the Queen of England as part of the tour . 
 Mansfield 's fourth starring role in a Hollywood film was in Kiss Them for Me ( 1957 ) , for which she received prominent billing alongside Cary Grant . However , in the film itself she is little more than comic relief ; Grant 's character prefers a sleek , demure redhead played by fashion model Suzy Parker . Kiss Them for Me was described as " vapid " and " ill @-@ advised " , and was a critical and box office flop . The film was Mansfield 's final starring role in a mainstream Hollywood studio film . It also marked one of the last attempts by 20th Century @-@ Fox to publicize her . 
 The continuing publicity surrounding Mansfield 's physical appearance failed to sustain her career . Fox gave her a leading role opposite Kenneth More in The Sheriff of Fractured Jaw ( 1958 ) , a western comedy filmed on location in England . In the film Mansfield sang three songs , but the studio had her voiced dubbed by singer Connie Francis . When the film was released in the United States in 1959 , it was Mansfield 's last mainstream film success . Mansfield was offered a part opposite James Stewart and Jack Lemmon in the romantic comedy Bell , Book and Candle ( 1958 ) , but had to turn it down because of her pregnancy . Thereafter , Fox attempted to cast Mansfield opposite Paul Newman in Rally ' Round the Flag , Boys ! ( 1958 ) , his ill @-@ fated first attempt at comedy . After intense lobbying by Newman and Joanne Woodward , however , she was replaced by Mansfield 's Wayward Bus co @-@ star Joan Collins . 
 = = = Career decline ( 1959 – 1963 ) = = = 
 With decreased demand for big @-@ breasted blonde bombshells and an increased negative backlash against her excessive publicity , she became a box @-@ office has @-@ been by the early 1960s , but she remained a popular celebrity , continuing to attract large crowds outside the United States by way of lucrative and successful nightclub acts . 
 Despite her publicity and popularity , Mansfield had no quality film roles after 1959 . She was also unable to fulfill a third of her time contracted to Fox because of her repeated pregnancies . Fox stopped viewing her as major Hollywood star material , and started loaning her out to foreign productions until the end of her contract in 1962 . She was first loaned out to English studios and then to Italian studios for a series of low @-@ budget films , many of them obscure and some considered lost . 
 In 1959 , Fox cast her in two independent gangster films filmed in the United Kingdom : The Challenge and Too Hot to Handle . Both films were low @-@ budget , and their American releases were delayed . Too Hot to Handle was not released in the United States until 1961 ( as Playgirl After Dark ) , and The Challenge in 1963 ( as It Takes a Thief ) . In the United States , censors objected to a scene in Too Hot to Handle where Mansfield , wearing silver netting with sequins painted over her nipples , appeared nearly nude . 
 When Mansfield returned to Hollywood in mid @-@ 1960 , 20th Century @-@ Fox cast her in It Happened in Athens ( 1962 ) . She received first billing above the title , but only appeared in a supporting role . It Happened in Athens starred Trax Colton , a handsome newcomer and an unknown whom Fox was trying to mold into a heartthrob . This Olympic Games @-@ based film was shot in Greece in fall 1960 , but was unreleased until June 1962 . It was a box office failure , and Mansfield 's 20th Century @-@ Fox contract was dropped . 
 In 1961 , Mansfield signed on for an above @-@ the @-@ title billing minor role in The George Raft Story . Starring Ray Danton as Raft , the film showcased Mansfield as a glamorous film star in a small part . Soon after the release of The George Raft Story , Mansfield returned to European films . Over the next few years she appeared primarily in low @-@ budget foreign films such as : <unk> nach St. Pauli ( 1963 , Germany ) , L 'Amore Primitivo ( 1964 , Italy ) , Panic Button ( 1964 , Italy ) and <unk> <unk> den anderen ( 1964 , Germany ) . 
 In 1963 , Tommy Noonan persuaded Mansfield to become the first mainstream American actress to appear nude in a starring role in the film Promises ! Promises ! . Nude photographs of Mansfield on the set were published in the June 1963 issue of Playboy , which resulted in obscenity charges against Hugh Hefner in Chicago city court . Promises ! Promises ! was banned in Cleveland , but enjoyed box @-@ office success elsewhere . As a result of the film 's success , Mansfield landed on the Top 10 list of box @-@ office attractions for that year . 
 = = = Final years ( 1964 – 1967 ) = = = 
 Soon after her success in Promises ! Promises ! Mansfield was chosen from many other actresses to replace the recently deceased Marilyn Monroe in Kiss Me , Stupid , a 1964 romantic comedy that would co @-@ star Dean Martin . She turned the role down due to her pregnancy with daughter Mariska Hargitay ( known best for her role as Detective Olivia Benson on the television show Law & Order : Special Victims Unit ) , and was replaced by Kim Novak . That same year , Mansfield appeared in a salacious @-@ for @-@ its @-@ time pinup book called " Jayne Mansfield for President : the White House or Bust , " which was promoted on billboards ; the photographs were taken by commercial and fine art photographer David Attie . In 1966 Mansfield was cast in Single Room Furnished , directed by then @-@ husband Matt Cimber . The film required Mansfield to portray three different characters , and was her first starring dramatic role in several years . It was briefly released in 1966 , but did not enjoy a full release until 1968 , almost a year after her death . 
 After Single Room Furnished wrapped , Mansfield was cast opposite Mamie Van Doren and Ferlin Husky in The Las Vegas Hillbillys ( 1966 ) , a low @-@ budget comedy from Woolner Brothers . It was her first country and western film , and she promoted it through a 29 @-@ day tour of major U.S. cities , accompanied by Ferlin Husky , Don Bowman , and other country musicians . Before filming began , Mansfield said she would not " share any screen time with the drive @-@ in 's answer to Marilyn Monroe , " meaning Van Doren . Though their characters do share one scene , Mansfield and Van Doren filmed their parts at different times , later edited together . 
 Mansfield 's wardrobe relied on the shapeless styles of the 1960s to hide her weight gain after the birth of her fifth child . Despite career setbacks , Mansfield remained a highly visible celebrity during the early 1960s , through her publicity antics and stage performances . In early 1967 , Mansfield filmed her last film role : a cameo in A Guide for the Married Man , a comedy starring Walter Matthau , Robert Morse , and Inger Stevens . Mansfield is listed as one of the technical advisers , along with other popular stars in the opening credits . 
 = = Stage career = = 
 Mansfield acted both on stage and in films . She was a student of acting , theater arts and dramatics in college and with Baruch Lumet . She started acting with campus clubs and summer stock theatre . Her first big break was on Broadway with Will success spoil Rock Hunter , for which she won a Theatre World Award as the most promising actress . In her later career she was more busy on stage , performing and making appearances with her nightclub acts , club engagements and performance tours . By 1960 , she made personal appearances for everything from supermarket promotions to drug store openings , at $ 10 @,@ 000 per appearance ( $ 80 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = = Theater = = = 
 During her tenure at Dallas , she and Paul Mansfield participated in a number of local theater productions . Between 1951 and 1953 she acted in The Slaves of Demon Rum , Ten Nights in a Barroom and Anything Goes . Her performance in an October 1953 production of Arthur Miller 's Death of a Salesman in Dallas , Texas , attracted Paramount Pictures to audition her . Lumet trained her for the audition . In 1955 , she went to New York and appeared in the Broadway production of George Axelrod 's comedy Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? , also featuring Orson Bean and Walter Matthau . She starred as Rita Marlowe ( a wild , blonde Hollywood starlet a la Monroe ) in the musical spoofing Hollywood in general and Marilyn Monroe in particular . Her wardrobe in the play , namely a bath @-@ towel , caused a sensation . Brooks Atkinson of the New York Times described the " commendable abandon " of her scantily clad rendition of Rita Marlowe in the play as " a platinum @-@ <unk> movie siren with the wavy contours of Marilyn Monroe " . She performed in 450 shows of the play between 1955 and 1956 . She was considered one of the biggest Broadway @-@ to @-@ Hollywood success stories . 
 In 1964 , she performed in stage productions of Gentlemen Prefer Blondes at Carousel Theater and Bus Stop at <unk> Playhouse . Both co @-@ starred Mickey Hargitay and were well @-@ reviewed . Mansfield toured small towns in the US alternating between the two plays . In 1965 , she performed in another pair of plays – Rabbit Habit at Latin Quarter and Champagne Complex at Pabst Theater . Both were directed by Matt Cimber and were poorly reviewed . 
 = = = Nightclub = = = 
 In February 1958 , Tropicana Las Vegas launched Mansfield 's striptease revue The Tropicana Holiday ( produced by Monte <unk> , co @-@ starring Mickey Hargitay ) under a four weeks contract that was extended to eight . The opening night raised $ 20 @,@ 000 for March of Dimes ( $ 164 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . She received $ 25 @,@ 000 per week for her performance as Trixie <unk> in the show ( $ 205 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , while her contract with 20th Century Fox was paying her $ 2 @,@ 500 per week ( $ 21 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . She had a million @-@ dollar policy with Lloyd 's of London in case of Hargitay dropping her as he whirled Mansfield around for the show . When her film offers disappeared , Mansfield turned to Las Vegas again . In December 1960 , Dunes hotel and casino launched Mansfield 's revue The House of Love ( produced by Jack Cole , co @-@ starring Hargitay ) . She received $ 35 @,@ 000 a week as her salary ( $ 280 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , which was the highest in her career . 
 Her wardrobe for the shows at Tropicana and Dunes featured a gold mesh dress with sequins to cover her nipples and pubic region . That controversial sheer dress was referred to as " Jayne Mansfield and a few sequins " . In early 1963 , she performed in her first club engagement outside Las Vegas , at Plantation Supper Club in Greensboro , North Carolina , earning $ 23 @,@ 000 in a week ( $ 178 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , and then at Iroquois Gardens in Louisville , Kentucky . She returned to Las Vegas in 1966 , but her show was staged at Fremont Street , away from the Strip where Tropicana and Dunes was . Her last nightclub act French Dressing was at Latin Quarter in New York in 1966 , also repeated at Tropicana . It was a modified version of the Tropicana show , and ran for six weeks with fair success . 
 Her nightclub career became inspirations for films , documentaries and a musical album . 20th Century Fox Records recorded The House of Love for an album entitled Jayne Mansfield Busts Up Las Vegas in 1962 . She played the roles of burlesque entertainer Midnight Franklin in Too Hot to Handle ( 1960 ) and Las Vegas show girl <unk> Downs in The Las Vegas Hillbillys ( 1966 ) . In 1967 , independent documentary Spree ( alternative title Las Vegas by Night ) on the antics of Las Vegas entertainers was released . The film , narrated as a part of a travelogue of Vic Damone and Juliet Prowse , featured Mansfield , Hargitay , Constance Moore and Clara Ward as guest stars . Mansfield strips and sings " Promise Her Anything " from the film Promises ! Promises ! . A court order prohibited using any of the guest stars to promote the film . 
 = = Television career = = 
 Mansfield 's first leading role on television was with NBC 's Sunday Spectacular " The Bachelor " in 1956 . In her first appearance on British television in 1957 she recited from Shakespeare ( including a line from Hamlet ) and played piano and violin . Her notable performances in television dramas included episodes of Burke 's Law , Alfred Hitchcock Presents , The Red Skelton Hour ( three episodes ) , Kraft Mystery Theater and Follow the Sun . Mansfield 's performance in her first series Follow the Sun ( " The Dumbest Blonde " ; Season 1 , Episode 21 ; February 4 , 1962 ; produced by 20th Century Fox Television ) was hailed as the advent of " a new and dramatic Jayne Mansfield " . She appeared on a number of game shows including Talk it up , Down You Go ( as a regular panelist in ) , The Match Game ( one rare episode has her as a team captain ) , and What 's My Line ? ( as a special mystery guest ) . 
 She performed in a number of variety shows including The Jack Benny Program ( on which she played violin ) , The Steve Allen Show and The Jackie Gleason Show ( during the mid @-@ 1960s , when the show was the second @-@ highest @-@ rated program in the U.S. ) . In November 1957 , she was portrayed in one of her nightclub acts in a special episode of The Perry Como Show ( Holiday in Las Vegas ) , which created " a situation " for the audience according to NBC , the television network that broadcast the show . She was a guest on three episodes of The Bob Hope Show touring team . In 1957 , she toured United States Pacific Command areas of Hawaii , Okinawa , Guam , Tokyo and Korea with Bob Hope for the United Service Organizations for 13 days appearing as a comedian ; and in 1961 , toured Newfoundland , Labrador and Baffin Island for a Christmas special . Her talk show career includes a large number of appearances . She appreciated the publicity and appeared frequently in the talk format . . One of her more notable appearances on a variety show was on The Ed Sullivan Show ( Season 10 , Episode 35 ; May 26 , 1957 ) right after her success with Rock Hunter . In the show she played violin with a six @-@ person back @-@ up . After the show she exclaimed , " Now I am really national . Momma and Dallas see the Ed Sullivan show ! " 
 By 1958 , she charged $ 20 @,@ 000 per episode for television performance ( $ 164 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . In 1964 , Mansfield turned down the role of Ginger Grant on the up @-@ and @-@ coming television sitcom Gilligan 's Island . Although her acting roles were becoming marginalized , Mansfield rejected the part as it epitomized the stereotype she wished to rid herself of . The part eventually went to Tina Louise . A widespread rumor that Jayne Mansfield had a breast @-@ flashing dress mishap at the 1957 Academy Awards was found baseless by Academy researchers . Ten days before her death , she read To the Virgins , to Make Much of Time , a poem by Robert Herrick about early death on The Joey Bishop Show ( Mansfield 's last television appearance ) . 
 As late as the mid @-@ 1980s , Mansfield remained one of the biggest television draws . In 1980 , The Jayne Mansfield Story aired on CBS starring Loni Anderson in the title role and Arnold Schwarzenegger as Mickey Hargitay . It was nominated for three Emmy Awards . She was featured in the A + E Networks TV series Biography in an episode titled Jayne Mansfield : Blonde Ambition . The TV series won an Emmy Award in outstanding non @-@ fiction TV series category in 2001 . A & E again featured her life in another TV serial , Dangerous Curves , in 1999 . In 1988 , her story and archival footage was a part of TV documentary Hollywood Sex Symbols . 
 = = Music career = = 
 Mansfield had classical training in piano and violin . She sang in film soundtracks , on stage for her theatrical and nightclub performances , and had singles and albums published . After her death , Mansfield became an inspiration for punk @-@ rock musicians . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 Mansfield sang in English and German for a number of her films , including The Girl Can 't Help It ( " Ev <unk> " and " Rock Around the Rock Pile " ) , Illegal ( " Too Marvelous for Words " ) , The Las Vegas Hillbillys ( " That makes it " ) , Too Hot to Handle ( " Too Hot To Handle " , " You Were Made For Me " , " Monsoon " and " Midnight " ) , Homesick for St. Pauli ( " Wo Ist Der Mann " and " <unk> <unk> " ) , The Challenge ( " The Challenge of Love " ) , The Sheriff of Fractured Jaw ( " Strolling Down The Lane With Billy " and " If The San Francisco Hills Could Only Talk " ) , and Promises ! Promises ! ( " I 'm in Love " , alternative title " Lullaby of Love " ) . In The Sheriff of Fractured Jaw she lip synced to the voice of Connie Francis for " In The Valley Of Love " , while signing two other songs . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 In 1958 , an orchestra was recorded for the 31st Academy Awards ceremony with Jack Benny on first violin , Jayne Mansfield on violin , Dick Powell on trumpet , Robert Mitchum on woodwind , Fred Astaire on drums and Jerry Lewis as conductor ; however , the performance was canceled . She played violin with a six @-@ musician back @-@ up ensemble on The Ed Sullivan Show , and sang " Too Marvelous for Words " for The Jack Benny Program ( " Jack Takes Boat to Hawaii " ; Episode 9 , Season 14 ; November 26 , 1963 ) . She sang in her club performances regularly featuring songs like Call Me , This Queen has her aces in all the right places , Plain Jane , Quando @-@ Quando , Besame Mucho , and the song made famous by Marilyn Monroe — Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend . 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 In 1962 , 20th Century Fox Records released an album titled Jayne Mansfield Busts Up Las Vegas , which was a recording of her Las Vegas revue The House of Love . In 1964 MGM Records released a novelty album called Jayne Mansfield : Shakespeare , Tchaikovsky & Me , in which Mansfield recited Shakespeare 's sonnets and poems by Marlowe , Browning , Wordsworth , and others against a background of Tchaikovsky 's music . The album cover depicted a bouffant @-@ coiffed Mansfield with lips pursed and breasts barely covered by a fur stole , posing between busts of Tchaikovsky and Shakespeare . The New York Times described the album a reading of " 30 @-@ odd poems in a husky , urban , baby voice " . The reviewer went on to remark that " Miss Mansfield is a lady with apparent charms , but reading poetry is not one of them . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Jimi Hendrix played bass and added lead in his session musician days for Mansfield in 1965 on two songs ( " As The Clouds Drift By " and " Suey " ) , released as a 45 @-@ rpm single released by London Records in 1966 . Ed Chalpin , the record producer , claimed that Mansfield played all the instruments on the singles . According to Hendrix historian Steven Roby ( Black Gold : The Lost Archives Of Jimi Hendrix , Billboard Books ) , this collaboration occurred because they shared the same manager . Wo ist der Mann sung in German and released by Polydor Records in Austria was much in demand immediately after its release in August 1963 . The A @-@ side featured Hans Last 's <unk> @-@ <unk> . Two original soundtracks from The Las Vegas Hillbillys — That Makes It ( an answer to The Big Bopper 's " Chantilly Lace " ) on side @-@ A and Little Things Mean a Lot on side @-@ B — was released in 1964 on the Original Sound label . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Film critic and exploitation movie expert Whitney Williams wrote of Mansfield in Variety in 1967 that " her personal life out @-@ rivaled any of the roles she played " . Mansfield was married three times , divorced twice , and had five children . She was ( reportedly ) intimately involved with numerous individuals , including Claude Terrail ( owner of the Paris restaurant Tour d 'Argent ) , Robert F. Kennedy , John F. Kennedy , Brazilian billionaire Jorge <unk> , her attorney Samuel S. Brody , Las Vegas entertainer Nelson Sardelli , and producer Enrico Bomba . She met John F. Kennedy through his brother @-@ in @-@ law Peter Lawford at Palm Springs , California in 1960 , before he had his alleged affair with Marilyn Monroe , but the alleged affair did not last . At her death , Mansfield was accompanied by Sam Brody , her lawyer and alleged lover at the time . 
 She had a daughter with her first husband , public relations professional Paul Mansfield . She was the mother of three children from her second marriage to actor / bodybuilder Mickey Hargitay . She also had a son with her third husband , film director Matt Cimber . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 Jayne met Paul Mansfield , a popular student at Highland Park High School , Dallas , at a party on Christmas Eve of 1949 . On May 6 , 1950 , they married in Fort Worth , Texas . At the time of their marriage , Jayne was 17 , and three months pregnant . Paul Mansfield was 20 . While most major biographies put the date at May 6 , some sources say the marriage was on May 10 , 1950 . According to biographer Raymond Strait , she had an earlier " secret " marriage on January 28 , after which she conceived her first child . On November 8 , 1950 , Mansfield gave birth to their daughter , Jayne Marie Mansfield . Some sources cite Paul Mansfield as the father of her child , while others allege the pregnancy was the result of date rape . 
 Paul Mansfield hoped the birth of their child would discourage her interest in acting . When it did not , he agreed to move to Los Angeles in late 1954 to help further her career . In 1952 , she juggled motherhood and classes at the University of Texas . Early in 1952 , Paul was called to the United States Army Reserve for the Korean War . While he served in the army , she spent a year at Camp Gordon , Georgia . Her life became easier with Paul 's army allotment . Coming back from the Korean War in 1954 , he took a job with a small newspaper in East Los Angeles , California , and lived in a small apartment in Van Nuys , Los Angeles , with Jayne and her pets — a Great Dane , three cats named Sabina , Romulus , and Ophelia , two <unk> , a poodle dyed pink , and a rabbit . While in California , she left Jayne Marie with her maternal grandparents and spent the summer semester at UCLA . 
 After a series of marital rows around Jayne 's ambitions , infidelity , and animals , they decided to annul the marriage . It was a long process . In February 1955 , Jayne filed for separate maintenance , and in August 1956 , Paul filed for custody of their daughter Jayne Marie . Jayne divorced Paul Mansfield in California on October 21 , 1956 . Paul Mansfield divorced her in Texas on March 16 , 1957 , on the grounds of mental cruelty . They finally received their divorce papers on January 8 , 1958 . After the divorce , she decided to keep " Mansfield " as her professional name . Paul Mansfield remarried , settled into the public relations business and moved to Chattanooga , Tennessee — but failed to win custody suits over Jayne Marie or restrain her from traveling abroad with her mother . 
 Two weeks before her mother 's death in 1967 , 16 @-@ year @-@ old Jayne Marie accused her mother 's boyfriend at that time , Sam Brody , of beating her . The girl 's statement to officers of the Los Angeles Police Department the following morning implicated her mother in encouraging the abuse , and days later a juvenile court judge awarded temporary custody of Jayne Marie to Paul 's uncle William W. <unk> and his wife Mary . Following her 18th birthday , Jayne Marie complained that she had not received her inheritance from the Mansfield estate or heard from her father since Jayne 's death . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 Mansfield met her second husband Mickey Hargitay at the Latin Quarter in New York on May 13 , 1956 , where he was performing as a member of the chorus line in Mae West 's show . Hargitay was an actor and bodybuilder who had won the Mr. Universe competition in 1955 . Mansfield immediately fell for him , which subsequently resulted in a squabble with West . In the ensuing row Mr. California , Chuck Krauser , beat up Hargitay . Krauser was arrested and released on a $ 300 bond ( $ 3 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 Hargitay proposed to Mansfield with a $ 5 @,@ 000 10 @-@ carat diamond ring on November 6 , 1957 ( $ 211 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , right after she returned from her 40 @-@ day European tour . On January 13 , 1958 , days after her divorce from Paul was finalized , Mansfield married Hargitay at the Wayfarers Chapel in Rancho Palos Verdes , California . The unique glass chapel made public and press viewing of the wedding easy . Mansfield wore a sensational pink skintight wedding gown made of sequins with a 30 @-@ yard <unk> . 
 Hargitay 's first film appearance with Mansfield was a bit part in Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? . The couple became a popular publicity and performing team touring widely in stage shows , wherein Jayne 's leopard @-@ spot bikini became a topic of discussion and newspaper coverage . Hargitay 's tossing her around his waist and spinning her in wide circles as a highlight of her shows made more headlines . On screen , he was Mansfield 's male lead in her Italian ventures — The Loves of Hercules and L 'Amore Primitivo , and a major supporting character in Promises ! Promises ! . On stage , he was the male lead in The Tropicana Holiday , The House of Love , French Dressing and other nightclub acts . 
 They were also popular for their personal appearances in television shows such as Bob Hope Christmas Specials . Mansfield and Hargitay had a number of business holdings , including the Hargitay Exercise Equipment Company , Jayne Mansfield Productions , and Eastland Savings and Loan . She co @-@ wrote the autobiographical book Jayne Mansfield 's Wild , Wild World with Hargitay . The book also contained 32 pages of black @-@ and @-@ white photographs from the film on glossy paper . 
 Mansfield 's son Zoltan was in the news when a lion named Sammy attacked him and bit his neck while he and his mother were visiting the theme park <unk> USA in Thousand Oaks , California on November 23 , 1966 . He suffered from severe head trauma , underwent three surgeries at Community Memorial Hospital in Ventura , California , including a six @-@ hour brain surgery , and contracted meningitis . He recovered . Mansfield 's attorney Sam Brody sued the theme park on her behalf for $ 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 11 @,@ 355 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . The negative publicity led to closure of the theme park . 
 In 1962 , she had a well @-@ publicized affair with Enrico Bomba , the Italian producer and production manager of her film Panic Button . Hargitay accused Bomba of sabotaging their marriage . In 1963 , she had another well @-@ publicized relationship with singer Nelson Sardelli , whom she said she planned to marry when her divorce from Mickey Hargitay was finalized . The couple divorced in Juarez , Mexico , in May 1963 , where Nelson Sardelli accompanied Mansfield in her legal preparations . She had previously filed for divorce on May 4 , 1962 , but told reporters " I 'm sure we will make it up . " Their acrimonious divorce had the actress accusing Hargitay of kidnapping one of her children to force a more favorable financial settlement . 
 = = = Between marriages = = = 
 After their divorce , Mansfield discovered she was pregnant . Since being an unwed mother would have killed her career , Mansfield and Hargitay announced they were still married . Mariska was born January 23 , 1964 , after the actual divorce but before California ruled it valid . Mariska later became an actress , best known for her role as Olivia Benson in Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . After her birth , Mansfield sued to get the Juarez divorce declared legal and won . The divorce was recognized in the United States on August 26 , 1964 . Shortly after Mansfield 's funeral , Mickey Hargitay sued his former wife 's estate for more than $ 275 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 95 million in 2016 dollars ) to support the children whom he and his third ( and last ) wife , Ellen <unk> , would raise . Hargitay was appointed the guardian of Micky , Zoltan and Mariska by a court decree in June 1967 , though they went on living with their mother . He married airline stewardess Ellen <unk> in 1968 , who accompanied him to New Orleans when he went to pick up his three children with Mansfield after her death . In January 1969 , he lost his claim of $ 275 @,@ 533 from Mansfield 's estate to support the three children ( $ 1 @,@ 778 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . Towards the very end of her life and some time after her divorce with Hargitay , Mansfield told her ex @-@ husband , on a television talk show , she was sorry for all the trouble she gave him . 
 = = = Third marriage = = = 
 Mansfield became involved with her third husband Matt Cimber ( a.k.a. Matteo Ottaviano , né Thomas Vitale Ottaviano ) , an Italian @-@ born film director , when he directed her in a well @-@ reviewed stage production of Bus Stop in Yonkers , New York <unk> Hargitay . She married him on September 24 , 1964 , in Mulegé , Baja California Sur , Mexico . The couple separated on July 11 , 1965 , and filed for divorce on July 20 , 1966 . Cimber took over the management of her career during their marriage , and guided her through a series of increasingly tawdry projects like Promises , Promises and The Las Vegas Hillbillys . Her marriage to Cimber began to collapse in the wake of Mansfield 's alcohol abuse , open infidelities and her disclosure to Cimber that she had only been happy with her former lover , Nelson Sardelli . Work on Mansfield 's film , Single Room Furnished directed by Cimber ( 1966 ) was suspended . 
 Mansfield at the time had descended into alcoholism , drunken brawls and cheap burlesque shows . By July 1966 , Mansfield started living with her attorney Sam Brody , who had frequent drunken brawls with her and mistreated her eldest daughter Jayne Marie . Sam 's wife Beverly Brody filed a divorce suit naming Mansfield as the " 41st other woman " in Sam 's life . Cimber 's divorce from the actress was pending when she was killed . The couple had one son , Antonio Raphael Ottaviano ( a.k.a. Tony Cimber , born October 18 , 1965 ) . Mansfield 's youngest child , Tony was raised by his father , Matt Cimber and his third wife , dress designer Christy Hilliard <unk> , whom he married on December 2 , 1967 . Tony Cimber later worked as an announcer for Married ... with Children and a producer for Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling . 
 = = Image = = 
 She was a major Hollywood sex symbol of the 1950s and early 1960s and 20th Century Fox 's alternative to Marilyn Monroe . She came to be known as the " Working Man 's Monroe " . She was one of Hollywood 's original blonde bombshells , and , although many people have never seen her movies , Mansfield remains one of the most recognizable icons of 1950s celebrity culture . 
 According to Hollywood historian and biographer James Robert Parish , Mansfield 's hourglass figure ( she claimed dimensions of 40 @-@ 21 @-@ 35 ) , unique sashaying walk , breathy baby talk and cleavage @-@ revealing costumes made a lasting impact on popular culture . According to Hollywood historian Andrew Nelson , she was seen as Hollywood 's gaudiest , boldest D @-@ cupped B @-@ grade actress from 1955 until the early 1960s . 
 Frequent references have been made to Mansfield 's very high IQ , which she claimed was 163 . In addition to English , she spoke four other languages . She learned French , Spanish , and German in high school , and she studied Italian in 1963 . Reputed to be Hollywood 's " smartest dumb blonde " , she later complained that the public did not care about her brains : " They 're more interested in 40 – 21 – 35 , " she said . 
 = = = Blonde = = = 
 A natural brunette , Mansfield had her hair bleached and colored platinum blonde when she moved to Los Angeles , and became one of the early " blonde bombshells " , along with Marilyn Monroe , Betty Grable and Mamie Van Doren . In 1958 , she also had her eyebrows dyed platinum . Following Jean Harlow ( who started the trend with her film Bombshell ) , Monroe , Mansfield , Van Doren and Diana Dors helped establish the stereotype typified by a combination of curvaceous physique , very light @-@ colored hair and a perceived lack of intelligence . A review of English @-@ language tabloids shows it to be one of the most persistent blonde stereotypes — along with busty blonde , and blonde babe . 
 Mansfield , Monroe and Barbara Windsor have been described as representations of a historical juncture of sexuality in comedy and popular culture . Academics also added Anita Ekberg and Bettie Page to the list of catalysts of the trend of exaggerated female sexuality , besides Mansfield and Monroe . M. Thomas Inge describes Mansfield , Monroe and Jane Russell as personification of the bad girl in popular culture . Monroe , Mansfield , Judy Holliday and Goldie Hawn are also identified to have established the stereotype of the " dumb blonde " , typified by their combination of overt sexuality and apparent inability to understand everyday life . Instead of the <unk> and virginal " nice girls " of earlier films , the pneumatic blonde bombshells took over the screen in the 1950s to become a cult that has been consistently emulated from that era onward . Social historian Joan Jacobs <unk> described the 1950s as " an era distinguished by its worship of full @-@ breasted women " and attributes the paradigm shift to Mansfield and Monroe . Patricia Vettel @-@ Becker made that observation more specific by attributing the phenomenon to Playboy and the appearance of Mansfield and Monroe in the magazine . 
 = = = Rivalry = = = 
 Throughout her career , Mansfield was compared by the media to the reigning sex symbol of the period , Marilyn Monroe . 20th Century Fox groomed her , as well as Sheree North , to substitute Monroe , their resident " blonde bombshell " , while Universal Pictures launched Van Doren as their substitute . The studio launched Mansfield , their new bombshell , with a grand 40 @-@ day tour of England and Europe from September 25 to November 6 , 1957 . She adopted Monroe 's vocal mannerisms instead of her original husky voice and Texan speech , performed in two plays that were based on Marilyn Monroe vehicles — Bus Stop and Gentlemen Prefer Blondes , and her role in The Wayward Bus was strongly influenced by Monroe 's character in Bus Stop . 
 Other studios also tried to find their own version of Monroe . Columbia Pictures tried it with Cleo Moore , Warner Bros. with Carroll Baker , Paramount Pictures with Anita Ekberg , and Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer with Barbara Lang , while Diana Dors was dubbed as England 's answer to Mansfield . Jacqueline Susann wrote , " When one studio has a Marilyn Monroe , every other studio is hiring Jayne Mansfield and Mamie Van Doren . " The crowd of contenders also included Sheree North , Kim Novak , Joi Lansing , Beverly Michaels , Barbara Nichols and Greta Thyssen , and even two brunettes — Elizabeth Taylor and Jane Russell . Mamie Van Doren , Diana Dors and Kim Novak also acted in various productions of Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . Even when Mansfield 's film roles were drying up she was widely considered Monroe 's primary rival ; Mansfield considered Mamie Van Doren her professional nemesis . At one point , Monroe , Mansfield , and Mamie were known as The Three M 's . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 Because of her striking figure , newspapers in the 1950s routinely published her body measurements , which once led to evangelist Billy Graham exclaiming , " This country knows more about Jayne Mansfield 's statistics than the Second Commandment . " Mansfield claimed a 41 @-@ inch bust line and a 22 @-@ inch waist when she made her Broadway debut in 1955 , though some scholars dispute those figures . She was known as the Cleavage Queen and the Queen of Sex and Bosom . 
 Mansfield 's breasts fluctuated in size , it was said , from her pregnancies and nursing her five children . Her smallest bust measurement was 40D ( 102 cm ) , which was constant throughout the 1950s , and her largest was <unk> ( 117 cm ) , measured by the press in 1967 . According to Playboy , her vital statistics were 40D @-@ 21 @-@ 36 ( 102 @-@ 53 @-@ 91 cm ) on her 5 ' 6 " ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) frame . According to her autopsy report , she was 5 ' 8 " ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) . 
 It has been claimed that her bosom was a major force behind the development of the 1950s brassieres , including the whirlpool bra , cuties , the shutter bra , the action bra , latex pads , cleavage @-@ revealing designs , and uplifted outlines . R. L. <unk> and Bill <unk> have claimed that it was Mansfield , along with Marilyn Monroe and Brigitte Bardot , who made the bikini popular . Drawing on the Freudian concept of fetishism , British science fiction writer and socio @-@ cultural commentator J. G. Ballard commented that Mae West , Mansfield and Monroe 's breasts " loomed across the horizon of popular consciousness . " But , as the 1960s approached , according to Dave Kehr , the anatomy that had made her a star turned her into a joke . In this decade , the female body ideal shifted to appreciate the slim waif @-@ like features popularized by supermodel Twiggy , actress Audrey Hepburn and others , demarcating the demise of the busty blonde bombshells . 
 = = Publicity = = 
 Mansfield 's publicity drive was one of the best in Hollywood . For publicity she gave up all privacy , keeping her doors always open to photographers . In 1954 , the day before Christmas she walked into publicist James Byron 's office with a gift and asked him to supervise her publicity . From that time till the end of 1961 , Byron shaped much of her publicity . Byron appointed most people in her team — William Shiffrin ( press agent ) , Greg Bautzer ( attorney ) and Charles Goldring ( business manager ) , and constantly planted bits of publicity material in the media . She appeared in about 2 @,@ 500 newspaper photographs between September 1956 and May 1957 , and had about 122 @,@ 000 lines of newspaper copy written about her during this time . 
 Because of the successful media blitz , she quickly became a household name . In 1960 , Mansfield topped press polls for more words in print than anyone else in the world , made more personal appearances than a political candidate , and was regarded as the world 's most @-@ photographed Hollywood celebrity . She made news on a regular basis , from dresses falling off , to clothing that burst strategically at the seams , to low cut dresses worn without a bra . Things started to get over the top , even by her standards , when she took charge of her own publicity without advice . According to Shiffrin , " She became a freak . " James Bacon wrote in the Los Angeles Herald @-@ Examiner in 1973 , " Here was a girl with real comedy talent , spectacular figure and looks and yet ridiculed herself out of business by outlandish publicity . " 
 Mansfield received her first truly negative publicity when she and Hargitay pleaded poverty when Mary Hargitay requested additional child support for Tina Hargitay in September 1958 . Mary was Mickey 's first wife , divorced on September 6 , 1956 , and Tina his nine @-@ year @-@ old first child . Mansfield said that she slept on the floor of her mansion , was unable to buy furniture , and spent only $ 71 on Jayne Marie ( $ 1 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . During this marriage she had three children , Miklós Jeffrey Palmer Hargitay ( born December 21 , 1958 ) , Zoltán Anthony Hargitay ( born August 1 , 1960 ) , and Mariska Hargitay ( born January 23 , 1964 ) . 
 = = = Publicity stunts = = = 
 In January 1955 Mansfield appeared at a Silver Springs , Florida , press junket promoting the film Underwater ! , starring Jane Russell . Mansfield purposely wore a too @-@ small red bikini , lent to her by photographer friend Peter Gowland . When she dove into the pool for photographers , her top came off , creating a burst of media attention . The ensuing publicity led to Warner Bros. and Playboy approaching her with offers . In June 8 of the same year , her dress fell down to her waist twice in a single evening — once at a movie party , and later at a nightclub . In February 1958 , she was stripped to the waist at a Mardi Gras party in Rio de Janeiro . In June 1962 , she shimmied out of her polka @-@ dot dress in a Rome nightclub . In the three years since making her Broadway debut in Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? , Mansfield had become the most controversial star of the decade . 
 In April 1957 , her breasts were the focus of a notorious publicity stunt intended to deflect media attention from Sophia Loren during a dinner party in the Italian star 's honor . Photographs of the encounter were published around the world . The best @-@ known photo showed Loren 's gaze falling on the cleavage of the American actress ( who was seated between Loren and her dinner companion , Clifton Webb ) when Mansfield leaned over the table , allowing her breasts to spill over her low neckline and exposing one nipple . The Jayne Mansfield @-@ Sophia Loren photo inspired a number of later photographers . The photograph of that episode was a UPI sensation , appearing in newspapers and magazines with the word " censored " hiding the actress 's exposed bosom . 
 At the same time , the world 's media were quick to condemn Mansfield 's stunts . One editorial columnist wrote , " We are amused when Miss Mansfield strains to pull in her stomach to fill out her bikini better ; but we get angry when career @-@ seeking women , shady ladies , and certain starlets and actresses ... use every opportunity to display their anatomy unasked " . By the late 1950s , Mansfield began to generate a great deal of negative publicity because of repeated exposure of her breasts in carefully staged public " accidents " . Richard Blackwell , her wardrobe designer ( who also designed for Jane Russell , Dorothy Lamour , Peggy Lee and Nancy Reagan ) , dropped her from his client list because of those accidents . In April 1967 , Los Angeles Times wrote , " She confuses publicity and notoriety with stardom and celebrity and the result is very distasteful to the public . " 
 = = = Signature color = = = 
 Mansfield adopted pink as her color in 1954 and was associated with pink for the rest of her career . Her original choice was purple , but she thought it too close to lavender , Kim Novak 's signature color . " It must have been the right decision , " she said , " because I got more column space from pink than Kim Novak ever did from lavender . " For her wedding to Hargitay she wore a tight @-@ fitting gown of pink lace with a <unk> of 30 yards of pink tulle ( designed by a 20th Century @-@ Fox costume designer ) , and at the reception she had Hargitay drink pink champagne . In November 1957 ( shortly before their marriage ) , Mansfield bought the 40 @-@ room Mediterranean @-@ style mansion ( formerly owned by Rudy Vallée ) at 10100 Sunset Boulevard in Beverly Hills . Much of the money to buy the house came from her inheritance from Elmer Palmer , her maternal grandfather . Mansfield had the house painted pink , with cupids surrounded by pink fluorescent lights , pink fur in the bathrooms , a pink heart @-@ shaped bathtub and a fountain spurting pink champagne ; she then dubbed it the " Pink Palace " . Hargitay ( a plumber and carpenter before taking up bodybuilding ) built the pink heart @-@ shaped swimming pool . The year after reconstructing the " Pink Palace " as a " pink landmark " , she began riding a pink Cadillac Eldorado Biarritz convertible with tailfins , then the only pink Cadillac in Hollywood . Though Elvis Presley 's Pink Cadillac came about in 1955 , it was in Memphis , Tennessee . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In August 1963 , Jayne Mansfield decided to convert to Catholicism . Although she never actually converted , she did attend Catholic services when she was in Europe , and followed Catholic practices when she was involved with a Catholic partner ( including Hargitay , Sardelli and Cimber ) . 
 In May 1967 , her performance at the Mount Brandon Hotel in Tralee , Ireland , was canceled because Catholic clergy condemned it . She wanted to marry Cimber in a Catholic ceremony , but was unable to find a priest who would perform the ceremony . While involved with Brody , she also showed interest in Judaism . 
 In San Francisco for the 1966 Film Festival , Mansfield visited the Church of Satan with Sam Brody ( her lawyer and boyfriend ) to meet Anton LaVey , the church 's founder . LaVey awarded Mansfield a medallion and the title " High Priestess of San Francisco 's Church of Satan " . The media enthusiastically covered the meeting and the events surrounding it , identifying her as a Satanist and romantically involved with LaVey . That meeting remained a much @-@ publicized and oft @-@ quoted event of her life , as well as the history of the Church of Satan . Additionally , Karla LaVey confirmed in a 1992 interview with Joan Rivers that Mansfield was indeed a practicing Satanist and that she had a romantic relationship with Anton LaVey . Her funeral ceremony was conducted by a Methodist minister . 
 = = Death = = 
 Mansfield was in Biloxi , Mississippi , for an engagement at the Gus Stevens Supper Club . After two appearances the evening of June 28 , 1967 , Mansfield , her lover Sam Brody , their driver Ronnie Harrison ( age 20 ) , and three of Mansfield 's children – Miklós , Zoltán and Mariska – departed Biloxi after midnight in Stevens ' 1966 Buick Electra 225 . Their destination was New Orleans , where Mansfield was scheduled to appear on WDSU 's " Midday Show " at noon the next day . At approximately 2 : 29 a.m. , on U.S. Highway 90 east of the Rigolets Bridge ( at approximately 30 ° 05 ′ 26 ″ N 89 ° 46 ′ 54 ″ W ) the Buick crashed at high speed into the rear of a tractor @-@ trailer that had slowed behind a truck spraying mosquito <unk> and which was shrouded in the insecticide fog . The three adults in the front seat were killed instantly . The children , who were asleep in the rear seat , survived with minor injuries . 
 Reports that Mansfield was decapitated are untrue , although she suffered severe head trauma . The urban legend was spawned by the appearance in police photographs of a crashed car with its top virtually sheared off , and what resembled a blonde @-@ haired head tangled in the car 's smashed windshield . However , this was a wig Mansfield was wearing and possibly parts of her actual hair and scalp . The death certificate stated that the immediate cause of Mansfield 's death was a " crushed skull with avulsion of cranium and brain " . After her death , the NHTSA recommended requiring an underride guard ( a strong bar made of steel tubing ) on all tractor @-@ trailers , although the trucking industry was slow to adopt this change . This bar is known as a " Mansfield bar " , or an " ICC bar " . 
 Mansfield 's funeral took place on July 3 in Pen Argyl , Pennsylvania . It was conducted by Rev. Charles Montgomery , a pastor of the Zion Methodist Church ( which was later destroyed by fire in February 1970 and rebuilt as Grace United Methodist Church ) . The funeral was private , a service held at the chapel of the <unk> Funeral Home . Of her three husbands , only Mickey Hargitay was present at the funeral . She is interred in Fairview Cemetery , southeast of Pen Argyl , beside her father Herbert William Palmer . Her heart @-@ shaped gravestone reads , " We Live to Love You More Each Day " . A cenotaph was placed in the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Hollywood by the Jayne Mansfield Fan Club , but incorrectly cites her year of birth as 1938 ( Mansfield tended to provide incorrect information about her age ) . In 1968 , two wrongful @-@ death lawsuits were filed on behalf of Jayne Marie Mansfield and Matt Cimber , the former for $ 4 @.@ 8 million ( $ 40 @.@ 4 million in 2016 dollars ) and the latter for $ 2 @.@ 7 million ( $ 22 @.@ 7 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In February 1955 , Mansfield was the Playmate of the Month in Playboy , in which she subsequently appeared more than 30 times . 
 She received a Theatre World Award ( Promising Personality ) for Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? in 1956 . 
 She received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 8 , 1960 for her contribution to motion pictures . 
 She received a Golden Globe Award ( New Star of the year , Actress ) for Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? in 1957 . 
 On Mother 's Day of 1960 , the Mildred Strauss Child Care Chapter of Mount Sinai Hospital , New York City declared her family as the " Family of the Year " . 
 Italian film , radio and television journalists awarded her the Silver Mask award in 1962 . 
 Mansfield received the Oscar of the Two World award in Italy . 
 In 1963 , Mansfield was voted one of the top @-@ 10 box @-@ office attractions by an organization of American theater owners for her performance in Promises ! Promises ! ( a film banned in parts of the U.S. ) . 
 In 1968 , Hollywood <unk> Guild declared a " Jayne Mansfield Award " would be given to the actress who received the maximum exposure and publicity in a year . Raquel Welch was the first winner of the award in 1969 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mansfield left behind five children , three ex @-@ husbands , a crumbling estate including the Pink Palace , a large number of followers , and a lasting impact on popular culture . 
 = = = Estate = = = 
 After Mansfield 's death , Hargitay , <unk> , Vera Peers ( Jayne Mansfield 's mother ) , William <unk> ( Jayne Marie 's legal guardian ) , and Charles Goldring ( Jayne Mansfield 's business manager ) , as well as Bernard B. Cohen and Jerome Webber ( both administrators of the estate ) filed suits to gain control of her estate without success . Mansfield 's estate was appraised initially at $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 3 @,@ 506 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , including the " Pink Palace " estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 584 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , a sports car sold for $ 7 @,@ 000 ( $ 41 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , her jewelry , and Sam Brody 's $ 185 @,@ 000 estate left to her by his last testimony ( $ 1 @,@ 081 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) . In 1971 , Beverly Brody sued the Mansfield estate for $ 325 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 899 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) worth of presents and jewelry given to Jayne by Sam Brody , which was settled out of court . However , four of her elder children ( Jayne Marie , Mickey , Zoltan and Mariska ) went to court in 1977 to find that approximately $ 500 @,@ 000 in debt that Mansfield had incurred ( $ 2 @,@ 922 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , including $ 11 @,@ 000 for lingerie ( $ 64 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , $ 11 @,@ 600 for plumbing of the heart @-@ shaped swimming pool ( $ 68 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , and litigation had left the estate insolvent . 
 The Pink Palace was sold . Its subsequent owners included Ringo Starr , Cass Elliot and Engelbert Humperdinck . In 2002 Humperdinck sold it to developers , and the house was demolished in November of that year . What remained of her estate subsequently came under the management of CMG Worldwide , an intellectual property @-@ management company . 
 = = = Following = = = 
 Several entertainers have been dubbed as the " new Jayne Mansfield " , including Italian actress Marisa <unk> and professional wrestler Missy Hyatt . Actress , model and Playmate of the Year ( 1993 ) Anna Nicole Smith was dubbed " a Jayne Mansfield for the ' 90s " because of her physical resemblance to Mansfield , similar desperation , and a mix of glamour and tragedy . Drag queen and actor Divine was selected by film maker John Waters to parody Mansfield in Mondo Trasho . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s , there were many Jayne Mansfield <unk> in United States and outside . The Jayne Mansfield Fan Club , headed by Sabin Gray , was very active in the 1980s , and was cited by Los Angeles Daily News as one of the major fan clubs for a Hollywood star . In 1992 , a second fan club named Simply <unk> was founded by Mike <unk> , which lent its picture collection to Jocelyn Faris to illustrate Jayne Mansfield : A bio bibliography . Frank Ferruccio , head of Mansfield 's Online Fan Club , lent his collection of Mansfield memorabilia to Slate Belt Heritage Center in Bangor , Pennsylvania , wrote two books on her , and organized a large fan gathering on her 75th birthday at Fairview Cemetery . <unk> and the Online Fan Club has been visiting her grave in Pen Argyl with a fans to commemorate her birth and death anniversaries since the mid @-@ 1990s on her birthdays . 
 = = Biographies = = 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 " Official Biography " . CMG Worldwide . Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Biography " . <unk> Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Biography " . St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture . Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Biography " . Salon.com. Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Biography " . The New York Times . Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Timeline " . Philadelphia Weekly . Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 " Timeline " . <unk> Retrieved July 2 , 2012 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Michael Feeney Callan ( 1986 ) Pink Goddess : The Jayne Mansfield Story . W H Allen . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> 
 Mann , May ( 1974 ) . Jayne Mansfield : A Biography . Abelard @-@ Schuman . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 200 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Strait , Raymond ( 1974 ) . Tragic Secret Life of Jayne Mansfield . Robert Hale . ISBN <unk> . 
 Saxton , Martha ( 1975 ) . Jayne Mansfield and the American Fifties . New York : Houghton Mifflin . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Jackson , Jean @-@ Pierre ( 1984 ) . Jayne Mansfield ( in French ) . <unk> . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , Guus ( June 1988 ) . <unk> : The Life and Death of Jayne Mansfield . Secaucus , NJ : Citadel . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8065 @-@ 1049 @-@ 1 . 
 Strait , Raymond ( 1992 ) . Here They Are Jayne Mansfield . New York : <unk> Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 56171 @-@ 146 @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Alan ( 1993 ) . Jayne Mansfield Vs . Mamie Van Doren : Battle of the Blondes ( A Pictorial History ) . Shake Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 Faris , Jocelyn ( November 1994 ) . Jayne Mansfield : A Bio @-@ Bibliography . Westport , CT : Greenwood Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Frank ( 2007 ) . Diamonds to Dust : The Life and Death of Jayne Mansfield . Outskirts Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Jordan , Jessica Hope ( 2009 ) . The Sex Goddess In American Film 1930 – 1965 : Jean Harlow , Mae West , Lana Turner and Jayne Mansfield . Cambria Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 663 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Frank ( 2010 ) . Did Success Spoil Jayne Mansfield ? Her Life in Pictures & Text . Outskirts Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , <unk> <unk> by Richard Koper 
 Fischer , Walter ( 2016 ) . California Infernal . ISBN 978 @-@ 91 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 3 . <unk> Books , California Infernal , Anton LaVey & Jayne Mansfield , as portrayed by Walter Fischer 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Jayne Mansfield : Blonde Ambition . A + E Networks . 2004 . 
 = Precedent fact errors in Singapore law = 
 Errors as to precedent facts , sometimes called jurisdictional facts , in Singapore administrative law are errors committed by public authorities concerning facts that must objectively exist or not exist before the authorities have the power to take actions or make decisions under legislation . If an error concerning a precedent fact is made , the statutory power has not been exercised lawfully and may be quashed by the High Court if judicial review is applied for by an aggrieved person . The willingness of the Court to review such errors of fact is an exception to the general rule that the Court only reviews errors of law . 
 In the United Kingdom , the House of Lords has held that the nature of the decision @-@ making process that the public authority is required to engage in determines whether a matter falls into the precedent fact category . If the process is complex and much discretion is accorded to the authority by the empowering statute , the court is unlikely to find that a precedent fact is involved . On the other hand , where an administrative decision interferes with an individual 's liberty , the matter will be considered within the precedent fact category unless Parliament has explicitly excluded judicial review . If Parliament intends to do so , it must make its meaning crystal clear . 
 As Singapore inherited English administrative law upon independence , the Singapore courts have adopted the UK position , holding that it is necessary to construe the relevant statutory provisions to ascertain whether Parliament has expressed an intention in plain and unequivocal words to take a discretion conferred on the executive out of the precedent fact category . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 = = = Distinction between errors of law and errors of fact = = = 
 Errors of law committed by public authorities when they act or make decisions are within the jurisdiction of the High Court of Singapore to correct by way of judicial review . On the other hand , the Court is generally unwilling to intervene where the alleged error is one that concerns the facts of the matter . The rationale for this rule is that it is the Court 's role in judicial review of administrative action to scrutinize the legality and not the merits of the decisions of public authorities . 
 It has been said that an error of fact involves a situation where there are new or different primary facts yet to be put before the court , such as a new witness , or what people saw or heard , whereas an error of law involves a misinterpretation of a statutory word or phrase with regard to such facts . However , this distinction is debatable , and the view has been taken that courts sometimes simply regard a matter as one involving an error of law if they wish to adopt an interventionist approach , and seek to allow judicial review to take place . 
 In Re Fong Thin Choo ( 1991 ) , the High Court accepted that if an authority 's discretion depends on the existence of certain facts , the court must ensure that those facts exist and have been taken into account by the authority , that the authority has exercised its discretion on a proper self @-@ direction as to those facts , and that the authority has not taken into account matters it ought not to have considered . Law professor Thio Li @-@ ann has expressed the view that this decision indicates a court is primarily concerned with whether an error that has been committed is serious – if so , the court will exercise judicial review , regardless of whether the error is jurisdictional or non @-@ jurisdictional in nature . " Since the law / fact boundary becomes indistinct , this <unk> the conceptual moorings of judicial review as confined to scrutinising legal error . An intrusive review of factual findings threatens to turn review into appeal . " 
 = = = Mixed fact and law = = = 
 Occasionally , the distinction between errors of law and errors of fact can be fuzzy . Where a public authority is alleged to have committed an error of mixed fact and law , the High Court is more likely to leave the matter to the authority and decline to intervene . This can be the case where a statutory term evaluated by the authority is so general and ambiguous that reasonable people may peg different meanings to it . In such a situation , it is generally left to the authority to evaluate the meaning of the term . This is illustrated by <unk> v. Hillingdon London Borough Council ( 1986 ) , which involved a public authority that bore a statutory responsibility for providing homeless people with accommodation . The applicants were a married couple who lived with their two children in a single room in a guest house . Their application for permanent accommodation was rejected because the authority claimed they were not " homeless " within the meaning of the statute . The House of Lords upheld this decision , determining that the issue of whether the applicants had accommodation was a question of fact to be determined by the public authority : 
 Where the existence or non @-@ existence of a fact is left to the judgment and discretion of a public body and that fact involves a broad spectrum ranging from the obvious to the debatable to the just conceivable , it is the duty of the court to leave the decision of that fact to the public body to whom Parliament has entrusted the decision @-@ making power save in a case where it is obvious that the public body , consciously or unconsciously , are acting perversely . 
 = = Errors as to precedent facts = = 
 An error as to a jurisdictional , or precedent , fact is an exception to the general rule that the High Court does not judicially review errors of fact . Under the threefold classification of the broad grounds of judicial review set out in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service ( " the GCHQ case " , 1983 ) – illegality , irrationality and procedural impropriety – an error as to a precedent fact may be regarded as a form of illegality . 
 An error as to a precedent fact , if committed , deprives the public authority of power to take the action or make the decision in question . The existence or non @-@ existence of the fact , as the case may be , is a condition precedent or prerequisite to the exercise of the power . An example of an error of this nature can be found in the United Kingdom case White & Collins v. Minister of Health ( 1939 ) . In that case , under the relevant statute , the authority could only issue a compulsory purchase order affecting the applicants ' land if it was not part of , among other things , a park . A minister confirmed the purchase order but the Court of Appeal of England and Wales held that it should be quashed , finding that the minister could not exercise power to acquire the land since it was part of a park . Whether the land was or was not a park was a precedent fact , and the minister had committed an error concerning this fact . 
 = = = United Kingdom position = = = 
 Courts in the United Kingdom have stated that the precedent fact doctrine is not applicable to all statutes . In Zamir v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ( 1980 ) , it was held that the statute in question did not fall into the " precedent fact " category , having regard to the discretionary nature of the power conferred on the public authority . The appellant Zamir , a Pakistani immigrant , was granted an entry certificate to enter the country on the basis that he was unmarried and intending to join his father , who had lived in England since 1962 , as a dependent . Less than three months after the issuance of the certificate , the appellant married , and about a month later , in March 1976 , he arrived in the UK at London Heathrow Airport and was granted leave by an immigration officer to enter the country for an indefinite period . The officer did not ask if the appellant was married and neither did the appellant volunteer this information . A son was subsequently born in Pakistan to the appellant and his wife , and in 1978 the appellant 's wife and son applied for permission to join the appellant in the UK . At that point , the validity of the appellant 's entry into the country in 1976 was queried . Following investigations , he was detained with a view to removal from the UK on the ground that he had obtained an entry certificate by deception . His detention was found to be lawful by the Divisional Court and the Court of Appeal . Before the House of Lords , one of the legal issues that arose was the basis for judicial review of the conclusion of the Home Secretary or the immigration officer that the appellant 's leave to enter the UK was vitiated by deception . 
 Counsel for the appellant argued that this was not a case of a decision reviewable on ordinary administrative law grounds , but rather a case where the exercise of the power depended " upon the precedent establishment of an objective fact " . However , the House of Lords disagreed with the argument . It held that the nature and process of the decision conferred upon immigration officers was inconsistent with the requirements for the establishment of any precedent facts . This was because the immigration officer had to consider a " complex of statutory rules and non @-@ statutory guidelines and other documentary evidence whose genuineness is doubtful , statements which cannot be verified , misunderstandings as to what was said , practices and attitudes in a foreign state which have to be estimated . There is room for appreciation , even for discretion . " On the other hand , the court was not well placed to determine which of several conflicting statements made by the appellant were true , or to decide if other factors were material to the immigration officer 's decision . The court had to determine the case based on affidavit evidence and , though cross @-@ examination on such evidence was permissible , this did not usually occur in practice . As the case did not fall into the precedent fact category , the court was unable to judicially review the decision . 
 The House of Lords modified its holding in Zamir in the later decision Khera v. Secretary of State for Home Department ; Khawaja v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ( " Khawaja " , 1983 ) . The facts of this case , which involved two separate appellants , were similar to those of Zamir . Khera had entered the country by allegedly deceiving a medical officer into thinking he was not married . An answer to the contrary would have precluded him from being given leave to enter the UK . The other appellant , Khawaja , having unsuccessfully applied for a UK visa in Brussels , entered the UK by flying into Manchester , saying he would stay for one week and then return to Brussels to continue his studies . Facts later surfaced proving that , at the time of his entry , contrary to his declaration that he was single , he had been married to a woman who had entered the UK on the same flight but had been attended to by a different immigration officer and was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK as a returning resident . Both of them were detained as " illegal immigrants " . 
 The House of Lords held that Zamir ought not to be followed as its reasoning would affect the judicial protection of those whose liberty the executive is seeking to interfere with . Lord Fraser of <unk> , who was one of the judges hearing the Zamir appeal , said that the case had wrongly stated the court 's function as only seeing if there were reasonable grounds for decisions made by the immigration authorities . In his view : 
 An immigration officer is only entitled to order the detention and removal of a person who has entered the country by virtue of an ex facie valid permission if the person is an illegal entrant . That is a " precedent fact " which has to be established . It is not enough that the immigration officer reasonably believes him to be an illegal entrant if the evidence does not justify his belief . Accordingly , the duty of the court must go beyond inquiring only whether he had reasonable grounds for his belief . 
 According to Lord Scarman , Zamir limited the scope of judicial review to the Wednesbury principle – in other words , the court will not intervene to quash a decision of a statutory authority unless it can be shown that the authority acted unreasonably . He held that although the principle is correct in appropriate circumstances , " it cannot extend to interference with liberty unless Parliament has <unk> enacted that it should " . He emphasized that if Parliament wished to exclude judicial review of the exercise of a power that restrained liberty , " it must make its meaning crystal clear " . On the facts , since Parliament had not clearly expressed any intention to exclude judicial review of discretion exercised by the immigration authorities , the statutory provision in question fell within the precedent fact category . Ultimately , Khera 's appeal was allowed as the authorities had not successfully demonstrated that he had obtained permission to enter the UK by deception . Conversely , since Khawaja had clearly deceived an immigration officer concerning his marital status , his appeal was dismissed . 
 = = = Singapore position = = = 
 The courts in Singapore have followed the legal position on errors as to precedent facts in the United Kingdom . This is illustrated by the High Court case Lau Seng Poh v. Controller of Immigration ( 1985 ) , which held that if a precedent fact is a prerequisite to the exercise of executive power , the court is responsible for deciding if the precedent fact has been satisfied . This principle was affirmed by the Court of Appeal case Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , which applied the principle set out in Khawaja and its departure from the approach taken in Zamir . 
 In the case , the Court examined whether it could review the executive 's discretionary power under sections 8 and 10 of the Internal Security Act ( " ISA " ) . Section 8 empowers the Minister for Home Affairs to make an order directing that a person be detained without trial if the President is satisfied that detention is necessary to prevent the person from endangering , among other things , the security or public order of Singapore , while section 10 allows the Minister to suspend detention orders and to revoke suspensions as he or she thinks fit . 
 Delivering the judgment of the Court , Chief Justice Wee Chong Jin held that the scope of judicial review depends on whether a precedent fact is involved . If the discretion falls outside the precedent fact category , the scope of judicial review is limited to the normal judicial review principles of illegality , irrationality ( that is , Wednesbury unreasonableness ) and procedural impropriety . On the other hand , if one or more precedent facts are involved , the scope of judicial review " extends to deciding whether the evidence justifies the decision " . However : 
 [ W ] hether a particular discretionary power is subject to any jurisdictional or precedent fact depends on the construction of the legislation which creates that power . A discretionary power may be required to be exercised based on objective facts but Parliament may decide to entrust all relevant decisions of these facts as well as the application to the facts of the relevant rules and any necessary exercise of discretion to the decision maker , in which case the scope of review would be limited to Wednesbury principles . So long as Parliament makes its intention clear , the scope of review would be so limited , even where the liberty of the subject is concerned . 
 The Court decided that both sections 8 and 10 of the ISA fell outside the precedent fact category . Section 8 ( 1 ) expressly stated , " in plain and unequivocal terms , that it is for the President to be satisfied that detention is necessary with a view to preventing the detainee from acting in any manner prejudicial to national security and the decision had been entrusted to the President " . Similarly , the decision whether there was evidence to revoke an order under section 10 in the public interest had expressly been entrusted to the Minister by the Act . In addition , since the Court was of the view that the judicial process was not suitable for determining issues involving national security , it did not think that Parliament could have intended for a court of law to determine whether , on the evidence , a detainee was likely to pose a security risk . Consequently , the Court could not go beyond determining if the detention decisions violated administrative law rules relating to illegality , irrationality or procedural impropriety . 
 In contrast , in Fong Thin Choo , the High Court expressed the view that under regulation 12 ( 6 ) of the Customs Regulations 1979 , the fact that goods had not been exported from Singapore was a precedent fact to the customs officer 's power to require the owner of the goods to pay customs duty . Therefore , the Court had to decide whether the customs officer 's decision was justified by the evidence , and not merely whether there was some evidence on which he could reasonably have reached his decision . However , the Court did not pursue the point since the applicant had not argued the case on this basis . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Zamir v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [ 1980 ] UKHL 14 , [ 1980 ] A.C. 930 , H.L. ( UK ) . 
 Khera v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ; Khawaja v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [ 1983 ] UKHL 8 , [ 1984 ] A.C. 74 , H.L. ( UK ) ( " Khawaja " ) . 
 Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1988 ] SGCA 16 , [ 1988 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 525 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 24 December 2011 . 
 Re Fong Thin Choo [ 1991 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 774 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Leyland , Peter ; Anthony , Gordon ( 2009 ) , " Illegality II " , Textbook on Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , Oxford ; New York , N.Y. : Oxford University Press , pp. 258 – 283 at 273 – 274 , para . 11 @.@ 6 @.@ 1 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 921776 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Grubb , Andrew ( November 1983 ) , " Illegal Immigrants — ' Nothing to Declare ' — The House of Lords <unk> " , Cambridge Law Journal 42 ( 2 ) : 183 – 186 at 185 – 186 , doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> , JSTOR <unk> . 
 Harrison , N.J. ( 1985 ) , " The Search for the Precedent Facts " , Trent Law Journal 9 : 61 – 69 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 23 January 2012 . 
 Williams , Rebecca A. ( 2007 ) , " When is an Error Not an Error ? Reform of Jurisdictional Review of Error of Law and Fact " ( PDF ) , Public Law : 793 – 808 , SSRN <unk> , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 14 July 2010 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Cane , Peter ( 2004 ) , " Substantive Review [ ch . 9 ] " , An Introduction to Administrative Law ( 4th ed . ) , Oxford : Clarendon Press , pp. 228 – 261 at 245 – 249 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 926898 @-@ 6 . 
 Craig , Paul [ P. ] ( 2008 ) , " Review of Fact and Evidence [ ch . 15 ] " , Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , pp. 475 – 499 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84703 @-@ 283 @-@ 6 . 
 Wade , William ; Forsyth , Christopher ( 2009 ) , " Jurisdiction over Fact and Law [ ch . 8 ] " , Administrative Law ( 10th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 211 – 236 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 923161 @-@ 4 . 
 Lord Woolf ; Jowell , Jeffrey [ L. ] ; Le Sueur , Andrew [ P. ] ; Donnelly , Catherine M [ ary ] ( 2007 ) , " Concepts of Jurisdiction and Lawful Administration [ ch . 4 ] " , De Smith 's Judicial Review ( 6th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , pp. 177 – 222 at 200 – 201 , paras . 4 – 047 – 4 – 048 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84703 @-@ 467 @-@ 0 . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Shōhō = 
 Shōhō ( Japanese : <unk> , " Auspicious Phoenix " or " Happy Phoenix " ) was a light aircraft carrier of the Imperial Japanese Navy . Originally built as the submarine support ship Tsurugizaki in the late 1930s , she was converted before the Pacific War into an aircraft carrier and renamed . Completed in early 1942 , the ship supported the invasion forces in Operation MO , the invasion of Port Moresby , New Guinea , and was sunk by American carrier aircraft on her first combat operation during the Battle of the Coral Sea on 7 May . Shōhō was the first Japanese aircraft carrier to be sunk during World War II . 
 = = Design , construction and conversion = = 
 Shōhō and her sister Zuihō were designed to be easily modified as an oil tanker , submarine tender , or aircraft carrier as needed . Shōhō was laid down by the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 3 December 1934 as the submarine tender Tsurugizaki . She was launched on 1 June 1935 and completed on 15 January 1939 . Not long after the ship was initially completed , she began reconstruction as an aircraft carrier in 1941 . Her superstructure was removed and replaced by a flight deck with a hangar for her aircraft below . Renamed Shōhō , the conversion was finished on 26 January 1942 . 
 After her conversion , Shōhō had a length of 205 @.@ 5 meters ( 674 ft 2 in ) overall . She had a beam of 18 @.@ 2 meters ( 59 ft 8 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 meters ( 21 ft 7 in ) . She displaced 11 @,@ 443 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 262 long tons ) at standard load . As part of her conversion , her original diesel engines , which had given her a top speed of 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) , were replaced by a pair of destroyer @-@ type geared steam turbine sets with a total of 52 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 39 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving one propeller . Steam was provided by four Kampon water @-@ tube boilers and Shōhō now had a maximum speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . The boilers exhausted through a single downturned starboard funnel and she carried 2 @,@ 642 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 600 long tons ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 7 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 400 km ; 9 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Her crew numbered 785 officers and men . 
 Shōhō 's flight deck was 180 meters ( 590 ft 6 in ) long and had a maximum width of 23 meters ( 75 ft 6 in ) . The ship was designed with a single hangar 124 meters ( 406 ft 10 in ) long and 18 meters ( 59 ft ) wide . The hangar was served by two octagonal centerline aircraft elevators . The forward elevator was 13 by 12 metres ( 42 ft 8 in by 39 ft 4 in ) in size and the smaller rear elevator measured 12 by 10 @.@ 8 metres ( 39 ft 4 in by 35 ft 5 in ) . She had arresting gear with six cables , but she was not fitted with an aircraft catapult . Shōhō was a flush @-@ deck design and lacked an island superstructure . She was designed to operate 30 aircraft . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of eight 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in twin mounts on sponsons along the sides of the hull . Shōhō was also initially equipped with four twin 25 mm Type 96 light AA guns , also in sponsons along the sides of the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Shōhō was commissioned on 30 November 1941 and Captain Izawa <unk> became her commanding officer . While still fitting @-@ out , the ship was assigned to the Fourth Carrier Division of the 1st Air Fleet on 22 December . On 4 February 1942 , she ferried aircraft to Truk , where she remained until 11 April before returning to Yokosuka . 
 In late April 1942 , Shōhō was assigned to Operation MO and arrived in Truk on 29 April . The following day , she departed Truk with the cruisers Aoba , Kinugasa , Furutaka , and Kako of Cruiser Division 6 under the command of Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō . They formed the Main Force of the operation . Due to aircraft shortages , her aircraft complement consisted of only four obsolete Mitsubishi <unk> " Claude " and eight modern Mitsubishi A6M2 " Zero " fighters plus six Nakajima B5N2 " Kate " torpedo bombers . Covering the other elements of Operation MO was the Striking Force that consisted of the fleet carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku . 
 = = = Battle of the Coral Sea = = = 
 After covering the landings on Tulagi on 3 May , Shōhō headed north to cover the invasion convoy the next day and was not present when aircraft from the American carrier Yorktown attacked Japanese shipping at Tulagi . This air strike confirmed that at least one American carrier was in the vicinity , but the Japanese had no idea of its location . They launched a number of reconnaissance aircraft the following day to search for the Americans , but without result . One Kawanishi H6K " Mavis " flying boat spotted Yorktown , but was shot down by one of Yorktown 's Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters before she could radio a report . US Army Air Force ( USAAF ) aircraft spotted Shōhō southwest of Bougainville Island on 5 May , but she was too far north to be attacked by the American carriers , which were refueling . That day , Rear Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher received Magic intelligence that placed the three Japanese carriers known to be involved in Operation MO near Bougainville , and predicted 10 May as the date of the invasion . It also predicted airstrikes by the Japanese carriers in support of the invasion several days before 10 May . Based on this information , Fletcher planned to complete refuelling his ships on 6 May and move closer to the eastern tip of New Guinea to be in a position to locate and attack Japanese forces on 7 May . 
 Another H6K spotted the Americans during the morning of 6 May and successfully shadowed them until 14 : 00 . The Japanese , however , were unwilling or unable to launch air strikes in poor weather or without updated spot reports . Both sides believed they knew where the other force was , and expected to fight the next day . The Japanese were the first to spot the Americans when one aircraft found the oiler Neosho escorted by the destroyer Sims at <unk> , south of the Strike Force . These ships were misidentified as a carrier and a cruiser and the carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku launched an airstrike 40 minutes later that sank Sims and damaged Neosho badly enough that she had to be scuttled a few days later . The American carriers were west of the Strike Force , not south , and they were spotted by other Japanese aircraft shortly after the carriers had launched their attack on Neosho and Sims . 
 American reconnaissance aircraft reported two Japanese heavy cruisers northeast of Misima Island in the Louisiade Archipelago off the eastern tip of New Guinea at 07 : 35 and two carriers at 08 : 15 . An hour later , Fletcher ordered an airstrike launched , believing that the two carriers reported were Shōkaku and Zuikaku . Lexington and Yorktown launched a total of 53 Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers and 22 Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo planes escorted by 18 F4F Wildcats . The 0815 report turned out to be miscoded , as the pilot had intended to report two heavy cruisers , but USAAF aircraft had spotted Shōhō , her escorts and the invasion convoy in the meantime . As the latest spot report plotted only 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) away from the 0815 report , the aircraft en route were diverted to this new target . 
 Shōhō and the rest of the Main Force were spotted by aircraft from Lexington at 10 : 40 . At this time , Shōhō 's combat air patrol ( CAP ) consisted of two A5Ms and one A6M Zero . The Dauntlesses began their attack at 11 : 10 as the three Japanese fighters attacked them in their dive . None of the dive bombers hit Shōhō , which was maneuvering to avoid their bombs ; one Dauntless was shot down by the Zero after it had pulled out of its dive and several others were damaged . The carrier launched three more Zeros immediately after this attack to reinforce its CAP . The second wave of Dauntlesses began their attack at 11 : 18 and they hit Shōhō twice with 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bombs . These penetrated the ship 's flight deck and burst inside her hangars , setting the fuelled and armed aircraft there on fire . A minute later , the Devastators began dropping their torpedoes from both sides of the ship . They hit Shōhō five times and the damage from the hits knocked out her steering and power . In addition , the hits flooded both engine and boiler rooms . Yorktown 's aircraft trailed those from Lexington , and the former 's Dauntlesses began their attacks at 11 : 25 , hitting Shōhō with another eleven 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound bombs by Japanese accounts and the carrier came to a complete stop . Yorktown 's Devastators trailed the rest of her aircraft and attacked at 11 : 29 . They claimed ten hits , although Japanese accounts acknowledge only two . As the Devastators were exiting the area , they were attacked by the CAP , but the Wildcats protecting the torpedo bombers shot down two A5Ms and an A6M Zero . Total American losses to all causes were three Dauntlesses . After his attack , Lieutenant Commander Robert E. Dixon , commander of Lexington 's Dive bombers , radioed his famous message to the American carriers : " Scratch one flat top ! " 
 With Shōhō hit by no fewer than 13 bombs and 7 torpedoes , Captain Izawa ordered the ship abandoned at 11 : 31 . She sank four minutes later . Some 300 men successfully abandoned the ship , but they had to wait to be rescued as Gotō ordered his remaining ships to head north at high speed to avoid any further airstrikes . Around 14 : 00 , he ordered the destroyer Sazanami to return to the scene and rescue the survivors . She found only 203 , including Captain Izawa . The rest of her crew of 834 died during the attack or in the water awaiting rescue . Shōhō was the first Japanese aircraft carrier lost during the war . 
 = Norodom Sihanouk = 
 Norodom Sihanouk ( Khmer : នរោត ្ តម សីហនុ ; 31 October 1922 – 15 October 2012 ) was the King of Cambodia from 1941 to 1955 and again from 1993 to 2004 . Affectionately known to the Cambodian people as Samdech Euv ( Khmer : <unk> ្ <unk> , father prince ) , Sihanouk became king in 1941 . After the Second World War , he campaigned for Cambodia 's independence from French rule , which took place in 1953 . In 1955 , Sihanouk abdicated the throne in favour of his father Norodom Suramarit , and went on to form the political organisation Sangkum . Sihanouk led the Sangkum to victory in the 1955 general elections , and became the Prime Minister of Cambodia . After his father 's death in 1960 , Sihanouk introduced a constitutional amendment which made him the Head of State of Cambodia , a position which he held until 1970 . Between 1955 and 1970 , Sihanouk governed Cambodia under one @-@ party rule , and cracked down on political dissent from the Democrat party and Pracheachon . While he was officially neutral in foreign relations , in practice he was friendlier toward communist countries , particularly China , than to the United States and its anti @-@ Communist allies . 
 In March 1970 Sihanouk was overthrown by Lon Nol and Sisowath Sirik Matak , paving the way for the formation of Khmer Republic . He fled to China and North Korea and went on to form a government @-@ in @-@ exile and resistance movement known as the Royal Government of the National Union of Kampuchea ( GRUNK ) and National United Front of Kampuchea , respectively . As GRUNK 's leader , Sihanouk lent support to the Khmer Rouge , which fought against the Khmer Republic in the Cambodian Civil War . After the Khmer Rouge won , a new government , Democratic Kampuchea , was formed . Subsequently , Sihanouk returned to Cambodia and became its figurehead head of state . In 1976 Sihanouk resigned from his position , leading to his house arrest . He was incarcerated until 1979 , when Vietnamese forces overthrew the Khmer Rouge . Sihanouk went into exile again , and in 1981 he formed FUNCINPEC , a resistance party . The following year , Sihanouk was appointed as the President of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea ( CGDK ) , consisting of the three anti @-@ Vietnamese resistance factions – FUNCINPEC , Khmer Rouge and the Khmer People 's National Liberation Front ( KPNLF ) . 
 In the late 1980s , informal talks were carried out to end hostilities between the People 's Republic of Kampuchea ( PRK ) and resistance factions under the CGDK . In 1990 the Supreme National Council of Cambodia ( SNC ) was formed as a transitional body to oversee Cambodia 's sovereign matters , with Sihanouk as its president . In 1991 peace accords were signed , and the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia ( UNTAC ) was established the following year . The UNTAC organised general elections in 1993 , and a coalition government , jointly led by his son Norodom Ranariddh and Hun Sen , was subsequently formed . In June 1993 Sihanouk was reinstated as Cambodia 's Head of State , and in September 1993 was appointed king . In 2004 Sihanouk abdicated again in favour of another son , Norodom Sihamoni , who succeeded him as king . He was known as the King father until his death in 2012 . Sihanouk pursued an artistic career during his lifetime , and wrote several musical compositions . He produced 50 films between 1966 and 2006 , at times directing and acting in them . 
 = = Early life and first reign = = 
 Norodom Sihanouk was the only child born of the union between Norodom Suramarit and Sisowath Kossamak . His parents , who heeded the royal court astrologer 's advice that he risked dying at a young age if he was raised under parental care , placed him under the care of Kossamak 's grandmother , Pat . When Pat died , Kossamak brought Sihanouk to live with his paternal grandfather , Norodom <unk> . <unk> delegated parenting responsibilities to his daughter , Norodom <unk> <unk> . Sihanouk received his primary education at the Francois Baudoin school and Nuon <unk> school in Phnom Penh . During this time , he received financial support from his maternal grandfather , Sisowath Monivong , to head an amateur performance troupe and soccer team . In 1936 Sihanouk was sent to Saigon , where he pursued his secondary education at Lycée Chasseloup Laubat , a boarding school . 
 When the reigning king Monivong died on 23 April 1941 , the Governor @-@ General of French Indochina , Jean <unk> chose Sihanouk to succeed him . Sihanouk 's appointment as king was formalised the following day by the Cambodian crown council , and his coronation ceremony took place on 3 May 1941 . During the Japanese occupation of Cambodia , he dedicated most of his time to sports , filming , and the occasional tour to the countryside . In March 1945 the Japanese military , which had occupied Cambodia since August 1941 , dissolved the nominal French colonial administration . Under pressure from the Japanese , Sihanouk proclaimed Cambodia 's independence and assumed the position of prime minister while serving as king at the same time . 
 As prime minister , Sihanouk revoked a decree issued by the last resident superior of Cambodia , Georges Gautier , to <unk> the Khmer alphabet . Following the Surrender of Japan in August 1945 , nationalist forces loyal to Son Ngoc Thanh launched a coup , which led to Thanh becoming prime minister . When the French returned to Cambodia in October 1945 , Thanh was dismissed and replaced by Sihanouk 's uncle Sisowath Monireth . Monireth negotiated for greater autonomy in managing Cambodia 's internal affairs . A Modus Vivendi was signed in January 1946 whereby Cambodia was granted full autonomy within the French Union . A joint French @-@ Cambodian commission was set up after that to draft Cambodia 's constitution , and in April 1946 , Sihanouk introduced clauses which provided for an elected parliament on the basis of universal male suffrage as well as press freedom . The first constitution was signed into effect by Sihanouk in May 1947 . Around this time , Sihanouk made two trips to Saumur , France where he attended military training at the Armoured Cavalry Branch Training School in 1946 , and again in 1948 . He was made a reserve captain for the French army . 
 In early 1949 Sihanouk traveled to Paris with his parents to negotiate with the French government for more autonomy over Cambodia . The Modus Vivendi was replaced by a new Franco @-@ Khmer treaty , which recognised Cambodia as " independent " within the French Union . In practice , the treaty granted only limited self @-@ rule to Cambodia . While Cambodia was given free rein in managing its foreign ministry and to a lesser extent , its defence , most of the other ministries remained under French control . Meanwhile , dissenting legislators from the national assembly started attacking the government led by prime minister Penn Nouth over its failure to resolve deepening financial and corruption problems plaguing the country . The dissenting legislators , led by Yem <unk> , who had defected from the Democrat party in November 1948 , deposed Penn Nouth . Yem <unk> replaced him , but his appointment did not sit well with the Democrats , who in turn pressured Sihanouk to dissolve the national assembly and hold elections . 
 Sihanouk , who by now had tired of the political squabbling , dissolved the assembly in September 1949 , but opted to rule by decree for the next two years before general elections were held , which the Democrats won . In October 1951 Thanh returned to Cambodia and was received by 100 @,@ 000 supporters , a spectacle which Sihanouk saw as an affront to his regal authority . Thanh disappeared six months later , presumably to join the Khmer <unk> . Sihanouk ordered the Democrat @-@ led government to arrest Thanh but was ignored . Subsequently , civil demonstrations rallying against the monarchy and the French broke out in the countryside , alarming Sihanouk , who began to suspect that the Democrats had played a complicit role in them . In June 1952 Sihanouk dismissed the Democrat nominee Huy <unk> and made himself prime minister . A few days later , Sihanouk privately confided in exasperation to the US chargé d 'affaires , Thomas Gardiner Corcoran , that parliamentary democracy was unsuitable for Cambodia . 
 In January 1952 Sihanouk re @-@ appointed Penn Nouth as prime minister before leaving for France . Once there , Sihanouk wrote to French president Vincent Auriol requesting that he grant Cambodia full independence , citing widespread anti @-@ French sentiment among the Cambodian populace . Auriol deferred Sihanouk 's request to the French commissioner for overseas territories , Jean Letourneau , who promptly rejected it . Subsequently , Sihanouk traveled to Canada and the United States , where he gave radio interviews to present his case . He took advantage of the prevailing anti @-@ communist sentiment in those countries , arguing that Cambodia faced a Communist threat similar to that of the Viet Minh in Vietnam , and that the solution was to grant full independence to Cambodia . Sihanouk returned to Cambodia in June 1953 , taking up residence in Siem Reap . He organised public rallies calling for Cambodians to fight for independence , and formed a citizenry militia which attracted about 130 @,@ 000 recruits . 
 In August 1953 France agreed to cede control over judicial and interior affairs to Cambodia , and subsequently the defense ministry as well in October 1953 . At the end of the month , Sihanouk went to Phnom Penh , where he declared Cambodia 's independence from France on 9 November 1953 . In May 1954 Sihanouk sent two of his cabinet ministers , <unk> Tioulong and <unk> Phan , to represent Cambodia at the Geneva Conference . The agreements signed for Cambodia affirmed the country 's independence and allowed it to seek military aid from any country without restrictions . At the same time , Sihanouk 's relations with the governing Democrat party remained strained , as they were wary of his growing influence in politics . To counter Democrat opposition , Sihanouk held a national referendum to gauge public approval for his efforts to seek national independence . While the results showed 99 @.@ 8 percent approval , Australian historian Milton Osborne noted that open balloting was carried out and voters were cowed into casting an approval vote under police surveillance . 
 = = Sangkum era = = 
 = = = Abdication and entry into politics = = = 
 On 2 March 1955 Sihanouk abdicated the throne , and was in turn succeeded by his father , Suramarit . In his abdication speech , Sihanouk explained that he was abdicating in order to extricate himself from the " intrigues " of palace life and allow easier access to common folk as an " ordinary citizen " . According to Osborne , Sihanouk 's abdication earned him the freedom to pursue politics while continuing to enjoy the deference that he had received from his subjects when he was king . In April 1955 Sihanouk formed his own political party , the Sangkum , and expressed interest in competing in the general elections slated to be held in September 1955 . While the Sangkum was , in effect , a political party , Sihanouk argued that the Sangkum should be seen as a political " organisation " , and explained that he could accommodate people with differing political orientations on the sole condition that they pledged fealty to the monarchy . 
 Soon after , the Sangkum absorbed several political parties with different political orientations such as the Khmer Renovation Party , People 's Party , and Liberal Party . At the same time , Sihanouk was running out of patience with the Democrat party and the left @-@ wing Pracheachon , as both had refused to merge into his party and had campaigned against him . He appointed as director of national security Dap Chhuon , who ordered the national police to jail their leaders and break up their election rallies . When elections were held , the Sangkum received 83 percent of all valid votes . They took up all seats in the National Assembly , replacing the Democrats , which had until then been the majority party . The following month , Sihanouk was appointed prime minister . 
 = = = Premiership ( 1955 – 60 ) = = = 
 Once in office , Sihanouk introduced several constitutional changes , including extending suffrage to women , adopting Khmer as the sole official language of the country and making Cambodia a constitutional monarchy by vesting policy @-@ making powers in the prime minister rather than the king . He viewed socialism as an ideal concept for establishing social equality and fostering national cohesion within newly independent Cambodia . In March 1956 he embarked on a national programme of " Buddhist socialism " , promoting socialist principles on the one hand while maintaining the kingdom 's Buddhist culture on the other . Between 1955 and 1960 , Sihanouk resigned and retook the post of prime minister several times , citing fatigue caused by overwork . The National Assembly nominated experienced politicians such as Sim Var and San Yun to become prime minister whenever Sihanouk took leave , but they similarly relinquished their posts each time , several months into their term , as cabinet ministers repeatedly disagreed over public policy matters . 
 In May 1955 Sihanouk accepted military aid from the US . The following January , when he was in the Philippines on a state visit , Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) operatives attempted to sway him into placing Cambodia under Southeast Asia Treaty Organization ( SEATO ) protection . Subsequently , Sihanouk began to suspect that the US was attempting to undermine his government and that it was lending covert support to the Democrat party , now without parliamentary representation , for that purpose . On the other hand , Sihanouk developed a good impression of China , whose premier Zhou Enlai , gave him a warm reception on his first visit there in February 1956 . They signed a friendship treaty , in which China promised US $ 40 million in economic aid to Cambodia . When Sihanouk returned from China , Sarit <unk> and Ngo Dinh Diem , leaders of Thailand and South Vietnam , respectively , both with pro @-@ American sympathies , started to accuse him as pro @-@ Communist . South Vietnam briefly imposed a trade embargo on Cambodia , preventing trading ships from travelling up the Mekong river to reach Phnom Penh , via Saigon . While Sihanouk professed that he was pursuing a policy of neutrality , Sarit and Diem remained distrustful of him , more so after he established formal diplomatic relations with China in 1958 . 
 The Democrat party continued to criticize the Sangkum and Sihanouk in their newspaper , much to Sihanouk 's consternation . In August 1957 Sihanouk finally lost patience , calling out Democrat leaders for a debate . Five of them attended . At the debate , held at the royal palace , Sihanouk spoke in a belligerent tone , challenging the Democrat leaders to present evidence of malfeasance in his government and inviting them to join the Sangkum . The Democrat leaders gave hesitant responses , and according to American historian David P. Chandler , it gave the audience the impression that they were disloyal to the monarchy . The debate led to the effective demise of the Democrat party , as its leaders were subsequently beaten up by government soldiers , with Sihanouk 's tacit approval . With the Democrats vanquished , Sihanouk focused on preparing for general elections , slated to be held in March 1958 . He drafted left @-@ wing politicians , including Hou Yuon , Hu Nim , and Chau Seng , to stand as Sangkum candidates , with a view to winning left @-@ wing support from the Pracheachon . The Pracheachon on their part fielded five candidates for the elections . However , four of them withdrew , as they were prevented by the national police from holding any election rallies . When voting took place , the Sangkum won all seats in the national assembly . 
 In December 1958 Ngo Dinh Nhu – Diem 's younger brother and chief adviser – broached the idea of orchestrating a coup to overthrow Sihanouk . Nhu contacted Dap Chhuon , Sihanouk 's Interior Minister , who was known for his pro @-@ American sympathies , to prepare for the coup against his boss . Chhuon received covert financial and military assistance from Thailand , South Vietnam , and the CIA . In January 1959 Sihanouk learned of the coup plans through intermediaries who were in contact with Chhuon . The following month , Sihanouk sent the army to capture Chhuon , who was summarily executed as soon as he was captured , effectively ending the coup attempt . Sihanouk then accused South Vietnam and the United States of orchestrating the coup attempt . Six months later , on 31 August 1959 , a small packaged lacquer gift , which was fitted with a parcel bomb , was delivered to the royal palace . Norodom <unk> , the chief of protocol , was killed instantly when he opened the package . Sihanouk 's parents , Suramarit and Kossamak , who were sitting in another room not far from <unk> , narrowly escaping unscathed . An investigation traced the origin of the parcel bomb to an American military base in Saigon . While Sihanouk publicly accused Ngo Dinh Nhu of masterminding the bomb attack , he secretly suspected that the US was also involved . The incident deepened his distrust of the US . 
 = = = Initial years as Head of State ( 1960 – 65 ) = = = 
 After several months of poor health , Suramarit , Sihanouk 's father , died on 3 April 1960 which Sihanouk blamed upon the shock that his father had received from the parcel bomb attack . The following day , the royal throne council met to choose Monireth as regent . Over the next two months , Sihanouk introduced constitutional amendments to create the new post of Head of State of Cambodia , which provided ceremonial powers equivalent to that of the king . A referendum held on 5 June 1960 approved Sihanouk 's proposals , and Sihanouk was formally appointed Head of State on 14 June 1960 . As the head of state , Sihanouk took over various ceremonial responsibilities of the king , such as holding public audiences and leading the Royal Ploughing Ceremony . At the same time , he continued to play an active role in politics as Sangkum 's leader . 
 In 1961 Pracheachon 's spokesperson , Non <unk> , criticized Sihanouk for failing to tackle inflation , unemployment , and corruption in the country . Non <unk> 's criticisms gave Sihanouk the impetus to arrest Pracheachon leaders , and according to him , he had discovered plans by their party to monitor local political developments on behalf of foreign powers . In May 1962 Tou <unk> , Pracheachon 's secretary @-@ general , disappeared , and its ideological ally , the Communist Party of Kampuchea , suspected that <unk> had been secretly captured and killed by police . However , Sihanouk allowed Sangkum 's left @-@ wing politicians to run again in the 1962 general elections , which they all won . He even appointed two left @-@ wing politicians , Hou Yuon and Khieu Samphan , as secretaries for planning and commerce , respectively , after the election . 
 In November 1962 Sihanouk called on the US to stop supporting the Khmer <unk> , which he believed they had been secretly doing through the CIA . He threatened to reject all economic aid from the US if they failed to respond to his demands , a threat he later carried out on 19 November 1963 . At the same time , Sihanouk also nationalised the country 's entrepot trade , banking sector , and distillery industries . To oversee policy and regulatory matters on the country 's entrepot trade , he set up the National Export @-@ Import Corporation and Statutory Board , better known as " <unk> " . When Sarit , Diem , and US president John F. Kennedy died in November and December 1963 , Sihanouk rejoiced over their deaths , as he accused them of attempting to destabilise Cambodia . He organised concerts and granted civil servants extra leave time to celebrate the occasion . When the US government protested Sihanouk 's celebrations , he responded by recalling the Cambodian ambassador to the US , Nong <unk> . 
 In early 1964 Sihanouk signed a secret agreement with North Vietnam and the Viet Cong , allowing Chinese military aid meant for them to be delivered through Sihanoukville 's port . In turn , the Cambodian army would be paid for delivering food supplies to the Viet Cong , and at the same time skim off 10 percent of all military hardware supplies . In addition , he also allowed the Viet Cong to build a trail through eastern Cambodia , so that their troops could receive war supplies from North Vietnam . The trail later became known as the Sihanouk Trail . When the US learned of Viet Cong presence in eastern Cambodia , they started a bombing campaign over it , spurring Sihanouk to sever diplomatic ties with the US in May 1965 . As a result of this secret agreement , Communist countries , including China , the Soviet Union , and Czechoslovakia , provided military aid to Cambodia . 
 = = = Continued leadership as Head of State ( 1966 – 70 ) = = = 
 In September 1966 general elections were held , and Sangkum legislators with conservative and right @-@ wing sympathies dominated the national assembly . In turn , they nominated Lon Nol , a military general who shared their political sympathies , as prime minister . However , their choice did not sit well with Sihanouk . To counterbalance conservative and right @-@ wing influence , in October 1966 Sihanouk set up a shadow government made up of Sangkum legislators with left @-@ wing sympathies . At the end of the month , Lon Nol offered to resign from his position , but was ironically stopped from doing so by Sihanouk . In April 1967 the Samlaut Uprising occurred , with local peasants fighting against government troops in Samlaut , Battambang . As soon as government troops managed to quell the fighting , Sihanouk began to suspect that three left @-@ wing Sangkum legislators – Khieu Samphan , Hou Yuon and Hu Nim – had incited the rebellion . When Sihanouk threatened to charge Khieu Samphan and Hou Yuon before a military tribunal , they fled into the jungle to join the Khmer Rouge , leaving Hu Nim behind . 
 Lon Nol resigned as prime minister in early May 1967 , and Sihanouk appointed Son Sann in his place . At the same time , Sihanouk replaced conservative @-@ leaning ministers appointed by Lon Nol with technocrats and left @-@ leaning politicians . In the later part of the month , after receiving news that the Chinese embassy in Cambodia had published and distributed Communist propaganda to the Cambodian populace praising the Cultural Revolution , Sihanouk accused China of supporting local Chinese Cambodians in engaging in " contraband " and " subversive " activities . In August 1967 Sihanouk sent to China his Foreign Minister , Norodom <unk> , who unsuccessfully urged Zhou to stop the Chinese embassy from disseminating Communist propaganda . In response , Sihanouk closed the Cambodia – Chinese Friendship Association in September 1967 . When the Chinese government protested , Sihanouk threatened to close the Chinese embassy in Cambodia . Zhou stepped in to placate Sihanouk , and compromised by instructing its embassy to send its publications to Cambodia 's information ministry for vetting prior to distribution . 
 As relations with China worsened , Sihanouk pursued rapprochement with the US . He learned that Kennedy 's widow , Jacqueline Kennedy , had expressed a desire to see Angkor Wat . Seeing this as an opportunity to restore relations with the US , Sihanouk invited her to visit Cambodia and personally hosted her visit in October 1967 . Jacqueline Kennedy 's visit paved the way for Sihanouk to meet with Chester Bowles , the US ambassador to India . To Bowles , Sihanouk expressed his willingness to restore bilateral relations with the US , hinted at the presence of Viet Cong troops in Cambodia , and suggested he would turn a blind eye should US forces enter Cambodia to attack the Viet Cong . Bowles relayed Sihanouk 's message to the US government , and in March 1969 , they launched Operation Menu , a bombing campaign covering parts of eastern Cambodia . The bombing forced the Viet Cong to flee from their jungle sanctuaries and seek refuge in populated towns and villages . As a result , Sihanouk became concerned that Cambodia might get drawn into fighting in the Vietnam War . In June 1969 he extended diplomatic recognition to the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam ( PRGSV ) , hoping that he could get the Viet Cong troops under its charge to leave Cambodia should they win the war . At the same time , he also openly admitted the presence of Viet Cong troops in Cambodia for the first time , prompting the US to restore formal diplomatic relations with Cambodia three months later . 
 As the Cambodian economy was stagnating due to systemic corruption , Sihanouk opened two casinos – in Phnom Penh and Sihanoukville – in January 1969 . While the casinos satisfied his aim of generating state revenues of up to 700 million <unk> in that year , it also caused a sharp increase in the number of bankruptcies and suicides . In August 1969 Lon Nol was reappointed as Prime Minister , with Sisowath Sirik Matak as his deputy . Two months later , Lon Nol left Cambodia to seek medical treatment , leaving Sirik Matak to run the government . Between October and December 1969 , Sirik Matak instituted several policy changes that ran contrary to Sihanouk 's wishes , such as allowing private banks to re @-@ open in the country and devaluing the <unk> . He also encouraged ambassadors to write to Lon Nol directly , instead of going through Sihanouk , angering the latter . In early January 1970 Sihanouk left Cambodia for medical treatment in France . Shortly after he left , Sirik Matak took the opportunity to close down the casinos . 
 = = Deposition , GRUNK and Khmer Rouge years = = 
 On 11 March 1970 a large protest took place outside the North Vietnamese and PRGSV embassies , as protesters demanded Viet Cong troops withdraw from Cambodia . The protests turned chaotic , as protesters looted both embassies and set them on fire , alarming Sihanouk . Sihanouk , who was in Paris at the time , contemplated between returning to quell the situation , and visiting Moscow , Beijing , and Hanoi . He opted for the latter , thinking that he could persuade its leaders to recall Viet Cong troops to their jungle sanctuaries , where they had originally established themselves between 1964 and 1969 . Five days later , Oum <unk> , the half @-@ brother of Sihanouk 's wife Monique , was summoned to the National Assembly to answer corruption charges . On that night after the hearing , <unk> ordered troops under his command to arrest Lon Nol and Sirik Matak , but ended up getting arrested by Lon Nol 's troops instead . On 18 March 1970 the National Assembly voted to depose Sihanouk , allowing Lon Nol to assume emergency powers . 
 On that day , Sihanouk was in Moscow meeting Soviet foreign minister Alexei Kosygin , who broke the news to him . From Moscow , Sihanouk flew to Beijing , where he was received by Zhou . Zhou arranged for the North Vietnamese Prime Minister , Pham Van Dong to fly to Beijing from Hanoi and meet with Sihanouk . Both Zhou and Dong encouraged Sihanouk to rebel against Lon Nol and promised him military and financial support . On 23 March 1970 , Sihanouk announced the formation of his resistance movement , the National United Front of Kampuchea ( FUNK ) . He encouraged the Cambodian populace to join him and fight against Lon Nol 's government . Khmer Rouge soldiers broadcast Sihanouk 's message in the Cambodian countryside , which roused demonstrations rooting for his cause that were brutally suppressed by Lon Nol 's troops . Sometime later , on 5 May 1970 , Sihanouk announced the formation of a government @-@ in @-@ exile known as the Royal Government of the National Union of Kampuchea ( GRUNK ) , leading Communist countries including China , North Vietnam , and North Korea to break relations with the Lon Nol regime . In Phnom Penh , a military trial convened on 2 July 1970 , whereby Sihanouk was charged with treason and corruption in his capacity as Head of State . After a three @-@ day trial , the judges ruled Sihanouk guilty of both charges and sentenced to him death in absentia on 5 July 1970 . 
 Between 1970 and 1975 , Sihanouk took up residence in state guesthouses at Beijing and Pyongyang , courtesy of the Chinese and North Korean governments , respectively . In February 1973 Sihanouk traveled to Hanoi , where he started on a long journey with Khieu Samphan and other Khmer Rouge leaders . The convoy proceeded along the Ho Chi Minh trail and reached the Cambodian border at Stung Treng Province the following month . From there , they traveled across the provinces of Stung Treng , Preah <unk> , and Siem Reap . Throughout this entire leg of the journey , Sihanouk faced constant bombardment from American planes participating in Operation Freedom Deal . At Siem Reap , Sihanouk visited the temples of Angkor Wat , <unk> <unk> , and Bayon . In August 1973 Sirik Matak wrote an open letter calling on Sihanouk to bring the Cambodian Civil War to an end and suggesting the possibility of his return to the country . When the letter reached Sihanouk , he angrily rejected Sirik Matak 's advances . 
 After the Khmer Republic fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975 , a new regime under its charge , Democratic Kampuchea , was formed . Sihanouk was appointed as its Head of State , a ceremonial position . In September 1975 , Sihanouk briefly returned to Cambodia to inter the ashes of his mother , before going abroad again to lobby for diplomatic recognition of Democratic Kampuchea . He returned on 31 December 1975 and presided over a meeting to endorse the constitution of Democratic Kampuchea . In February 1976 Khieu Samphan took him on a tour across the Cambodian countryside . Sihanouk was shocked to see the use of forced labour and population displacement carried out by the Khmer Rouge government , known as the Angkar . Following the tour , Sihanouk decided to resign as the Head of State . The Angkar initially rejected his resignation request , though they subsequently accepted it in mid @-@ April 1976 , retroactively backdating it to 2 April 1976 . 
 From this point onwards Sihanouk was kept under house arrest at the royal palace . In September 1978 he was removed to another apartment in Phnom Penh 's suburbs , where he lived until the end of the year . Throughout his confinement , Sihanouk made several unsuccessful requests to the Angkar to travel overseas . On New Year 's Day of 1979 , Sihanouk was taken from Phnom Penh to <unk> , where they stayed for three days until 5 January , when they were taken back to Phnom Penh . Sihanouk was taken to meet Pol Pot , who briefed him on the Angkar 's plans to repulse Vietnamese troops , which had since invaded parts of eastern Cambodia in December 1978 . On 6 January 1979 , Sihanouk flew to Beijing from Phnom Penh , where he was greeted by Zhou Enlai 's successor , Deng Xiaoping . Three days later , Sihanouk flew from Beijing to New York to attend the UN Security Council , where he simultaneously condemned the Khmer Rouge for orchestrating the Cambodian genocide as well as the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia . Sihanouk subsequently sought asylum in China after making two unsuccessful asylum applications with the US and France . 
 = = FUNCINPEC and CGDK years = = 
 After the Khmer Rouge regime was overthrown , a new Cambodian government supported by Vietnam , the People 's Republic of Kampuchea ( PRK ) , was established . The Chinese leader , Deng Xiaoping , was unhappy with Vietnam 's influence over the PRK government . Deng proposed to Sihanouk that he co @-@ operate with the Khmer Rouge to overthrow the PRK government , but rejected it , as he opposed the genocidal policies pursued by the Khmer Rouge while they were in power . In March 1981 Sihanouk established a resistance movement , FUNCINPEC which was complemented by a small resistance army known as Armée Nationale Sihanoukiste ( ANS ) . He appointed In Tam , who had briefly served as Prime Minister in the Khmer Republic , as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of ANS . The ANS needed military aid from China , and Deng seized the opportunity to sway Sihanouk into collaborating with the Khmer Rouge . Sihanouk reluctantly agreed , and started talks in March 1981 with the Khmer Rouge and the Son Sann @-@ led Khmer People 's National Liberation Front ( KPNLF ) on a unified anti @-@ PRK resistance movement . 
 After several rounds of negotiations mediated by Deng and Singapore 's prime minister Lee Kuan Yew , FUNCINPEC , KPNLF , and the Khmer Rouge agreed to form the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea ( CGDK ) in June 1982 . The CGDK was headed by Sihanouk , and functioned as a government @-@ in @-@ exile . As CGDK chairperson , Sihanouk unsuccessfully negotiated , over the next five years , with the Chinese government to broker a political settlement to end the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia . During this period , Sihanouk appointed two of his sons , Norodom Chakrapong and Norodom Ranariddh , to lead the ANS . Chakrapong was appointed as the deputy chief @-@ of @-@ staff for the ANS in March 1985 , while Ranariddh was minted to the twin positions of commander @-@ in @-@ chief and the chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the ANS in January 1986 , replacing Tam . In December 1987 the Prime Minister of the PRK government , Hun Sen , first met with Sihanouk to discuss ending the protracted Cambodian – Vietnamese War . The following July , the then @-@ foreign minister of Indonesia , Ali Alatas , brokered the first round of meetings between the four warring Cambodian factions consisting of FUNCINPEC , Khmer Rouge , KPNLF , and the PRK government over the future of Cambodia . Two more rounds of meetings were held in February and May 1989 ; since all were held near Jakarta , they became known as the Jakarta Informal Meetings ( <unk> ) . 
 In July 1989 Ali Alatas joined French foreign minister Roland Dumas in opening the Paris Peace Conference , where discussions took place regarding plans for Vietnamese troop withdrawal and power @-@ sharing arrangements in a hypothetical future Cambodian government . The following month , Sihanouk resigned as president of FUNCINPEC but remained in the party as an ordinary member . In September 1990 the United Nations ( UN ) sponsored the establishment of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia ( SNC ) , an administrative body responsible for overseeing the sovereign affairs of Cambodia for an interim period until UN @-@ sponsored elections were held . The creation of the SNC was subsequently ratified with United Nations Security Council Resolution 668 . In July 1991 Sihanouk left FUNCINPEC altogether and was elected as the chairperson of the SNC . 
 = = UNTAC administration era = = 
 On 23 October 1991 Sihanouk led the FUNCINPEC , Khmer Rouge , KPNLF , and PRK into signing the Paris Peace Accords . The accords recognised the SNC as a " legitimate representative of Cambodian sovereignty " and created the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia ( UNTAC ) to serve as a transitional government between 1992 and 1993 . In turn , UNTAC was given the mandate to station peacekeeping troops in Cambodia to supervise the disarmament of troops from the four warring Cambodian factions and to carry out national elections by 1993 . Sihanouk subsequently returned to Phnom Penh on 14 November 1991 . Together with Hun Sen , Sihanouk rode in an open top limousine from Pochentong Airport all the way to the royal palace , greeting city residents who lined the streets to welcome his return . The UNTAC administration was set up in February 1992 , but stumbled in its peacekeeping operations as the Khmer Rouge refused to cooperate in disarmament . In response , Sihanouk urged UNTAC to abandon the Khmer Rouge from the peacekeeping process on two occasions , in July and September 1992 . During this period , Sihanouk mostly resided in Siem Reap and occasionally traveled by helicopter to supervise election preparations in KPNLF , FUNCINPEC , and Khmer Rouge resistance bases . 
 Sihanouk left in November 1992 to seek medical treatment in Beijing , where he stayed for the next six months until his return to Cambodia in May 1993 , on the eve of elections . While in Beijing , Sihanouk proposed a Presidential system government for Cambodia to then @-@ UN secretary @-@ general Boutros Boutros @-@ Ghali , but soon dropped the idea after facing opposition from the Khmer Rouge . When general elections were held , FUNCINPEC , now headed by Sihanouk 's son Norodom Ranariddh , won , while the Cambodian People 's Party ( CPP ) headed by Hun Sen came in second . The CPP was unhappy with the election results , and on 3 June 1993 Hun Sen and Chea Sim called on Sihanouk to lead the government . Sihanouk complied , and announced the formation of a Provisional National Government ( PRG ) headed by him , with Hun Sen and Ranariddh as his deputies . Ranariddh was surprised at Sihanouk 's announcement , as he had not been informed of his father 's plans , and joined Australia , China , the United Kingdom , and the United States in opposing the plan . The following day , Sihanouk rescinded his announcement through a national radio broadcast . 
 On 14 June 1993 Sihanouk was reinstated as the head of state in a constituent assembly session presided over by Ranariddh , who took the opportunity to declare the 1970 coup d 'état which overthrew Sihanouk as " illegal " . As Head of State , Sihanouk renamed the Cambodian military to its pre @-@ 1970 namesake , the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces . He also issued orders to officially rename the country from the State of Cambodia to simply " Cambodia " , reinstating <unk> Reach as the National Anthem of Cambodia with some minor modifications to its lyrics , and the Cambodian flag to its pre @-@ 1970 design . At the same time , Sihanouk appointed Ranariddh and Hun Sen co @-@ prime ministers , with equal powers . This arrangement , which was provisional , was ratified by the Constituent Assembly on 2 July 1993 . On 30 August 1993 Ranariddh and Hun Sen met with Sihanouk and presented two draft constitutions , one of them stipulating a constitutional monarchy headed by a king , and another a republic led by a head of state . Sihanouk opted for the draft stipulating Cambodia a constitutional monarchy , which was ratified by the constituent assembly on 21 September 1993 . 
 = = Second reign = = 
 The new constitution came into force on 24 September 1993 , and Sihanouk was reinstated as the King of Cambodia . A permanent coalition government was formed between FUNCINPEC , CPP and a third political party , the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party ( BLDP ) . In turn , Sihanouk made Ranariddh and Hun Sen First and Second Prime Ministers , respectively . Shortly after that , Sihanouk left for Beijing , where he spent several months for cancer treatment . In April 1994 Sihanouk returned , and the following month called the government to hold new elections so that the Khmer Rouge could be co @-@ opted into the government . Both Ranariddh and Hun Sen rejected his suggestion , but Sihanouk pressed on , and further proposed a national unity government consisting of FUNCINPEC , CPP , and the Khmer Rouge headed by him . Again , both prime ministers rejected Sihanouk 's proposal , arguing that Khmer Rouge 's past intransigent attitude made the proposal unrealistic . Sihanouk backed down , and expressed frustration that Hun Sen and Ranariddh had been ignoring him . As both Norodom Sirivudh and Julio Jeldres , his younger half @-@ brother and official biographer , respectively , saw it , this was a clear sign that the monarchy 's ability to exert control over national affairs had diminished , at least vis @-@ a @-@ vis the prime ministers . 
 In July 1994 one of his sons , Norodom Chakrapong , led a failed coup attempt to topple the government . Following the coup attempt , Chakrapong took refuge in a hotel in Phnom Penh , but government troops soon discovered his hideout and surrounded the hotel . Chakrapong called Sihanouk , who negotiated with government representatives to allow him to go into exile in Malaysia . The following November , Sirivudh was accused of plotting to assassinate Hun Sen and imprisoned . Sihanouk intervened to have Sirivudh detained at the interior ministry 's headquarters , convinced that there was a secret plan to kill the latter if he were to remain in prison . After Sirivudh was relocated to the safer location , Sihanouk appealed to Hun Sen that Sirivudh be allowed to go into exile in France together with his family . Subsequently , Hun Sen accepted his offer . 
 Relations between the two co @-@ prime ministers , Ranariddh and Hun Sen , deteriorated from March 1996 , when the former accused the CPP of repeatedly delaying the allocation process of low @-@ level government posts to <unk> . Ranariddh threatened to pull out of the coalition government and hold national elections in the same year if his demands were not met , stoking unease among Hun Sen and other CPP officials . The following month , Sihanouk presided over a meeting between several royal family members and senior FUNCINPEC officials in Paris . Sihanouk attempted to reduce tensions between FUNCINPEC and the CPP by assuring that FUNCINPEC would not leave the coalition government and that there were no reactionary elements planning to bring down Hun Sen or the CPP . In March 1997 Sihanouk expressed his willingness to abdicate the throne , claiming that rising anti @-@ royalist sentiment among the populace was threatening the monarchy 's existence . In response , Hun Sen tersely warned Sihanouk that he would introduce constitutional amendments to prohibit members of the royal family from participating in politics if he followed through on his suggestion . As Widyono saw it , Sihanouk remained popular with the Cambodian electorate , and Hun Sen feared that , should he abdicate and enter politics , he would win in any future elections , thereby undercutting CPP 's political clout . 
 In July 1997 , violent clashes erupted in Phnom Penh between infantry forces separately allied to the CPP and FUNCINPEC , which effectively led to Ranariddh 's ousting after FUNCINPEC forces were defeated . Sihanouk voiced displeasure with Hun Sen for orchestrating the clashes , but refrained from calling Ranariddh 's ouster a " coup d 'etat " , a term which FUNCINPEC members used . When the National Assembly elected Ung Huot as the First Prime Minister to replace Ranariddh on 6 August 1997 , Sihanouk charged that Ranariddh 's ouster was illegal and renewed his offer to abdicate the throne , a plan which did not materialize . In September 1998 Sihanouk meditated political talks in Siem Reap after the FUNCINPEC and the Sam Rainsy Party ( SRP ) staged protests against the CPP @-@ led government for irregularities over the 1998 general elections . The talks broke down at the end of the month after Hun Sen narrowly escaped an assassination attempt , which he accused Sam Rainsy of masterminding . Two months later , in November 1998 , Sihanouk brokered a second round of political talks between the CPP and FUNCINPEC whereby an agreement was reached for another coalition government between the CPP and FUNCINPEC . 
 Sihanouk maintained a monthly bulletin in which he wrote commentaries on political issues and posted old photos of Cambodia in the 1950s and 1960s . In 1997 a character known by the name of " Ruom Rith " first appeared in his monthly bulletin , expressing critical comments on Hun Sen and the government . Hun Sen became offended by Ruom Rith 's criticisms , and on at least two occasions in 1998 and 2003 persuaded Sihanouk to stop publishing his comments . According to Ranariddh , Ruom Rith was an alter ego of Sihanouk , a claim which the latter vehemently denied . In July 2002 Sihanouk expressed concern over the absence of detailed constitutional provisions over the organization and functioning of the Cambodian throne council . When Hun Sen rejected Sihanouk 's concern , the latter followed up in September 2002 by threatening to abdicate , so as to force the throne council to convene and elect a new monarch . 
 In July 2003 general elections were held again , and the CPP won . However , they failed to secure two @-@ thirds of all parliamentary seats , as required by the constitution to form a new government . The two runner @-@ up parties of the election , FUNCINPEC and SRP , blocked the CPP from doing so . Instead , in August 2003 they filed complaints with the Constitutional Council over alleged electoral irregularities . After their complaints were rejected , FUNCINPEC and SRP threatened to boycott the swearing @-@ in ceremony of parliamentarians . Sihanouk coaxed both parties to change their decision , stating that he would abstain from presiding over the ceremony as well if they did not comply with his wishes . Both parties eventually backed off from their threats , and the swearing @-@ in ceremony was held in October 2003 , with Sihanouk in attendance . The CPP , FUNCINPEC , and SRP held additional talks into 2004 to break the political stalemate , but to no avail . At the same time , Sihanouk proposed a unity government jointly led by politicians from all three political parties , which Hun Sen and Ranariddh both rebuffed . 
 = = Abdication and final years = = 
 On 6 July 2004 in an open letter , Sihanouk announced his plans to abdicate . At the same time , he criticised Hun Sen and Ranariddh for ignoring his suggestions on how to resolve the political stalemate of the past year . Meanwhile , Hun Sen and Ranariddh had agreed to introduce a constitutional amendment that provided for an open voting system , requiring parliamentarians to select cabinet ministers and the president of the National Assembly by a show of hands . Sihanouk disapproved of the open voting system , calling upon Senate President Chea Sim not to sign the amendment . When Chea Sim heeded Sihanouk 's advice , he was ferried out of the country shortly before the National Assembly convened to vote on the amendment on 15 July . On 17 July 2004 , the CPP and FUNCINPEC agreed to form a coalition government , leaving SRP out as an opposition party . On 6 October 2004 , Sihanouk wrote a letter calling for the throne council to convene and select a successor . The National Assembly and Senate both held emergency meetings to pass laws allowing for the abdication of the monarch . On 14 October 2004 the throne council unanimously voted to select Norodom Sihamoni as Sihanouk 's successor . Sihamoni was crowned as the King of Cambodia on 29 October 2004 . 
 In March 2005 Sihanouk accused Thailand , Laos , and Vietnam of encroaching into Cambodian territory , through unilateral border demarcation exercises without Cambodian participation . Two months later , Sihanouk formed the Supreme National Council on Border Affairs ( SNCBA ) , which he headed , to address these concerns . While the SRP and Chea Sim expressed support for Sihanouk for the formation of the SNCBA , Hun Sen decided to form a separate body , National Authority on Border Affairs ( <unk> ) , to deal with border concerns , with SNCBA to serve only as an advisory body . After Hun Sen signed a border treaty with Vietnam in October 2005 , Sihanouk dissolved the SNCBA . In August 2007 the Cambodian Action Committee for Justice and Equity , a US @-@ based human rights NGO , called for Sihanouk 's State immunity to be lifted , so as to allow him to testify in the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia ( ECCC ) . Sihanouk responded to the call by inviting the ECCC public affairs officer , Peter Foster , for a discussion session on his personal experience under the Khmer Rouge regime . Both Hun Sen and FUNCINPEC criticized the suggestion , with the latter accusing the NGO of being disrespectful . The ECCC subsequently rejected Sihanouk 's invitation . 
 The following year , bilateral relations between Thailand and Cambodia became strained due to overlapping claims on the land area surrounding Preah <unk> Temple . Sihanouk issued a communique in July 2008 emphasizing the Khmer architecture of the temple as well as ICJ 's 1962 ruling of the temple in favour of Cambodia . In August 2009 Sihanouk stated that he would stop posting messages on his personal website as he was getting old , making it difficult for him to keep up with his personal duties . Between 2009 and 2011 , Sihanouk spent most of his time in Beijing for medical care . He made a final public appearance in Phnom Penh on his 89th birthday and 20th anniversary of the Paris Peace Accords on 30 October 2011 . Thereafter , Sihanouk expressed his intent to stay in Cambodia indefinitely , but returned to Beijing in January 2012 for further medical treatment at the advice of his Chinese doctors . 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 In January 2012 Sihanouk issued a letter to express his wish to be cremated after his death , and for his ashes to be interred in a golden urn . A few months later , in September 2012 , Sihanouk said that he would not return to Cambodia from Beijing for his 90th birthday , citing fatigue . On 15 October 2012 Sihanouk died of a heart attack at 1 : 20 am , Phnom Penh time . When the news broke , Sihamoni , Hun Sen , and other government officials flew to Beijing to pay their last respects . The Cambodian government announced an official mourning period of seven days between 17 October and 24 October 2012 , and state flags were ordered to fly at one @-@ third height . Two days later , Sihanouk 's body was brought back from Beijing on an Air China flight , and about 1 @.@ 2 million people lined the streets from the airport to the royal palace to witness the return of Sihanouk 's cortege . 
 In late November 2012 , Hun Sen said that Sihanouk 's funeral and cremation were to be carried out in February 2013 . Sihanouk 's body lay in state at the royal palace for the next three months until the funeral was held on 1 February 2013 . A 6 @,@ 000 @-@ metre ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) street procession was held , and Sihanouk 's body was subsequently kept at the royal crematorium until 4 February 2013 when his body was cremated . The following day , the royal family scattered some of Sihanouk 's ashes into the Tonle Sap river , while the rest were kept in the palace 's throne hall for about a year . In October 2013 a stupa featuring a bronze statue of Sihanouk was inaugurated next to the Independence Monument . In July 2014 Sihanouk 's ashes were interred at the silver pagoda next to those of one of his daughters , Kantha Bopha . 
 = = Artistic works = = 
 = = = Film @-@ making = = = 
 Sihanouk produced about 50 films throughout his lifetime . He developed an interest in the cinema at a young age , which he attributed to frequent trips to the cinema with his parents . Shortly after becoming king in 1941 , Sihanouk made a few amateur films , and sent Cambodian students to study film @-@ making in France . When the film Lord Jim was released in 1965 , Sihanouk was vexed with the negative portrayal it gave of Cambodia . In response , Sihanouk produced his first feature film , Apsara , in 1966 . He went on to produce , direct , and act in eight more films between 1966 and 1969 , roping in members of the royal family and military generals to star in his films . Sihanouk expressed that his films were created with the intent of portraying Cambodia in a positive light ; Milton Osborne also noted that the films were filled with Cold War and nationalist propaganda themes . Sihanouk 's former adviser , Charles Meyer , said that his films created from the 1960s were of amateur standard , while the director of <unk> Institute , Ly <unk> , similarly commented in 2006 that his films lacked artistic qualities . 
 In 1967 one of his films , The Enchanted Forest was nominated at the 5th Moscow International Film Festival . In 1968 Sihanouk launched the Phnom Penh International Film Festival , which was held for a second time in 1969 . In both years , a special award category was designated , the Golden Apsara Prize , of which Sihanouk was its only nominee and winner . After Sihanouk was ousted in 1970 , he ceased producing films for the next seventeen years until 1987 . In 1997 Sihanouk received a special jury prize from the International Film Festival of Moscow , where he revealed that he had received a budget ranging from US $ 20 @,@ 000 to US $ 70 @,@ 000 for each of his film productions from the Cambodian government . Six years later , Sihanouk donated his film archives to the École française d 'Extrême @-@ Orient in France and Monash University in Australia . In 2006 he produced his last film , Miss <unk> , and then declared his retirement from film @-@ making in May 2010 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Sihanouk wrote at least 48 musical compositions between the late 1940s and the early 1970s , combining both traditional Khmer and Western themes into his works . From the 1940s until the 1960s , Sihanouk 's compositions were mostly based on sentimental , romantic and patriotic themes . Sihanouk 's romantic songs reflected his numerous romantic liaisons , particularly his relationship with his wife Monique , and compositions such as " My Darling " and " Monica " were dedicated to her . He also wrote nationalistic songs , meant to showcase the beauty of provincial towns and at the same time foster a sense of patriotism and national unity among Cambodians . Notable compositions , such as " Flower of Battambang " , " Beauty of Kep City " , " Phnom Kulen " , and " Phnom Penh " , are examples of these . A few of his other compositions , including " Luang Prabang " , " Nostalgia of China " , and " Goodbye Bogor " were sentimental songs about neighbouring countries including Laos , Indonesia , and China . 
 After he was ousted as head of state in 1970 , Sihanouk wrote several revolutionary @-@ style songs that praised the leaders of Communist countries , including " <unk> Khmer au Maréchal Kim Il Sung " and " Merci , Piste Ho Chi Minh " . They were intended to show his gratitude toward the Communist leaders , which had supported GRUNK between 1970 and 1975 . From a young age , Sihanouk learned to play several musical instruments including the clarinet , saxophone , piano , and accordion . In the 1960s Sihanouk led a musical band made up of his relatives , who would perform French songs and his own personal compositions for diplomats at the royal palace . In his tours across Cambodian provinces , Sihanouk was accompanied by the royal military orchestra and Cambodian pop singers . Later , while Sihanouk was living in exile during the 1980s , he hosted concerts to entertain diplomats whenever he visited the United Nations Headquarters in New York City . After he was reinstated as king in 1993 , Sihanouk continued to perform in concerts held at the royal palace on an occasional basis . 
 = = Titles and styles = = 
 Sihanouk was known by many formal and informal titles throughout his lifetime , and the Guinness Book of World Records identifies Sihanouk as the royal who had served the greatest variety of state and political offices . When Sihanouk became king in 1941 , he was bestowed with the official title of " Preah Bat Samdech Preah Norodom Sihanouk Varman " , which he used for both reigns between 1941 and 1955 and again from 1993 to 2004 . He reverted to the title of Prince after he abdicated 1955 , and in that year was given by his father and successor the title of " Samdech Preah <unk> " , which translates in English as " The Prince who has been King " . Starting from the early 1960s when he became the Head of State , Sihanouk was affectionately known to most Cambodians as " Samdech Euv " , which translates as the " Prince Father " in English . 
 In 2004 , after his second abdication , Sihanouk became known as the King Father of Cambodia , with the official title of " Preah Karuna Preah Bat <unk> Preah Norodom Sihanouk <unk> " ( Khmer : ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ រះ នរោត ្ តម សីហនុ ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ រ ) . He was also referred to by another honorific , " His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk The Great Heroic King King @-@ Father of Khmer independence , territorial integrity and national unity " ( ព ្ <unk> ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ រះ នរោត ្ តម សីហនុ ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ រ ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> <unk> <unk> ្ <unk> ) . At the same time , he issued a royal decree requesting to be called " Samdech Ta " or " Samdech Ta @-@ <unk> " , which translates as " Grandfather " and " Great @-@ grandfather " , respectively , in English . When Sihanouk died in October 2012 , he was bestowed by his son Sihamoni with the posthumous title of " Preah Karuna Preah Norodom Sihanouk Preah Borom <unk> " ( Khmer : ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ តម សីហនុ ព ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ) , which literally translates as " The King who lies in the Diamond Urn " in English . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sihanouk 's name is derived from two Sanskrit words " <unk> " and " Manu " , which translates as " Lion " and " Jaws " , respectively , in English . He was fluent in Khmer , French , and English , and also learned Greek and Latin in high school . In his high school days , Sihanouk played soccer , basketball , volleyball , and also took up horse riding . He suffered from diabetes and depression in the 1960s , which flared up again in the late 1970s while living in captivity under the Khmer Rouge . In November 1992 Sihanouk suffered a stroke caused by the thickening of the coronary arteries and blood vessels . In 1993 he was diagnosed with B cell lymphoma in the prostate and was treated with chemotherapy and surgery . Sihanouk 's lymphoma went into remission in 1995 , but returned again in 2005 in the gastric region . He suffered a third bout of lymphoma in 2008 , and after prolonged treatment it went into remission the following year . 
 In 1960 Sihanouk built a personal residence at <unk> District where he lived over the next ten years as the Head of State . Following his overthrow in 1970 , Sihanouk took up residence in Beijing , where he lived at the <unk> State <unk> in the first year of his stay . In 1971 Sihanouk moved to a larger residence in the city that once housed the French embassy . The residence was equipped with a temperature @-@ adjustable swimming pool , cinema and seven chefs to cook his meals . In 1974 North Korean leader Kim Il @-@ sung built <unk> , a 40 @-@ room mansion , for Sihanouk . <unk> was built near an artificial lake , and Sihanouk spent time taking boat trips there and also shot a few films within the compound . In August 2008 Sihanouk declared his assets on his website , which according to him consisted of a small house in Siem Reap and 30 @,@ 000 Euros of cash savings stored in a French bank . He also stated that his residences in Beijing and Pyongyang were guesthouses owned by the governments of China and North Korea , respectively , and that they did not belong to him . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 In April 1952 Sihanouk married Paule Monique Izzi , the daughter of Pomme <unk> – a Cambodian lady , and Jean @-@ François Izzi , a French banker of Italian ancestry . Monique became Sihanouk 's lifelong partner , and in the 1990s she changed her name to <unk> . Before his marriage to Monique , Sihanouk had married five other women including Phat Kanhol , Sisowath Pongsanmoni , Sisowath <unk> , Mam <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . <unk> died of childbirth in 1946 , and his marriages to the other women all ended in divorce . Sihanouk sired fourteen children with five different wives except for <unk> <unk> , who bore him no children . During the Khmer Rouge years , five children and fourteen grandchildren disappeared ; Sihanouk believed they were killed by the Khmer Rouge . 
 Sihanouk had the following issue : 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Burchett , William G. ; Norodom , Sihanouk ( 1973 ) . My War with the CIA : Cambodia 's fight for survival . United States of America : Penguin Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Chandler , David P. ( 1991 ) . The Tragedy of Cambodian History : Politics , War and Revolutions since 1945 . United States of America : Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Chin , Kin Wah ( 2005 ) . Southeast Asian Affairs 2005 . National University of Singapore : Institute of Southeast Asian Studies . ISBN 981 @-@ 230 @-@ 306 @-@ 5 . 
 Findlay , Trevor ( 1995 ) . Cambodia – The Legacy and Lessons of UNTAC – SIPRI Research Report No. 9 ( PDF ) . Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . Solna , Sweden : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Retrieved 22 May 2016 . 
 Jeldres , Julio A ( 2003 ) . The Royal House of Cambodia . Phnom Penh Cambodia : Monument Books . OCLC <unk> . 
 Jeldres , Julio A ( 2005 ) . Volume 1 – Shadows Over Angkor : Memoirs of His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia . Phnom Penh Cambodia : Monument Books . ISBN 974 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ X. 
 Marlay , Ross ; Neher , Clark D. ( 1999 ) . Patriots and Tyrants : Ten Asian Leaders . Lanham , Maryland , United States of America : Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Mehta , Harish C. & Julie B. ( 2013 ) . Strongman : The Extraordinary Life of Hun Sen : The Extraordinary Life of Hun Sen. Singapore : Marshall Cavendish International Asia Pte Ltd . ISBN 981 @-@ <unk> @-@ 60 @-@ 1 . 
 Mehta , Harish C. ( 2001 ) . Warrior Prince : Norodom Ranariddh , Son of King Sihanouk of Cambodia . Singapore : Graham Brash . ISBN 981 @-@ 218 @-@ 086 @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Men S. ( 2007 ) . Who 's Who , The Most Influential People in Cambodia . Phnom Penh Cambodia : Media Business Networks . ISBN <unk> @-@ 66 @-@ 00 @-@ 9 . 
 Osborne , Milton E ( 1994 ) . Sihanouk Prince of Light , Prince of Darkness . Honolulu , Hawaii , United States of America : University of Hawaii Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1639 @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 2000 ) . Intervention and Change in Cambodia : Towards Democracy ? . National University of Singapore : Institute of Southeast Asian Studies . ISBN 981 @-@ 230 @-@ 042 @-@ 2 . 
 Summers , Laura ( 2003 ) . The Far East and Australasia 2003 . New York , United States of America : Psychology Press. pp. 227 – 243 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 133 @-@ 2 . 
 Widyono , Benny ( 2008 ) . Dancing in Shadows : Sihanouk , the Khmer Rouge , and the United Nations in Cambodia . Lanham , Maryland , United States of America : Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 0 @-@ 7425 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Reports = = = 
 <unk> , Tilman ( 2010 ) . " <unk> – The Cinema of Cambodia " . Department of Media and Communication – Royal University of Phnom Penh . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 27 August 2015 . Retrieved 8 July 2015 . 
 Cohen , Arthur ( 9 April 1968 ) . " Intelligence Report – Ten Years of Chinese Communist Foreign Policy " . Central Intelligence Agency ( Directorate of Intelligence ) . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 27 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . 
 Jeldres , Julio ( September 2012 ) . " A Personal Reflection on Norodom Sihanouk and Zhou Enlai : An Extraordinary Friendship on the Fringes of the Cold War " . Cross @-@ Currents : East Asian History and Culture Review ( 4 ) : 53 – 64 . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 30 September 2015 . Retrieved 1 September 2015 . 
 <unk> , Erika ; <unk> , Kay ; Wasson , Erik ; Chan <unk> , <unk> ( 31 October 2006 ) . " His Majesty 's Norodom Sihanouk 's 84th Birthday – A special supplement to The Cambodia Daily " . The Cambodia Daily . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 17 August 2015 . Retrieved 9 July 2015 . 
 Scott @-@ Maxwell , Aline ( January 2008 ) . " Royal songs and royal singing : Music in the Norodom Sihanouk archival collection , Monash University Library " . Fontes Artis <unk> 5 ( 1 ) : 180 – 190 . JSTOR <unk> . 
 <unk> , Séverine ( managing director ) ( 1 June 2013 ) . " Memory ! International Film Heritage Festival " . Technicolor Film Foundation . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on 27 August 2015 . Retrieved 8 July 2015 . 
 = Better Off Ted = 
 Better Off Ted is an American satirical situation comedy series , created by Victor Fresco ( known for his other television series Andy Richter Controls the Universe and the short @-@ lived show Life on a Stick ) , who also served as the show 's executive producer . The series ran on the ABC network from March 18 , 2009 to January 26 , 2010 . 
 Better Off Ted focuses on the protagonist , Ted Crisp ( Jay Harrington ) , a single father and the well @-@ respected and beloved head of a research and development department at the fictional , soulless conglomerate of Veridian Dynamics . Ted narrates the series ' events by regularly breaking the fourth wall and directly addressing the audience as the show 's on @-@ camera narrator . Supporting characters include Ted 's supervisor Veronica Palmer ( Portia de Rossi ) , co @-@ worker and love interest Linda <unk> ( Andrea Anders ) , his daughter Rose ( Isabella Acres ) , and laboratory scientists Phillip Myman ( Jonathan Slavin ) and Lem Hewitt ( Malcolm Barrett ) . 
 The series received critical acclaim , with particular praise going towards its witty and satirical humor . Its second season holds a score of 84 out of 100 on Metacritic . However , despite such positive feedback , the show 's debut only drew in 5 @.@ 64 million viewers and continued to have extremely low ratings . Although many expressed skepticism that it would return , it was renewed for a second season . On May 13 , 2010 , ABC officially canceled the series due to low viewing figures . Two episodes were unaired in the United States , but are available to view on Netflix , Amazon Video on Demand , Xbox Live Marketplace , and iTunes . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Victor Fresco , the show 's creator , has cited his being a new parent as inspiration for the show . In an interview with NPR , he discussed how having a kid piqued his interest to develop a show about the disconnection between a person 's public and personal lives , such as how parents teach their kids to be moral , yet work for giant corporations . According to Fresco , Ted Crisp is the single father and his daughter serves as his moral compass . Fresco stated that since he 's worked for a few giant companies , he didn 't base Veridian Dynamics on any specific corporation . The show 's name was based on the idea that a person is better off if they are Ted , that essentially the average person wants to be Ted . Fresco has stated that he wasn 't a fan of the show 's title , but hadn 't spoken of changing it . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In casting his crew , Fresco and his team worked fairly quickly . " You don 't have a lot of time to cast , unfortunately , and it 's the most important thing in the show , I think . " says Fresco , " Good casting can transcend mediocre material but the best material in the world cannot transcend the mediocre casting . It 's all about casting and I think we got really lucky in all five of these regulars . " 
 Fresco approached Jonathan Slavin , with whom he had previously worked on the sitcom Andy Richter Controls the Universe , about playing the role of Phil . Being a fan of Slavin 's work , he thought he 'd be great for the role . Andrea Anders , whom Fresco previously enjoyed on The Class , and Malcolm Barrett were cast for the roles of Linda and Lem respectively . Portia de Rossi met with Fresco about the role of Veronica . Fresco assessed during their meeting that de Rossi was completely convinced that the role was perfect for her and that she was born to play it . He thought de Rossi nailed the role and cast her . When asked what drew her to the role , de Rossi replied , " I 'm really attracted to strong women . " De Rossi further went on to say , " I kind of had to throw myself at [ Fresco ] . I told him I 'd played this character who had similar qualities , very work driven , strong , insensitive , slightly chilly . I had to convince him I could play this character well and could play a character of this nature . " Jay Harrington was the first person Fresco met with when trying to cast someone as Ted Crisp . Although Fresco really liked Harrington , he decided to see more people before casting the role . After five weeks , Harrington was cast . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Better Off Ted revolves around the employees of a stereotypically evil company . The company , Veridian Dynamics , experiments on its employees , twists the truth , and will stop at nothing to achieve its goals . It has been mentioned that Veridian has swayed presidential elections , created killer pandas and robots , weaponized pumpkins , and that there are only three governments left in the world which are more powerful than Veridian . Although not promoted as such , and rarely the focus of storylines , the show 's frequent references to futuristic technologies , killer robots , sentient computers , etc . , places Better Off Ted at least partially in the science fiction genre . 
 Most of the characters are fully aware of Veridian 's nature , and often try to manipulate the system in order to stop bad things from happening to them ( and sometimes to mitigate the evil effects of some of Veridian 's projects ) . They are also all susceptible to the potential rewards the company can offer despite the consequences of their actions , such as the company 's attempt to hire Lem 's mother , or the company 's introduction of scented light bulbs with known flaws . Much of the comedy of the show comes from the characters ' navigation of these morally ambiguous areas . 
 Jay Harrington , who plays Ted Crisp on the show , serves both as a main character and as an on @-@ camera narrator . Throughout the show , he breaks the fourth wall and speaks directly to viewers , offering inside information and observations while the action continues around him . Another plot element involves the use of mock commercials for Veridian Dynamics , thematically related to individual episodes and placed at the end or beginning of actual commercial breaks in all but a couple of episodes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jay Harrington as Theodore Margaret " Ted " Crisp : Ted is the titular character , and also the show 's narrator . He is the senior vice @-@ president of the Research and Development department at Veridian Dynamics , and is well respected and loved by most of the employees – and even members of the otherwise difficult upper management . He balances his desire to maintain his position at the company with his feeling that he must demonstrate a moral center to his daughter . He has had sexual relations with his immediate supervisor , although she remains emotionally distant . He also has interest in Linda , who was a new hire to Veridian Dynamics at the launch of the series . 
 Portia de Rossi as Veronica Palmer : Veronica is Ted 's boss and immediate supervisor at Veridian Dynamics . She maintains a fierce and unapproachable workplace demeanor , and many employees have a deep fear of her . She seems cold and calculating , but it is also clear that she has more than grudging respect for Ted , and often recognizes what moral action is necessary to maintain balance in the workplace . An ongoing subplot touched on sporadically in the first season but more frequently in the second sees Veronica becoming a mentor to Linda and , to a lesser degree , Rose . 
 Andrea Anders as Linda Katherine <unk> : Linda is a tester in one of Veridian 's departments . She finds herself very attracted to Ted , but maintains other relationships and reminds Ted repeatedly that he has rejected the idea of a workplace romance with her . She seems to be a bit of an outsider to the corporate culture . Often she demands that Ted consider the horrible ramifications of the company policies or activities . Her relationship with the scientists is strained by her rejection of the weird things they do in the name of science . Despite this , she finds herself increasingly looking at Veronica as a mentor as the series progresses . 
 Jonathan Slavin as Dr. Philip " Phil " Myman : Phil is one of the laboratory scientists in Veridian 's Research Department . He is usually working or hanging out with Lem , who works with him on almost every project . He generally does whatever he can to be accepted and avoid conflicts . He is married , and makes frequent references to his wife , who seems to hate him . In season 2 's episode 6 , " Beating a Dead Workforce " , we learn she was a member of Mossad . 
 Malcolm Barrett as Dr. Lem Hewitt : Lem is one of the laboratory scientists in Veridian 's Research Department . He is best friends with his lab partner Phil , who works with him on almost every project . Lem is just as conflict @-@ averse as Phil , and seems just as willing to roll over and take whatever abuse the company has to offer . He grew up in the shadow of his mother ( <unk> Alexander ) a renowned scientist . 
 Isabella Acres as Rose Crisp : Rose is Ted 's preteen daughter . She attends the Veridian Dynamics daycare program when her nanny is not available , but prefers to stay at home . According to Ted , " her mom ran off to Africa to go save the world . " She is often the voice of reason on the show . When Ted talks with her about work she points out the terrible choices the company makes , and often helps Ted focus on what needs to be done to set things straight . She attends Eugene Debs Elementary School . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics have praised Better Off Ted 's witty and satirical humour , as well as its cast . According to Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the show 's first season holds a score of 68 out of 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " , based on 21 reviews . Misha Davenport of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote favorably of the show , comparing its characters to those of the highly acclaimed show Arrested Development . Linda Stasi of the New York Post gave the show three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , lauding the cast and simply referring to it as " a very funny comedy " . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly gave the show a B + , stating " ' Better Off Ted ' is certainly the most original sitcom to come along in a while . " Robert Bianco from USA Today referred to the show as " well @-@ cast and reasonably entertaining . " 
 After returning for a second season , the show became even more acclaimed and is considered by some critics to be a vast improvement on its first . On Metacritic , it holds a score of 84 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 11 reviews . Linda Stasi of the New York Post gave the show 's second season a perfect score , calling it " hilarious and even funnier this year than last . " Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle also gave the show 's second season a perfect score , praising the show 's return , saying it " means there 's finally something good ( and funny ) on Tuesday nights . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly gave the show 's return an A- , stating " Thank goodness Better Off Ted has returned intact . I love everything about this show , from star Jay Harrington 's delivery of Ted 's straight @-@ man lines with WASP ramrod posture to the show 's up @-@ front critiques of corporate capitalism . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The show 's pilot episode averaged a total of 5 @.@ 64 million viewers , which made it ABC 's lowest @-@ rated comedy debut since 2005 . The show 's first season continued to experience both a drop and mild fluctuation in ratings , taking in only 2 @.@ 41 million for its finale . After being renewed , the show 's second season premiered to a low 3 @.@ 82 million viewers . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 On TV.com , editorial assistant Anna Hiatt included the show in the website 's list of The Best TV Shows of 2009 . Josh Bell , a writer from About.com , ranked the series second on his list of The Best TV Comedies of 2010 . In 2009 , the show was nominated for an EWwy Award for Best Comedy Series . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 The series was officially canceled by ABC on May 13 , 2010 . In an interview with New York Magazine , Victor Fresco , the show 's creator , was asked why he thought the show didn 't catch on . He responded , " I think not enough people knew about it . It wasn ’ t like we had a lot of people watch it and they didn ’ t come back to it . If anything , I think we were building slowly , but to me the way TV works is you spend a lot of money advertising and promoting , or you have to let a show stay some place for a long period of time and an audience slowly comes to it . And I don ’ t think we got either of that " . Fresco also added , " I still feel there ’ s an audience out there for it , because I know that the people who liked it , liked it a lot . " 
 At the time of its cancellation , two episodes of Better Off Ted had yet to be broadcast by ABC . The network announced on May 27 , 2010 that it would air the two episodes back @-@ to @-@ back on June 17 , 2010 , contingent on the 2010 NBA Finals not requiring a seventh game . Ultimately , however , a seventh game was needed , and thus ABC did not air the final two episodes of the series . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = DVD release = = 
 It was initially announced that a Blu @-@ ray edition would be released of Season 1 , but this has yet to occur . 
 = = Music video reunion = = 
 In mid @-@ 2011 series co @-@ star Malcolm Barrett released his first single , " Revenge of the Nerds " under his alternate performance name , Verbal . The official music video for the song , released in June 2011 , reunited all the major cast members of Better Off Ted , although only Barrett , Slavin and de Rossi reprised their original series characters ( Harrington and Anders appear as a high school jock and a cheerleader , respectively , while series creator Victor Fresco also appears in the video ) . Barrett 's recording is also included on the soundtrack of the final episode of Better Off Ted , " Swag the Dog . " 
 = Columbia Park , Torrance , California = 
 Columbia Park ( formally Columbia Regional Park ) is a 52 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) recreational urban regional park in the City of Torrance , located in southern Los Angeles County , California . Columbia Park provides the community with soccer fields , baseball diamonds , a roller hockey rink , community gardening beds , walking paths , and a jogging — competitive cross country running trail . It is one of thirty parks in the Torrance Parks system . 
 = = Park features = = 
 = = = Recreation and sports = = = 
 Columbia Park includes six soccer fields , two baseball diamonds , and a roller hockey rink . 
 The park also includes a 1 @.@ 32 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 12 km ) walking path which is divided by a fence line to the east of the main soccer field into a 0 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) west section and a 0 @.@ 57 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 92 km ) east section . In addition , the park has a jog path that serves as a flat , 2 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 7 km ) exercise trail and competitive cross country running racecourse . The heavily used soccer fields include lights for night play . 
 = = = Community gardening = = = 
 Columbia Park features a Community Garden providing planting beds and ' community ' for residents . It is one of twelve county @-@ operated Smart Gardening Centers around the region . Columbia Park additionally serves as home to the Home Garden Learning Center , and is a backyard composting demonstration center provided by Los Angeles County . 
 = = History = = 
 Columbia Park was conceived in 1970 and built in 1983 . In 1985 , the park 's designer , Paul Saito , received an achievement award for the design and installation of Columbia Park . 
 = = = Phase one = = = 
 Columbia Park first was conceived by former Torrance City manager Edward J. Ferraro . In 1970 , Ferraro acquired 50 acres ( 20 ha ) of U.S. Navy surplus property for $ 250 @,@ 000 to build Torrance 's Wilson Park . At about the same time , Ferraro put a plan together to acquire approximately 50 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land in North Torrance to build ' Columbia Regional Park ' . By December 1973 , the Torrance City Council took a step closer to acquiring land for both Columbia Park and also for Madrona Marsh Preserve , protecting the last vernal marsh and wetlands remaining in the South Bay area of Los Angeles . In 1975 the state of California agreed to provide funds for the development of Columbia Park . 
 The park , located adjacent to an ExxonMobil oil refinery , includes a 494 @-@ foot ( 151 m ) radio antenna that services the Los Angeles all @-@ news radio station KNX ( AM ) . There are also 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) -high electrical line towers , each of which supports 220 @,@ 000 @-@ volt electrical lines maintained by electricity supply company Southern California Edison . 
 Columbia Park was opened in 1983 as a 52 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) Torrance recreational regional park with large grassy expanses . 
 = = = = Sculptures = = = = 
 In 1983 Standard Brands Paint Company in Torrance donated a sculpture by public works artist Roger Berry to the park . The sculpture , entitled " <unk> " , presently resides in the southwest corner of Columbia Park . 
 = = = = Women 's soccer = = = = 
 In the late 1980s , Columbia Park became the home field to the Manhattan Beach club women 's soccer team ' Ajax America Women . ' On Sundays at Columbia Park , Ajax and the other women 's teams played as many as 16 games on four fields from September to April . U.S. woman 's soccer standouts , defender Joy Biefeld @-@ Fawcett and forward Carin Jennings , were members of ' Ajax America Women ' and regularly practiced and played at the Columbia Park 's soccer fields . These two Columbia park players would go on in 1991 to help ' Ajax ' win the U.S. women 's amateur championship , and then help the U.S. national team win the first FIFA Women 's World Cup in China that same year . U.S. woman 's soccer standouts , defender Joy Biefeld @-@ Fawcett and forward Carin Jennings , routinely practiced and played in the soccer fields at Columbia Park in the late 1980s and early 1990s . 
 = = = Redesign - walks and trails = = = 
 When Columbia Park first was designed and planned , the design supported soccer and other field sports , but didn 't serve the needs of walkers and joggers , the present day walkways and trails were not part of the original park . In 1984 Landscape designer Paul Saito returned , to redesign Columbia Park to include walking paths and running trails , adding exercise challenges and aesthetic enjoyment . After receiving of San Diego , California , Saito had the park laid out according to his plan , with enjoyable concrete pathways winding around the hilly landscape . The park has , with sponsorship by Hydro @-@ <unk> Products Inc . , around 100 distinct automated and water conserving sprinkler stations @-@ zones to irrigate the 52 acres ( 21 ha ) . The California Landscape Contractors Association awarded Paul Saito the 1985 Achievement Award , for his creativity in the completed project . 
 = = = Phase two - southwest = = = 
 To enlarge Columbia Park , in 1985 the city council awarded Terra @-@ Cal Construction a $ 173 @,@ 655 contract for construction of the southwest portion of the park , expanding public access and amenities , and community green @-@ space . 
 = = = Phase three = = = 
 In 2000 , plans were made to increase the number of parking spaces serving the park users . In addition , the plans included attractive gazebos , which are located near 190th Street park area . 
 In 2004 , the Columbia Park parking lot at the southwest corner of 190th Street and Prairie Avenue was used by Chevrolet as a filming location for their television commercial . 
 = = Tree dedications - urban forest = = 
 On April 22 , 1995 , a tree was planted in Columbia Park by The Friends of Madrona Marsh to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Earth Day . 
 = = = Cherry blossom trees = = = 
 During the summer of 2001 , the Buddhist association Soka Gakkai International USA donated the cost of 100 Cherry blossom trees to the city of Torrance as part of Torrance 's Living Tree Dedication program that began in 1993 . The plan for the program was to plant 10 cherry trees at Columbia Park as part of a ceremony each year for ten years beginning in 2001 . This donation in particular was part of <unk> Gakkai 's campaign to plant trees in cities across the nation as a way to " create a peaceful environment " in society and better the communities they live in . In August 2001 , ten of those cherry trees were planted at Columbia Park . By April 2007 , seventy cherry trees had been planted in Columbia Park . In November of that year , Soka Gakkai International USA increased its donation from ten to thirty cherry trees per year . 
 = = = Living Tribute Trees program = = = 
 The Torrance Living Dedication Tree Program is coordinated and by the City , so that families , individuals , and groups can sponsor the planting of a new tree in the park to honor a person or commemorate an event with a living tribute Tree Dedication . 
 = = Park challenges = = 
 = = = Sail @-@ Skating = = = 
 The long , winding cement walk pathways and usually vacant parking lots of Columbia Park quickly became a popular place for skate sailing in the mid @-@ 1980s . In the summer of 1985 , a sail skater was clocked by a police radar gun doing 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) inside the park . Near the end of 1985 , the Torrance City Council had enough and unanimously approved an ordinance that made it illegal to ride a " wheeled conveyance " equipped with sails on city streets , in parks or on other public property . 
 = = = Gophers = = = 
 The grassy expanse of the newly developed Columbia Park turned out to be an ideal habitat for gophers and quickly attracted and maintained a gopher population of more than 600 animals . The gopher holes made it impossible to use the fields to play sports . The gopher population was so large that an " exceptionally sized " hawk could perch on the top of the KNX antenna and repeatedly swoop down , snatch a gopher , and fly back to the top of the antenna to consume . Other animals also survived on the gophers . 
 In 1987 , the city assigned Hank " G @-@ Man " Baranowski to the park to address the gopher problem . At that time , Baranowski was known as ' G @-@ Man ' due to his ability to " wipe out gopher populations " and his reputation as the city 's " premier gopher grabber . " Within a few months , Baranowski had eliminated the gopher population in Columbia Park . With the gopher problem resolved , the recreation fields at Columbia Park began to receive regular use . 
