 = = = Safety concerns = = = 
 = = = = People = = = = 
 In May 1993 , a fight broke out among members of two gangs in Columbia Park . One of the gang members fired a gun that hit a bystander . However , a necklace worn by the woman stopped the bullet from completely penetrating her chest . As a result of the shooting , a neighborhood association 's lobbying the city for park improvements , and homeowner complaints about " non @-@ residents " using the basketball court and causing trouble . Torrance officials sought to improve security and took the unusual step of closing the park 's basketball court by removing the basketball rims and <unk> the entry to the court . 
 = = = = Floods = = = = 
 Plans were created in 2001 to realign portions of the Columbia Park jogging path that were in lower areas or overlapped by sprinklers , to prevent flooded and slippery paths . The city added decomposed granite as part of fixing the problem , by draining water off the new raised sections . 
 = = = = Play equipment = = = = 
 In 2003 , the <unk> used as play equipment at Columbia Park was determined to not meet the Federal Safety Guidelines for preventing head and hand entrapment , and protecting children from falling off the vehicle . In response to concerns about children playing on the firetruck it was fenced off . Three years later in January 2006 both the firetruck and fencing were removed , with plans to replacement with " neat , fun , and attractive play equipment with rubberized matting . " 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 In 2006 Torrance considered possible sites , at both the city 's Columbia Park and Wilson Park , for fenced @-@ in dog parks , with two leash @-@ free roaming sections separating large dogs from small dogs . In 2007 , the city 's Open Space Committee met to discuss the feasibility of adding city dog parks . Later in 2007 the Committee had determined the only area large enough to accommodate a divided area for both large and small dogs was the Southern California Edison easement at Columbia Park . The plan required Southern California Edison needed to approve the proposal , and start @-@ up costs of at least $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 In presenting the proposal to the Torrance City Council one month later , the Open Space Committee stated : 
 " a dog park in Torrance is not an essential element of our park system due to a lack of unused open space and the absence of a grassroots community group supporting this type of park . " 
 At that same meeting , the Dog Obedience Club of Torrance asserted that a Torrance Dog Park could bring potential liability to the city through dog fights , dog caused injuries , and spread of diseases and that the money would be better spent on the city 's animal shelters . By a voice vote , the city council agreed that a dog park was not an essential element of Torrance 's city park system . 
 = = Reservations and events = = 
 Columbia Park and the 29 other Torrance city parks were deemed busy enough satisfying the citizens pleasure and recreation needs . Reservations are available from the Community Services : Parks Department , and needed for group picnic areas , organized sports fields , and larger special group events in the park and its facilities . 
 Online Information Desk for : 
 Artists , <unk> 's , & <unk> Guild 
 Arts and Craft <unk> 
 Co @-@ Rec Dances 
 Dog Obedience and other Charter Clubs 
 Lap Swimming hours 
 Registration ( classes , instructors , etc . ) 
 Rental for Parks & Buildings 
 Senior Services , ( taxi , bus ID 's , housing ) , Senior Income Tax 
 Sports ; teams , field reservations , locations . 
 Torrance Symphony info . 
 = Bela Talbot = 
 Bela Talbot is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's drama / horror television series Supernatural , portrayed by Lauren Cohan . Appearing only in the third season , she uses knowledge of the supernatural world to her advantage rather than to help those in need . Self @-@ centered and a thorn in the side of the series ' protagonists , Bela makes her living by stealing occult objects and selling them to wealthy clients . Critical reaction to the character was mixed , with negative responses from fans ultimately leading to her departure at the end of the season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In her first appearance , " Bad Day at Black Rock " , Bela Talbot hires two crooks to steal a cursed rabbit 's foot from a storage container owned by the deceased John Winchester , a hunter of supernatural creatures . Anyone who touches the foot is granted good luck , but will die within a week if the foot is lost . She intends to sell it and shows no concern for the fate of the thieves . John 's sons , series protagonists Sam and Dean , retrieve the foot but are cursed by it . Bela interferes when they attempt to destroy it , and shoots Sam in the shoulder . Dean , however , tricks her into touching it . She gives the foot up for destruction to save herself , but manages to steal $ 46 @,@ 000 in winning lottery tickets from Dean that he had purchased using the foot 's granted luck . 
 She next appears in " Red Sky at Morning " , an episode in which the Winchesters track down a ghost ship responsible for local deaths . Bela fools them into helping her again , with the three of them working together to steal the precious and magical Hand of Glory . The Winchesters plan to destroy the artifact to end the curse , but Bela steals it from them to sell to a client . However , Bela then witnesses the ghost ship , which only appears to those who have spilled the blood of a family member . Condemned to death , she turns to the Winchesters for help . Dean is prepared to leave her behind to die , but Sam comes up with a plan to save Bela 's life . This time , Bela gives them $ 10 @,@ 000 as a " thank you " before she leaves because she does not like being indebted to others . 
 In " Fresh Blood " , hunter and recently escaped felon Gordon Walker tracks Bela down and threatens to kill her unless she reveals the location of the Winchesters , as he plans to kill Sam . Bela agrees to find out their location in exchange for his priceless mojo bag , and has an unsuspecting Dean disclose their whereabouts to her . After Dean threatens to kill her , she uses a Ouija board to placate him by obtaining information on Gordon 's location so the Winchesters can neutralize the other hunter first . 
 In " Dream a Little Dream of Me " , Bela returns when the Winchesters contact her for help in saving fellow hunter and family friend Bobby Singer after he falls into a mystical coma . They need dream root to enter Bobby 's dreams and find out what is keeping him asleep . She claims nothing from them in compensation , explaining she is helping them in order to repay a debt to Bobby . However , the Winchesters discover after Bobby awakens that she was lying , having helped them to gain access to the Colt , a mystical gun capable of killing any being . Enraged at the theft , Dean and Sam attempt to track her down in " Jus in Bello " , but instead are led into a trap she has set up ; police arrest the Winchesters and place them in jail . Though the demonic overlord Lilith sends her forces , Sam and Dean eventually make their escape . 
 In " Time Is On My Side " , Dean discovers Bela no longer has the Colt . He later gets her criminal record from England and learns her true name is Abbie . Almost ten years prior , when she was 14 , she had her parents killed in exchange for her soul as part of a ten @-@ year deal made with a Crossroads Demon ; though Dean believes that she killed them to inherit their fortune and Bela supports this story , the audience is shown a flashback that suggests that she had actually agreed to the deal to escape abuse from her father . Now desperate because her time is running out , Bela tries to kill the Winchesters , but they anticipate her and escape ahead of time . Dean then calls her a few minutes before her deal is up and she confesses to him she tried to get out of the deal with the Crossroads Demon by trading the Colt . Once she gave it up , however , the deal changed so she had to kill Sam as well . Though Dean refuses her pleas for help , she reveals to him the demon Lilith holds all the contracts brokered by Crossroads Demons , including his own . Bela 's death — and her soul 's resulting descent into Hell — is inevitable , but not shown . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Described by her actress , Lauren Cohan , as " a female Humphrey Bogart " , Bela is " a little bit manipulative " and she " always wants to be in control " . According to series creator Eric Kripke , the writers conceptualized the character as " someone [ the Winchesters have ] really never come across before " because , though she moves throughout the supernatural world , Bela has no interest in the " altruistic or obsessed or revenge @-@ minded motives of hunting " . Writer and producer Sera Gamble summarized the writing team 's characterization of Bela as a greedy " mercenary that [ sic ] just [ doesn 't ] give a shit about the cause " . Gamble believed that Bela " finds it quite amusing " that the Winchesters use their knowledge of the supernatural to help people . On this aspect , Gamble added , " I always suspect when someone is that blasé that there 's something underneath , and we 're finally getting into that " . 
 Cohan viewed Bela as " a young woman trying to make a living and find some kind of reason in her world " who was " a little damaged . " The actress shared Gamble 's opinion of Bela 's behavior being a façade , and incorporated into her performance the idea of Bela hiding her true self , with Cohan feeling that her character created a persona to shield her from " real strong connections " . This defensiveness prevented her from opening up to the Winchesters , with whom Cohan believed Bela " would have loved to be able to have a normal relationship " . Contrary to Kripke and Gamble 's assessment of Bela as amoral and uncaring , Cohan envisioned the character as having " fits of conscience " offscreen throughout the third season . In the actress 's opinion , Bela " would have loved to go around fighting evil with those boys . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Supernatural producers originally intended for Bela to be a recurring character . Having already created a new female lead in the form of the demon Ruby , they chose to upgrade Bela to series regular after Dawn Ostroff — at the time , the CW President of Entertainment — requested a second female lead for the season , because they " [ loved Bela ] " and already planned for her to return in future episodes . To avoid the " mistake " they had made in the previous season in introducing Jo Harvelle as a love interest , the writers planned to introduce Bela as " a character in [ her ] own right " who would act as an antagonist " with [ her ] own interests and [ her ] own motives " . They were , however , willing to add in a romantic involvement with Sam or Dean should they and the fans both want it . The writers also planned for Bela to be " very separate and very different " from Ruby , and for the characters to " [ serve ] very different storylines . " 
 Cohan auditioned for Ruby , but ultimately received the part of Bela . Upon learning of Cohan 's British accent , a " really psyched " Kripke reworked the character to be British . The actress herself later pictured Bela that way , feeling she " has some kind of cool shading and <unk> , which fits the British accent " . At the time Cohan 's casting , however , she had been given little exposure to the character script @-@ wise , and was unaware she would play a " nasty person " . It was not until The CW up @-@ fronts that Kripke gave her a " good spiel " about Bela because she would be interviewed . The actress later turned down an offer from him to provide more of the character 's backstory , and instead opted to learn it as the episodes were filmed . In order to prepare for her role , Cohan received training in weaponry to be " well equipped with swords and a lot of instruments — sharp instruments " , and in kickboxing alongside Ruby 's actress Katie Cassidy . Cohan and Cassidy also decided to catch up on Supernatural before filming for the third season began , by watching the first two seasons together . 
 Due to " protective and occasionally nervous " fans , Kripke meant for Bela to be introduced in " small doses " . He wanted fans to know the show would always be just about Sam and Dean Winchester , and stated , " [ Ruby and Bela are ] there for important plot elements , but it 's not the Ruby and Bela show , nor is it about the four of them cruising around in the Impala together . It 's about the guys . " However , he felt the writers pushed it too far in the episode " Red Sky at Morning " , stating his opinion that it " was by far the least successful episode this year because it really kind of became the Bela show " . The writers also did not take the time to consider how to tie her into the Winchesters ' storylines . As Kripke pointed out , " It 's a road show and we 're in a different town every week , so if you 're going to run into the same character over and over again , you better have a damn good reason ... " They were eventually " crushed under the weight of the absurdity of it " because it became more difficult to justify her reappearances within the narrative . Another key problem stemmed from their conceptualization of her as an antagonistic character rather than a potential love interest for the brothers . The writers , " so taken with a woman who could screw the boys over at every turn " , ended up making Bela too antagonistic without establishing a balance . Any chance for a " funny effervescent episode where they all work together " was lost after the character attempts to have the Winchesters killed on multiple occasions . They eventually decided to drop the character from the series , opting to " send her off in an appropriate and dramatic way " which would " show a couple of cards [ they have ] been holding onto all season " by revealing her backstory " in a way that will surprise the audience and kind of tie her into the story . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical response to the character has been mixed . BuddyTV staff columnist Don Williams deemed the addition of Bela a " cheap ploy " to attract teen male viewers , believing the character distracts viewers from the " brotherly bond that made the show so special in the first place " . As well , he felt her " sexy cat burglar act , coupled with her flirtation with one of our heroes , is cliched and has been seen a thousand times before " , and he likened her to a combination of Catwoman and " the equally annoying Electro @-@ Gwen from Angel " . However , he later admitted Bela was " a great comic foil " . Diana Steenbergen of IGN became " increasingly frustrated " with the " unlikable and manipulative " Bela throughout her appearances . She found the character 's tragic backstory to be " too little , too late " , but was surprised the writers were able to make her feel " even a tiny bit sorry for [ Bela ] " during her death scene . Writing that " Bela had a hint of vulnerability that would have been intriguing had we glimpsed it more than 30 seconds before she died " , Steenbergen wished the character had been written differently — " not either annoying or downright contemptible " — and deemed her " a wasted opportunity to give us an interesting female foil for the boys " . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune expressed similar sentiments , voicing her belief in her review of the third season finale " No Rest For The Wicked " that Bela " got gone just as [ she was ] getting interesting " . In the same review , Peterson deemed the character to be a " decent traveling [ companion ] " . Although TV Guide 's Tina Charles was annoyed that Bela continuously steals from the Winchesters and makes them " look ridiculous " , she " really liked " the character . Overall , she felt Cohan " did one hell of a job " . 
 From the start , fans were very wary of bringing in female characters to the male @-@ dominated show ; they feared Bela was brought on to be " arm candy or [ a sidekick ] " . To make matters worse , when coming up with the scenes for the auditions for Bela , executive producer Robert Singer spent an hour writing a lackluster script not intended to be used in the show . Mere hours after the script was given to the casting director , the show 's fans had found them on casting websites and were " obsessively going over these scenes " . According to Kripke , the fan reaction was the characters " really look like they suck " . Bela 's overly @-@ antagonistic actions throughout the season did not calm the viewers ' fears . " [ Bela screwed ] over the boys so badly , " Kripke explained , " that she became unlikeable to the fans because she was irredeemable " . Kripke has confessed part of the decision to kill the character off was due to the negative reaction from the fans . 
 = Battle of Alexandretta = 
 The Battle of Alexandretta was the first clash between the forces of the Byzantine Empire and the Fatimid Caliphate in Syria . It was fought in early 971 near Alexandretta , while the main Fatimid army was besieging Antioch , which the Byzantines had captured two years previously . The Byzantines , led by one of Emperor John I Tzimiskes ' household eunuchs , lured a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Fatimid detachment to attack their empty encampment and then attacked them from all sides , destroying the Fatimid force . The defeat at Alexandretta , coupled with the Qarmatian invasion of southern Syria , forced the Fatimids to lift the siege and secured Byzantine control of Antioch and northern Syria . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 28 October 969 , Antioch fell to the Byzantine commander Michael Bourtzes . The fall of the great metropolis of northern Syria was soon followed by a treaty between the Byzantines and the Hamdanid Emirate of Aleppo , which made Aleppo a tributary vassal and handed over to the Byzantine Empire the entirety of the former Abbasid frontier zones ( thughur ) in Cilicia and Upper Mesopotamia , as well as the coastal strip of Syria between the Mediterranean Sea and the Orontes River until the environs of Tripoli , Arqa , and Shayzar . Byzantine control of this area was initially only theoretical , and the murder of the Byzantine emperor Nikephoros II Phokas in December 969 threatened to nullify Byzantine gains in the region . 
 Further south , the troops of the Fatimids of Ifriqiya , under the command of Jawhar al @-@ Siqilli , had just conquered Egypt from its Ikhshidid rulers . Seized with the spirit of jihad and aiming to legitimize their rule , the Fatimids used the Byzantine advance on Antioch and the " infidel " threat as a major item in their propaganda aimed towards the newly conquered region , along with promises to restore just government . The news of Antioch 's fall helped to persuade the Fatimids to allow Jawhar to send Ja 'far ibn Falah to invade Palestine . There , Ja 'far defeated the last Ikhshidid remnants under al @-@ Hasan ibn Ubayd Allah ibn Tughj and took Ramla in May 970 , before occupying Damascus in November . 
 = = Siege of Antioch and battle at Alexandretta = = 
 Almost as soon as Damascus submitted , Ja 'far ibn Falah entrusted one of his ghilman , named Futuh ( " Victories " ) , to carry out the promised jihad against the Byzantines , although the 15th @-@ century compilation Uyun al @-@ Akhbar by the Yemeni historian Imad al @-@ Din Idris ibn al @-@ Hasan also mentions a certain Abdallah ibn Ubayd Allah al @-@ Husayni <unk> Muslim as commander . Futuh assembled a large army of Kutama Berbers , strengthened with levies from Palestine and southern Syria , and moved to besiege Antioch in December 970 . The Byzantine writer Kedrenos claims that the Fatimid army numbered a clearly much exaggerated 100 @,@ 000 men , but Imad al @-@ Din records the number as 20 @,@ 000 men . The Fatimids laid siege to the city , but its inhabitants offered stiff resistance , and Ibn Falah had to send " army after army " , in the description of the 14th @-@ century historian Abu Bakr ibn al @-@ <unk> , apparently from the levies raised in southern Syria , to its reinforcement . Following the account of the 15th @-@ century Egyptian al @-@ Maqrizi , it was with these additional troops , which he puts at 4 @,@ 000 men , that it became possible to completely halt the city 's resupply by intercepting the caravans headed towards it . 
 In the meantime , Nikephoros ' murderer and successor , John I Tzimiskes , was unable to intervene in person in the east due to the more menacing invasion of the Balkans by Sviatoslav I of Kiev . As a result , he sent a small force under a trusted eunuch of his household , the patrikios Nicholas , who according to the contemporary Leo the Deacon was experienced in battle , to relieve the siege . In the meantime , the siege of Antioch had continued for five months over winter and into spring , without result . At some point , a Fatimid detachment — according to Ibn al @-@ <unk> 4 @,@ 000 men under a Berber chieftain called Aras and a former emir of Tarsus , Ibn az @-@ Zayyat — moved north against Alexandretta , where the Byzantine relief army had camped . Informed of their approach , the Byzantine commander vacated the camp and placed his troops in ambush . Finding the enemy encampment deserted , the Fatimid troops began to plunder it , heedless of anything else . At that moment , Nicholas launched a surprise attack from all sides and the Fatimid force disintegrated ; most of the Muslim army perished , but Aras with Ibn az @-@ Zayyat managed to escape . 
 The defeat at Alexandretta was a major blow to Fatimid morale . Coupled with news of an advance against Damascus of the Qarmatians , a radical Isma 'ili group originating from Eastern Arabia , Ibn Falah ordered Futuh to raise the siege of Antioch in early July 971 . The army returned to Damascus , whence the various contingents dispersed to their home districts . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The fist clash between the eastern Mediterranean 's two foremost powers thus ended in a Byzantine victory , which on the one hand strengthened the Byzantine position in northern Syria and on the other weakened the Fatimids , both in lives lost and in morale and reputation . As the historian Paul Walker writes , had Ibn Falah " possessed the troops and the prestige lost at Alexandretta , he might have resisted the onrush of the Qarmatians . The armies of the local districts might have aided him had they not dispersed " . In the event , Ja 'far was unable to resist the Qarmatians and their Arab Bedouin allies ; making the fatal choice of confronting them in the desert , he was defeated and killed in battle in August 971 . It was a defeat that led to the near total collapse of Fatimid control in southern Syria and Palestine , and the Qarmatian invasion of Egypt . The Fatimids were victorious before Fustat , however , and eventually managed to drive the Qarmatians out of Syria and restore their control over the restive province . The Byzantines remained quiescent until the great campaigns led by John Tzimiskes in person in 974 – 975 . Although the emperor advanced deep in Muslim lands and even threatened to take Jerusalem , his death in January 976 lifted the Byzantine danger for the Fatimids : the Byzantines would never again try to advance far beyond their northern Syrian possessions around Antioch . 
 = Music of Final Fantasy V = 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy V was composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu . The Final Fantasy V Original Sound Version , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by Square Co . / NTT Publishing , and subsequently re @-@ released by NTT Publishing after the game was brought to North America as part of the Final Fantasy Anthology . An arranged album entitled Final Fantasy V Dear Friends , containing a selection of musical tracks from the game arranged in multiple styles , including live and vocal versions , was released by Square / NTT Publishing and later re @-@ released by NTT Publishing . Additionally , a collection of piano arrangements composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Shirou Satou and played by Toshiyuki Mori titled Piano Collections Final Fantasy V was released by Square / NTT Publishing , and re @-@ released by NTT Publishing . 
 The music received mixed reviews ; while some reviewers enjoyed the soundtrack and found it to be underrated , others felt it was only of middling quality . Several pieces , especially " Dear Friends " , remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series such as the Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series , named after the Final Fantasy V piece , and the Orchestral Game Concert series . Music from the soundtrack has also been published in arranged and compilation albums by Square as well as outside groups . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Uematsu had originally calculated that the game would require more than 100 pieces of music , but managed to reduce the number to 56 . He has stated that he developed the ideas for the music by first reading through the script and creating the titles for all of the tracks , then composing melodies to match the themes of the story and titles . Uematsu felt that the sound quality of the soundtrack for Final Fantasy V was much better than that of Final Fantasy IV . He also claimed that this resulted in the soundtrack release requiring two CDs as opposed to the one CD required for the Final Fantasy IV soundtrack . Uematsu has stated that he would have preferred to keep the soundtrack to one CD , in order to keep the price of the album low . 
 = = Final Fantasy V Original Sound Version = = 
 Final Fantasy V Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album of video game music from Final Fantasy V. The album contains the musical tracks from the game , composed , arranged , produced and performed by Nobuo Uematsu . It spans two discs and 67 tracks , covering a duration of 2 : 08 : 30 . It was released on December 7 , 1992 by Square and NTT Publishing with the catalog number <unk> @-@ 013 ~ 4 , and re @-@ released on November 26 , 1994 and October 1 , 2004 by NTT Publishing with the catalog numbers of PSCN @-@ <unk> ~ 6 and NTCP @-@ <unk> ~ 6 , respectively . 
 A single was released in 1992 titled Final Fantasy V : 5 + 1 , consisting of the " Opening Theme " , " Main Theme of FINAL FANTASY V " , " Harvest " , " Dungeon " , and " Battle 1 " tracks from the soundtrack , as well as the previously unreleased " <unk> no <unk> " ( " Matoya 's Cave " ) from Final Fantasy . It was published by NTT Publishing and had a catalog number of NO9D @-@ 012 and a length of 14 : 46 . A single named Final Fantasy V Mambo de Chocobo was also released , containing the " Mambo de Chocobo " track from the game , as well as three unused tracks from the game and a compilation mix track . The single was released by NTT Publishing in 1993 ; it covered a duration of 16 : 14 and had a catalog number of NO9D @-@ 016 . Nine tracks from the soundtrack were included in a bonus CD titled Music From FFV and FFVI Video Games that shipped with Final Fantasy Anthology on October 5 , 1999 , along with tracks from Final Fantasy VI . The soundtrack was again released as part of the Final Fantasy Finest Box by Square Enix on March 28 , 2007 under the catalog numbers FFFB @-@ 0002 @-@ 3 along with the OSTs of Final Fantasy IV and Final Fantasy VI after the game was ported to the Game Boy Advance . 
 Critical opinion of the soundtrack was mixed . Some reviewers , such as Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan , found it to be of medium quality , saying it " suffer [ ed ] from occasional compositional problems " and noted that others refer to it as simply " in the middle " of the soundtracks of Final Fantasy IV and Final Fantasy VI , though he stated " I don 't know why I love Final Fantasy V 's music " despite this . Schweitzer praised the " Main Theme of Final Fantasy V " ( " Ahead on Our Way " ) as " a truly stirring piece of music " and " triumphant , hopeful , and yet almost longing at the same time , " but stated that " Uematsu 's compositional style hits a sort of early plateau here . " Other reviewers disagreed , with Jason Strohmaier of Soundtrack Central finding it to be an underrated album , while Jeremy <unk> of Soundtrack Central felt that it was on par with Uematsu 's other works . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Final Fantasy V Dear Friends = = 
 Final Fantasy V Dear Friends is an arranged soundtrack album of Final Fantasy V music containing a selection of musical tracks from the game arranged with live instruments mixed with synth instruments . Several tracks have added vocals performed by <unk> and Ulla <unk> , in both English and Sámi . The album spans 14 tracks and covers a duration of 55 : 48 . It was first released on March 25 , 1993 , by Square and NTT Publishing , and subsequently re @-@ released on November 26 , 1994 , and on October 1 , 2004 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number N30D @-@ 017 , the first re @-@ release bears the catalog number PSCN @-@ <unk> , and the most recent re @-@ release bears the catalog number NTCP @-@ <unk> . 
 Reviewers were of mixed opinion about Final Fantasy V Dear Friends ; finding it to be of fair quality , though Jason Strohmaier took issue with some of the synthesized instruments and Freddie W. of RPGFan concluded in his review that the album was " a mixed bag of moods , emotions , and ideas that would only appeal to those who loved Final Fantasy V. " 
 = = Piano Collections Final Fantasy V = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy V is an album of music from Final Fantasy V composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged on piano by Shirou Satou and performed by Toshiyuki Mori . It was first published by Square and NTT Publishing on June 21 , 1993 with the catalog number <unk> @-@ 018 . It was subsequently republished by NTT Publishing on September 24 , 1994 under the catalog number PSCN @-@ 5009 and on June 27 , 2001 with the catalog number NTCP @-@ 1002 . The album spans 13 tracks and covers a duration of 46 : 31 . 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy V was well received by reviewers such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who found it to be " amazing " and on par with , if not better than , the piano arrangements for the music of the other Final Fantasy games . He also enjoyed the artistic license taken with several of the pieces , finding the album to be the most " abstract " of the Piano Collections series . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Black Mages , a band that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style , has arranged two pieces from Final Fantasy V. These are " Clash on the Big Bridge " from their self @-@ titled album , published in 2003 , and " Neo <unk> " , an arrangement of " The Final Battle " , from Darkness and Starlight , published in 2008 . Lyrical versions of " Music Box " and " Dear Friends " , sung by Risa Ohki , appeared on Final Fantasy : Pray , a compilation album produced by Square . Additionally , lyrical versions of " The Day Will Come " and " Home , Sweet Home " , sung by Risa Ohki and Ikuko Noguchi , appeared on Final Fantasy : Love Will Grow . 
 Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series , the name of which is taken from the Final Fantasy V piece . The music of Final Fantasy V has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from FINAL FANTASY , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including " Dear Friends " . " Opening Theme " , " Waltz Clavier " , " Town Theme " , and " Main Theme of FINAL FANTASY V " were played by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra in their second Orchestral Game Concert in 1992 as part of a five concert tour , which was later released as a series of albums . Additionally , " Main Theme of FINAL FANTASY V " was performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The Black Mages performed " Clash on the Big Bridge " at the Extra : Hyper Game Music Event 2007 concert in Tokyo on July 7 , 2007 . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy V music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . An arranged version of " Clash on the Big Bridge " appears in the soundtrack of Final Fantasy XII . A group of remixes of music from the game was released as an unofficial download @-@ only album titled The Fabled Warriors : Wind , by the remix website OverClocked ReMix on September 10 , 2010 containing 9 remixes ; a further four albums are planned to be released as part of the Fabled Warriors set . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = Avatar ( 2009 film ) = 
 Avatar ( marketed as James Cameron 's Avatar ) is a 2009 American epic science fiction film directed , written , produced , and co @-@ edited by James Cameron , and starring Sam Worthington , Zoe Saldana , Stephen Lang , Michelle Rodriguez , and Sigourney Weaver . The film is set in the mid @-@ 22nd century , when humans are colonizing Pandora , a lush habitable moon of a gas giant in the Alpha Centauri star system , in order to mine the mineral unobtanium , a room @-@ temperature superconductor . The expansion of the mining colony threatens the continued existence of a local tribe of Na 'vi – a humanoid species indigenous to Pandora . The film 's title refers to a genetically engineered Na 'vi body with the mind of a remotely located human that is used to interact with the natives of Pandora . 
 Development of Avatar began in 1994 , when Cameron wrote an 80 @-@ page treatment for the film . Filming was supposed to take place after the completion of Cameron 's 1997 film Titanic , for a planned release in 1999 , but according to Cameron , the necessary technology was not yet available to achieve his vision of the film . Work on the language of the film 's extraterrestrial beings began in 2005 , and Cameron began developing the screenplay and fictional universe in early 2006 . Avatar was officially budgeted at $ 237 million . Other estimates put the cost between $ 280 million and $ 310 million for production and at $ 150 million for promotion . The film made extensive use of new motion capture filming techniques , and was released for traditional viewing , 3D viewing ( using the RealD 3D , Dolby 3D , <unk> 3D , and IMAX 3D formats ) , and for " 4D " experiences in select South Korean theaters . The stereoscopic filmmaking was touted as a breakthrough in cinematic technology . 
 Avatar premiered in London on December 10 , 2009 , and was internationally released on December 16 and in the United States and Canada on December 18 , to positive critical reviews , with critics highly praising its groundbreaking visual effects . During its theatrical run , the film broke several box office records and became the highest @-@ grossing film of all time , as well as in the United States and Canada , surpassing Titanic , which had held those records for twelve years ( and was also directed by Cameron ) . It also became the first film to gross more than $ 2 billion and the best @-@ selling film of 2010 in the United States . Avatar was nominated for nine Academy Awards , including Best Picture and Best Director , and won three , for Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography and Best Visual Effects . Following the film 's success , Cameron signed with 20th Century Fox to produce three sequels , making Avatar the first of a planned tetralogy . On April 14 , 2016 , Cameron confirmed that there are now plans for four sequels . Avatar 2 is scheduled for release in December 2018 , with the sequels following in December 2020 , 2022 , and 2023 , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 By 2154 , humans have depleted Earth 's natural resources , leading to a severe energy crisis . The Resources Development Administration ( RDA for short ) mines for a valuable mineral – unobtanium – on Pandora , a densely forested habitable moon orbiting the gas giant Polyphemus in the Alpha Centauri star system . Pandora , whose atmosphere is poisonous to humans , is inhabited by the Na 'vi , 10 @-@ foot tall ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , blue @-@ skinned , sapient humanoids who live in harmony with nature and worship a mother goddess called Eywa . 
 To explore Pandora 's biosphere , scientists use Na 'vi @-@ human hybrids called " avatars " , operated by genetically matched humans ; Jake Sully , a paraplegic former Marine , replaces his deceased identical twin brother as an operator of one . Dr. Grace Augustine , head of the Avatar Program , considers Sully an inadequate replacement but accepts his assignment as a bodyguard . While protecting the avatars of Grace and fellow scientist Dr. Norm Spellman as they collect biological data , Jake 's avatar is attacked by a <unk> and flees into the forest , where he is rescued by Neytiri , a female Na 'vi . Witnessing an auspicious sign , she takes him to her clan , whereupon Neytiri 's mother Mo 'at , the clan 's spiritual leader , orders her daughter to initiate Jake into their society . 
 Colonel Miles Quaritch , head of RDA 's private security force , promises Jake that the company will restore his legs if he gathers information about the Na 'vi and the clan 's gathering place , a giant tree called Hometree , on grounds that it stands above the richest deposit of unobtanium in the area . When Grace learns of this , she transfers herself , Jake , and Norm to an outpost . Over three months , Jake grows to sympathize with the natives . After Jake is initiated into the tribe , he and Neytiri choose each other as mates , and soon afterward , Jake reveals his change of allegiance when he attempts to disable a bulldozer that threatens to destroy a sacred Na 'vi site . When Quaritch shows a video recording of Jake 's attack on the bulldozer to Administrator Parker Selfridge , and another in which Jake admits that the Na 'vi will never abandon Hometree , Selfridge orders Hometree destroyed . 
 Despite Grace 's argument that destroying Hometree could damage the biological neural network native to Pandora , Selfridge gives Jake and Grace one hour to convince the Na 'vi to evacuate before commencing the attack . While trying to warn the Na 'vi , Jake confesses to being a spy and the Na 'vi take him and Grace captive . Seeing this , Quaritch 's men destroy Hometree , killing Neytiri 's father ( the clan chief ) and many others . Mo 'at frees Jake and Grace , but they are detached from their avatars and imprisoned by Quaritch 's forces . Pilot Trudy Chacón , disgusted by Quaritch 's brutality , carries them to Grace 's outpost , but during the escape , Quaritch fires at them , hitting Grace . 
 To regain the Na 'vi 's trust , Jake connects his mind to that of <unk> , a dragon @-@ like predator feared and honored by the Na 'vi . Jake finds the refugees at the sacred Tree of Souls and pleads with Mo 'at to heal Grace . The clan attempts to transfer Grace from her human body into her avatar with the aid of the Tree of Souls , but she dies before the process can be completed . 
 Supported by the new chief Tsu 'tey , who acts as Jake 's translator , Jake speaks to unite the clan and tells them to gather all of the clans to battle against the RDA . Noticing the impending gathering , Quaritch organizes a pre @-@ emptive strike against the Tree of Souls , believing that its destruction will demoralize the natives . On the eve of battle , Jake prays to Eywa , via a neural connection to the Tree of Souls , to intercede on behalf of the Na 'vi . 
 During the subsequent battle , the Na 'vi suffer heavy casualties , including Tsu 'tey and Trudy ; but are rescued when <unk> wildlife unexpectedly join the attack and overwhelm the humans , which Neytiri interprets as Eywa 's answer to Jake 's prayer . Jake destroys a makeshift bomber before it can reach the Tree of Souls ; Quaritch escapes from his own damaged aircraft , wearing an AMP suit and breaks open the avatar link unit containing Jake 's human body , exposing it to Pandora 's poisonous atmosphere . Quaritch prepares to slit the throat of Jake 's avatar , but Neytiri kills Quaritch and saves Jake from suffocation . 
 With the exceptions of Jake , Norm , Max ( another scientist ) , and a select few others , all humans are expelled from Pandora and sent back to Earth , after which Jake is transferred permanently into his avatar with the aid of the Tree of Souls . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Humans 
 Sam Worthington as Jake Sully , a disabled former Marine who becomes part of the Avatar Program after his twin brother is killed . His military background helps the Na 'vi warriors relate to him . Cameron cast the Australian actor after a worldwide search for promising young actors , preferring relative unknowns to keep the budget down . Worthington , who was living in his car at the time , auditioned twice early in development , and he has signed on for possible sequels . Cameron felt that because Worthington had not done a major film , he would give the character " a quality that is really real " . Cameron said he " has that quality of being a guy you 'd want to have a beer with , and he ultimately becomes a leader who transforms the world " . 
 Stephen Lang as Colonel Miles Quaritch , the head of the mining operation 's security detail . Fiercely loyal to his military code , he has a profound disregard for Pandora 's inhabitants that is evident in both his actions and his language . Lang had unsuccessfully auditioned for a role in Cameron 's Aliens ( 1986 ) , but the director remembered Lang and sought him for Avatar . Michael Biehn , who was in Aliens , read the script and watched some of the 3 @-@ D footage with Cameron , but was ultimately not cast in the role . 
 Sigourney Weaver as Dr. Grace Augustine , an <unk> and head of the Avatar Program . She is also Sully 's mentor and an advocate of peaceful relations with the Na 'vi , having set up a school to teach them English . 
 Michelle Rodriguez as Trudy Chacón , a combat pilot assigned to support the Avatar Program who is sympathetic to the Na 'vi . Cameron had wanted to work with Rodriguez since seeing her in Girlfight . 
 Giovanni Ribisi as Parker Selfridge , the corporate administrator for the RDA mining operation . While he is at first willing to destroy the Na 'vi civilization to preserve the company 's bottom line , he is reluctant to authorize the attacks on the Na 'vi and taint his image , doing so only after Quaritch persuades him that it is necessary , and the attacks will be humane . When the attacks are broadcast to the base , Selfridge displays discomfort at the violence . 
 Joel David Moore as Dr. Norm Spellman , a <unk> who studies plant and animal life as part of the Avatar Program . He arrives on Pandora at the same time as Sully and operates an avatar . Although he is expected to lead the diplomatic contact with the Na 'vi , it turns out that Jake has the personality better suited to win the natives ' respect . 
 Dileep Rao as Dr. Max Patel , a scientist who works in the Avatar Program and comes to support Jake 's rebellion against the RDA . 
 Na 'vi 
 Zoe Saldana as Neytiri , the daughter of the leader of the Omaticaya ( the Na 'vi clan central to the story ) . She is attracted to Jake because of his bravery , though frustrated with him for what she sees as his naiveté and stupidity . She serves as Jake 's love interest . The character , like all the Na 'vi , was created using performance capture , and its visual aspect is entirely computer generated . Saldana has also signed on for potential sequels . 
 C. C. H. Pounder as Mo 'at , the Omaticaya 's spiritual leader , Neytiri 's mother , and consort to clan leader <unk> . 
 Wes Studi as <unk> , the Omaticaya 's clan leader , Neytiri 's father , and Mo 'at 's mate . 
 Laz Alonso as Tsu 'tey , the finest warrior of the Omaticaya . He is heir to the chieftainship of the tribe . At the beginning of the film 's story , he is betrothed to Neytiri . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1994 , director James Cameron wrote an 80 @-@ page treatment for Avatar , drawing inspiration from " every single science fiction book " he had read in his childhood as well as from adventure novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs and H. Rider Haggard . In August 1996 , Cameron announced that after completing Titanic , he would film Avatar , which would make use of synthetic , or computer @-@ generated , actors . The project would cost $ 100 million and involve at least six actors in leading roles " who appear to be real but do not exist in the physical world " . Visual effects house Digital Domain , with whom Cameron has a partnership , joined the project , which was supposed to begin production in mid @-@ 1997 for a 1999 release . However , Cameron felt that the technology had not caught up with the story and vision that he intended to tell . He decided to concentrate on making documentaries and refining the technology for the next few years . It was revealed in a Bloomberg BusinessWeek cover story that 20th Century Fox had fronted $ 10 million to Cameron to film a proof @-@ of @-@ concept clip for Avatar , which he showed to Fox executives in October 2005 . 
 In February 2006 , Cameron revealed that his film Project 880 was " a retooled version of Avatar " , a film that he had tried to make years earlier , citing the technological advances in the creation of the computer @-@ generated characters Gollum , King Kong , and Davy Jones . Cameron had chosen Avatar over his project Battle Angel after completing a five @-@ day camera test in the previous year . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 From January to April 2006 , Cameron worked on the script and developed a culture for the film 's aliens , the Na 'vi . Their language was created by Dr. Paul Frommer , a linguist at USC . The Na 'vi language has a lexicon of about 1000 words , with some 30 added by Cameron . The tongue 's phonemes include ejective consonants ( such as the " <unk> " in " <unk> " ) that are found in the Amharic language of Ethiopia , and the initial " ng " that Cameron may have taken from New Zealand Māori . Actress Sigourney Weaver and the film 's set designers met with Jodie S. Holt , professor of plant physiology at University of California , Riverside , to learn about the methods used by botanists to study and sample plants , and to discuss ways to explain the communication between Pandora 's organisms depicted in the film . 
 From 2005 to 2007 , Cameron worked with a handful of designers , including famed fantasy illustrator Wayne Barlowe and renowned concept artist Jordu Schell , to shape the design of the Na 'vi with paintings and physical sculptures when Cameron felt that 3 @-@ D brush renderings were not capturing his vision , often working together in the kitchen of Cameron 's Malibu home . In July 2006 , Cameron announced that he would film Avatar for a mid @-@ 2008 release and planned to begin principal photography with an established cast by February 2007 . The following August , the visual effects studio Weta Digital signed on to help Cameron produce Avatar . Stan Winston , who had collaborated with Cameron in the past , joined Avatar to help with the film 's designs . Production design for the film took several years . The film had two different production designers , and two separate art departments , one of which focused on the flora and fauna of Pandora , and another that created human machines and human factors . In September 2006 , Cameron was announced to be using his own Reality Camera System to film in 3 @-@ D. The system would use two high @-@ definition cameras in a single camera body to create depth perception . 
 While these preparations were underway , Fox kept wavering in its commitment to Avatar because of its painful experience with cost overruns and delays on Cameron 's previous picture , Titanic , even though Cameron rewrote the script to combine several characters together and offered to cut his fee in case the film flopped . Cameron installed a traffic light with the amber signal lit outside of co @-@ producer Jon Landau 's office to represent the film 's uncertain future . In mid @-@ 2006 , Fox told Cameron " in no uncertain terms that they were passing on this film , " so he began shopping it around to other studios , and showed his proof @-@ of @-@ concept to Dick Cook ( then chairman of the Walt Disney Studios ) . However , when Disney attempted to take over , Fox exercised its right of first refusal . In October 2006 , Fox finally agreed to commit to making Avatar after Ingenious Media agreed to back the film , which reduced Fox 's financial exposure to less than half of the film 's official $ 237 million budget . After Fox accepted Avatar , one skeptical Fox executive shook his head and told Cameron and Landau , " I don 't know if we 're crazier for letting you do this , or if you 're crazier for thinking you can do this ... " 
 In December 2006 , Cameron described Avatar as " a futuristic tale set on a planet 200 years hence ... an old @-@ fashioned jungle adventure with an environmental conscience [ that ] aspires to a mythic level of storytelling " . The January 2007 press release described the film as " an emotional journey of redemption and revolution " and said the story is of " a wounded former Marine , thrust unwillingly into an effort to settle and exploit an exotic planet rich in biodiversity , who eventually crosses over to lead the indigenous race in a battle for survival " . The story would be of an entire world complete with an ecosystem of phantasmagorical plants and creatures , and native people with a rich culture and language . 
 Estimates put the cost of the film at about $ 280 – 310 million to produce and an estimated $ 150 million for marketing , noting that about $ 30 million in tax credits will lessen the financial impact on the studio and its financiers . A studio spokesperson said that the budget was " $ 237 million , with $ 150 million for promotion , end of story . " 
 = = = Themes and inspirations = = = 
 Avatar is primarily an action @-@ adventure journey of self @-@ discovery , in the context of imperialism and deep ecology . Cameron said his inspiration was " every single science fiction book I read as a kid " , and that he was particularly striving to update the style of Edgar Rice Burroughs 's John Carter series and the deep jungles of Pandora were visualized from Disney 's 37th animated film , Tarzan . He acknowledged that Avatar shares themes with the films At Play in the Fields of the Lord , The Emerald Forest , and Princess Mononoke , which feature clashes between cultures and civilizations , and with Dances with Wolves , where a battered soldier finds himself drawn to the culture he was initially fighting against . 
 In a 2007 interview with Time magazine , Cameron was asked about the meaning of the term Avatar , to which he replied , " It 's an incarnation of one of the Hindu gods taking a flesh form . In this film what that means is that the human technology in the future is capable of injecting a human 's intelligence into a remotely located body , a biological body . " 
 The look of the Na 'vi – the humanoids indigenous to Pandora – was inspired by a dream that Cameron 's mother had , long before he started work on Avatar . In her dream , she saw a blue @-@ skinned woman 12 feet ( 4 m ) tall , which he thought was " kind of a cool image " . Also he said , " I just like blue . It 's a good color ... plus , there 's a connection to the Hindu deities , which I like conceptually . " He included similar creatures in his first screenplay ( written in 1976 or 1977 ) , which featured a planet with a native population of " gorgeous " tall blue aliens . The Na 'vi were based on them . 
 For the love story between characters Jake and Neytiri , Cameron applied a star @-@ crossed love theme , and acknowledged its similarity to the pairing of Jack and Rose from his film Titanic . An interviewer stated , " Both couples come from radically different cultures that are contemptuous of their relationship and are forced to choose sides between the competing communities . " Cameron felt that whether or not the Jake and Neytiri love story would be perceived as believable partially hinged on the physical attractiveness of Neytiri 's alien appearance , which was developed by considering her appeal to the all @-@ male crew of artists . Though Cameron felt Jake and Neytiri do not fall in love right away , their portrayers ( Worthington and Saldana ) felt the characters do . Cameron said the two actors " had a great chemistry " during filming . 
 For the film 's floating " Hallelujah Mountains " , the designers drew inspiration from " many different types of mountains , but mainly the karst limestone formations in China . " According to production designer Dylan Cole , the fictional floating rocks were inspired by Mount Huang ( also known as Huangshan ) , Guilin , <unk> , among others around the world . Director Cameron had noted the influence of the Chinese peaks on the design of the floating mountains . 
 To create the interiors of the human mining colony on Pandora , production designers visited the Noble Clyde Boudreaux oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico during June 2007 . They photographed , measured and filmed every aspect of the platform , which was later replicated on @-@ screen with photorealistic CGI during post @-@ production . 
 Cameron said that he wanted to make " something that has this spoonful of sugar of all the action and the adventure and all that " but also have a conscience " that maybe in the enjoying of it makes you think a little bit about the way you interact with nature and your fellow man " . He added that " the Na 'vi represent something that is our higher selves , or our aspirational selves , what we would like to think we are " and that even though there are good humans within the film , the humans " represent what we know to be the parts of ourselves that are trashing our world and maybe condemning ourselves to a grim future " . 
 Cameron acknowledges that Avatar implicitly criticizes the United States ' role in the Iraq War and the impersonal nature of mechanized warfare in general . In reference to the use of the term shock and awe in the film , Cameron said , " We know what it feels like to launch the missiles . We don 't know what it feels like for them to land on our home soil , not in America . " He said in later interviews , " ... I think it 's very patriotic to question a system that needs to be corralled ... " and , " The film is definitely not anti @-@ American . " A scene in the film portrays the violent destruction of the towering Na 'vi Hometree , which collapses in flames after a missile attack , coating the landscape with ash and floating embers . Asked about the scene 's resemblance to the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center , Cameron said he had been " surprised at how much it did look like September 11 " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Avatar began in April 2007 in Los Angeles and Wellington , New Zealand . Cameron described the film as a hybrid with a full live @-@ action shoot in combination with computer @-@ generated characters and live environments . " Ideally at the end of the day the audience has no idea which they 're looking at , " Cameron said . The director indicated that he had already worked four months on <unk> scenes for the film . The live action was shot with a modified version of the proprietary digital 3 @-@ D Fusion Camera System , developed by Cameron and Vince Pace . In January 2007 , Fox had announced that 3 @-@ D filming for Avatar would be done at 24 frames per second despite Cameron 's strong opinion that a 3 @-@ D film requires higher frame rate to make strobing less noticeable . According to Cameron , the film is composed of 60 % computer @-@ generated elements and 40 % live action , as well as traditional miniatures . 
 Motion @-@ capture photography lasted 31 days at the Hughes Aircraft stage in Playa Vista in Los Angeles . Live action photography began in October 2007 at Stone Street Studios in Wellington , New Zealand , and was scheduled to last 31 days . More than a thousand people worked on the production . In preparation of the filming sequences , all of the actors underwent professional training specific to their characters such as archery , horseback riding , firearm use , and hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . They received language and dialect training in the Na 'vi language created for the film . Before shooting the film , Cameron also sent the cast to the Hawaiian tropical rainforests to get a feel for a rainforest setting before shooting on the soundstage . 
 During filming , Cameron made use of his virtual camera system , a new way of directing motion @-@ capture filmmaking . The system shows the actors ' virtual counterparts in their digital surroundings in real time , allowing the director to adjust and direct scenes just as if shooting live action . According to Cameron , " It 's like a big , powerful game engine . If I want to fly through space , or change my perspective , I can . I can turn the whole scene into a living miniature and go through it on a 50 to 1 scale . " Using conventional techniques , the complete virtual world cannot be seen until the motion @-@ capture of the actors is complete . Cameron said this process does not diminish the value or importance of acting . On the contrary , because there is no need for repeated camera and lighting setups , costume fittings and make @-@ up touch @-@ ups , scenes do not need to be interrupted repeatedly . Cameron described the system as a " form of pure creation where if you want to move a tree or a mountain or the sky or change the time of day , you have complete control over the elements " . 
 Cameron gave fellow directors Steven Spielberg and Peter Jackson a chance to test the new technology . Spielberg said , " I like to think of it as digital makeup , not augmented animation ... Motion capture brings the director back to a kind of intimacy that actors and directors only know when they 're working in live theater . " Spielberg and George Lucas were also able to visit the set to watch Cameron direct with the equipment . 
 To film the shots where CGI interacts with live action , a unique camera referred to as a " <unk> " was used , a merger of the 3 @-@ D fusion camera and the virtual camera systems . While filming live action in real time with the <unk> , the CGI images captured with the virtual camera or designed from scratch , are superimposed over the live action images as in augmented reality and shown on a small monitor , making it possible for the director to instruct the actors how to relate to the virtual material in the scene . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 A number of innovative visual effects techniques were used during production . According to Cameron , work on the film had been delayed since the 1990s to allow the techniques to reach the necessary degree of advancement to adequately portray his vision of the film . The director planned to make use of photorealistic computer @-@ generated characters , created using new motion capture animation technologies he had been developing in the 14 months leading up to December 2006 . 
 Innovations include a new system for lighting massive areas like Pandora 's jungle , a motion @-@ capture stage or " volume " six times larger than any previously used , and an improved method of capturing facial expressions , enabling full performance capture . To achieve the face capturing , actors wore individually made skull caps fitted with a tiny camera positioned in front of the actors ' faces ; the information collected about their facial expressions and eyes is then transmitted to computers . According to Cameron , the method allows the filmmakers to transfer 100 % of the actors ' physical performances to their digital counterparts . Besides the performance capture data which were transferred directly to the computers , numerous reference cameras gave the digital artists multiple angles of each performance . A technically challenging scene was near the end of the film when the computer @-@ generated Neytiri held the live action Jake in human form , and attention was given to the details of the shadows and reflected light between them . 
 The lead visual effects company was Weta Digital in Wellington , New Zealand , at one point employing 900 people to work on the film . Because of the huge amount of data which needed to be stored , cataloged and available for everybody involved , even on the other side of the world , a new cloud computing and Digital Asset Management ( DAM ) system named Gaia was created by Microsoft especially for Avatar , which allowed the crews to keep track of and coordinate all stages in the digital processing . To render Avatar , Weta used a 10 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 930 m2 ) server farm making use of 4 @,@ 000 Hewlett @-@ Packard servers with 35 @,@ 000 processor cores with 104 terabytes of RAM and three petabytes of network area storage running Ubuntu Linux , Grid Engine cluster manager , and 2 of the animation software and managers , Pixar 's RenderMan and Pixar 's Alfred queue management system . The render farm occupies the 193rd to 197th spots in the TOP500 list of the world 's most powerful supercomputers . A new texturing and paint software system , called Mari , was developed by The Foundry in cooperation with Weta . Creating the Na 'vi characters and the virtual world of Pandora required over a <unk> of digital storage , and each minute of the final footage for Avatar occupies 17 @.@ 28 gigabytes of storage . Often , it would take each frame of the movie several hours to render . To help finish preparing the special effects sequences on time , a number of other companies were brought on board , including Industrial Light & Magic , which worked alongside Weta Digital to create the battle sequences . ILM was responsible for the visual effects for many of the film 's specialized vehicles and devised a new way to make CGI explosions . Joe Letteri was the film 's visual effects general supervisor . 
 = = = Music and soundtrack = = = 
 Composer James Horner scored the film , his third collaboration with Cameron after Aliens and Titanic . Horner recorded parts of the score with a small chorus singing in the alien language Na 'vi in March 2008 . He also worked with Wanda Bryant , an ethnomusicologist , to create a music culture for the alien race . The first scoring sessions were planned to take place in early 2009 . During production , Horner promised Cameron that he would not work on any other project except for Avatar and reportedly worked on the score from four in the morning till ten at night throughout the process . He stated in an interview , " Avatar has been the most difficult film I have worked on and the biggest job I have undertaken . " Horner composed the score as two different scores merged into one . He first created a score that reflected the Na 'vi way of sound and then combined it with a separate " traditional " score to drive the film . British singer Leona Lewis was chosen to sing the theme song for the film , called " I See You " . An accompanying music video , directed by Jake Nava , premiered December 15 , 2009 , on MySpace . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Promotions = = = 
 The first photo of the film was released on August 14 , 2009 , and Empire released exclusive images from the film in its October issue . Cameron , producer Jon Landau , Zoe Saldana , Stephen Lang , and Sigourney Weaver appeared at a panel , moderated by Tom Rothman , at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con on July 23 . Twenty @-@ five minutes of footage was screened in Dolby 3D . Weaver and Cameron appeared at additional panels to promote the film , speaking on the 23rd and 24th respectively . James Cameron announced at the Comic @-@ Con Avatar Panel that August 21 will be ' Avatar Day ' . On this day , the trailer was released in all theatrical formats . The official game trailer and toy line of the film were also unveiled on this day . 
 The 129 @-@ second trailer was released online on August 20 , 2009 . The new 210 @-@ second trailer was premiered in theatres on October 23 , 2009 , then soon after premiered online on Yahoo ! on October 29 , 2009 , to positive reviews . An extended version in IMAX 3D received overwhelmingly positive reviews . The Hollywood Reporter said that audience expectations were coloured by " the [ same ] establishment skepticism that preceded Titanic " and suggested the showing reflected the desire for original storytelling . The teaser has been among the most viewed trailers in the history of film marketing , reaching the first place of all trailers viewed on <unk> with 4 million views . On October 30 , to celebrate the opening of the first 3 @-@ D cinema in Vietnam , Fox allowed <unk> Cinema to screen exclusive 16 minutes of Avatar to a number of press . The three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute trailer of the film premiered live on November 1 , 2009 , during a Dallas Cowboys football game at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington , Texas , on the Diamond Vision screen , one of the world 's largest video displays , and to TV audiences viewing the game on Fox . It is said to be the largest live motion picture trailer viewing in history . 
 The Coca @-@ Cola Company collaborated with Fox to launch a worldwide marketing campaign to promote the film . The highlight of the campaign was the website <unk> Specially marked bottles and cans of Coca @-@ Cola Zero , when held in front of a webcam , enabled users to interact with the website 's 3 @-@ D features using augmented reality ( AR ) technology . The film was heavily promoted in an episode of the Fox Network series Bones in the episode " The Gamer In The Grease " ( Season 5 , Episode 9 ) . Avatar star Joel David Moore has a recurring role on the program , and is seen in the episode anxiously awaiting the release of the film . A week prior to the American release , Zoe Saldana promoted the film on Adult Swim when she was interviewed by an animated Space Ghost . McDonald 's had a promotion mentioned in television commercials in Europe called " <unk> yourself " , which encouraged people to go to the website set up by <unk> , and use a photograph of themselves to change into a Na 'vi . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Avatar : A Confidential Report on the Biological and Social History of Pandora , a 224 @-@ page book in the form of a field guide to the film 's fictional setting of the planet of Pandora , was released by Harper Entertainment on November 24 , 2009 . It is presented as a compilation of data collected by the humans about Pandora and the life on it , written by Maria Wilhelm and Dirk Mathison . <unk> also released Wilhelm 's 48 @-@ page James Cameron 's Avatar : The Reusable Scrapbook for children . The Art of Avatar was released on November 30 , 2009 , by Abrams Books . The book features detailed production artwork from the film , including production sketches , illustrations by Lisa Fitzpatrick , and film stills . Producer Jon Landau wrote the foreword , Cameron wrote the epilogue , and director Peter Jackson wrote the preface . In October 2010 , Abrams Books also released The Making of Avatar , a 272 @-@ page book that detailed the film 's production process and contains over 500 color photographs and illustrations . 
 In a 2009 interview , Cameron said that he planned to write a novel version of Avatar after the film was released . In February 2010 , producer Jon Landau stated that Cameron plans a prequel novel for Avatar that will " lead up to telling the story of the movie , but it would go into much more depth about all the stories that we didn 't have time to deal with " , saying that " Jim wants to write a novel that is a big , epic story that fills in a lot of things " . In August 2013 it was announced that Cameron hired Steven Gould to pen four standalone novels to expand the Avatar universe . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Cameron chose Ubisoft Montreal to create an Avatar game for the film in 2007 . The filmmakers and game developers collaborated heavily , and Cameron decided to include some of Ubisoft 's vehicle and creature designs in the film . James Cameron 's Avatar : The Game was released on December 1 , 2009 , for most home video game consoles ( PS3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , Nintendo DS , iPhone ) , Microsoft Windows and December 8 for PSP . 
 = = = Action figures and postage stamps = = = 
 Mattel Toys announced in December 2009 that it would be introducing a line of Avatar action figures . Each action figure will be made with a 3 @-@ D web tag , called an i @-@ TAG , that consumers can scan using a web cam , revealing unique on @-@ screen content that is special to each specific action figure . A series of toys representing six different characters from the film were also distributed globally in McDonald 's Happy Meals . 
 In December 2009 , France Post released a special limited edition stamp based on Avatar , coinciding with the film 's worldwide release . 
 = = = Theme park attraction = = = 
 In 2011 , Cameron , <unk> , and Fox entered an exclusive licensing agreement with The Walt Disney Company to feature Avatar @-@ themed attractions at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts worldwide , including a themed land for Disney 's Animal Kingdom in Lake Buena Vista , Florida . At Disney 's 2013 D23 Expo , Disney announced that the area would include two attractions . Construction began in 2014 and is set to open in 2017 . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial screening = = = 
 Avatar premiered in London on December 10 , 2009 , and was released theatrically worldwide from December 16 to 18 . The film was originally set for release on May 22 , 2009 , during filming , but was pushed back to allow more post @-@ production time ( the last shots were delivered in November ) , and to give more time for theatres worldwide to install 3D projectors . Cameron stated that the film 's aspect ratio would be 1 @.@ 78 : 1 for 3D screenings and that a 2 @.@ 39 : 1 image would be extracted for 2D screenings . However , a 3D 2 @.@ 39 : 1 extract was approved for use with constant @-@ image @-@ height screens ( i.e. screens which increase in width to display 2 @.@ 39 : 1 films ) . During a 3D preview showing in Germany on December 16 , the movie 's DRM ' protection ' system failed , and some copies delivered could not be watched at all in the theaters . The problems were fixed in time for the public premiere . Avatar was released in a total of 3 @,@ 457 theatres in the US , of which 2 @,@ 032 theatres ran it in 3D . In total 90 % of all advance ticket sales for Avatar were for 3D screenings . 
 Internationally , Avatar opened on a total of 14 @,@ 604 screens in 106 territories , of which 3 @,@ 671 were showing the film in 3D ( producing 56 % of the first weekend gross ) . The film was simultaneously presented in IMAX 3D format , opening in 178 theaters in the United States on December 18 . The international IMAX release included 58 theaters beginning on December 16 , and 25 more theaters were to be added in the coming weeks . The IMAX release was the company 's widest to date , a total of 261 theaters worldwide . The previous IMAX record opening was Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , which opened in 161 IMAX theatres in the US , and about 70 international . 20th Century Fox Korea adapted and later released Avatar in 4D version , which included " moving seats , smells of explosives , sprinkling water , laser lights and wind " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 = = = = General = = = = 
 Avatar was released internationally on more than 14 @,@ 000 screens . It earned $ 3 @,@ 537 @,@ 000 from midnight screenings domestically ( United States and Canada ) , with the initial 3D release limited to 2 @,@ 200 screens . The film earned $ 26 @,@ 752 @,@ 099 on its opening day , and $ 77 @,@ 025 @,@ 481 over its opening weekend , making it the second @-@ largest December opening ever behind I Am Legend , the largest domestic opening weekend for a film not based on a franchise ( topping The Incredibles ) , the highest opening weekend for a film entirely in 3D ( breaking Up 's record ) , the highest opening weekend for an environmentalist film ( breaking The Day After Tomorrow 's record ) , and the 40th largest opening weekend in North America , despite a blizzard that blanketed the East Coast of the United States and reportedly hurt its opening weekend results . The film also set an IMAX opening weekend record , with 178 theaters generating approximately $ 9 @.@ 5 million , 12 % of the film 's $ 77 million ( at the time ) North American gross on less than 3 % of the screens . 
 International markets generating opening weekend tallies of at least $ 10 million were for Russia ( $ 19 @.@ 7 million ) , France ( $ 17 @.@ 4 million ) , the UK ( $ 13 @.@ 8 million ) , Germany ( $ 13 @.@ 3 million ) , South Korea ( $ 11 @.@ 7 million ) , Australia ( $ 11 @.@ 5 million ) and Spain ( $ 11 @.@ 0 million ) . Avatar 's worldwide gross was US $ 241 @.@ 6 million after five days , the ninth largest opening @-@ weekend gross of all time , and the largest for a non @-@ franchise , non @-@ sequel and original film . 58 international IMAX screens generated an estimated $ 4 @.@ 1 million during the opening weekend . 
 Revenues in the film 's second weekend decreased by only 1 @.@ 8 % in domestic markets , marking a rare occurrence , earning $ 75 @,@ 617 @,@ 183 , to remain in first place at the box office and recording the biggest second weekend of all time ( since surpassed by Marvel 's The Avengers ) . The film experienced another marginal decrease in revenue in its third weekend , dropping 9 @.@ 4 % to $ 68 @,@ 490 @,@ 688 domestically , remaining in first place at the box office , to set a third @-@ weekend record . 
 Avatar crossed the $ 1 billion mark on the 19th day of its international release , making it the first film to reach this mark in only 19 days ( a record now matched by both Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 in 2011 and The Avengers in 2012 ) . It became the fifth film grossing more than $ 1 billion worldwide , and the only film of 2009 to do so . In its fourth weekend , Avatar continued to lead the box office domestically , setting a new all @-@ time fourth @-@ weekend record of $ 50 @,@ 306 @,@ 217 , and becoming the highest @-@ grossing 2009 release in the United States . In the film 's fifth weekend , it set the Martin Luther King Day weekend record , grossing $ 54 @,@ 401 @,@ 446 , and set a fifth @-@ weekend record with a take of $ 42 @,@ 785 @,@ 612 . It held the top spot to set the sixth and seventh weekend records earning $ 34 @,@ 944 @,@ 081 and $ 31 @,@ 280 @,@ 029 respectively . It was the fastest film to gross $ 600 million domestically , on its 47th day in theatres . 
 On January 31 , it became the first film to earn over $ 2 billion worldwide , and it became the first film to gross over $ 700 million in North America , on February 27 , after 72 days of release . It remained at number one at the domestic box office for seven consecutive weeks – the most consecutive No. 1 weekends since Titanic spent 15 weekends at No.1 in 1997 and 1998 – and also spent 11 consecutive weekends at the top of the box office outside the United States and Canada , breaking the record of nine consecutive weekends set by Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest . By the end of its first theatrical release Avatar had grossed $ 749 @,@ 766 @,@ 139 in the U.S. and Canada , and $ 1 @,@ 999 @,@ 298 @,@ 189 in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 2 @,@ 749 @,@ 064 @,@ 328 . 
 Including the revenue from a re @-@ release of Avatar featuring extended footage , Avatar grossed $ 760 @,@ 507 @,@ 625 in the U.S. and Canada , and $ 2 @,@ 027 @,@ 457 @,@ 462 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 2 @,@ 787 @,@ 965 @,@ 087 with 72 @.@ 7 % of its total worldwide gross in international markets . Avatar has set a number of box office records during its release : on January 25 , 2010 , it surpassed Titanic 's worldwide gross to become the highest @-@ grossing film of all time worldwide 41 days after its international release , just two days after taking the foreign box office record . On February 2 , 47 days after its domestic release , Avatar surpassed Titanic to become the highest @-@ grossing film of all time in Canada and the United States . It became the highest @-@ grossing film of all time in at least 30 other countries and is the first film to earn over $ 2 billion in foreign box office receipts . IMAX ticket sales account for $ 243 @.@ 3 million of its worldwide gross , more than double the previous record . 
 Box Office Mojo estimates that after adjusting for the rise in average ticket prices , Avatar would be the 14th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time in North America . Box Office Mojo also observes that the higher ticket prices for 3D and IMAX screenings have had a significant impact on Avatar 's gross ; it estimated , on April 21 , 2010 , that Avatar had sold approximately 75 million tickets in North American theatres , more than any other film since 1999 's Star Wars Episode I : The Phantom Menace . On a worldwide basis , when Avatar 's gross stood at $ 2 billion just 35 days into its run , The Daily Telegraph estimated its gross was surpassed by only Gone with the Wind ( $ 3 @.@ 0 billion ) , Titanic ( $ 2 @.@ 9 billion ) and Star Wars ( $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ) after adjusting for inflation to 2010 prices , with Avatar ultimately winding up with $ 2 @.@ 8 billion by the end of its run in 2010 . Reuters even placed it ahead of Titanic after adjusting the global total for inflation . 
 = = = = Commercial analysis = = = = 
 Before its release , various film critics and fan communities predicted the film would be a significant disappointment at the box office , in line with predictions made for Cameron 's previous blockbuster Titanic . This criticism ranged from Avatar 's film budget , to its concept and use of 3 @-@ D " blue cat people " . Slate magazine 's Daniel <unk> complimented the 3D effects , but criticized them for reminding him of certain CGI characters from the Star Wars prequel films and for having the " uncanny valley " effect . The New York Times noted that 20th Century Fox executives had decided to release Alvin and the Chipmunks : The Squeakquel alongside Avatar , calling it a " secret weapon " to cover any unforeseeable losses at the box @-@ office . 
 Box office analysts , on the other hand , estimated that the film would be a box office success . " The holy grail of 3 @-@ D has finally arrived , " said an analyst for Exhibitor Relations . " This is why all these 3 @-@ D venues were built : for Avatar . This is the one . The behemoth . " The " cautionary estimate " was that Avatar would bring in around $ 60 million in its opening weekend . Others guessed higher . There were also analysts who believed that the film 's three @-@ dimensionality would help its box office performance , given that recent 3D films had been successful . 
 Cameron said he felt the pressure of the predictions , but that pressure is good for film @-@ makers . " It makes us think about our audiences and what the audience wants , " he stated . " We owe them a good time . We owe them a piece of good entertainment . " Although he felt Avatar would appeal to everyone and that the film could not afford to have a target demographic , he especially wanted hard @-@ core science @-@ fiction fans to see it : " If I can just get ' em in the damn theater , the film will act on them in the way it 's supposed to , in terms of taking them on an amazing journey and giving them this rich emotional experience . " Cameron was aware of the sentiment that Avatar would need significant " repeat business " just to make up for its budget and achieve box office success , and believed Avatar could inspire the same " sharing " reaction as Titanic . He said that film worked because , " When people have an experience that 's very powerful in the movie theatre , they want to go share it . They want to grab their friend and bring them , so that they can enjoy it . They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life . " 
 After the film 's release and unusually strong box office performance over its first two weeks , it was debated as the one film capable of surpassing Titanic 's worldwide gross , and its continued strength perplexed box office analysts . Other films in recent years had been cited as contenders for surpassing Titanic , such as 2008 's The Dark Knight , but Avatar was considered the first film with a genuine chance to do so , and its numbers being aided by higher ticket prices for 3D screenings did not fully explain its success to box office analysts . " Most films are considered to be healthy if they manage anything less than a 50 % drop from their first weekend to their second . Dipping just 11 % from the first to the third is unheard of , " said Paul Dergarabedian , president of box @-@ office analysis for Hollywood.com. " This is just unprecedented . I had to do a double take . I thought it was a miscalculation . " Analysts predicted second place for the film 's worldwide gross , but most were uncertain about it surpassing Titanic because " Today 's films flame out much faster than they did when Titanic was released . " Brandon Gray , president of Box Office Mojo , believed in the film 's chances of becoming the highest @-@ grossing film of all time , though he also believed it was too early to surmise because it had only played during the holidays . He said , " While Avatar may beat Titanic 's revenue record , it will be tough , and the film is unlikely to surpass Titanic in attendance . Ticket prices were about $ 3 cheaper in the late 1990s . " Cameron said he did not think it was realistic to " try to topple Titanic off its perch " because it " just struck some kind of chord " and there had been other good films in recent years . He changed his prediction by mid @-@ January . " It 's gonna happen . It 's just a matter of time , " he said . 
 Though analysts have been unable to agree that Avatar 's success is attributable to one primary factor , several explanations have been advanced . First , January is historically " the dumping ground for the year 's weakest films " , and this also applied to 2010 . Cameron himself said he decided to open the film in December so that it would have less competition from then to January . Titanic capitalized on the same January predictability , and earned most of its gross in 1998 . Additionally , Avatar established itself as a " must @-@ see " event . Gray said , " At this point , people who are going to see Avatar are going to see Avatar and would even if the slate was strong . " Marketing the film as a " novelty factor " also helped . Fox positioned the film as a cinematic event that should be seen in the theatres . " It 's really hard to sell the idea that you can have the same experience at home , " stated David <unk> , an analyst at <unk> The " Oscar buzz " surrounding the film and international viewings helped . " Two @-@ thirds of Titanic 's haul was earned overseas , and Avatar [ tracked ] similarly ... Avatar opened in 106 markets globally and was No. 1 in all of them " , and the markets " such as Russia , where Titanic saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998 , are white @-@ hot today " with " more screens and moviegoers " than before . 
 According to Variety , films in 3D accumulated $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in 2009 , " a threefold increase over 2008 and more than 10 % of the total 2009 box @-@ office gross " . The increased ticket price – an average of $ 2 to $ 3 per ticket in most markets – helped the film . Likewise , Entertainment Weekly attributed the film 's success to 3D glasses , but also to its " astronomic word @-@ of @-@ mouth " . Not only do some theaters charge up to $ 18 @.@ 50 for IMAX tickets , but " the buzz " created by the new technology was the possible cause for sold @-@ out screenings . Gray said Avatar having no basis in previously established material makes its performance remarkable and even more impressive . " The movie might be derivative of many movies in its story and themes , " he said , " but it had no direct antecedent like the other top @-@ grossing films : Titanic ( historical events ) , the Star Wars movies ( an established film franchise ) , or The Lord of the Rings ( literature ) . It was a tougher sell ... " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 See also : Themes in Avatar for more reviews 
 The film received mostly positive reviews . On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 83 % based on 292 reviews , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 4 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads " It might be more impressive on a technical level than as a piece of storytelling , but Avatar reaffirms James Cameron 's singular gift for imaginative , absorbing filmmaking . " On Metacritic — which assigns a weighted mean score , the film has a score of 83 out of 100 based on 35 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " . CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave Avatar was " A " on an A + to F scale . Every demographic surveyed was reported to give this rating . These polls also indicated that the main draw of the film was its use of 3D . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called the film " extraordinary " and gave it four stars out of four . " Watching Avatar , I felt sort of the same as when I saw Star Wars in 1977 , " he said , adding that like Star Wars and The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring , the film " employs a new generation of special effects " and it " is not simply a sensational entertainment , although it is that . It 's a technical breakthrough . It has a flat @-@ out Green and anti @-@ war message " . A. O. Scott of At The Movies also compared his viewing of the film to the first time he viewed Star Wars and he said " although the script is a little bit ... obvious , " it was " part of what made it work " . Todd McCarthy of Variety praised the film , saying " The King of the World sets his sights on creating another world entirely in Avatar , and it 's very much a place worth visiting . " Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review . " The screen is alive with more action and the soundtrack pops with more robust music than any dozen sci @-@ fi shoot- ' em @-@ ups you care to mention , " he stated . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded Avatar a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four star rating and wrote in his print review " It extends the possibilities of what movies can do . Cameron 's talent may just be as big as his dreams . " Richard Corliss of Time magazine thought that the film was " the most vivid and convincing creation of a fantasy world ever seen in the history of moving pictures . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times thought the film has " powerful " visual accomplishments but " flat dialogue " and " obvious characterization " . James Berardinelli of ReelViews praised the film and its story , giving it four out of four stars ; he wrote " In 3 @-@ D , it 's immersive – but the traditional film elements – story , character , editing , theme , emotional resonance , etc . – are presented with sufficient expertise to make even the 2 @-@ D version an engrossing 2 ½ -hour experience . " 
 Avatar 's underlying social and political themes attracted attention . Armond White of the New York Press wrote that Cameron used " villainous American characters " to " misrepresent facets of militarism , capitalism , and imperialism " . Russell D. Moore of The Christian Post concluded that " propaganda exists in the film " and stated " If you can get a theater full of people in Kentucky to stand and applaud the defeat of their country in war , then you 've got some amazing special effects . " Some commentators sympathetic to anarcho @-@ primitivism have even praised the film as a manifesto for their cause . Adam Cohen of The New York Times was more positive about the film , calling its anti @-@ imperialist message " a 22nd @-@ century version of the American colonists vs. the British , India vs. the Raj , or Latin America vs. United Fruit " . Ross Douthat of The New York Times opined that the film is " Cameron 's long apologia for pantheism ... Hollywood 's religion of choice for a generation now " , while Saritha Prabhu of The Tennessean called the film a " misportrayal of pantheism and Eastern spirituality in general " , and Maxim Osipov of The Hindustan Times , on the contrary , commended the film 's message for its overall consistency with the teachings of Hinduism in the Bhagavad Gita . Annalee Newitz of io9 concluded that Avatar is another film that has the recurring " fantasy about race " whereby " some white guy " becomes the " most awesome " member of a non @-@ white culture . Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune called Avatar " the season 's ideological Rorschach blot " , while Miranda Devine of The Sydney Morning Herald <unk> that " It [ was ] impossible to watch Avatar without being banged over the head with the director 's ideological hammer . " <unk> <unk> believed that an essential , yet less visible social theme that contributed to Avatar 's success concerns contemporary fascinations with virtual avatars and " the transition from the world of reality to that of virtual reality . " . 
 Critics and audiences have cited similarities with other films , literature or media , describing the perceived connections in ways ranging from simple " borrowing " to outright plagiarism . Ty Burr of the Boston Globe called it " the same movie " as Dances with Wolves . Like Dances with Wolves , Avatar has been characterized as being a " white savior " movie , in which a " backwards " native people is impotent without the leadership of a member of the invading white culture . Parallels to the concept and use of an avatar are in Poul Anderson 's 1957 novelette " Call Me Joe " , in which a paralyzed man uses his mind from orbit to control an artificial body on Jupiter . Cinema audiences in Russia have noted that Avatar has elements in common with the 1960s Noon Universe novels by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky , which are set in the 22nd century on a forested world called Pandora with a sentient indigenous species called the Nave . Various reviews have compared Avatar to the films FernGully : The Last Rainforest , Pocahontas and The Last Samurai . NPR 's Morning Edition has compared the film to a montage of tropes , with one commentator stating that Avatar was made by mixing a bunch of film scripts in a blender . Gary Westfahl wrote that " the science fiction story that most closely resembles Avatar has to be Ursula K. Le Guin 's novella " The Word for World Is Forest " ( 1972 ) , another epic about a benevolent race of alien beings who happily inhabit dense forests while living in harmony with nature until they are attacked and slaughtered by invading human soldiers who believe that the only good gook is a dead gook . " The science fiction writer and editor Gardner Dozois said that along with the Anderson and Le Guin stories , the " mash @-@ up " included Alan Dean Foster 's 1975 novel , <unk> . Some sources saw similarities to the artwork of Roger Dean , which featured fantastic images of floating rock formations and dragons . In 2013 , Dean sued Cameron and Fox , claiming that Pandora was inspired by 14 of his images . Dean sought damages of $ 50m . Dean 's case was dismissed in 2014 , and the Hollywood Reporter noted that Cameron has won multiple Avatar idea theft cases . 
 Avatar received compliments from filmmakers , with Steven Spielberg praising it as " the most evocative and amazing science @-@ fiction movie since Star Wars " and others calling it " audacious and awe inspiring " , " master class " , and " brilliant " . Noted art director @-@ turned @-@ filmmaker Roger Christian is also a noted fan of the film . On the other hand , Duncan Jones said : " It 's not in my top three James Cameron films . ... [ A ] t what point in the film did you have any doubt what was going to happen next ? " . Time ranked Avatar number 3 in their list of " The 10 Greatest Movies of the Millennium ( Thus Far ) " also earning it a spot on the magazine 's All @-@ TIME 100 list , and IGN listed Avatar as number 22 on their list of the top 25 Sci @-@ Fi movies of all time . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Avatar won the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , and Best Visual Effects , and was nominated for a total of nine , including Best Picture and Best Director . Avatar also won the 67th Golden Globe Awards for Best Motion Picture – Drama and Best Director , and was nominated for two others . At the 36th Saturn Awards , Avatar won all ten awards it was nominated for : Best Science Fiction Film , Best Actor , Best Actress , Best Supporting Actor , Best Supporting Actress , Best Director , Best Writing , Best Music , Best Production Design and Best Special Effects . 
 The New York Film Critics Online honored the film with its Best Picture award . The film also won the Critics ' Choice Awards of the Broadcast Film Critics Association for Best Action Film and several technical categories , out of nine nominations . It won two of the St. Louis Film Critics awards : Best Visual Effects and Most Original , Innovative or Creative Film . The film also won the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) award for Production Design and Special Visual Effects , and was nominated for seven others , including Best Film and Director . The film has received numerous other major awards , nominations and honors . 
 = = = Extended theatrical re @-@ release = = = 
 In July 2010 , Cameron confirmed that there would be an extended theatrical re @-@ release of the film on August 27 , 2010 , exclusively in 3D theaters and IMAX 3D . Avatar : Special Edition includes an additional nine minutes of footage , all of which is CG , including an extension of the sex scene and various other scenes that were cut from the original theatrical film . This extended re @-@ release resulted in the film 's run time approaching the current IMAX platter maximum of 170 minutes , thereby leaving less time for the end credits . Cameron stated that the nine minutes of added scenes cost more than $ 1 million a minute to produce and finish . During its 12 @-@ week re @-@ release , Avatar : Special Edition grossed an additional $ 10 @.@ 74 million in North America and $ 22 @.@ 46 million overseas for a worldwide total of $ 33 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the US on April 22 , 2010 and in the UK on April 26 . The US release was not on a Tuesday as is the norm , but was done to coincide with Earth Day . The first DVD and Blu @-@ ray release does not contain any supplemental features other than the theatrical film and the disc menu in favor of and to make space for optimal picture and sound . The release also preserves the film 's native 1 @.@ 78 : 1 ( 16 : 9 ) format as Cameron felt that was the best format to watch the film . The Blu @-@ ray disc contains DRM ( BD + 5 ) which some Blu @-@ ray players might not support without a firmware update . 
 Avatar set a first @-@ day launch record in the U.S. for Blu @-@ ray sales at 1 @.@ 5 million units sold , breaking the record previously held by The Dark Knight ( 600 @,@ 000 units sold ) . First @-@ day DVD and Blu @-@ ray sales combined were over four million units sold . In its first four days of release , sales of Avatar on Blu @-@ ray reached 2 @.@ 7 million in the United States and Canada – overtaking The Dark Knight to become the best ever selling Blu @-@ ray release in the region . The release later broke the Blu @-@ ray sales record in the UK the following week . In its first three weeks of release , the film sold a total of 19 @.@ 7 million DVD and Blu @-@ ray discs combined , a new record for sales in that period . As of July 18 , 2012 , DVD sales ( not including Blu @-@ ray ) totaled over 10 @.@ 5 million units sold with $ 190 @,@ 806 @,@ 055 in revenue . Avatar retained its record as the top @-@ selling Blu @-@ ray in the US market until January 2015 when Disney 's Frozen surpassed it . 
 The Avatar Three @-@ Disc Extended Collector 's Edition on DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on November 16 , 2010 . Three different versions of the film are present on the discs : the original theatrical cut , the special edition cut , and a collector 's extended cut ( with the DVD set spreading them on two discs , but the Blu @-@ ray set presenting them on a single disc ) . The collector 's extended cut contains 6 more minutes of footage , thus making it 16 minutes longer than the original theatrical cut . Cameron mentioned , " you can sit down , and in a continuous screening of the film , watch it with the Earth opening " . He stated the " Earth opening " is an additional 4 ½ minutes of scenes that were in the film for much of its production but were ultimately cut before the film 's theatrical release . The release also includes an additional 45 minutes of deleted scenes and other extras . 
 Cameron initially stated that Avatar would be released in 3D around November 2010 , but the studio issued a correction : " 3 @-@ D is in the conceptual stage and Avatar will not be out on 3D Blu @-@ ray in November . " In May 2010 , Fox stated that the 3D version would be released some time in 2011 . It was later revealed that Fox had given Panasonic an exclusive license for the 3D Blu @-@ ray version and only with the purchase of a Panasonic <unk> . The length of Panasonic 's exclusivity period is stated to last until February 2012 . On October 2010 , Cameron stated that the standalone 3D Blu @-@ ray would be the final version of the film 's home release and that it was , " maybe one , two years out " . On Christmas Eve 2010 , Avatar had its 3D television world premiere on Sky . 
 On August 13 , 2012 , Cameron announced on Facebook that Avatar would be released globally on Blu @-@ ray 3D . The Blu @-@ ray 3D version was finally released on October 16 , 2012 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 In 2006 , Cameron stated that if Avatar was successful , he hoped to make two sequels to the film . In 2010 , he said the film 's widespread success confirmed that he would . He included certain scenes in the first film for future story follow @-@ ups . Cameron planned to shoot the sequels back @-@ to @-@ back and to begin work " once the novel is nailed down " . He stated that the sequels would widen the universe while exploring other moons of Polyphemus . The first sequel would focus on the ocean of Pandora and also feature more of the rainforest . He intended to capture footage for this sequel at the bottom of the Mariana Trench using a deepwater submersible . In 2011 , Cameron stated that he was just starting to design the ocean ecosystem of Pandora and the other worlds to be included in the story . The storyline , although continuing the environmental theme of the first film , would not be " strident " since the film will concentrate on entertainment . 
 The sequels would continue to follow the characters of Jake and Neytiri . Cameron implied that the humans would return as the antagonists of the story . Worthington and Saldana signed on to reprise their roles in the sequels . In 2010 , Cameron confirmed that Sigourney Weaver and Stephen Lang were also expected to return despite the demise of their characters . The sequels were originally scheduled for release in December 2014 and 2015 . In 2011 , Cameron stated his intention to film the sequels at a higher frame rate than the industry standard 24 frames per second , in order to add a heightened sense of reality . 
 In 2012 , Cameron first mentioned a possible third sequel . That year , Cameron stated that the sequels were being written as " separate stories that have an overall arc inclusive of the first film " , with the second having a clear conclusion instead of a cliffhanger to the next film . Cameron expected to release Avatar 2 in 2015 . In 2013 , it was confirmed that there would be three sequels . Screenwriters were also announced : Josh Friedman for the first , Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver for the second , and Shane Salerno for the third . Production was re @-@ scheduled for 2014 with the films to be released in December 2016 , 2017 , and 2018 . Steven Gould was engaged to write four novels based on the films . Later that year , Cameron announced that the sequels would be filmed in New Zealand , with performance capture to take place in 2014 . An agreement with the New Zealand government required at least one world premiere to be held in Wellington and at least NZ $ 500 million ( approximately US $ 410 million at December 2013 exchange rates ) to be spent on production activity in New Zealand , including live @-@ action filming and visual effects . The New Zealand government announced it would raise its baseline tax rebate for filmmaking from 15 % to 20 % , with 25 % available to international productions in some cases and 40 % for New Zealand productions ( as defined by section 18 of the New Zealand Film Commission Act 1978 ) . 
 In April 2014 , Cameron expected to finish the three scripts within six weeks , stating that all three sequels would be in production simultaneously and were still slated for December 2016 to 2018 releases . He stated that although Friedman , Jaffa and Silver , and Salerno are each co @-@ writing one sequel with him , they at first all worked together on all three scripts : " I didn 't assign each writer which film they were going to work on until the last day . I knew if I assigned them their scripts ahead of time , they 'd tune out every time we were talking about the other movie . " " We ... worked out every beat of the story across all three films so it all connects as one , sort of , three @-@ film saga . " Cameron also stated that Weaver would be featured in all three sequels and that her character Grace Augustine would be alive . In March 2015 , however , Weaver said that she will play a new character in the next film . 
 By 2015 , the scheduled release dates for the sequels were each delayed by another year , with the first sequel expected to be released in December 2017 ; Cameron called the writing process " a complex job " . In June 2015 , James Horner , who was reported to be engaged to write music for the franchise , was killed in a plane crash . In December , Cameron stated that he was " doing another pass through all three scripts ... Just refining . That ’ s in parallel with the design process . The design process is very mature at this point . We ’ ve been designing for about a year and a half . All the characters , settings and creatures are all pretty much [ set ] . " The following month , Fox announced a further release delay . 
 As of February 2016 , production of the sequels was scheduled to begin in April 2016 in New Zealand . In April 2016 , Cameron announced at CinemaCon that there will be four Avatar sequels , all of which will be filmed simultaneously , with release dates in December 2018 , 2020 , 2022 and 2023 , respectively . 
 = Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix = 
 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the fifth novel in the Harry Potter series , written by J. K. Rowling . It follows Harry Potter 's struggles through his fifth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry , including the surreptitious return of the antagonist Lord Voldemort , <unk> exams , and an obstructive Ministry of Magic . The novel was published on 21 June 2003 by Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom , Scholastic in the United States , and Raincoast in Canada . Five million copies were sold in the first 24 hours of publication . It is the longest book of the series . 
 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix has won several awards , including being named an American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults in 2003 . The book has also been made into a film , which was released in 2007 , and into a video game by Electronic Arts . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During another summer with his Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon , Harry Potter and Dudley are attacked by <unk> . After using magic to save Dudley and himself , Harry is expelled from Hogwarts , but the decision is later rescinded . Harry is whisked off by a group of wizards to Number 12 , Grimmauld Place , the home of his godfather , Sirius Black . The house also serves as the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix , of which Mr. and Mrs. Weasley , Remus Lupin , Mad @-@ Eye Moody , and Sirius are members . Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger explain that the Order of the Phoenix is a secret organisation led by Hogwarts headmaster Albus Dumbledore , dedicated to fighting Lord Voldemort and his followers , the Death Eaters . From the members of the Order , Harry and the others learn that Voldemort is seeking an object that he did not have prior to his first defeat , and assume this object to be a weapon of some sort . Harry learns that the Ministry of Magic , led by Cornelius Fudge , is refusing to acknowledge Voldemort 's return because of the trouble that doing so would cause , and has been running a smear campaign against him and Dumbledore . 
 At Hogwarts , Harry learns that Dolores Umbridge , a senior employee under the Minister of Magic , Cornelius Fudge , will be the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher . Umbridge and Harry clash , as she , like Fudge , refuses to believe that Voldemort has returned . She punishes Harry for his rebellious outbursts by having him write " I must not tell lies " with a cursed quill that carves the phrase into his skin . She also refuses to teach her students how to perform defensive spells , prompting Harry , Ron and Hermione to form their own Defence Against the Dark Arts group ( with students from Gryffindor , Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff ) , which they call Dumbledore 's Army . Many students sign up , including Neville Longbottom , Fred and George Weasley , Ginny Weasley and Luna Lovegood . The club meets in the Room of Requirement to learn and practise Defence spells under Harry 's instruction . 
 Meanwhile , Rubeus Hagrid has not yet returned from the secret mission given to him by Dumbledore at the end of the previous book , and is absent for the first part of the school year . Upon his return , Harry , Ron , and Hermione learn that his mission , which was mostly unsuccessful , was to seek out the last giants to stop them from joining Lord Voldemort . Dolores Umbridge has been steadily amassing more and more power and influence at the school , and as she begins regularly inspecting Hagrid 's Care of Magical Creatures lessons , it is clear that she intends to get rid of him . 
 One night , Harry has a vision through the eyes of Voldemort 's snake Nagini , possessed by Voldemort , attacking Ron 's father Arthur Weasley . Harry informs Professor McGonagall and Dumbledore , and Mr. Weasley is rescued . Dumbledore arranges for Harry to take Occlumency lessons with Professor Snape to protect his mind against further invasions by Voldemort . 
 Umbridge finally sacks Professor Trelawney , the Divination teacher ; However , she is outraged when Professor Dumbledore undermines her power by allowing Trelawney to continue living at the school , and hires Firenze , a centaur , to take her place , in spite of Umbridge 's prejudice against part @-@ humans . Soon after , Umbridge is given a tip @-@ off about Dumbledore 's Army by Marietta Edgecomb , who in doing so unwittingly activates a curse set by Hermione which disfigures her face . When Dumbledore takes responsibility for the illegal organisation , he is forced to leave the school and go into hiding . Dolores Umbridge becomes headmistress , and Fred and George cause pandemonium around the school in revenge . 
 During one Occlumency lesson , Snape is called away and Harry , left alone , looks into Snape 's <unk> , viewing a memory of his time as a student at Hogwarts . Harry sees his father , James Potter , and Sirius bullying Snape . Snape catches Harry and , enraged , refuses to continue the lessons . Distraught , Harry talks to Sirius and Lupin by using Floo powder through the fireplace in Umbridge 's own office , under cover of a distraction by Fred and George . The twins then leave Hogwarts to start a joke @-@ shop in Diagon Alley . 
 Suspecting that he will be next teacher to be sacked by Umbridge , Hagrid confesses to Harry , Ron and Hermione that he has brought his giant half @-@ brother , Grawp , to Hogwarts , and hidden him in the Forbidden Forest , with the intention of eventually introducing him to human society . Hagrid asks the three of them to look after Grawp if he himself must leave the school . Sure enough , Umbridge leads a party of <unk> to attack Hagrid in his house one night . Hagrid overpowers them and flees the school . McGonagall , trying to disrupt the violence , is badly injured and is put in St. Mungo 's Hospital . 
 On the last day of OWL tests , Harry has a vision of Sirius being tortured by Voldemort in the Department of Mysteries . He tries again to illegally use Umbridge 's office fire to communicate with the Order of the Phoenix 's headquarters to make sure the vision was genuine , and is told by Kreacher the house @-@ elf that Sirius is indeed at the Ministry , before Umbridge catches Harry and his friends in the act . Snape is summoned to provide <unk> in order to question Harry , but he claims to have no further stocks of the potion left . Remembering that Snape is also a member of the Order of the Phoenix , Harry gives him a cryptic warning about Sirius 's fate , but Snape claims to have not understood it . 
 Umbridge decides to use the illegal <unk> Curse on Harry to interrogate him on Sirius 's whereabouts . She also reveals she herself ordered the <unk> attack on him , intending to have him either silenced or discredited . Hermione intervenes and in order to create a distraction , convinces Umbridge that they are hiding a weapon of Dumbledore 's in the Forbidden Forest . Harry and Hermione lead her into an area of the forest inhabited by centaurs , where Umbridge provokes them into taking her captive . The centaurs are furious upon learning that Hermione used them to do her bidding and turn on the pair , but Grawp arrives and clashes with the centaurs , allowing Harry and Hermione to escape . 
 Luna , Ron , Ginny , and Neville join them in the forest and all six fly to the Ministry on <unk> , expecting to find and rescue Sirius . Once in the Department of Mysteries , Harry realises that his vision was falsely planted by Voldemort ; however , he finds a glass sphere that bears his and the Dark Lord 's names . Death Eaters led by Lucius Malfoy attack in order to capture the sphere , which is a recording of a prophecy concerning Harry and Lord Voldemort , which is revealed to be the object Voldemort has been trying to obtain for the whole year , the Dark Lord believing that there was something he missed when he first heard the prophecy . Lucius explains that only the subjects of the prophecies , in this case Harry or Voldemort , can safely remove them from the shelves . Harry and his friends , soon joined by members of the Order , enter a battle with the Death Eaters . Amidst the chaos , Bellatrix Lestrange kills Sirius and Harry faces Voldemort . Voldemort attempts to kill Harry , but Dumbledore prevents him and <unk> fights the Dark Lord to a stalemate . In the midst of the duel , Voldemort unsuccessfully tries to possess Harry in an attempt to get Dumbledore to kill the boy . Dumbledore does not do so and Voldemort escapes just as Cornelius Fudge appears , finally faced with first @-@ hand evidence that Voldemort has truly returned . 
 In his office , Dumbledore explains that Snape had understood Harry 's cryptic warning , and had subsequently contacted Sirius , learning that he was still at Grimmauld Place . After Harry failed to return from the Forbidden Forest , Snape deduced that he had gone to the Department of Mysteries and alerted the Order of the Phoenix , allowing them to travel there and save Harry and his friends . It is revealed that during the Christmas holidays , Kreacher had interpreted a command of Sirius 's as an order to leave the house , and went to Narcissa Malfoy , the wife of Lucius , and told them about Harry and Sirius 's close relationship ; Voldemort subsequently realised that he could lure Harry to the Department of Mysteries by tricking him into thinking that Sirius was in danger there . 
 Dumbledore then explains the prophecy : Before Harry was born , Professor Trelawney predicted that a boy with the power to defeat Voldemort would be born , would be marked as an equal by Voldemort and have power unknown to him , and that one of the pair must kill the other , for " neither can live while the other survives " . Voldemort learnt of the first part of the prophecy , and subsequently tried to murder Harry in the belief that he could prevent it from coming true , unaware that he would grant Harry power by doing so . Dumbledore tells Harry that he must stay with the Dursleys for one last summer because by taking Harry into her home , his Aunt Petunia , Lily 's sister , seals the protection that Harry 's mother afforded him when she died ; as long as he is there , he is safe from Voldemort and his followers . 
 Harry comes to terms with the responsibility of the prophecy , but mourns for the loss of his godfather . Luna comforts him , telling him about her and her father 's belief in heaven . Harry then finds an old hand @-@ held mirror in his dormitory that was a gift from Sirius . He realises that Sirius would not want him to be depressed on the matter , and resolves to continue fighting Voldemort still . 
 = = Publication and release = = 
 Potter fans waited three years between the releases of the fourth and fifth books . Before the release of the fifth book , 200 million copies of the first four books had already been sold and translated into 55 languages in 200 countries . As the series was already a global phenomenon , the book forged new pre @-@ order records , with thousands of people queuing outside book stores on 20 June 2003 to secure their copy at midnight . Despite the security , thousands of copies were stolen from an Earlestown , Merseyside warehouse on 15 June 2003 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was met with mostly positive reviews , and received several awards . The book was cited as an American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults and as an American Library Association Notable Book , both in 2004 . It also received the Oppenheim Toy Portfolio 2004 Gold Medal along with several other awards . 
 The novel was also well received by critics . Rowling was praised for her imagination by USA Today writer Deirdre Donahue . Most of the negative reviewers were concerned with the violence contained in the novel and with morality issues occurring throughout the book . 
 The New York Times writer John Leonard praised the novel , saying " The Order of the Phoenix starts slow , gathers speed and then skateboards , with somersaults , to its furious conclusion .... As Harry gets older , Rowling gets better . " However , he also criticises " the one @-@ note Draco Malfoy " and the predictable Lord Voldemort . Another review by Julie Smithouser , of the Christian @-@ right group Focus on the Family , said the book was , " Likely to be considered the weakest book in the series , Phoenix does feel less oppressive than the two most previous novels . " Smithouser 's main criticism was that the book was not moral . Harry lies to authority to escape punishment , and that , at times , the violence is too " gruesome and graphic . " 
 = = = Predecessors and sequels = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the fifth book in the Harry Potter series . The first book in the series , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone was first published by Bloomsbury in 1997 with an initial print @-@ run of 500 copies in hardback , three hundred of which were distributed to libraries . By the end of 1997 , the UK edition won a National Book Award and a gold medal in the 9 to 11 year @-@ olds category of the Nestlé Smarties Book Prize . The second novel , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was published in the UK on 2 July 1998 . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999 . Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 simultaneously by Bloomsbury and Scholastic . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book from the series , yet the second shortest film at 2 hours and 18 minutes . 
 After the publishing of Order of the Phoenix , the sixth book of the series , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , was published on 16 July 2005 , and sold 9 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release . The seventh and final novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , was published 21 July 2007 . The book sold 11 million copies within 24 hours of its release : 2 @.@ 7 million copies in the UK and 8 @.@ 3 million in the US . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 2007 , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was released in a film version directed by David Yates and written by Michael Goldenberg . The film was produced by David Heyman 's company , Heyday Films , alongside David Barron . The budget was reportedly between £ 75 and 100 million ( US $ 150 – 200 million ) , and it became the unadjusted eleventh @-@ highest grossing film of all time , and a critical and commercial success . The film opened to a worldwide 5 @-@ day opening of $ 333 million , third all @-@ time , and grossed $ 938 @.@ 4 million in total , second to Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End for the greatest total of 2007 . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 A video game adaptation of the book and film versions of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was made for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , PSP , Nintendo DS , Wii , Game Boy Advance and Mac OS X. It was released on 25 June 2007 in the U.S. , 28 June 2007 in Australia and 29 June 2007 in the UK and Europe for PlayStation 3 , PSP , PlayStation 2 , Windows and 3 July 2007 for most other platforms . The games were published by Electronic Arts . 
 The book is also depicted in the 2011 video game Lego Harry Potter : Years 5 – 7 . 
 = = Translations = = 
 The first official foreign translation of the book appeared in Vietnamese on 21 July 2003 , when the first of twenty @-@ two instalments was released . The first official European translation appeared in Serbia and Montenegro in Serbian , by the official publisher Narodna <unk> , in early September 2003 . Other translations appeared later ( e.g. in November 2003 in Dutch and German ) . The English @-@ language version has topped the best @-@ seller list in France , while in Germany and the Netherlands an unofficial distributed translation process has been started on the Internet . 
 = Hugh Boustead = 
 Colonel Sir John Edmond Hugh Boustead , KBE , CMG , DSO , MC & Bar ( 14 April 1895 – 3 April 1980 ) , was a British military officer , modern pentathlete , and diplomat who served in numerous posts across several Middle Eastern countries , including ambassador to Abu Dhabi from 1961 to 1965 . The son of a tea planter from Sri Lanka , Boustead began his career with the Royal Navy , but soon joined the British Army to fight in the trenches during World War I , where he earned his first of two Military Crosses . Following an appearance at the 1920 Summer Olympics , Boustead spent several years as a mountaineer and explorer prior to being appointed commander of the Sudan Camel Corps , with whom he served through World War II . He then embarked on a diplomatic career until his 1965 retirement and published an autobiography , The Wind of Morning , in 1971 , nine years prior to his death in Dubai . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Boustead was born on 14 April 1895 in Nuwara Eliya , Sri Lanka , the son of a local tea planter who later became a director of The Imperial Ethiopian Rubber Company . He was educated at the Cheam School and attended Britannia Royal Naval College ( then Royal Naval College , Dartmouth ) prior to the onset of World War I , where he began the conflict as a midshipman in the Royal Navy , having attained that rank on 15 January 1913 . On 15 May 1915 he was promoted to acting Sub @-@ Lieutenant , but deserted this post one month later while on leave in Simon 's Town to engage in trench warfare as a member of the Transvaal Scottish Regiment from South Africa . He earned a Military Cross at the Battle of Arras , which was gazetted on 26 July 1917 with the citation : 
 SOUTH <unk> FORCE . 
 2nd Lt. Hugh Boustead , <unk> . 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . As intelligence and sniping officer he showed great skill and initiative in posting the snipers . His fine leadership and good disposition largely contributed to the success of the operation . 
 Boustead received the honour from George V of the United Kingdom on 15 August 1917 and transferred to the British Indian Army ten days later . He was posted to the 2nd battalion 4th Gurkha Rifles . He was promoted to lieutenant on 6 August 1918 . He returned to the South African Army on 30 September 1918 . A Bar to the MC followed , for actions on 25 August 1919 at <unk> , fighting alongside the Cossacks against the Bolshevik Red Army . The citation was gazetted on 23 April 1920 and read : 
 SOUTH <unk> FORCE . 
 2nd Lt. ( A. / Capt. ) Hugh Boustead , M.C. S. <unk> . <unk> . 
 For conspicuous gallantry at <unk> , on the 25th August , 1919 , when by the skilful manner in which he personally handed Lewis guns he assisted in beating off several hostile cavalry attacks , and by his example greatly inspired the Lewis @-@ gun sections of the Russian regiment to which he was attached . 
 ( M.C. gazetted 26th July , 1917 . ) 
 At this time he was officially an " Instr [ <unk> ] , Physical Training " with the infantry . His gallantry eventually led to the pardoning of his earlier desertion . 
 = = Career = = 
 A boxing champion in the lightweight division during his service with the British army , Boustead was recruited to captain the British team in the modern pentathlon at the 1920 Summer Olympics . He finished joint 14th in a field of 23 competitors in his only Olympic appearance . He then continued his military career and , after transferring to the Gordon Highlanders , he was seconded from them to serve in Sudan beginning 19 November 1924 . A seasoned explorer , he participated in both the 1926 British expedition to Kangchenjunga and the 1933 expedition to Mount Everest , organized his own mountaineering expedition in Sikkim , explored the Libyan desert with Ralph Alger Bagnold in 1932 , and traversed the wastes of Greenland . 
 Boustead was promoted to the rank of captain on 1 March 1927 and served as a General Staff Officer , Third Grade from 22 July 1929 to 26 November 1930 . He was promoted to local major on 3 February 1931 , a secondment that culminated in his appointment as commander of the Sudan Camel Corps later that year . He was then promoted to local lieutenant colonel on 17 October 1931 and awarded a brevet majority on 1 January 1933 . He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1934 King 's Birthday Honours . His secondment ended on 19 November 1934 and he returned to regimental duty with the Gordons in his substantive rank of captain . He retired in April 1935 to begin a career with the Sudan Political Service and spent five years as District Commissioner in Darfur . 
 Boustead rejoined the military following the onset of World War II to raise , train , and command the Sudanese Frontier Force . As a local Lieutenant @-@ Colonel and commander of its Camel Corps he led some of the units that helped restore Emperor Haile Selassie I to the throne of Ethiopia in 1941 . For his actions in this conflict , he was recommended for the Distinguished Service Order by Orde Wingate on 15 August 1941 , which he received on 30 December 1941 , being Mentioned in Despatches on the same date . His World War II service officially ended on 7 December 1946 and the honorary rank of Colonel was <unk> upon him . 
 After the conflict Boustead served as a diplomat in several Middle Eastern countries including Sudan , Yemen , and Oman , prior to spending nine years ( 1949 @-@ 1958 ) as a Resident Adviser in the Aden Protectorate . His next post was the then @-@ Sultanate of Muscat and Oman , where held the position of Development Secretary . He was appointed political agent ( then equivalent to ambassador ) of Abu Dhabi in 1961 , a post that he held until 1965 . He was promoted Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the New Year Honours that year , and presented with the Lawrence of Arabia Memorial Medal of the Royal Society for Asian Affairs . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his 1965 retirement Boustead went on a lecture tour in the United States and eventually settled down in <unk> , Al Ain , where he was asked by Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan to oversee his stable of horses in Al Ain . In 1971 he published his autobiography , The Wind of Morning , which was well received . In addition to his knighthood , DSO , and receiving the Military Cross and Bar , he was appointed Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George in the 1954 Queen 's Birthday Honours and awarded the St George 's Military Medal with 1 Palm by Haile Selassie . He died on 3 April 1980 in Dubai at the age of 84 , having never married . At Boustead 's death , British MP Richard Luce claimed that no one had a greater impact in " cement [ ing ] relations between the British and the Arabs " as Boustead . 
 = Tomb of Antipope John XXIII = 
 The Tomb of Antipope John XXIII is the marble @-@ and @-@ bronze tomb monument of Antipope John XXIII ( Baldassare Cossa , c . 1360 – 1419 ) , created by Donatello and Michelozzo for the Florence Baptistry adjacent to the Duomo . It was commissioned by the executors of Cossa 's will after his death on December 22 , 1419 and completed during the 1420s , establishing it as one of the early landmarks of Renaissance Florence . According to Ferdinand <unk> , the tomb is " at once the sepulchre of the Great Schism in the church and the last papal tomb which is outside Rome itself " . 
 Cossa had a long history of cooperation with Florence , which had viewed him as the legitimate pontiff for a time during the Western Schism . The tomb monument is often interpreted as an attempt to strengthen the legitimacy of Cossa 's pontificate by linking him to the spiritually powerful site of the Baptistry . The evocation of papal symbolism on the tomb and the linkage between Cossa and Florence have been interpreted as a snub to Cossa 's successor Pope Martin V or vicarious " Medici self @-@ promotion " , as such a tomb would have been deemed unacceptable for a Florentine citizen . 
 The tomb monument 's design included figures of the three Virtues in niches , Cossa 's family arms , a gilded bronze recumbent effigy laid out above an inscription @-@ bearing sarcophagus supported on corbel brackets , and above it a Madonna and Child in a half @-@ lunette , with a canopy over all . At the time of its completion , the monument was the tallest sculpture in Florence , and one of very few tombs within the Baptistry or the neighboring Duomo . The tomb monument was the first of several collaborations between Donatello and Michelozzo , and the attribution of its various elements to each of them has been debated by art historians , as have the interpretations of its design and iconography . 
 = = Antipope John XXIII = = 
 Antipope John XXIII had a complicated life , legacy , and relationship with the city of Florence . Baldassare Cossa was a Neapolitan nobleman who grew up in Bologna . Pope Boniface IX elevated Cossa to the Archdiocese of Bologna in 1396 and made him a cardinal in 1402 . After the Council of Pisa in 1409 , Cossa encouraged rebellion against Pope Gregory XII , who refused to resign . Cossa was deprived of his cardinalate , but it was restored by Antipope Alexander V , who had been elected by the council . 
 Cossa succeeded Alexander V as John XXIII in 1410 . John XXIII was acknowledged as pope by France , England , Bohemia , Prussia , Portugal , parts of the Holy Roman Empire , and numerous Northern Italian city states , including Florence and Venice ; however , the Avignon Pope Benedict XIII was regarded as pope by the Kingdoms of Aragon , Castile , and Scotland and Gregory XII was still favored by Ladislaus of Naples , Carlo I Malatesta , the princes of Bavaria , Louis III , Elector of the Palatinate , and parts of Germany and Poland . 
 When Ladislaus of Naples conquered Rome in 1413 , John XXIII was forced to flee to Florence . He was compelled by Sigismund , Holy Roman Emperor , to convoke the Council of Constance in 1414 , although when the threat to his pontificate and possibly his person became apparent , he fled in 1415 . Although he expected his departure would disperse the council , the members of which he called to join him under the protection of Frederick IV , Duke of Austria , it continued to operate where they were . As John XXIII tried to make his way towards the territory of John II , Duke of Burgundy , Frederick IV surrendered him to the custody of Sigismund and the Council , and he was imprisoned by Louis III . 
 In the meantime , the Council deposed John XXIII on May 29 , 1415 and elected Pope Martin V on November 11 , 1417 ; Martin V proceeded to Florence in February 1419 . Cossa was ransomed by the Republic of Florence in 1419 ( Louis III had abandoned the allegiance of Sigismund in 1417 ) , as orchestrated by Giovanni di Bicci de ' Medici . His ransom may have been a reward for past assistance to Florence , or a manoeuvre to put pressure on Martin V ( still in Florence ; he would arrive in Rome in September 1420 ) , or both . Cossa had helped Florence conquer Pisa in 1405 in his capacity as Papal legate to Bologna and , as pope , had designated the Medici bank as the depository @-@ general for the papal finances . 
 In Florence , Cossa submitted to Martin V on June 14 , 1419 and was rewarded with a cardinal 's hat on June 26 , only to die on December 22 . Although given the title of Cardinal Bishop of Tusculum , Cossa called himself " Cardinal of Florence " . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Cossa 's body was moved to the Baptistry and the nine @-@ day funeral , as prescribed by the Ordo Romanus , was well @-@ attended by the Florentine elite and the papal court . Cossa 's corpse was crowned with a white mitre with his cardinal 's hat at his feet on the funerary bier during the rituals , which took place entirely within the Baptistry and Duomo . The first three days of ceremonies celebrated in turn Cossa 's role as cardinal and pope , his role as an ally of Florence , and his role as a private citizen . He received a temporary burial until the tomb was complete . 
 = = Commissioning = = 
 The commissioning of Cossa 's tomb monument was negotiated for about a decade following Cossa 's death . Cossa 's last will and testament — written on his death bed on December 22 , 1419 — made several of the customary Florentine civic bequests , acts of charity , and traditional ecclesiastical courtesies , but the bulk of his estate was left to his nephews Michele and Giovanni . The bequests to his nephews took priority , and his estate remained disputed by various creditors while the tomb was being completed . 
 Cossa designated four prominent Florentines as his executors : Bartolommeo di <unk> Valori , Niccolò da <unk> , Giovanni di Bicci de ' Medici , and Vieri Guadagni , allowing any two of the executors to act on behalf of all four , as Valori and Medici appear to have done . Valori died on September 2 , 1427 , by which time Guadagni was also deceased and <unk> had long lost interest , leaving the remaining work of commissioning entirely to Giovanni , or — more likely — Cosimo de ' Medici . 
 The executors claimed that Cossa had revealed his desire for burial in the Baptistry to them but had been too modest to request it in his will . Most later scholars accept this testimony of the executors , attributing Cossa with " tact — and tactics " , although at least one has postulated that the executors chose the site of the Baptistry against Cossa 's wishes . 
 Documentary records indicate that , on January 9 , 1421 , Palla Strozzi , on behalf of the Arte di Calimala , the guild who were responsible for the upkeep of the Baptistry , authorized a " breve et <unk> " ( " small and inconspicuous " ) monument in the Baptistry , but not the chapel requested by Cossa 's will ; present scholarship accepts Strozzi 's assertion that burial within the Baptistry was a considerable honor , perhaps beyond the status of Cossa . After this meeting , there are no extant records from the Calimala regarding the tomb as the bulk of documents from the 1420s have been lost , although the notes of <unk> Carlo Strozzi , who went through the records , are extant . 
 The Calimala 's acquiescence is traditionally explained by Cossa 's donation of the relic of the right index finger of John the Baptist ( and 200 florins for an appropriate reliquary ) to the Baptistry . With this finger John was believed to have pointed to Jesus , saying " Ecce Agnus Dei " ( " Behold the lamb of God " ) in John 1 : 29 . The long and complicated history of the relic would only have increased the legendary status of the finger : <unk> <unk> , Patriarch of Constantinople presented it in 1363 to Pope Urban V , who passed it to his successors Gregory XI and Urban VI , who was dispossessed of it during the siege of <unk> , after which John XXIII bought it for 800 florins and wore it on his person before hiding it in the monastery of Santa Maria degli Angeli . 
 = = Completion = = 
 The chronology of the tomb monument 's completion is not precisely known , but portions can be determined from various sources . According to the passing reference of a Florentine notary , in 1424 ( by the Florentine calendar ) part of the tomb was installed . Michelozzo 's <unk> from July 1427 indicates that Michelozzo had been Donatello 's partner for about two years ( " due <unk> o <unk> " ) and that three @-@ fourths of the 800 florin budget had been spent . To harmonize these accounts , one must conclude either that Michelozzo 's chronology was imprecise , that Donatello received the commission before the partnership was formed , or that the 1424 date in the Florentine calendar falls in 1425 in the modern calendar . 
 On February 2 , 1425 , Bartolomeo Valori and Cosimo de ' Medici requested 400 of the 800 florins that had been deposited with the Calimala , likely for work already completed . This deposit was insurance in case the executors left the tomb unfinished and the Calimala was forced to pay for its completion , as it had been obliged to with the finger reliquary . This request is also the most direct piece of evidence for Cosimo 's involvement with the commissioning . Despite this document , Vasari 's claim in his <unk> of 1550 that Cosimo was responsible for the handling of the commission has been questioned . 
 It is probable that the sarcophagus was installed on or shortly before May 2 , 1426 , when the Calimala contracted for two chaplains to say a daily mass for Cossa 's soul . The records of the Duomo workshop indicate that on January 28 , 1427 Valori bought four white marble blocks for the tomb . 
 The exact date of completion is unknown but an extreme terminus ante quem is given by the death in 1431 of Pope Martin V , who is known to have visited the completed tomb ; other factors may push the terminus ante quem back significantly into the 1420s . The most reliable such indication is that in September 1428 Jacopo della Quercia returned to Bologna and produced a wall tomb with Virtues reflecting in minute details the Cossa Virtues . 
 Vasari suggests that the tomb went over budget , costing 1 @,@ 000 florins , although it is unclear who covered the excess . Although the original source for this claim is unknown , it has gained credence with modern scholars as the effigy alone would have cost 500 florins , yet its exactness may be taken with a grain of salt . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Baptistry already contained three sarcophagi : those of Bishop Ranieri ( d . 1113 ) and two reused Roman sarcophagi . However , the tomb monument at 7 @.@ 32 metres ( 24 @.@ 02 ft ) in height was easily the tallest monument in the Baptistry , and — at the time — in Florence . The Duomo contains few tombs , with some notable exceptions , such as that of <unk> <unk> . 
 The tomb monument adapted to the conditions imposed by the Calimala and integrated with the interior of the Baptistry . The wall tomb was required to be placed between two pre @-@ existing Corinthian columns — the central pillars between Ghiberti 's North Doors and the eastern tribune — constituting one @-@ third of one of the octagonal walls , near the altar and facing Ghiberti 's East Doors . The setting starves the tomb monument of light , especially when the Baptistry 's doors are closed , which is normally the case . It would be even darker were it not for the " screen " back wall protruding 48 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 19 @.@ 1 in ) from the Baptistry wall . The white and brown ( and whitish @-@ brown ) marble further integrates the structure with the polychromatic white and green of the Baptistry interior . Some scholars accept the colored sketch of Buonaccorso <unk> as evidence that the " original effaced polychromy " of the tomb was more integrated , although others contend that the sketch is too inaccurate . The canopy 's interaction with the columns and conceit of being supported by the Baptistry cornice make the tomb monument further " wedded to the architecture " around it , even if the marriage is morganatic . Apart from the effigy on the sarcophagus , all the other sculpted figures are in high relief . 
 Although the style of the work is thoroughly classicising , the overall form reflects the grandest type of the medieval Italian wall tomb , in which the vertical piling @-@ up of a series of different elements is characteristic . Italian Gothic sculpture always retained considerable elements of classicism , and it was not necessary for Donatello and Michelozzo to adopt a radically original overall scheme from those of Tino di <unk> ( c . 1285 – 1337 ) , the <unk> sculptor whose wall @-@ tombs of a century before had been very influential throughout Italy . A life @-@ size marble effigy lying on top of an elevated protruding sarcophagus is highly typical . The motif of curtains at the top is often found in monuments using Gothic decorative details , and the shape recalls the triangular gable tops of monuments in a more thoroughly Gothic style ; other monuments have curtains , often held open by angels , around the effigy , and then sculptures above . The Cossa monument is often compared to the monument to Doge Tommaso Mocenigo of Venice , of 1423 , which has high relief saints in shell niches on and above the sarcophagus , above which a large pair of curtains sweep up to a single terminal ; however the architectural detailing here is Gothic . The design of the Cossa tomb itself was elaborated on , and adapted to local conventions , in the tomb by the same team for Cardinal Brancacci in Naples , and influenced the monument to Leonardo Bruni by Bernardo <unk> , of about 20 years later , in the Basilica of Santa Croce , Florence . 
 = = = Base = = = 
 The base slab , or pylon , of the tomb monument rests on a 38 @-@ centimetre ( 15 in ) high plinth , separated by a cornice and concave mouldings . The pylon is 1 @.@ 39 metres ( 4 @.@ 56 ft ) high and 2 @.@ 02 metres ( 6 @.@ 63 ft ) wide , decorated with a frieze of winged angel heads ( perhaps seraphim ) and garlands and ribbons . 
 = = = Virtues = = = 
 Above the pylon , separated by the cornice , are the three Virtues — from left to right , Faith , Charity , and Hope — in shell niches , separated by four Corinthian fluted pilasters . Such a motif is unprecedented in Tuscan funerary sculpture but found at this date in Venice , Padua , and especially Cossa 's native Naples . As a result , excursions to Venice have been suggested for both Michelozzo and Donatello . However , Janson suggests that one " need not go all the way to Venice " to find such motifs . Outside Florence , Virtues were common on tombs , with the cardinal Virtues used for laymen , and the theological virtues reserved for ecclesiastics , including the Brancaccio tomb . However , the Cossa Virtues , from their hair to their sandals , are more thoroughly antique . Donatello also produced two similar bronze Virtues for the Siena Baptistry , whose chronological relationship to the Cossa Virtues is unclear . 
 The 1 @.@ 05 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 44 ft ) tall Faith , to the right of Charity , is holding a Eucharistic chalice ; the 1 @.@ 07 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 51 ft ) tall Charity is holding a cornucopia and a brazier ( or flaming vase ) ; and the 1 @.@ 06 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 48 ft ) tall Hope , to the left of Charity , has hands clasped in prayer . The central figure of Charity is the most antique , assimilating elements of Classical depictions of <unk> , Ceres , and Juno , all of which were depicted with <unk> in their left hands . Besides underscoring the antiquity of the tomb monument , the main purpose of the tall yet poorly finished Virtues is to put additional vertical distance between the viewer and the effigy , which has the cumulative effect of de @-@ emphasizing the peculiarities of Cossa , in favor of a generic pontiff ( i.e. a potential line of Florentine popes ) , by blunting the " immediacy " of the trope of lying in state , which was otherwise dominant on Quattrocento wall tombs . 
 = = = Sarcophagus and inscription = = = 
 Above the Virtues , four classical consoles decorated with acanthus leaves support the sarcophagus . In the tripartite space between the consoles — from left to right — are Cossa 's family arms with the papal tiara , the papal coat of arms , and Cossa 's family arms with the cardinal 's hat . The <unk> <unk> ( a type of very shallow bas @-@ relief pioneered by Donatello ) on the architrave sarcophagus ( 2 @.@ 12 @-@ metre ( 6 @.@ 96 ft ) wide and 0 @.@ 7 @-@ metre ( 2 @.@ 30 ft ) high ) depicts two putti or <unk> ( " little spirits " ) holding open a large inscribed parchment , perhaps in the style of a papal brief . The putti ( or <unk> ) share many characteristics with their ancient counterparts , except for their crossed legs . 
 Pope Martin V objected to a portion of the inscription — " <unk> <unk> <unk> " — because he thought it implied Cossa had died as pope ( the Latin " quondam " could mean either " the former " or " the late " ) . The use of " olim Papa " , as was common in many contemporary documents , instead of " quondam Papa " would probably have removed Martin V 's objections . Martin himself suggested instead that Cossa be identified as a Neapolitan cardinal , thus emphasizing instead his submission . Contemporary sources report that the Signoria mimicked the reply of Pontius Pilate regarding the inscription on the cross of Christ : " What is written , is written . " Martin V himself was buried underneath an undecorated bronze floor slab , the only known example of a two @-@ dimensional papal monument , although also the first to be set in the central nave of a major basilica , the Basilica of St. John Lateran in Rome , and cast in bronze . 
 According to Avery , Donatello 's Ascension of Christ and the Giving of the Keys to St. Peter may have been intended to share the front of the sarcophagus , further strengthening the papal associations , which were created by dating Cossa 's death using the ancient Roman <unk> of January , which was uncommon on Florentine tombs , but was used in papal ones . 
 = = = Effigy = = = 
 On top of the sarcophagus , the bier of the effigy is supported by lions whose shape mimics Trecento consoles . The lions may be based on the Florentine <unk> , as if to mark John XXIII in the same manner as a conquered city @-@ state . As Donatello 's <unk> for the papal apartment in Santa Maria Novella conveyed Florence 's ambivalence towards Martin V ( as both a source of prestige by visiting , and a potential adversary of the Republic ) , the lions supporting the bier contextualize the tomb monument 's support for John XXIII 's claim to the papacy by cementing it as a Florentine claim . Yet , any iconographical interpretation of the lions must be taken with a grain of salt as lions are symbolically promiscuous , and are also seen as supports on earlier tombs , such as that of <unk> de ' Bardi ( d . 1342 ) in the Bargello . 
 The bier and the pall spread over it are tilted towards the viewer with the lion supporting the head standing 2 @-@ centimetre ( 1 in ) shorter , increasing the visibility of the effigy , especially the head . The gilded @-@ bronze , life @-@ size effigy itself makes no attempt to argue for Cossa 's papal status , dressing Cossa clearly in the costume of a cardinal ; the bedding it rests on is of un @-@ gilt bronze . The opening in the 16th century of the sarcophagus confirmed that Cossa 's actual burial clothes matched the effigy . There was no precedent for a three @-@ dimensional gilded @-@ bronze effigy on an Italian tomb monument ; there was , however , a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) gilt bronze statue on the balcony of the Palazzo della <unk> in Bologna commissioned by Pope Boniface VIII . 
 Some scholars suggest that Donatello created the effigy with the aid of a death mask , but others disagree . 
 = = = Canopy = = = 
 Behind the effigy is a 1 @.@ 34 @-@ metre ( 4 @.@ 40 ft ) tripartite pylon with sunk molded borders supporting the cornice and framed by two additional Corinthian pilasters . Above it rests an entablature of the Madonna and Child on a half @-@ lunette , a typical — symbolizing intercession — motif for a tomb . Above the effigy and Madonna is a gilt @-@ edged architectonic canopy decorated with patterned stemmed flowers , giving the conceit of being supported by the ribbed brass ring , an impossibility given its weight . <unk> suggests that the canopy is based on the " Dome of Heaven " , and thus the baldacchino of papal enthronement . However , Lightbown is emphatic that the double @-@ summited canopy looped against the pillars is not a baldacchino , but rather a secular bed @-@ canopy . 
 = = Attribution = = 
 The tomb monument was the first collaboration between Donatello and Michelozzo , who went on to collaborate on the tomb of Cardinal Rainaldo Brancacci in the Church of Sant 'Angelo a Nilo in Naples , the tomb of Papal Secretary Bartolomeo <unk> in what is now the Duomo of Montepulciano , and the external pulpit of the Duomo of Prato . At the time of their partnership , Donatello was already well known for his statues of prophets and saints for the Duomo and <unk> , while Michelozzo was more obscure . Both had worked for a time for Ghiberti , whose workshop then led Florentine sculpture . 
 Nearly every element of the tomb monument has been attributed to both Donatello and Michelozzo by different art historians . These characterizations are mostly of historiographical interest : attribution to Donatello is more of an indication of what is valued by each commentator than any objective criteria ; often , aspects are attributed to Michelozzo explicitly because they are " less well executed " . 
 Descriptions from 1475 to 1568 attribute all of the tomb except for the figure of Faith to Donatello . Some modern sources reverse this dichotomy , attributing all of the tomb to Michelozzo with the exception of the gilded bronze effigy . Some sources credit Donatello only with the bronze effigy . According to Janson , of the marble work , only the putti can be attributed to " Donatello 's own hand " . Donatello 's alleged deficiencies in casting or in architecture have been proposed as the reason for his partnership with Michelozzo , in addition to his busy schedule . 
 = Tropical cyclone forecasting = 
 Tropical cyclone forecasting is the science of forecasting where a tropical cyclone 's center , and its effects , are expected to be at some point in the future . There are several elements to tropical cyclone forecasting : track forecasting , intensity forecasting , rainfall forecasting , storm surge , and tornado forecasting . While skill is increasing in regard to track forecasting , intensity forecasting skill remains nearly unchanged over the past several years . 
 = = History = = 
 The methods through which tropical cyclones are forecast have changed with the passage of time . The first known forecasts in the Western Hemisphere were made by Lt. Col. William Reed of the Corps of Royal Engineers at Barbados in 1847 . Reed mostly utilized barometric pressure measurements as the basis of his forecasts . Benito Vines introduced a forecast and warning system based on cloud cover changes in Havana during the 1870s . Before the early 1900s , though , most forecasts were done by direct observations at weather stations , which were then relayed to forecast centers via telegraph . It wasn ’ t until the advent of radio in the early twentieth century that observations from ships at sea were available to forecasters . The 1930s saw the usage of radiosondes in tropical cyclone forecasting . The next decade saw the advent of aircraft @-@ based reconnaissance by the military , starting with the first dedicated flight into a hurricane in 1943 , and the establishment of the Hurricane Hunters in 1944 . In the 1950s , coastal weather radars began to be used in the United States , and research reconnaissance flights by the precursor of the Hurricane Research Division began in 1954 . 
 The launch of the first weather satellite , TIROS @-@ I , in 1960 , introduced new forecasting techniques that remain important to tropical cyclone forecasting to the present . In the 1970s , buoys were introduced to improve the resolution of surface measurements , which until that point , were not available at all over sea surfaces . 
 = = Track = = 
 The large @-@ scale synoptic flow determines 70 to 90 percent of a tropical cyclone 's motion . The deep @-@ layer mean flow is considered to be the best tool in determining track direction and speed . If storms are significantly sheared , use of a lower @-@ level wind is a better predictor . Knowledge of the beta effect can be used to steer a tropical cyclone , since it leads to a more northwest heading for tropical cyclones in the Northern Hemisphere . It is also best to smooth out short term wobbles of the storm center in order to determine a more accurate trajectory . 
 Because of the forces that affect tropical cyclone tracks , accurate track predictions depend on determining the position and strength of high- and low @-@ pressure areas , and predicting how those areas will change during the life of a tropical system . Combining forecast models with increased understanding of the forces that act on tropical cyclones , and a wealth of data from Earth @-@ orbiting satellites and other sensors , scientists have increased the accuracy of track forecasts over recent decades . An accurate track forecast is important , because if the track forecast is incorrect , forecasts for intensity , rainfall , storm surge , and tornado threat will also be incorrect . 
 = = = 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 rule = = = 
 The 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 rule ( mariner 's 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 rule or danger area ) is a guideline commonly taught to mariners for severe storm ( specifically hurricane and tropical storm ) tracking and prediction . It refers to the rounded long @-@ term NHC / TPC forecast errors of 100 @-@ 200 @-@ 300 nautical miles at 24 @-@ 48 @-@ 72 hours , respectively . These numbers were close to the 10 @-@ year average for the 1982 @-@ 1991 time frame . However , these errors have decreased to near 50 @-@ 100 @-@ 150 as NHC forecasters become more accurate . The " danger area " to be avoided is constructed by expanding the forecast path by a radius equal to the respective hundreds of miles plus the forecast wind radii ( size of the storm at those hours ) . 
 = = Intensity = = 
 Forecasters say they are less skillful at predicting the intensity of tropical cyclones than cyclone track . They attribute the lack of improvement in intensity forecasting to the complexity of tropical systems and an incomplete understanding of factors that affect their development . 
 An accurate track forecast is essential to creating accurate intensity forecasts , particularly in an area with large islands such as the western north Pacific and the Caribbean Sea , as proximity to land is an inhibiting factor to developing tropical cyclones . A strong hurricane / typhoon / cyclone can weaken if an outer eye wall forms ( typically around 80 @-@ 160 kilometers ( 50 – 100 miles ) from the center of the storm ) , choking off the convection within the inner eye wall . Such weakening is called an eyewall replacement cycle , and is usually temporary . 
 = = = Maximum potential intensity = = = 
 Dr. Kerry Emanuel created a mathematical model around 1988 , called the maximum potential intensity or MPI , to compute the upper limit of tropical cyclone intensity based on sea surface temperature and atmospheric profiles from the latest global model runs . Maps created from this equation show values of the maximum achievable intensity due to the thermodynamics of the atmosphere at the time of the last model run ( either 0000 or 1200 UTC ) . However , MPI does not take vertical wind shear into account . MPI is computed using the following formula : 
 <formula> 
 Where <formula> is the maximum potential velocity in meters per second ; <formula> is the sea surface temperature underneath the center of the tropical cyclone , <formula> is a reference temperature ( 30 ˚ C ) and <formula> , <formula> and <formula> are curve @-@ fit constants . When <formula> , <formula> , and <formula> , the graph generated by this function corresponds to the 99th percentile of empirical tropical cyclone intensity data . 
 = = Rainfall = = 
 Tropical cyclone rainfall forecasting is important , since between 1970 – 2004 , inland flooding from tropical cyclones caused a majority of the fatalities from tropical cyclones in the United States . While flooding is common to tropical cyclones near a landmass , there are a few factors which lead to excessive rainfall from tropical cyclones . Slow motion , as was seen during Hurricane Danny and Hurricane Wilma , can lead to high amounts . The presence of topography near the coast , as is the case across much of Mexico , Haiti , the Dominican Republic , much of Central America , Madagascar , Réunion , China , and Japan acts to magnify amounts due to upslope flow into the mountains . Strong upper level forcing from a trough moving through the Westerlies , as was the case during Hurricane Floyd , can lead to high amounts even from systems moving at an average forward motion . A combination of two of these factors could be especially crippling , as was seen during Hurricane Mitch in Central America . Therefore , an accurate track forecast is essential in order to produce an accurate tropical cyclone rainfall forecast . 
 = = Storm surge = = 
 The main storm surge forecast model in the Atlantic basin is SLOSH , which stands for Sea , Lake , Overland , Surge from Hurricanes . It uses the size of a storm , its intensity , its forward motion , and the topography of the coastal plain to estimate the depth of a storm surge at any individual grid point across the United States . An accurate forecast track is required in order to produce accurate storm surge forecasts . However , if the landfall point is uncertain , a maximum envelope of water ( <unk> ) map can be generated based on the direction of approach . If the forecast track itself is also uncertain , a maximum of maximums ( <unk> ) map can be generated which will show the worst possible scenario for a hurricane of a specific strength . 
 = = Tornado = = 
 The location of most tropical cyclone @-@ related tornadoes is their northeast quadrant in the Northern Hemisphere and southeast quadrant in the Southern Hemisphere . Like most of the other forecasts for tropical cyclone effects , an accurate track forecast is required in order to produce an accurate tornado threat forecast . 
 = = Seasonal forecast = = 
 By looking at annual variations in various climate parameters , forecasters can make predictions about the overall number and intensity of tropical cyclones that will occur in a given season . For example , when constructing its seasonal outlooks , the Climate Prediction Center in the United States considers the effects of the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation , 25 @-@ 40 year tropical cycle , wind shear over the oceans , and ocean surface temperature . 
 = Katharine Way = 
 Katharine " Kay " Way ( February 20 , 1902 – December 9 , 1995 ) was an American physicist best known for her work on the Nuclear Data Project . During World War II , she worked for the Manhattan Project at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . She became an adjunct professor at Duke University in 1968 . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 Katharine Way was born in Sewickley , Pennsylvania , the second child of William <unk> Way , a lawyer , and his wife Louise Jones . She had an older brother and a younger sister . Originally named Catherine , she later changed her name to Katharine . Friends and colleagues generally knew her as Kay . Her mother died when she was twelve years old , and her father married an ear and throat specialist , who provided Kay with a role model of a career woman . 
 Way was educated at Miss <unk> 's boarding school in Plainfield , New Jersey , and Rosemary Hall in Greenwich , Connecticut . In 1920 she entered Vassar College , but was forced to drop out after two years after becoming ill with suspected tuberculosis . After convalescing in Saranac Lake , New York , she attended Barnard College for a couple of semesters in 1924 and 1925 . 
 From 1929 to 1934 she studied at Columbia University , where Edward <unk> stoked an interest in mathematics , and co @-@ authored Way 's first published academic paper . She finally graduated with her BS in 1932 . She next went to the University of North Carolina , where John Wheeler stimulated an interest in nuclear physics , and she became his first PhD student . Because jobs were hard to come by during the Great Depression , she stayed on as a graduate student after completing the requirements of her PhD . 
 In 1938 , she became a Huff Research Fellow at Bryn Mawr College , which allowed her to receive her PhD for her thesis on nuclear physics about the " <unk> cross section of the deuteron " , She subsequently took up a teaching position at the University of Tennessee in 1939 , becoming an assistant professor in 1941 . 
 At a conference in New York in 1938 , Way presented a paper on " Nuclear <unk> and Magnetic Moments " in which she examined deformation of a spinning atomic nucleus under three models , including Niels Bohr 's liquid drop model . She followed this up with a closer examination of the liquid drop model in a paper entitled " The Liquid @-@ Drop Model and Nuclear Moments " , in which she showed that the resulting cigar @-@ shaped nucleus could be unstable . Wheeler later recalled that : 
 One day [ Katherine Way ] came in and reported a <unk> . The equations gave no solution in the case of a sufficiently great angular velocity . It was clear that one had to do in this case with a kind of instability . It took only 1939 and the discovery of Hahn and <unk> to recognize the nature of the instability : nuclear fission . Why did we not do to the analysis of the higher order terms in the deformation energy and predict fission in advance of its discovery ? It was not any difficulty in mathematics . It was a difficulty in the model . It failed to give the right magnitudes and right trends for nuclear magnetic moments . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 In 1942 , Wheeler recruited Way to work on the Manhattan Project at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . Working with physicist Alvin Weinberg , Way analyzed neutron flux data from Enrico Fermi 's early nuclear reactor designs to see whether it would be possible to create a self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction . These calculations were put to use in the construction of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 . Afterwards , she examined the problem of nuclear poisoning of reactors by certain fission products . With physicist Eugene Wigner she developed the Way @-@ Wigner approximation for fission product decay . 
 Apart from working on the Manhattan Project in Chicago , Way also visited the Hanford Site and the Los Alamos Laboratory . In mid @-@ 1945 she moved to Oak Ridge , Tennessee , where she continued her research into nuclear decay . While there , she began to specialize in the collection and organization of nuclear data . 
 With Dexter Masters , she co @-@ edited the 1946 New York Times bestseller One World or None : a Report to the Public on the Full Meaning of the Atomic Bomb . The book included essays by Niels Bohr , Albert Einstein and Robert Oppenheimer , and sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Way moved to Washington , D.C. , in 1949 , where she went to work for the National Bureau of Standards . Four years later , she persuaded the National Academy of Sciences ' National Research Council to establish the Nuclear Data Project ( NDP ) , an organization with special responsibility for gathering and disseminating nuclear data , under her leadership . The NDP moved to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 1964 , but Way remained its head until 1968 . Beginning in 1964 , the NDP published a journal , Nuclear Data Sheets , to disseminate the information that the NDP had gathered . This was joined the following year by a second journal , Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables . She also persuaded the editors of Nuclear Physics to add keywords to the subject headings of articles to facilitate cross @-@ referencing . 
 Way left the NDP in 1968 and became an adjunct professor at Duke University in Durham , North Carolina , although she continued as editor of Nuclear Data Sheets until 1973 , and Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables until 1982 . In later life she became interested in the health problems of seniors , and lobbied for improved health care for them . 
 Way , who never married , died at Chapel Hill , North Carolina , on December 9 , 1995 . 
 = Toa Payoh ritual murders = 
 The Toa Payoh ritual murders took place in Singapore in 1981 . On 25 January , the body of a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl was found dumped next to the lift of a block of flats in the town of Toa Payoh , and two weeks later , a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy was found dead nearby . The children had been killed , purportedly as blood sacrifices to the Hindu goddess Kali . The murders were masterminded by Adrian Lim , a self @-@ styled medium , who had tricked scores of women into believing he had supernatural powers . His victims offered money and sexual services in exchange for cures , beauty , and good fortune . Two of the women became his loyal assistants ; Tan Mui Choo married him , and Hoe Kah Hong became one of his " holy wives " . When the police investigated a rape charge filed by one of Lim 's targets , he became furious and decided to kill children to derail the investigations . On each occasion , Hoe lured a child to Lim 's flat where he or she was drugged and killed by the trio . Lim also sexually assaulted the girl before her death . The trio were arrested after the police found a trail of blood that led to their flat . Although the case name suggested ritualistic murders , the defendants said they did not conduct prayers , burning of joss sticks , ringing of bells , or any other rituals during the killings . 
 The 41 @-@ day trial was the second longest to have been held in the courts of Singapore at the time . None of the defendants denied their guilt . Their appointed counsels tried to spare their clients the death sentence by pleading diminished responsibility , arguing that the accused were mentally ill and could not be held entirely responsible for the killings . To support their case they brought in doctors and psychologists , who analysed the defendants and concluded that they had exhibited schizophrenia , and depressions of the psychotic and manic order . The prosecution 's expert , however , refuted these testimonies and argued that they were in full control of their mental faculties when they planned and carried out the murders . The judges agreed with the prosecution 's case and sentenced the trio to death . While on death row , the women appealed to the Privy Council in London and pleaded for clemency from the President of Singapore to no avail . Lim did not seek any pardons ; instead , he accepted his fate and went smiling to the gallows . The three were hanged on 25 November 1988 . 
 The Toa Payoh ritual murders shocked the public in Singapore , who were surprised by such an act taking place in their society . Reports of the trio 's deeds and the court proceedings were closely followed and remained prominent in the Singaporean consciousness for several years . Twice , movie companies tried to capitalise on the sensation generated by the murders by producing motion pictures based on the killings ; however , critics panned both films for indulging in gratuitous sex and violence , and the movies performed poorly at the box office . The actions and behaviour of the three killers were studied by academics in the criminal psychology field , and the rulings set by the courts became local case studies for diminished responsibility . 
 = = Singaporean society in the 1980s = = 
 Early in the nineteenth century , immigrants flooded into Peninsular Malaysia , colonising the Straits Settlements including the island city of Singapore . Migrants and natives held differing beliefs , but over time the boundaries between those belief systems blurred . Most of the population believed in spirits that inhabit the jungles , and in gods and devils that hover around , capable of benevolence and mischief . Certain people claimed that they could communicate with these supernatural beings . Through rituals in which they danced and chanted , these spirit mediums — tang @-@ <unk> and <unk> — invited the beings to possess their bodies and dole out wisdoms , blessings , and curses to their believers . As time passed and the cities grew , the jungles gave way to concrete structures and the mediums ' practices moved deeper into the heartland of communities . 
 By 1980 , 75 % of the residents in Singapore were living in public housing . Government @-@ built high @-@ rise blocks of flats clustered in the population centres , of which Toa Payoh was typical . Although a high density of people lived in each block , the residents mostly kept to themselves , valuing their privacy and tending to ignore what was happening around their homes . During this time , Singapore was a relatively peaceful society — a stark contrast to the prevalence of secret societies , triads and gang warfare during the pre @-@ independence days . The low crime rate , brought on by strict laws and tough enforcement , gave citizens a sense of security . Nonetheless , the government warned against complacency and lectured in its local campaigns , " Low crime doesn 't mean no crime " . In 1981 , three Singaporeans committed a crime that shocked the nation . 
 = = Two murders , three arrests = = 
 For several years , a medium in Block 12 , Toa Payoh Lorong 7 , had been performing noisy rituals in the middle of the night . The residents complained several times to the authorities , but the rituals would always resume after a short time . On the afternoon of 24 January 1981 , nine @-@ year @-@ old Agnes Ng Siew <unk> ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Huáng <unk> ) disappeared after attending religious classes at her church in Toa Payoh . Hours later , her naked body was found stuffed in a bag outside a lift in Block 11 , less than a kilometre ( five @-@ eighths of a mile ) from the church . The girl had been smothered to death ; the investigation revealed injuries to her genitals and semen in her rectum . Although the police launched an intensive investigation , questioning more than 250 people around the crime scene , they failed to obtain any leads . On 7 February ten @-@ year @-@ old Ghazali bin Marzuki was found dead under a tree between Blocks 10 and 11 , naked . He had been missing since the previous day , after being seen boarding a taxi with an unknown woman . Forensic pathologists on the scene deemed the cause of death as drowning , and found on the boy suffocation marks similar to those on Ng . There were no signs of sexual assault , but burns were on the boy 's back and a puncture on his arm . Traces of a sedative were later detected in his blood . 
 The police found a scattered trail of blood that led to the seventh floor of Block 12 . Stepping into the common corridor from the stairwell , Inspector Pereira noticed an eclectic mix of religious symbols ( a cross , a mirror , and a knife @-@ blade ) on the entrance of the first flat ( unit number <unk> ) . The owner of the flat , Adrian Lim , approached the inspector and introduced himself , informing Pereira that he was living there with his wife , Tan Mui Choo , and a girlfriend , Hoe Kah Hong . Permitted by Lim to search his flat , the police found traces of blood . Lim initially tried to pass the stains off as candle wax , but when challenged claimed they were chicken blood . After the police found slips of paper written with the dead children 's personal details , Lim tried to allay suspicions by claiming that Ghazali had come to his flat seeking treatment for a bleeding nose . He discreetly removed hair from under a carpet and tried to flush it down the toilet , but the police stopped him ; forensics later determined the hair to be Ng 's . Requesting a background check on Lim , Pereira received word from local officers that the medium was currently involved in a rape investigation . Lim overheard them and became agitated , raising his voice at the law enforcers . His ire was mimicked by Hoe as she gestured violently and shouted at the officers . Their actions further raised the investigators ' suspicions that the trio were deeply involved in the murders . The police collected the evidence , sealed the flat as a crime scene , and took Lim and the two women in for questioning . 
 = = Perpetrators = = 
 = = = Adrian Lim = = = 
 Born on 6 January 1942 , Adrian Lim ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lín <unk> ) was the eldest son of a middle @-@ class family . Described at the trial by his sister as a hot @-@ tempered boy , he dropped out of secondary school and worked a short stint as an informant for the Internal Security Department , joining the cable radio company Rediffusion Singapore in 1962 . For three years , he installed and serviced Rediffusion sets as an electrician before being promoted to bill collector . In April 1967 , Lim married his childhood sweetheart with whom he had two children . He converted to Catholicism for his marriage . Lim and his family lived in rented rooms until his 1970 purchase of a three @-@ room flat — a seventh floor unit ( unit number <unk> ) of Block 12 , Toa Payoh . 
 Lim started part @-@ time practice as a spirit medium in 1973 . He rented a room where he attended to the women — most of whom were <unk> , dance hostesses , and prostitutes — introduced to him by his landlord . Lim 's customers also included superstitious men and elderly females , whom he cheated only of cash . He had learned the trade from a <unk> called " Uncle Willie " and prayed to gods of various religions despite his Catholic baptism . The Hindu goddess Kali and " Phragann " , which Lim described as a Siamese sex god , were among the spiritual entities he called on in his rituals . Lim deceived his clients with several confidence tricks ; his most effective gimmick , known as the " needles and egg " trick , duped many to believe that he had supernatural abilities . After blackening needles with soot from a burning candle , Lim carefully inserted them into a raw egg and sealed the hole with powder . In his rituals , he passed the egg several times over his client while chanting and asked her to crack open the egg . Unaware that the egg had been tampered with , the client would be convinced by the sight of the black needles that evil spirits were harassing her . 
 Lim particularly preyed on gullible girls who had deep personal problems . He promised them that he could solve their woes and increase their beauty through a ritual massage . After Lim and his client had stripped , he would <unk> her body — including her genitals — with Phragann 's idol and have sex with her . Lim 's treatments also included an electro @-@ shock therapy based on that used on mental patients . After placing his client 's feet in a tub of water and attaching wires to her temples , Lim passed electricity through her . The shocks , he assured her , would cure headaches and drive away evil spirits . 
 = = = Tan Mui Choo = = = 
 Catherine Tan Mui Choo ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Chén <unk> ) was referred to Lim by a fellow <unk> , who claimed the spirit medium could cure ailments and depression . Tan , at that time , was grieving the death of her grandmother to whom she had been devoted . Furthermore , her estrangement from her parents weighed on her mind ; having been sent away at the age of 13 to a vocational centre ( a home mostly for juvenile delinquents ) , she felt unwanted by them . Tan 's visits to Lim became regular , and their relationship grew intimate . In 1975 she moved into his flat on his insistence . To allay his wife 's suspicions that he was having an affair with Tan , Lim swore an oath of denial before a picture of Jesus Christ . However , she discovered the truth and moved out with their children a few days later , divorcing Lim in 1976 . Lim quit his Rediffusion job and became a full @-@ time medium . He enjoyed brisk business , at one point receiving S $ 6 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 838 – 3 @,@ 311 ) a month from a single client . In June 1977 , Lim and Tan registered their marriage . 
 Lim dominated Tan through beatings , threats , and lies . He persuaded her to prostitute herself to supplement their income . He also convinced her that he needed to fornicate with young women to stay healthy ; thus , Tan assisted him in his business , preparing their clients for his pleasure . Lim 's influence over Tan was strong ; on his encouragement and promise that sex with a younger man would preserve her youth , Tan copulated with a Malay teenager and even with her younger brother . The boy was not her only sibling to be influenced by Lim ; the medium had earlier seduced Tan 's younger sister and tricked her into selling her body and having sex with the two youths . Despite the abuses , Tan lived with Lim , enjoying the dresses , beauty products and slimming courses bought with their income . 
 = = = Hoe Kah Hong = = = 
 Born on 10 September 1955 , Hoe Kah Hong ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) was eight years old when her father died ; she was sent to live with her grandmother until she was fifteen . When she returned to her mother and siblings she was constantly required to give way to her elder sister Lai Ho . Under the perception that her mother favoured her sister , Hoe became disgruntled , showing her temper easily . In 1979 her mother brought Lai to Lim for treatment , and became convinced of Lim 's powers by his " needles and egg " trick . Believing that Hoe 's volatile temper could also be cured by Lim , the old woman brought her younger daughter to the medium . After witnessing the same trick , Hoe became Lim 's loyal follower . Lim desired to make Hoe one of his " holy wives " , even though she was already married to Benson Loh <unk> Hua . To achieve his goal , Lim sought to isolate Hoe from her family by feeding her lies . He claimed that her family were immoral people who practiced infidelity , and that Loh was an unfaithful man who would force her into prostitution . Hoe believed Lim 's words , and after going through a rite with him she was declared by the medium as his " holy wife " . She no longer trusted her husband and family , and became violent towards her mother . Three months after she had first met Lim , Hoe moved from her house and went to live with him . 
 Loh sought his wife at Lim 's flat and ended up staying to observe her treatment . He was persuaded by her to participate in the electro @-@ shock therapies . In the early hours of 7 January 1980 , Loh sat with Hoe , their arms locked together and their feet in separate tubs of water . Lim applied a large voltage to Loh , who was electrocuted , while Hoe was stunned into unconsciousness . When she woke , Lim requested her to lie to the police about Loh 's death . Hoe repeated the story Lim had given her , saying that her husband had been electrocuted in their bedroom when he tried to switch on a faulty electric fan in the dark . The coroner recorded an open verdict , and the police made no further investigations . 
 Despite her antipathy towards Loh , Hoe was affected by his death . Her sanity broke ; she started hearing voices and hallucinating , seeing her dead husband . At the end of May she was admitted to the Woodbridge Hospital . There , psychologists diagnosed her condition as schizophrenia and started appropriate treatments . Hoe made a remarkably quick recovery ; by the first week of July , she was discharged . She continued her treatment with the hospital ; follow @-@ up checks showed that she was in a state of remission . Hoe 's attitude towards her mother and other family members began to improve after her stay in the hospital , although she continued to live with Lim and Tan . 
 = = Rape and revenge = = 
 With Hoe and Tan as his assistants , Lim continued his trade , tricking more women into giving him money and sex . By the time of his arrest , he had 40 " holy wives " . In late 1980 he was arrested and charged with rape . His accuser was Lucy Lau , a door @-@ to @-@ door cosmetic salesgirl , who had met Lim when she was promoting beauty products to Tan . On 19 October , Lim told Lau that a ghost was haunting her , but he could exorcise it with his sex rituals . She was unconvinced , but the medium persisted . He secretly mixed two capsules of <unk> , a sedative , into a glass of milk and offered it to her , claiming it had holy properties . Lau became groggy after drinking it , which allowed Lim to take advantage of her . For the next few weeks , he continued to abuse her by using drugs or threats . In November , after Lim had given her parents a loan smaller than the amount they had requested , Lau made a police report about his treatment of her . Lim was arrested on charges of rape , and Tan for abetting him . Out on bail , Lim persuaded Hoe to lie that she was present at the alleged rape but saw no crime committed . This failed to stop the police enquiries ; Lim and Tan had to extend their bail , in person , at the police station every fortnight . 
 Frustrated , Lim plotted to distract the police with a series of child murders . Moreover , he believed that sacrifices of children to Kali would persuade her supernaturally to draw the attention of the police away from him . Lim pretended to be possessed by Kali , and convinced Tan and Hoe that the goddess wanted them to kill children to wreak vengeance on Lau . He also told them Phragann demanded that he have sex with their female victims . 
 On 24 January 1981 , Hoe spotted Agnes at a nearby church and lured her to the flat . The trio plied her with food and drink that was laced with <unk> . After Agnes became groggy and fell asleep , Lim sexually abused her . Near midnight , the trio smothered Agnes with a pillow and drew her blood , drinking and smearing it on a portrait of Kali . Following that , they drowned the girl by holding down her head in a pail of water . Finally , Lim used his electro @-@ shock therapy device to " make doubly sure that she was dead " . They stuffed her body in a bag and dumped it near the lift at Block 11 . 
 Ghazali suffered a similar fate when he was brought by Hoe to the flat on 6 February . He , however , proved resistant to the sedatives , taking a long time to fall asleep . Lim decided to tie up the boy as a precaution ; however , the boy awoke and struggled . Panicking , the trio delivered karate chops to Ghazali 's neck and stunned him . After drawing his blood , they proceeded to drown their victim . Ghazali struggled , vomiting and losing control of his bowels as he died . Blood kept streaming from his nose after his death . While Tan stayed behind to clean the flat , Lim and Hoe disposed of the body . Lim noticed that a trail of blood led to their flat , so he and his accomplices cleaned as much as they could of these stains before sunrise . What they missed led the police to their flat and resulted in their arrest . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Two days after their arrest , Lim , Tan and Hoe were charged in the Subordinate Court for the murders of the two children . The trio were subjected to further interrogations by the police , and to medical examinations by prison doctors . On 16 – 17 September , their case was brought to the court for a committal procedure . To prove that there was a case against the accused , Deputy Public Prosecutor Glenn Knight called on 58 witnesses and arrayed 184 pieces of evidence before the magistrate . While Tan and Hoe denied the charges of murder , Lim pleaded guilty and claimed sole responsibility for the acts . The magistrate decided that the case against the accused was sufficiently strong to be heard at the High Court . Lim , Tan , and Hoe remained in custody while investigations continued . 
 = = = Judiciary , prosecution , and defence = = = 
 The High Court was convened in the Supreme Court Building on 25 March 1983 . Presiding over the case were two judges : Justice Thirugnana <unk> Sinnathuray , who would deliver judgment on serial murderer John Martin Scripps 13 years later , and Justice Frederick Arthur Chua , who was at the time the longest serving judge in Singapore . Knight continued to build his case on the evidence gathered by detective work . Photographs of the crime scenes , together with witness testimonies , would help the court to visualise the events that led to the crimes . Other evidence — the blood samples , religious objects , drugs , and the notes with Ng and Ghazali 's names — conclusively proved the defendants ' involvement . Knight had no eyewitnesses to the murders ; his evidence was circumstantial , but he told the court in his opening statement , " What matters is that [ the accused ] did intentionally suffocate and drown these two innocent children , causing their deaths in circumstances which amount to murder . And this we will prove beyond all reasonable doubt . " 
 Tan , with Lim 's and the police 's permission , used $ 10 @,@ 000 of the $ 159 @,@ 340 ( US $ 4 @,@ 730 of US $ 75 @,@ 370 ) seized from the trio 's flat to engage J. B. Jeyaretnam for her defence . Hoe had to accept the court 's offer of counsel , receiving Nathan Isaac as her defender . Since his arrest , Lim had refused legal representation . He defended himself at the Subordinate Court hearings , but could not continue to do so when the case was moved to the High Court ; Singapore law requires that for capital crimes the accused must be defended by a legal professional . Thus Howard Cashin was appointed as Lim 's lawyer , although his job was complicated by his client 's refusal to cooperate . The three lawyers decided not to dispute that their clients had killed the children . Acting on a defence of diminished responsibility , they attempted to show that their clients were not sound of mind and could not be held responsible for the killings . If this defence had been successful , the defendants would have escaped the death penalty to face either life imprisonment , or up to 10 years in jail . 
 = = = Proceedings = = = 
 After Knight had presented the prosecution evidence the court heard testimonies on the personalities and character flaws of the accused , from their relatives and acquaintances . Details of their lives were revealed by one of Lim 's " holy wives " . Private medical practitioners Dr. Yeo Peng Ngee and Dr. Ang <unk> Hua admitted that they were Lim 's sources for drugs , and had provided the trio sleeping pills and sedatives without question on each consultation . The police and forensics teams gave their accounts of their investigations ; Inspector <unk> , the investigating officer @-@ in @-@ charge , read out the statements the defendants had made during their remand . In these statements Lim stated that he had killed for revenge , and that he had <unk> Ng . The accused had also confirmed in their statements that each was an active participant in the murders . There were many contradictions among these statements and the confessions made in court by the accused , but Judge Sinnathuray declared that despite the conflicting evidence , " the essential facts of this case are not in dispute " . Lim 's involvement in the crimes was further evidenced by a witness who vouched that just after midnight on 7 February 1981 , at the ground floor of Block 12 , he saw Lim and a woman walk past him carrying a dark @-@ skinned boy . 
 On 13 April , Lim took the stand . He maintained that he was the sole perpetrator of the crimes . He denied that he raped Lucy Lau or Ng , claiming that he made the earlier statements only to satisfy his interrogators . Lim was selective in answering the questions the court threw at him ; he <unk> answered those that agreed with his stance , and refused to comment on the others . When challenged on the veracity of his latest confession , he claimed that he was bound by religious and moral duty to tell the truth . Knight , however , countered that Lim was inherently a dishonest man who had no respect for oaths . Lim had lied to his wife , his clients , the police , and psychiatrists . Knight claimed Lim 's stance in court was an open admission that he willingly lied in his earlier statements . Tan and Hoe were more cooperative , answering the questions posed by the court . They denied Lim 's story , and vouched for the veracity of the statements they had given to the police . They told how they had lived in constant fear and awe of Lim ; believing he had supernatural powers , they followed his every order and had no free will of their own . Under Knight 's questioning , however , Tan admitted that Lim had been defrauding his customers , and that she had knowingly helped him to do so . Knight then got Hoe to agree that she was conscious of her actions at the time of the murders . 
 = = = Battle of the psychiatrists = = = 
 No one doubted that Lim , Tan , and Hoe had killed the children . Their defence was based on convincing the judges that medically , the accused were not in total control of themselves during the crimes . The bulk of the trial was therefore a battle between expert witnesses called by both sides . Dr Wong Yip Chong , a senior psychiatrist in private practice , believed that Lim was mentally ill at the time of the crimes . Claiming to be " judging by the big picture , and not fussing over contradictions " , he said that Lim 's voracious sexual appetite and deluded belief in Kali were characteristics of a mild manic depression . The doctor also said that only an unsound mind would dump the bodies close to his home when his plan was to distract the police . In rebuttal , the prosecution 's expert witness , Dr Chee Kuan <unk> , a psychiatrist at Woodbridge Hospital , said that Lim was " purposeful in his pursuits , patient in his planning and persuasive in his performance for personal power and pleasure " . In Dr Chee 's opinion , Lim had indulged in sex because through his role as a medium he obtained a supply of women who were willing to go to bed with him . Furthermore , his belief in Kali was religious in nature , not delusional . Lim 's use of religion for personal benefit indicated full self @-@ control . Lastly , Lim had consulted doctors and freely taken sedatives to alleviate his insomnia , a condition which , according to Dr Chee , sufferers from manic depression fail to recognise . 
 Dr R. Nagulendran , a consultant psychiatrist , testified that Tan was mentally impaired by reactive psychotic depression . According to him she was depressed before she met Lim , due to her family background . Physical abuse and threats from Lim deepened her depression ; drug abuse led her to hallucinate and believe the medium 's lies . Dr Chee disagreed ; he said that Tan had admitted to being quite happy with the material lifestyle Lim gave to her , enjoying fine clothes and beauty salon treatments . A sufferer from reactive psychotic depression would not have paid such attention to her appearance . Also , Tan had earlier confessed to knowing Lim was a fraud , but changed her stance in court to claim she was acting completely under his influence . Although Dr Chee had neglected Lim 's physical abuse of Tan in his judgment , he was firm in his opinion that Tan was mentally sound during the crimes . Both Dr Nagulendran and Dr Chee agreed that Hoe suffered from schizophrenia long before she met Lim , and that her stay in Woodbridge Hospital had helped her recovery . However , while Dr Nagulendran was convinced that Hoe suffered a relapse during the time of the child killings , Dr Chee pointed out that none of the Woodbridge doctors saw any signs of relapse during the six months of her follow @-@ up checks ( 16 July 1980 – 31 January 1981 ) . If Hoe had been as severely impaired by her condition as Dr Nagulendran described , she would have become an invalid . Instead , she methodically abducted and helped kill a child on two occasions . Ending his testimony , Dr Chee stated that it was incredible that three people with different mental illnesses should share a common delusion of receiving a request to kill from a god . 
 = = = Closing statements = = = 
 In their closing speeches , the defence tried to reinforce the portrayal of their clients as mentally disturbed individuals . Cashin said that Lim was a normal man until his initiation into the occult , and that he was clearly divorced from reality when he entered the " unreasonable world of <unk> " , acting on his delusions to kill children in Kali 's name . Jeyaretnam said that due to her depression and Lim 's abuse , Tan was just " a robot " , carrying out orders without thought . Isaac simply concluded , " [ Hoe 's ] schizophrenic mind accepted that if the children were killed , they would go to heaven and not grow up evil like her mother and others . " The defence criticised Dr Chee for failing to recognise their clients ' symptoms . 
 The prosecution started its closing speech by drawing attention to the " cool and calculating " manner in which the children were killed . Knight also argued that the accused could not have shared the same delusion , and only brought it up during the trial . The " cunning and deliberation " displayed in the acts could not have been done by a deluded person . Tan helped Lim because " she loved [ him ] " , and Hoe was simply misled into helping the crimes . Urging the judges to consider the ramifications of their verdict , Knight said : " My Lords , to say that Lim was less than a coward who preyed on little children because they could not fight back ; killed them in the hope that he would gain power or wealth and therefore did not commit murder , is to make no sense of the law of murder . It would lend credence to the shroud of mystery and magic he has conjured up his practices and by which he managed to frighten , intimidate and persuade the superstitious , the weak and the gullible into participating in the most lewd and obscene acts . " 
 = = = Judgment = = = 
 On 25 May 1983 , crowds massed outside the building , waiting for the outcome of the trial . Due to limited seating , only a few were allowed inside to hear Justice Sinnathuray 's delivery of the verdict , which took 15 minutes . The two judges were not convinced that the accused were mentally unsound during the crimes . They found Lim to be " abominable and depraved " in carrying out his schemes . Viewing her interviews with the expert witnesses as admissions of guilt , Sinnathuray and Chua found Tan to be an " artful and wicked person " , and a " willing [ party ] to [ Lim 's ] loathsome and nefarious acts " . The judges found Hoe to be " simple " and " easily influenced " . Although she suffered from schizophrenia , they noted that she was in a state of remission during the murders ; hence she should bear full responsibility for her actions . All three defendants were found guilty of murder and sentenced to be hanged . The two women did not react to their sentences . On the other hand , Lim beamed and cried , " Thank you , my Lords ! " , as he was led out . 
 Lim accepted his fate ; the women did not , and appealed against their sentences . Tan hired Francis Seow to appeal for her , and the court again assigned Isaac to Hoe . The lawyers asked the appeal court to reconsider the mental states of their clients during the murders , charging that the trial judges in their deliberations had failed to consider this point . The Court of Criminal Appeal reached their decision in August 1986 . The appeal judges reaffirmed the decision of their trial counterparts , noting that as finders of facts , judges have the right to discount medical evidence in the light of evidence from other sources . Tan and Hoe 's further appeals to London 's Privy Council and Singapore President Wee Kim Wee met with similar failures . 
 Having exhausted all their avenues for pardon , Tan and Hoe calmly faced their fates . While waiting on death row the trio were counselled by Catholic priests and nuns . In spite of the reputation that surrounded Lim , Father Brian Doro recalled the murderer as a " rather friendly person " . When the day of execution loomed , Lim asked Father Doro for absolution and Holy Communion . Likewise , Tan and Hoe had Sister Gerard Fernandez as their spiritual counsellor . The nun converted the two female convicts to Catholicism , and they received forgiveness and Holy Communion during their final days . On 25 November 1988 the trio were given their last meal and led to the hangman 's noose . Lim smiled throughout his last walk . After the sentences were carried out , the three murderers were given a short Catholic funeral mass by Father Doro , and cremated on the same day . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The trial on the Toa Payoh ritual murders was closely followed by the populace of Singapore . <unk> of people constantly packed the grounds of the courts , hoping to catch a glimpse of Adrian Lim and to hear the revelations first @-@ hand . Reported by regional newspapers in detail , the gory and sexually explicit recounting of Lim 's acts offended the sensibilities of some ; Canon Frank Lomax , Vicar of St. Andrew 's Anglican Church , complained to The Straits Times that the reports could have a corrupting effect on the young . His words received support from a few readers . Others , however , welcomed the open reporting , considering it helpful in raising public awareness of the need for vigilance even in a city with low crime rates . Books , which covered the murders and the trial , were quickly bought by the public on their release . 
 The revelations from the trial cast Lim as evil incarnate in the minds of Singaporeans . Some citizens could not believe that anyone would willingly defend such a man . They called Cashin to voice their anger ; a few even issued death threats against him . On the other hand , Knight 's name spread among Singaporeans as the man who brought Adrian Lim to justice , boosting his career . He handled more high @-@ profile cases , and became the director of the Commercial Affairs Department in 1984 . He would maintain his good reputation until his conviction for corruption seven years later . 
 Even in prison , Lim was hated ; his fellow prisoners abused and treated him as an outcast . In the years that followed the crime , memories remained fresh among those who followed the case . Journalists deemed it the most sensational trial of the 80s , being " the talk of a horrified city as gruesome accounts of sexual perversion , the drinking of human blood , spirit possession , exorcism and indiscriminate cruelty unfolded during the 41 @-@ day hearing " . Fifteen years from the trial 's conclusion , a poll conducted by The New Paper reported that 30 per cent of its respondents had picked the Toa Payoh ritual murders as the most horrible crime , despite the paper 's request to vote only for crimes committed in 1998 . Lim had become a benchmark for local criminals ; in 2002 Subhas Anandan described his client , wife @-@ killer Anthony <unk> , as a " cooler , more handsome version of [ the ] notorious Toa Payoh medium @-@ murderer " . 
 During the 1990s , the local film industry made two movies based on the murder case , the first of which was Medium Rare . The 1991 production had substantial foreign involvement ; most of the cast and crew were American or British . The script was locally written and intended to explore the " psyche of the three main characters " . The director , however , focused on sex and violence , and the resulting film was jeered by the audience at its midnight screening . Its 16 @-@ day run brought in $ 130 @,@ 000 ( US $ 75 @,@ 145 ) , and a reporter called it " more bizarre than the tales of unnatural sex and occult practices associated with the Adrian Lim story " . The second film , 1997 's God or Dog , also had a dismal box @-@ office performance despite a more positive critical reception . Both shows had difficulty in finding local actors for the lead role ; Zhu <unk> declined on the basis that Adrian Lim was too unique a personality for an actor to portray accurately , and Xie <unk> rejected the role for the lack of " redeeming factors " in the murderer . On the television , the murder case would have been the opening episode for True Files , a crime awareness programme in 2002 . The public , however , complained that the trailers were too gruesome with the re @-@ enactments of the rituals and murders , forcing the media company MediaCorp to reshuffle the schedule . The Toa Payoh ritual murders episode was replaced by a less sensational episode as the opener and pushed back into a later timeslot for more mature viewers , marking the horrific nature of the crimes committed by Lim , Tan , and Hoe . 
 = Norman E. Rosenthal = 
 Norman E. Rosenthal is a South African , author , psychiatrist and scientist who in the 1980s first described winter depression or seasonal affective disorder ( SAD ) , and pioneered the use of light therapy for its treatment . 
 Rosenthal was born and educated in South Africa and moved to the United States to complete his medical training . He established a private practice and conducted research at the National Institute of Mental Health ( NIMH ) as a researcher and senior researcher for more than twenty years where he studied the disorders of mood , sleep , and biological rhythms and was the first psychiatrist to describe and diagnose Seasonal Affective Disorder ( SAD ) 
 Rosenthal ’ s research with SAD led him to write “ Winter Blues ” and two other books on the topic . More recently Rosenthal has written a book on the Transcendental Meditation technique and conducted research on its potential influence on posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) . In total , he has written nine books , including one on the topic of jet lag , and published 200 scholarly papers . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Rosenthal ( b . 1950 ) was born and raised in Johannesburg , South Africa . He received his M.B. <unk> ( equivalent of an M.D. ) from the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and completed an internship in Internal Medicine and Surgery at Johannesburg General Hospital . He moved to the United States to further his education as a resident , and then became Chief Resident in psychiatry at the New York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia Presbyterian Hospital . 
 = = Career = = 
 Rosenthal began a private practice in the suburbs of Washington , D.C. in 1979 . At the same time , he began a research fellowship with Frederick Goodwin at the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda , Maryland . This was the beginning of a 20 year career with the NIMH as a Researcher , Research Fellow , and Senior Researcher . Rosenthal became the director of seasonal studies at the institute and in 1985 , led research with 160 participants on the effects of seasonal affective disorder ( SAD ) and later studied the psycho @-@ physiological phenomena of " spring fever " . 
 Rosenthal co @-@ authored the book , How to Beat Jet Lag in 1993 and in 1998 , he was named clinical professor of psychiatry at Georgetown Medical School . He became the Medical Director of Capital Clinical Research Associates in Rockville , Maryland in 2001 and is currently its CEO . He received a special recognition award from the Society for Light Treatment & Biological Rhythms ( <unk> ) in 1999 and published the book The Emotional Revolution : How the New Science of Feeling Can Transform Your Life in 2002 . 
 Early in his career , Rosenthal learned the Transcendental Meditation technique while in South Africa , but found that as a medical student and a medical resident he didn 't have time to practice . Then 35 years later , after one of his patients had a dramatic improvement as a result of TM , he began practicing again and then began recommending it to his patients . In 2011 , he published Transcendence : Healing and Transformation Through Transcendental Meditation , which debuted at number seven on the New York Times ' Best Sellers : Hardcover Advice , How @-@ To And Miscellaneous list . Earlier that year , Rosenthal published preliminary research on the potential influence of TM on Post Traumatic Stress Disorder . 
 Rosenthal has written more than 200 scholarly publications and his writings have been featured in the American Journal of Psychiatry , Psychiatry Research , Archives of General Psychiatry , Biological Psychiatry , Molecular Psychiatry , and Journal of Affective Disorders . He continues to conduct research on pediatric and adolescent SAD , pharmaceutical treatments for SAD and the effects of light therapy on seasonal bipolar disorder and circadian rhythms . He is often cited in mainstream media as an expert on the topic of SAD . 
 According to his web site , Rosenthal has received the <unk> New York District Branch prize for paper written by a resident , the Psychiatric Institute Alumni Prize for best research performed by Psychiatric Institute Resident , the Public Health Service Commendation Medal , the Anna Monika Foundation Award for Depression Research , the Public Health Service Outstanding Service Award . 
 = = = Seasonal affective disorder = = = 
 Rosenthal is referred to as the pioneer of research into seasonal affective disorder . In 1984 , he coined the term and began studying the use of light therapy as a treatment . Rosenthal ’ s interest in studying the effects of the seasons on mood changes emerged when he emigrated from the mild climate of Johannesburg , South Africa , to the northeastern USA . As a resident in the psychiatry program at the New York State Psychiatric Institute , he noticed that he was more energetic and productive during the long days of summer versus the shorter darker days of the winter . 
 In 1980 , his team at NIMH admitted a patient with depression who had observed seasonal changes within himself and thought previous research regarding melatonin release at night may be able to help him . Rosenthal and his colleagues treated the patient with bright lights , which helped to successfully manage the depression . They conducted a formal follow @-@ up study to confirm the success . The results were published in 1984 , officially describing SAD and pioneering light therapy as an effective treatment method . The research on SAD and light therapy is inconclusive and in <unk> controversial , as not all researchers agree with Rosenthal 's conclusions on the effect of light therapy and at what time of day the light should be administered . 
 Rosenthal has written three books on the topic of SAD ; Seasonal Affective Disorders and Phototherapy ( 1989 ) , Seasons of the Mind : Why You Get the Winter Blues and What You Can Do About It ( 1989 ) and Winter Blues ( 2005 ) . As a result of his research and publications , " it is now widely acknowledged that winter depression has a sound medical basis , involving changes in the body 's mood centers " associated with exposure to light . Rosenthal later identified a form of reverse SAD which some experience in the summer season . 
 = = Books = = 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 1989 ) . Seasonal Affective Disorders and Phototherapy . New York : Guilford Press. p . 350 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 1993 ) . Seasons of the Mind : Why You Get the Winter Blues and What You Can Do About It . Bantam Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ; co @-@ authored with <unk> , W. Reich and T.A. Wehr ( 1993 ) . How to Beat Jet Lag . New York : Henry Holt & Company Inc. p . 141 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 1993 ) . Winter Blues . New York : Guilford Press. p . 372 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 1998 ) . St. John 's Wort : The Herbal Way to Feeling Good . New York : Harper Collins . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 2002 ) . The Emotional Revolution : How the New Science of Feeling Can Transform Your Life . New York : Citadel . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 2011 ) . Transcendence : Healing and Transformation Through Transcendental Meditation . New York : Hay House UK Ltd. p . 320 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 2013 ) . The Gift of Adversity : The Unexpected Benefits of Life 's Difficulties , <unk> , and Imperfections . New York : Tarcher . ISBN <unk> . 
 Rosenthal , Norman ( 2016 ) . Super Mind : How to Boost Performance and Live a Richer and Happier Life Through Transcendental Meditation . New York : <unk> p . 320 . ISBN <unk> . 
 = White Deer Hole Creek = 
 White Deer Hole Creek is a 20 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 33 @.@ 0 km ) tributary of the West Branch Susquehanna River in Clinton , Lycoming and Union counties in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . A part of the Chesapeake Bay drainage basin , the White Deer Hole Creek watershed drains parts of ten townships . The creek flows east in a valley of the Ridge @-@ and @-@ valley Appalachians , through sandstone , limestone , and shale from the Ordovician , Silurian , and Devonian periods . 
 As of 2006 , the creek and its 67 @.@ 2 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 174 km2 ) watershed are relatively undeveloped , with 28 @.@ 4 percent of the watershed given to agriculture and 71 @.@ 6 percent covered by forest , including part of Tiadaghton State Forest . The western part of White Deer Hole Creek has very high water quality and is the only major creek section in Lycoming County classified as Class A Wild Trout Waters , defined by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission as " streams which support a population of naturally produced trout of sufficient size and abundance to support a long @-@ term and rewarding sport fishery . " The rest of the creek and its major tributary ( Spring Creek ) are kept stocked . There are opportunities in the watershed for canoeing , hunting , and camping , and trails for hiking and horseback riding . 
 Historically , two paths of the native indigenous peoples ran along parts of White Deer Hole Creek . Settlers arrived by 1770 , but fled in 1778 during the American Revolutionary War . They returned and the creek served as the southern boundary of Lycoming County when it was formed on April 13 , 1795 . A logging railroad ran along the creek from 1901 to 1904 for timber clearcutting , and small @-@ scale lumbering continues . During World War II a <unk> ( TNT ) plant , which became a federal prison in 1952 , was built in the watershed . Most development is in the eastern end of the valley , with two unincorporated villages , a hamlet , and most of the farms ( many Amish ) . 
 = = Name = = 
 Two etymologies have been suggested for White Deer Hole Creek 's unusual name . According to Donehoo , it is a translation of the Lenape ( or Delaware ) Woap @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( literally " white @-@ deer digs a hole " ) , meaning " where the white deer digs " . It is <unk> on the earliest map showing the creek ( 1755 ) , while a 1759 map has both <unk> and its translation , " White Flint Creek " . These are seen as corruptions of Woap @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , and by 1770 ( when the first settlers arrived ) a map has " White Deer hole " ( sic ) . 
 In 1870 , 88 @-@ year @-@ old John Farley gave a second explanation of the name . His family had settled on the banks of White Deer Hole Creek in 1787 , and John 's father John built a mill on the creek by 1789 . The creek was named because " a white deer is said to have been killed at an early day in a low hole or pond of water that once existed where my father built his mill " . The hole was " a large circular basin of low ground of some ten acres [ ( four ha ) ] in extent .... after my father 's mill and dam were built the water of the dam overflowed and covered the most of the hollow basin of ground . " The mill was just west of the mouth at the unincorporated village of Allenwood ( then called Uniontown ) , now in Gregg Township in Union County . 
 The name " White Deer Hole Creek " is unique in the USGS Geographic Names Information System and on its maps of the United States . Although the whole creek is now referred to by this name , in 1870 the name applied only to the section from the confluence with Spring Creek east to its mouth , while the main branch west of Spring Creek was called " South Creek " . Meginness used this name in 1892 and it appeared on a 1915 state map of Union County ( but not the 1916 Lycoming County map ) . In 2009 the name " South Creek " has disappeared , but there is still a " South Creek Road " on the right bank of the creek in Gregg Township from near the mouth of Spring Creek west to the county line . 
 According to Meginness , the 17 @-@ mile ( 27 km ) long and 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) wide White Deer Hole Creek valley was just called " White Deer valley " by many in 1892 , and this is still common . Confusion about the names arises since White Deer Creek is the next creek south of White Deer Hole Creek ( they are on opposite sides of South White Deer Ridge ) . The Lenape name for White Deer Creek was Woap ' <unk> @-@ <unk> ( translated as " white @-@ deer stream " ) . 
 Spring Creek is the only named tributary of White Deer Hole Creek . Five unnamed tributaries flow through named features of South White Deer Ridge . Going upstream in order they are : Beartrap Hollow , First Gap , Second Gap , Third Gap , and Fourth Gap . 
 = = Course = = 
 Lycoming County is about 130 miles ( 210 km ) northwest of Philadelphia and 165 miles ( 266 km ) east @-@ northeast of Pittsburgh . The source of White Deer Hole Creek is in Crawford Township , just over the Clinton County line . Both it and the western half of the creek are within Tiadaghton State Forest . The creek flows east and soon crosses a natural gas pipeline and the Lycoming County line into Limestone Township . 
 It soon flows into Washington Township , which has more of White Deer Hole Creek than any other township . It receives unnamed tributaries in the Fourth , Third , Second , and First Gaps of South White Deer Ridge on the south or right bank . The creek leaves Tiadaghton State Forest after the Third Gap ( the forest itself continues along the ridge to the river ) , and stops being " Class A Wild Trout Waters " between the Second and First Gaps . It receives the unnamed tributary in Beartrap Hollow 10 @.@ 8 miles ( 17 @.@ 4 km ) upstream of its mouth , then passes south of the unincorporated village of Elimsport . 
 White Deer Hole Creek then flows east into Gregg Township in Union County , receiving its major tributary , Spring Creek , on the left bank 3 @.@ 6 miles ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) upstream of its mouth . Spring Creek rises north of Elimsport in Washington Township and flows east @-@ southeast , passing through Pennsylvania State Game Lands No. 252 and just south of the Federal Correctional Institute , Allenwood . 
 The creek next flows just south of the hamlet of Spring Garden , then south of the village of Allenwood , where it has its confluence with the West Branch Susquehanna River . The direct distance between the source and mouth is only 16 miles ( 26 km ) . U.S. Route 15 and the Union County Industrial Railroad run north @-@ south here along the river and cross the creek just before its mouth ; however , this track is not in service as of 2009 . Pennsylvania Route 44 runs east @-@ west roughly parallel to the creek between Elimsport and Allenwood . Township roads run along the eastern two @-@ thirds of the creek , and smaller , more primitive roads follow it to its source . 
 From the mouth of White Deer Hole Creek it is 17 @.@ 7 miles ( 28 @.@ 5 km ) along the West Branch Susquehanna River to its confluence with the Susquehanna River at Northumberland . The elevation at the source is 2 @,@ 180 feet ( 660 m ) , while the mouth is at an elevation of 445 feet ( 136 m ) . The difference in elevation , 1 @,@ 735 feet ( 529 m ) , divided by the length of the creek of 20 @.@ 5 miles ( 33 @.@ 0 km ) gives the average drop in elevation per unit length of creek or relief ratio of 84 @.@ 6 feet / mile ( 16 @.@ 0 m / km ) . The meander ratio is 1 @.@ 14 , so the creek 's path is not entirely straight in its bed . The meandering increases near the mouth . 
 For its entire length , White Deer Hole Creek runs along the north side of South White Deer Ridge , an east @-@ west ridge of the Appalachian Mountains . North White Deer Ridge and Bald Eagle Mountain form the northern edge of the creek valley . There are 24 unnamed tributaries on the south side of the creek , all flowing down the side of South White Deer Ridge , while there are only 11 tributaries on the north side , including Spring Creek . 
 White Deer Creek , the next major creek to the south , flows along the other side of South White Deer Ridge in Union County and is just 1 @.@ 9 miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) away ( as measured along the West Branch Susquehanna River ) . The next major creek to the north is Muncy Creek , 10 @.@ 2 miles ( 16 @.@ 4 km ) away along the river , but on the opposite bank . The next creek to the north on the same bank ( except for the small Black Run ) is Black Hole Creek , on the south side of Bald Eagle Mountain . It has a watershed area of 21 @.@ 1 square miles ( 55 km2 ) and enters the river 4 @.@ 0 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) away at the borough of Montgomery . 
 White Deer Hole Creek joins the West Branch Susquehanna River 17 @.@ 66 miles ( 28 @.@ 42 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = Geology = = 
 White Deer Hole Creek is in a sandstone , limestone , and shale mountain region , entirely in the Ridge @-@ and @-@ valley Appalachians . South and North White Deer Ridge and Bald Eagle Mountain are composed of sedimentary Ordovician rock , while the valley rock is Silurian , with a small Devonian region closer to the river , in the north . The watershed has no deposits of coal , nor natural gas or oil fields . The creek is in a narrow mountain valley with steep slopes in its upper reaches . In its middle and lower reaches it has steep mountain slopes to the south , and a wide valley with rolling hills and gentle slopes to the north . The channel pattern is transitional , with a trellised drainage pattern . 
 From 1961 to 1995 , the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) operated one stream gauge on White Deer Hole Creek at the Gap Road bridge ( upstream of Elimsport ) , for the uppermost 18 @.@ 2 square miles ( 47 km2 ) of the watershed . The highest yearly peak discharge measured at this site was 4 @,@ 200 cubic feet ( 120 m3 ) per second and the highest yearly peak gauge height was 11 @.@ 83 feet ( 3 @.@ 61 m ) , both on June 22 , 1972 , during Hurricane Agnes . The lowest yearly peak discharge in this time period was 135 cubic feet ( 3 @.@ 8 m3 ) per second and the lowest yearly peak gauge height was 4 @.@ 29 feet ( 1 @.@ 31 m ) , both on November 26 , 1986 . The USGS also measured discharge at Allenwood , very near the creek 's mouth , as part of water quality measurements on seven occasions between 1970 and 1975 . The average discharge was 70 @.@ 4 cubic feet ( 1 @.@ 99 m3 ) per second , and ranged from a high of 111 cubic feet ( 3 @.@ 1 m3 ) per second to a low of 33 cubic feet ( 0 @.@ 93 m3 ) per second . There are no other known stream gauges on the creek . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The White Deer Hole Creek watershed consists of 0 @.@ 08 percent of the area of Clinton County , 4 @.@ 40 percent of the area of Lycoming County , and 3 @.@ 67 percent of the area of Union County . Neighboring watersheds are the West Branch Susquehanna River and its minor tributaries ( north and east ) , White Deer Creek ( south ) , and Fishing Creek ( west ) . 
 In 2000 , the White Deer Hole Creek watershed population was 2 @,@ 672 . In the 1970s , Amish began moving to the Elimsport area from Lancaster County . In 1995 there were over 200 Amish in more than twenty families . In comparison , Washington Township 's population was 1 @,@ 613 in 2000 . Elimsport has Amish harness , machine repair , and food shops , and a new one @-@ room school was built nearby in 1997 . 
 The watershed area is 67 square miles ( 170 km2 ) , with 48 square miles ( 120 km2 ) of forest and 19 square miles ( 49 km2 ) for agriculture . By area , 1 @.@ 1 percent of the watershed lies in Clinton County ( in Crawford and Greene Townships ) , 81 @.@ 6 percent lies in Lycoming County ( in Brady , Clinton , Limestone , and Washington Townships ) , and 17 @.@ 3 percent lies in Union County ( in Gregg , Lewis , West Buffalo , and White Deer Townships ) . 
 Spring Creek is the major tributary , draining an area of 21 @.@ 1 square miles ( 55 km2 ) or 31 percent of the total White Deer Hole Creek watershed . No other tributaries are named and only the area of the tributary in Beartrap Hollow is known , with 0 @.@ 42 square miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km2 ) or 0 @.@ 63 percent of the total . 
 = = = Water quality and pollution = = = 
 Clearcutting of forests in the early 20th century and the ordnance plant in the Second World War adversely affected the White Deer Hole Creek watershed 's ecology and water quality . Agricultural runoff was and is another potential source of pollution . Gregg Township had no wastewater treatment plant until an 800 @,@ 000 @-@ gallon / day ( 304 m3 / day ) plant was built along the river just north of the creek for the federal prison ( 90 percent ) and village of Allenwood ( 10 percent ) . The drainage basin has been designated by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as " a high quality watershed " since 2001 . 
 The mean annual precipitation for White Deer Hole Creek is 40 to 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 016 to 1 @,@ 067 mm ) . Pennsylvania receives the most acid rain of any state in the United States . Because the creek is in a sandstone , limestone , and shale mountain region , it has a relatively low capacity to neutralize added acid . This makes it especially vulnerable to acid rain , which poses a threat to the long term health of the plants and animals in the creek . The total alkalinity of the " Class A Wild Trout Waters " is 2 for the 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) of White Deer Hole Creek so classified , and 13 for the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) unnamed tributary in the Fourth Gap . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Edward Gertler writes in Keystone Canoeing that White Deer Hole Creek " offers a good springtime beginner cruise through a pretty , agricultural valley " with " many satisfying views " and " good current and many easy riffles " . Canoeing and kayaking are possible in spring and after hard rain , with 10 @.@ 6 miles ( 17 @.@ 1 km ) of Class 1 whitewater on the International Scale of River Difficulty from Back Road bridge east to U.S. Route 15 ( the mouth ) . One can start further upstream at the Gap Road bridge , for 2 @.@ 0 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of Class 2 whitewater , but <unk> are more of a problem here . 
 White Deer Hole Creek is designated by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission as a " Class A Wild Trout Waters " stream , from the source downstream to the Township Road 384 ( Gap Road ) bridge . The unnamed tributary in Fourth Gap is also " Class A Wild Trout Waters " . The creek downstream from the bridge , as well as Spring Creek , have been designated as approved trout waters by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission and are stocked with trout and may be fished during trout season . Other fish found in the creek and river include carp , catfish , pickerel , and pike . 
 Hunting , trapping , and fishing are possible with proper licenses in Tiadaghton State Forest and the 3 @,@ 018 acres ( 1 @,@ 221 ha ) in State Game Lands No. 252 . In 2002 , a Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources report on " State Forest Waters with Special Protection " rated White Deer Hole Creek from its source to Spring Creek as a " High Quality @-@ Cold Water Fishery " . In addition to these public lands , there are private hunting and fishing clubs and cabins along White Deer Hole Creek and its tributaries . Popular game species include American black bear , white @-@ tailed deer , ruffed grouse , and wild turkey . 
 Part of the 261 @-@ mile ( 420 km ) Pennsylvania Mid State Trail , marked with orange blazes to indicate it is solely for hiking , runs along a section of White Deer Hole Creek from west of the Fourth Gap to beyond the source . There are other hiking trails in the watershed , and the Third Gap , Metzger , Mud Hole , Pennsylvania Mid State , <unk> , and Mountain Gap trails are part of the 120 @-@ mile ( 190 km ) Central Mountains Shared Use Trails System , marked with red blazes , in Tiadaghton and Bald Eagle State Forests in Union , Lycoming , and Clinton Counties . 
 Roads and trails in the state forest are also open for horseback riding and mountain biking . Some trails are dedicated to cross @-@ country skiing and snowmobiling in winter . The state forest is open for primitive camping , although certain areas require a permit . Small campfires are allowed , except from March to mid @-@ May and October through November , or by order of the district forester , when self @-@ contained stoves are allowed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native American paths = = = 
 The first recorded inhabitants of the Susquehanna River valley were the Susquehannocks , an Iroquoian speaking people . Their name meant " people of the muddy river " in the Algonquian , but their name for themselves is unknown . Decimated by diseases and warfare , they had largely died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes by the early 18th century . The lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were then chiefly occupied by the Munsee phratry of the Lenape ( or Delaware ) , and were under the nominal control of the Five ( later Six ) Nations of the Iroquois . Two important paths of these native indigenous peoples ran along parts of White Deer Hole Creek . 
 The Great Island Path was a major trail that ran north along the Susquehanna River from the <unk> village of Shamokin at modern Sunbury , fording the river there and following the west bank of the West Branch Susquehanna River north until White Deer Hole valley . The path turned west at Allenwood and followed White Deer Hole Creek until about the present location of Elimsport . There it headed northwest , crossed North White Deer Ridge and passed west through the Nippenose valley , then turned north and crossed Bald Eagle Mountain via <unk> Creek and ran along the south bank of the river to the Great Island ( near the present day city of Lock Haven ) . The stretch from the mouth of the creek to the Nippenose valley is approximately followed by Route 44 . From the Great Island , the Great Shamokin Path continued further west to the modern boroughs of Clearfield and Kittanning , the last on the Allegheny River . 
 Culbertson 's Path followed White Deer Hole Creek west from Allenwood , then followed Spring Creek north , crossed Bald Eagle Mountain and followed Mosquito Run to the river at the current borough of <unk> . Here it crossed the river to " French Margaret 's Town " ( western modern day Williamsport ) before joining the major <unk> Path , which led north up Lycoming Creek to the North Branch of the Susquehanna River , modern New York , and the Iroquois there . These trails were only wide enough for one person , but settlers in White Deer Hole valley broadened the path to <unk> to take grain to Culbertson 's mill on Mosquito Run , hence the name . Culbertson 's Path was used as a part of the Underground Railroad until the American Civil War began in 1861 . Escaped slaves would often wade in creeks to hide their scent from pursuing bloodhounds . In 2009 , there is still a " Culbertson 's Trail " , for hiking over Bald Eagle Mountain from Pennsylvania Route 554 to <unk> . 
 = = = Lycoming County boundaries = = = 
 When Lycoming County was organized on April 13 , 1795 , the bill passed by the Pennsylvania legislature defined the new county 's boundaries thus : 
 That all that part of Northumberland County lying northwestward of a line drawn from the Mifflin county line on the summit of Nittany mountain ; thence running along the top or highest ridge of said mountain , to where White Deer Hole creek runs through the same ; and from thence by a direct line crossing the West Branch of Susquehanna , at the mouth of Black Hole creek to the end of Muncy Hills ; thence along the top of Muncy Hills and the Bald Mountain to the Luzerne county line , shall be , and the same is hereby erected into a separate county , to be henceforth called and known by the name of Lycoming County . [ emphasis added ] 
 The borders of the county have changed considerably since , but the White Deer Hole Creek watershed still approximates the county line in the south . Until 1861 , what is now Gregg Township in Union County was a part of Brady Township in Lycoming County . Thus , until the start of the American Civil War , almost all of White Deer Hole Creek and its watershed were part of Lycoming County . 
 = = = Early inhabitants = = = 
 Prior to construction , the site of the wastewater treatment plant yielded archeological evidence of habitation by indigenous peoples from the Paleo @-@ Indian , Archaic , and Woodland periods . The only Native American inhabitant of the valley whose name is known , " <unk> " , lived near the mouth of White Deer Hole Creek . White Deer Hole Creek was acquired by the colonial government of Pennsylvania on November 5 , 1768 , as part of the " New Purchase " in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix . The first settlers came to the valley in 1769 or 1770 , and by 1778 there were 146 landowners on the township tax rolls ( though many likely resided elsewhere . ) 
 In the American Revolutionary War , settlements throughout the Susquehanna valley were attacked by Loyalists and Native Americans allied with the British . After the Wyoming Valley battle and massacre in the summer of 1778 ( near what is now Wilkes @-@ Barre ) and smaller local attacks , the " Big Runaway " occurred throughout the West Branch Susquehanna valley . Settlers fled from feared and actual attacks by the British and their allies . Settlers abandoned their homes and fields , drove their livestock south , and towed their possessions on rafts on the river to Sunbury . Their abandoned property was burnt by the attackers . Some settlers soon returned , only to flee again in the summer of 1779 in the " Little Runaway " . 
 Sullivan 's Expedition helped stabilize the area and encouraged resettlement , which continued after the war . However , in 1787 there were only fourteen families in the valley : five on the river banks , five on White Deer Hole Creek between Spring Creek and the river , two on Spring Creek , and two on the creek west of Spring Creek . Six families left the area not long after 1787 . The first grist mill was built on the creek in 1789 , and four more were built in 1798 , 1815 , 1817 , and 1842 . 
 = = = Lumber and logging railroad = = = 
 Beginning with the first settlers , much of the land along White Deer Hole Creek was slowly cleared of timber . Small sawmills were constructed in the 19th century , and a much larger lumber operation was run by the Vincent Lumber Company from 1901 to 1904 . The company built a narrow gauge 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) railroad from Elimsport 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west into timber , and a line east to Allenwood and the Reading Railroad there . The lumber railroad , which ended near the Fourth Gap , ran parallel to the creek . It was incorporated on June 24 , 1901 , ( around the time of construction ) as the " Allenwood and Western Railroad " . The lumbering operation ceased in 1904 when the forests were gone . The railroad was torn up , and its one second @-@ hand Shay locomotive was moved to the Vincent Lumber Company operation at Denholm in Juniata County . 
 From 1900 to 1935 , much of what is now Tiadaghton State Forest was purchased by Pennsylvania from lumber companies that had no further use for the clear @-@ cut land . In the 1930s there were seven Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) camps to construct roads and trails in the forest . CCC Camp S @-@ 125 @-@ Pa ( Elimsport ) was located 15 miles ( 24 km ) west of Allenwood along the creek , between the Third and Fourth Gaps . 
 Small @-@ scale lumbering continues in the watershed , but the forest is certified as well @-@ managed " in an environmentally sensitive manner " and lumber from it qualifies for a " green label " . Gertler reports lumber operations along White Deer Hole Creek near Elimsport in the early 1980s . A sawmill owned and operated by Amish is on Route 44 in Elimsport . It burned down on May 10 , 2006 , causing $ 500 @,@ 000 in damages , but was expected to be back in operation in a month ; it has since reopened . Despite this small @-@ scale lumbering , as of 2009 the forests have grown back and are mixed oak , with blueberry and mountain laurel bushes . White Deer Hole Creek and its tributaries also have stands of hemlock and thickets of rhododendron along them . 
 = = = Ordnance plant to federal prison and game lands = = = 
 During the Second World War , the federal government built the $ 50 million Susquehanna Ordnance Depot to make TNT on 8 @,@ 500 acres ( 3 @,@ 400 ha ) , partially in the White Deer Hole Creek watershed . In the spring of 1942 , residents were evicted by eminent domain from 163 farms and 47 other properties in Gregg Township in Union County and Brady , Clinton , and Washington Townships in Lycoming County . The village of Alvira in Gregg Township disappeared . Alvira was founded in 1825 as " <unk> " and had 100 inhabitants by 1900 . Although the inhabitants were told they could return after the war , almost all the buildings seized were razed . Only some cemeteries and the nearby " Stone Church " remain . Construction of the plant involved some 10 @,@ 000 people , and it took 3 @,@ 500 to 4 @,@ 500 employees to run the plant with its more than 200 buildings and 149 storage bunkers for TNT and high explosives , as well as storage racks of bombs . However , the need for TNT was lower than originally estimated and the project was nearly abandoned . By 1945 , the only workers left at the depot were guards . 
 The depot closed after the war and the land was used by the United States Army for testing . In 1950 , the Federal Bureau of Prisons was given 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) of the plant site , and began housing prisoners from the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary there in 1952 . In 1957 the " Allenwood Prison Camp " was built , which became the " Federal Correctional Institute , Allenwood " . This was greatly expanded in the early 1990s to become " the largest federal prison facility " in the United States . North of the White Deer Hole Creek watershed , some of the land was sold to make the " White Deer Golf Course " in Clinton Township , and in 1973 , 125 acres ( 51 ha ) of prison land in Brady Township were leased to Lycoming County for its landfill ( which serves five counties ) . 
 The remaining 3 @,@ 018 acres ( 1 @,@ 221 ha ) were given to Pennsylvania and became State Game Lands 252 . Many of the 149 concrete bunkers remain , but it is " a diverse mix of mature forest , impoundments , and brushy thickets , as well as a local hotspot for a variety of birds during migration " . The watershed is a haven for wildlife . Common animals in the game lands include painted and common snapping turtles , muskrats , frogs , eastern cottontails , red foxes , and white @-@ tailed deer , while birds include golden @-@ winged , hooded , and blue @-@ winged warblers , red @-@ shouldered hawks , wood ducks , tundra swans , pied @-@ billed grebes , American bitterns , herons , and belted kingfishers . The first barn owls to be banded in Lycoming County were in a barn near Elimsport in 2006 . Gray squirrels , groundhogs , raccoons , crows , red @-@ tailed hawks , downy woodpeckers , cardinals , blue jays , American robins , nuthatches , titmice , and sparrows are also found in the White Deer Hole Creek watershed . 
 Some locals in the surrounding areas often report paranormal sightings and activities in the bunker areas . Many stories and experiences are recurring while others are different . There have been no formal investigations of the activity reported so far , however some people have performed personal investigations and reported their outcomes . 
 = Eliminative materialism = 
 Eliminative materialism ( also called eliminativism ) is a materialist position in the philosophy of mind . Its primary claim is that people 's common @-@ sense understanding of the mind ( or folk psychology ) is false and that certain classes of mental states that most people believe in do not exist . Some eliminativists argue that no coherent neural basis will be found for many everyday psychological concepts such as belief or desire , since they are poorly defined . Rather , they argue that psychological concepts of behaviour and experience should be judged by how well they reduce to the biological level . Other versions entail the non @-@ existence of conscious mental states such as pain and visual perceptions . 
 Eliminativism stands in opposition to reductive materialism , which argues that a mental state is well defined , and that further research will result in a more detailed , but not different understanding . An intermediate position is revisionary materialism , which will often argue that the mental state in question will prove to be somewhat reducible to physical phenomena - with some changes to the common sense concept . 
 Eliminativism about a class of entities is the view that that class of entities does not exist . For example , materialism tends to be eliminativist about the soul ; modern chemists are eliminativist about phlogiston ; and modern physicists are eliminativist about the existence of luminiferous aether . Eliminative materialism is the relatively new ( 1960s @-@ 1970s ) idea that certain classes of mental entities that common sense takes for granted , such as beliefs , desires , and the subjective sensation of pain , do not exist . The most common versions are eliminativism about propositional attitudes , as expressed by Paul and Patricia Churchland , and eliminativism about qualia ( subjective experience ) , as expressed by Daniel Dennett and Georges Rey . These philosophers often appeal to an introspection illusion . 
 Since eliminative materialism claims that future research will fail to find a neuronal basis for various mental phenomena , it must necessarily wait for science to progress further . One might question the position on these grounds , but other philosophers like Churchland argue that eliminativism is often necessary in order to open the minds of thinkers to new evidence and better explanations . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Various arguments have been put forth both for and against eliminative materialism over the last forty years . Most of the arguments in favor of the view are based on the assumption that people 's commonsense view of the mind is actually an implicit theory . It is to be compared and contrasted with other scientific theories in its explanatory success , accuracy , and ability to allow people to make correct predictions about the future . Eliminativists argue that , based on these and other criteria , commonsense " folk " psychology has failed and will eventually need to be replaced with explanations derived from the neurosciences . These philosophers therefore tend to emphasize the importance of neuroscientific research as well as developments in artificial intelligence to sustain their thesis . 
 Philosophers who argue against eliminativism may take several approaches . Simulation theorists , like Robert Gordon and Alvin Goldman argue that folk psychology is not a theory , but rather depends on internal simulation of others , and therefore is not subject to falsification in the same way that theories are . Jerry Fodor , among others , argues that folk psychology is , in fact , a successful ( even indispensable ) theory . Another view is that eliminativism assumes the existence of the beliefs and other entities it seeks to " eliminate " and is thus self @-@ refuting . 
 Eliminativism maintains that the common @-@ sense understanding of the mind is mistaken , and that the neurosciences will one day reveal that the mental states that are talked about in everyday discourse , using words such as " intend " , " believe " , " desire " , and " love " , do not refer to anything real . Because of the inadequacy of natural languages , people mistakenly think that they have such beliefs and desires . Some eliminativists , such as Frank Jackson , claim that consciousness does not exist except as an <unk> of brain function ; others , such as Georges Rey , claim that the concept will eventually be eliminated as neuroscience progresses . Consciousness and folk psychology are separate issues and it is possible to take an eliminative stance on one but not the other . The roots of eliminativism go back to the writings of Wilfred Sellars , W.V. Quine , Paul Feyerabend , and Richard Rorty . The term " eliminative materialism " was first introduced by James <unk> in 1968 while describing a version of physicalism endorsed by Rorty . The later Ludwig Wittgenstein was also an important inspiration for eliminativism , particularly with his attack on " private objects " as " grammatical fictions " . 
 Early eliminativists such as Rorty and Feyerabend often confused two different notions of the sort of elimination that the term " eliminative materialism " entailed . On the one hand , they claimed , the cognitive sciences that will ultimately give people a correct account of the workings of the mind will not employ terms that refer to common @-@ sense mental states like beliefs and desires ; these states will not be part of the ontology of a mature cognitive science . But critics immediately countered that this view was indistinguishable from the identity theory of mind . Quine himself wondered what exactly was so eliminative about eliminative materialism after all : 
 On the other hand , the same philosophers also claimed that common @-@ sense mental states simply do not exist . But critics pointed out that eliminativists could not have it both ways : either mental states exist and will ultimately be explained in terms of lower @-@ level neurophysiological processes or they do not . Modern eliminativists have much more clearly expressed the view that mental phenomena simply do not exist and will eventually be eliminated from people 's thinking about the brain in the same way that demons have been eliminated from people 's thinking about mental illness and psychopathology . 
 While it was a minority view in the 1960s , eliminative materialism gained prominence and acceptance during the 1980s . Proponents of this view , such as B.F. Skinner , often made parallels to previous pseudoscientific theories ( such as that of the four humours , the phlogiston theory of combustion , and the vital force theory of life ) that have all been successfully eliminated in attempting to establish their thesis about the nature of the mental . In these cases , science has not produced more detailed versions or reductions of these theories , but rejected them altogether as obsolete . Radical behaviorists , such as Skinner , argued that folk psychology is already obsolete and should be replaced by descriptions of histories of reinforcement and punishment . Such views were eventually abandoned . Patricia and Paul Churchland argued that folk psychology will be gradually replaced as neuroscience matures . 
 Eliminativism is not only motivated by philosophical considerations , but is also a prediction about what form future scientific theories will take . <unk> philosophers therefore tend to be concerned with the data coming from the relevant brain and cognitive sciences . In addition , because eliminativism is essentially predictive in nature , different theorists can , and often do , make different predictions about which aspects of folk psychology will be eliminated from folk psychological vocabulary . None of these philosophers are eliminativists " tout court " . 
 Today , the eliminativist view is most closely associated with the philosophers Paul and Patricia Churchland , who deny the existence of propositional attitudes ( a subclass of intentional states ) , and with Daniel Dennett , who is generally considered to be an eliminativist about qualia and phenomenal aspects of consciousness . One way to summarize the difference between the Churchlands 's views and Dennett 's view is that the Churchlands are eliminativists when it comes to propositional attitudes , but <unk> concerning qualia , while Dennett is an anti @-@ reductionist with respect to propositional attitudes , and an eliminativist concerning qualia . 
 = = Arguments for eliminativism = = 
 = = = Problems with folk theories = = = 
 Eliminativists such as Paul and Patricia Churchland argue that folk psychology is a fully developed but non @-@ formalized theory of human behavior . It is used to explain and make predictions about human mental states and behavior . This view is often referred to as the theory of mind or just simply theory @-@ theory , for it is a theory which theorizes the existence of an unacknowledged theory . As a theory in the scientific sense , eliminativists maintain , folk psychology needs to be evaluated on the basis of its predictive power and explanatory success as a research program for the investigation of the mind / brain . 
 Such eliminativists have developed different arguments to show that folk psychology is a seriously mistaken theory and needs to be abolished . They argue that folk psychology excludes from its purview or has traditionally been mistaken about many important mental phenomena that can , and are , being examined and explained by modern neurosciences . Some examples are dreaming , consciousness , mental disorders , learning processes , and memory abilities . Furthermore , they argue , folk psychology 's development in the last 2 @,@ 500 years has not been significant and it is therefore a stagnating theory . The ancient Greeks already had a folk psychology comparable to modern views . But in contrast to this lack of development , the neurosciences are a rapidly progressing science complex that , in their view , can explain many cognitive processes that folk psychology cannot . 
 Folk psychology retains characteristics of now obsolete theories or legends from the past . Ancient societies tried to explain the physical mysteries of nature by ascribing mental conditions to them in such statements as " the sea is angry " . Gradually , these everyday folk psychological explanations were replaced by more efficient scientific descriptions . Today , eliminativists argue , there is no reason not to accept an effective scientific account of people 's cognitive abilities . If such an explanation existed , then there would be no need for folk @-@ psychological explanations of behavior , and the latter would be eliminated the same way as the mythological explanations the ancients used . 
 Another line of argument is the meta @-@ induction based on what eliminativists view as the disastrous historical record of folk theories in general . Ancient pre @-@ scientific " theories " of folk biology , folk physics , and folk cosmology have all proven to be radically wrong . Eliminativists argue the same in the case of folk psychology . There seems no logical basis , to the eliminativist , for making an exception just because folk psychology has lasted longer and is more intuitive or instinctively plausible than the other folk theories . Indeed , the eliminativists warn , considerations of intuitive plausibility may be precisely the result of the deeply entrenched nature in society of folk psychology itself . It may be that people 's beliefs and other such states are as theory @-@ laden as external perceptions and hence intuitions will tend to be biased in favor of them . 
 = = = Specific problems with folk psychology = = = 
 Much of folk psychology involves the attribution of intentional states ( or more specifically as a subclass , propositional attitudes ) . Eliminativists point out that these states are generally ascribed syntactic and semantic properties . An example of this is the language of thought hypothesis , which attributes a discrete , combinatorial syntax and other linguistic properties to these mental phenomena . Eliminativists argue that such discrete and combinatorial characteristics have no place in the neurosciences , which speak of action potentials , spiking frequencies , and other effects which are continuous and distributed in nature . Hence , the syntactic structures which are assumed by folk psychology can have no place in such a structure as the brain . Against this there have been two responses . On the one hand , there are philosophers who deny that mental states are linguistic in nature and see this as a straw man argument . The other view is represented by those who subscribe to " a language of thought " . They assert that the mental states can be multiply realized and that functional characterizations are just higher @-@ level characterizations of what 's happening at the physical level . 
 It has also been argued against folk psychology that the intentionality of mental states like belief imply that they have semantic qualities . Specifically , their meaning is determined by the things that they are about in the external world . This makes it difficult to explain how they can play the causal roles that they are supposed to in cognitive processes . 
 In recent years , this latter argument has been fortified by the theory of connectionism . Many <unk> models of the brain have been developed in which the processes of language learning and other forms of representation are highly distributed and parallel . This would tend to indicate that there is no need for such discrete and semantically endowed entities as beliefs and desires . 
 = = Arguments against eliminativism = = 
 = = = Intuitive reservations = = = 
 The thesis of eliminativism seems to be so obviously wrong to many critics , under the claim that people know immediately and indubitably that they have minds , that argumentation seems unnecessary . This sort of intuition pumping is illustrated by asking what happens when one asks oneself honestly if one has mental states . Eliminativists object to such a rebuttal of their position by claiming that intuitions often are mistaken . Analogies from the history of science are frequently invoked to buttress this observation : it may appear obvious that the sun travels around the earth , for example , but for all its apparent obviousness this conception was proved wrong nevertheless . Similarly , it may appear obvious that apart from neural events there are also mental conditions . Nevertheless , this could equally turn out to be false . 
 But even if one accepts the susceptibility to error of people 's intuitions , the objection can be reformulated : if the existence of mental conditions seems perfectly obvious and is central in people 's conception of the world , then enormously strong arguments are needed in order to successfully deny the existence of mental conditions . Furthermore , these arguments , to be consistent , need to be formulated in a way which does not pre @-@ suppose the existence of entities like " mental states " , " logical arguments " , and " ideas " , otherwise they are self @-@ contradictory . Those who accept this objection say that the arguments in favor of eliminativism are far too weak to establish such a radical claim ; therefore there is no reason to believe in eliminativism . 
 = = = Self @-@ refutation = = = 
 Some philosophers , such as Paul <unk> , have attempted to show that eliminativism is in some sense self @-@ refuting , since the theory itself presupposes the existence of mental phenomena . If eliminativism is true , then the eliminativist must permit an intentional property like truth , supposing that in order to assert something one must believe it . Hence , for eliminativism to be asserted as a thesis , the eliminativist must believe that it is true ; if that is the case , then there are beliefs and the eliminativist claim is false . 
 Georges Rey and Michael Devitt reply to this objection by invoking deflationary semantic theories that avoid analysing predicates like " x is true " as expressing a real property . They are construed , instead , as logical devices so that asserting that a sentence is true is just a quoted way of asserting the sentence itself . To say , " ' God exists ' is true " is just to say , " God exists " . This way , Rey and Devitt argue , insofar as dispositional replacements of " claims " and deflationary accounts of " true " are coherent , eliminativism is not self @-@ refuting . 
 = = = Qualia = = = 
 Another problem for the eliminativist is the consideration that human beings undergo subjective experiences and , hence , their conscious mental states have qualia . Since qualia are generally regarded as characteristics of mental states , their existence does not seem to be compatible with eliminativism . Eliminativists , such as Daniel Dennett and Georges Rey , respond by rejecting qualia . This is seen to be problematic to opponents of eliminativists , since many claim that the existence of qualia seems perfectly obvious . Many philosophers consider the " elimination " of qualia implausible , if not incomprehensible . They assert that , for instance , the existence of pain is simply beyond denial . 
 Admitting that the existence of qualia seems obvious , Dennett nevertheless states that " qualia " is a theoretical term from an outdated metaphysics stemming from Cartesian intuitions . He argues that a precise analysis shows that the term is in the long run empty and full of contradictions . The eliminativist 's claim with respect to qualia is that there is no unbiased evidence for such experiences when regarded as something more than propositional attitudes . Influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein 's Philosophical Investigations , Dennett and Rey have defended eliminativism about qualia , even when other portions of the mental are accepted . 
 = = = Efficacy of folk psychology = = = 
 Some philosophers simply argue that folk @-@ psychology is a quite successful theory . Simulation theorists doubt that people 's understanding of the mental can be explained in terms of a theory at all . Rather they argue that people 's understanding of others is based on internal simulations of how they would act and respond in similar situations . Jerry Fodor is one of the objectors that believes in folk psychology 's success as a theory , because it makes for an effective way of communication in everyday life that can be implemented with few words . Such an effectiveness could never be achieved with a complex neuroscientific terminology . 
 = The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants = 
 " The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants " is the seventh episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It first aired on Fox in the United States on November 27 , 2011 , and was seen by around 5 @.@ 6 million people during this broadcast . In the episode , Homer becomes an account manager for Mr. Burns after successfully hosting a viral marketing event for Krusty the Clown . Meanwhile , Lisa is teaching Bart how to read classic novels like Little Women . Homer 's new job affects his family as he becomes more distant and in the end he has to choose between his family or his new job . The episode 's title references The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit . 
 The episode was written by Jeff Westbrook and directed by Steven Dean Moore . It functions mainly as a parody of the television show Mad Men , and features the guest voices of Mad Men actor John Slattery and creator Matthew Weiner . Critics found the episode to be average in quality , receiving criticism for the wasted opportunities with the Mad Men parody . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family host a tastemaker party at their home to promote Absolut Krusty , Krusty the Clown 's own brand of vodka . Mr. Burns takes notice of the party 's success and decides to promote Homer to " Account Man " for the Springfield Nuclear Plant . Robert Marlowe , a seasoned account veteran , takes Homer under his wing and shows Homer what the high life is like in the corner office . The job changes Homer into a sad individual , who drinks in the dark and complains about the meaninglessness of his job . When Homer 's long hours at the office become the norm and Homer becomes distant from his family , a family vacation with Marge and the children help him realize that family always comes before work . Meanwhile , Lisa introduces Bart to a new literary world which sparks his interest in reading classic novels . In the beginning , Bart struggles with reading and suggests that he should just get a job where he does not have to read . Lisa insists and Bart eventually learns to read properly . When the bullies watches him reading a classic novel at school , they force him to read Little Women to them . 
 Meanwhile , both Marge and Mr. Burns want Homer to go on the same rafting trip . Homer starts with being on his family 's raft , and then swims back and forth between that and Mr. Burns 's raft . Marge discovers that he has double booked the weekend while both rafts float near a waterfall , and is upset that he chose to do work on a family outing . Homer can only save one raft , and he saves the one containing his family . As Mr. Burns and the executives are about to go over the waterfall , Marlowe rides up on a motorboat and carries Mr. Burns to safety , while the executives fall over the edge . Homer goes over the waterfall by himself , but is completely unharmed and finds gold . Later , at their house , Homer tells Marge that he is a safety inspector again . Fireworks go off outside , and it is revealed that they were caused by a fire at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , presumably because Homer failed at his job . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants " was written by Jeff Westbrook and directed by Steven Dean Moore . It featured John Slattery , Matthew Weiner , and Kevin Michael Richardson as guest voices . Weiner is the creator , writer , and showrunner of the television show Mad Men , in which Slattery portrays the character Roger Sterling . The entire A @-@ Plot of the episode was a parody of Mad Men . Homer transforms into the lead character from Mad Men , Don Draper , and Slattery 's character Robert Marlowe shares similarities with Roger Sterling . Weiner 's role in the episode was a brief cameo as one of the businessmen on the rafting trip with Mr. Burns . The lead actor of Mad Men , Jon Hamm , did not appear in the episode , but previously appeared in the season 22 episode " Donnie Fatso " as a different character . " The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants " even recreated a scene from Mad Men , in which a lawnmower runs loose in an office . In an interview with IGN in 2011 , the showrunner of the episode , Al Jean , named Mad Men as one of the two television shows he always makes time to watch . 
 The music in the episode was edited by Chris Ledesma . In his own blog , he explains that this episode required very little musical scoring . In some cases , the musical score is used to take away focus from the scenes that did not work as well as planned . If the episode on the other side is well @-@ scripted and features strong performances from the voice cast , then the music becomes a distraction . Ledesma thought that the " episode offers a nice balance of dialogue and music . " Of the music that was used , the theme from the 1965 film Moment to Moment , which was scored by Henry Mancini , was featured during the montage of Homer working at his new job . The episode ends with a piece of music , which is the music composer Alf Clausen 's version of the Mancini theme . In total five minutes of music was used for the episode . 
 The episode featured several references to the character Mr. Burns 's old age . When Burns is requesting a song from the <unk> , he asks for " anything by Prince ... Wilhelm , of Prussia ? " . Prince Wilhelm of Prussia was second in line to the German throne and lived from 1906 to 1940 . Instead , the <unk> plays " Come Josephine in My Flying Machine " from 1910 . Other Mr. Burns quotes include " How ironic . I survive the Titanic by making a raft out of steerage passengers ... and now this . " and the RMS Titanic sank in 1912 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 27 , 2011 . It was watched by approximately 5 @.@ 61 million people during this broadcast . The show received a 2 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , which was a 4 % drop from the previous episode " The Book Job " , and a six percent audience share . It was preceded by The Cleveland Show and became the highest @-@ rated program in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of total viewers , finishing higher than Family Guy ( 5 @.@ 50 million ) , American Dad ! ( 4 @.@ 48 million ) , The Cleveland Show ( 3 @.@ 67 million ) , and Allan Gregory ( 3 @.@ 18 million ) . The episode did however not rate higher than Family Guy in the 18 – 49 demographic . Seven days after the initial airing , the episode had a 19 @.@ 2 % increase in the 18 – 49 demographics from DVR viewings , raising the overall ratings to 3 @.@ 1 . The overall viewership increased with 15 @.@ 7 % to 6 @.@ 49 million viewers . For the week of November 21 – 27 , 2011 , " The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants " finished in 21st place in the ratings among all network prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 Since airing , " The Man in the Blue Flannel Pants " has been generally received as being average in quality by television critics . The A.V. Club 's Hayden Childs gave the episode an overall rating of B- and found that the episode " wasn ’ t particularly funny but neither was it particularly bad . " She praised the episode for " a strong storyline " and " elements that often crop up in the better episodes , like a focus that does not stray too far from the Simpson family and a B @-@ plot that works " . Despite this , she felt that the " jokes are so low @-@ key and mild that the episode zooms by without raising a single chuckle or smirk . " Similarly , Jason Hughes of AOL TV commented that " [ w ] hile it was a charming enough episode , there were no stand @-@ out moments of clever satire or unexpected twists . " Ology 's Josh Harrison was slightly more negative and thought the episode was " charming but a bit of a comic flop " . He concluded that the episode was nothing special and gave the episode a rating of six out of ten . 
 On the Mad Men parody , Childs found comedic potential in Homer 's transformation into Don Draper , but concluded that this was " where the episode could have gotten very funny very fast , but it doesn ’ t bring any of these jokes home . " She further elaborated that " Don Draper is a sad character , true , but there is some real comic potential in his pretensions and vanity . The writers are tapping into this aspect of his characterization to a small degree , but they aren ’ t really satirizing it . " Hughes was not impressed with the Mad Men parody and sarcastically stated that the spoof was " so sharp , you 'll swear it 's 2008 " . 
 = WrestleMania XXIV = 
 WrestleMania XXIV was the twenty @-@ fourth annual WrestleMania professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . The event took place on March 30 , 2008 , at the Florida Citrus Bowl in Orlando , Florida and was the first WrestleMania to be held in the state of Florida . WrestleMania XXIV was the second WrestleMania to be held outdoors , with the first being WrestleMania IX , held in Caesars Palace in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 Nine professional wrestling matches were scheduled for the event , which featured a supercard , a scheduling of more than one main bout . The first of these matches was a Singles match from the SmackDown brand that featured The Undertaker defeating World Heavyweight Champion Edge to win the title . The second was a Triple Threat match from the Raw brand , in which WWE Champion Randy Orton defeated challengers Triple H and John Cena to retain the championship . The other was a singles match from the ECW brand , in which Kane defeated ECW Champion Chavo Guerrero to win the ECW title . From the six scheduled bouts on the undercard , three received more promotion than the others . In a No Disqualification match , Floyd Mayweather Jr. defeated Big Show . The second match involved wrestlers from all three brands fighting in a Money in the Bank ladder match , which CM Punk won . The other match was a retirement match in which Shawn Michaels defeated Ric Flair , leading to Flair 's departure from the WWE and a period of retirement from active wrestling . 
 Tickets for the event commenced sale to the public on November 3 , 2007 . WWE and the City of Orlando hosted festivities that spanned a five @-@ day period within the central Florida region . For the second consecutive year , WrestleMania broke the record for the highest @-@ grossing pay @-@ per @-@ view in WWE history . It also set a gate record for the Citrus Bowl , grossing US $ 5 @.@ 85 million in ticket sales . According to a study by Enigma Research Corporation of Toronto , the Citrus Bowl 's record @-@ breaking attendance brought an estimated $ 51 @.@ 5 million – surpassing the projected $ 25 million – into the local economy and generated $ 1 @.@ 8 million in local tax revenue . The Central Florida Sports Commission reported that the event created jobs and brought approximately 60 @,@ 000 visitors to the city . Over one million people ordered the event on pay @-@ per @-@ view , grossing $ 23 @.@ 8 million in revenue . 
 = = Background = = 
 WrestleMania XXIV featured nine professional wrestling matches with wrestlers involved in pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots , and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of tension @-@ building events , which culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . All wrestlers belonged to either the Raw , SmackDown , or ECW brand – storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees to different programs . 
 The predominant rivalry scripted into WrestleMania on the Raw brand was between Randy Orton , John Cena , and Triple H , over the WWE Championship . At the Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view event in January , Randy Orton successfully defended the WWE Championship against Jeff Hardy at the same event where John Cena returned from an injury and won the Royal Rumble match , where thirty wrestlers competed in a ring and were eliminated by being thrown over the top rope when he last eliminated Triple H. By winning the match , Cena became a top contender for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania XXIV . Instead of challenging Randy Orton for the title at WrestleMania , he decided to challenge him at No Way Out . In the match , Orton got himself intentionally disqualified by slapping the referee , thus retaining the WWE Championship due to WWE regulations . That same night , Triple H also became a top contender to the WWE Championship by defeating five other men in an Elimination Chamber match , which featured wrestlers fighting in a ring surrounded by chains and girders . The next night on Raw , Cena argued that he deserved another WWE Championship match . Raw General Manager William Regal , who was portrayed as a matchmaker and rules enforcer , then announced that Cena would face Orton later in the night . Regal added a stipulation to the match that if Cena won , he would be added to the WrestleMania match between Triple H and Orton , making it a Triple threat match , a standard match that involves three wrestlers . If Orton won , the main event would remain as Orton versus Triple H in a singles match . However , Cena won the match and was added to the bout at WrestleMania . After the match , Triple H , who was the Special Guest Referee , executed a Pedigree to both Cena and Orton . On the February 25 episode of Raw , the unlikely team of Cena and Triple H defeated WWE Champion , Randy Orton and Mr. Kennedy in a tag team brawl . Yet as Cena and Triple H stared each other down , Mr. Kennedy snuck up on Cena and took him down with the Mic Check , as Triple H did nothing to intervene . On the March 3 episode of Raw , Raw General Manager , William Regal allowed a triple threat take over , which would permit Randy Orton , Triple H , and John Cena to establish rules for their matches leading up to the March 30 extravaganza @-@ WrestleMania 24 . On that night , Cena was in charge and pitted Orton against Triple H. During the match , Cena charged into the ring and lifted Triple H overhead for an FU . Then Orton snuck up and dropped Cena with an RKO . On the March 10 episode of Raw ( WrestleMania re @-@ wind night ) , Randy Orton was next to be in charge . He arranged a match between Triple H and his WrestleMania XV opponent , Kane , which Triple H won after executing a Pedigree on Kane while Orton was watching at ringside . Orton also threw John Cena in a match against his WrestleMania 23 opponent , Shawn Michaels . In an attempt at throwing a victory at HBK , Orton attacked him and then went to RKO Cena . Cena countered the RKO and leveled Orton with an FU . On the following week 's episode of Raw , Triple H got his turn of being in charge by pitting Cena and Orton against the entire Raw roster . During the match , both men were forced to work together to eliminate Paul Burchill , Snitsky , and Trevor Murdoch before the rest of the roster charged over the ropes , disqualifying themselves and handing Cena and Orton the victory . Afterwards , Triple H had his say too , when he entered the ring and Pedigreed both Orton and Cena , standing over their spent bodies with a look of satisfaction . On the last episode of Raw , the Raw GM , William Regal ordered a No @-@ disqualification " WrestleMania Showcase " eight @-@ man tag team match pitting Triple H , John Cena , Ric Flair , and Shawn Michaels against Randy Orton , John " Bradshaw " Layfield , Umaga , and Big Show which Triple H and John Cena 's team won when Flair forced Orton to tap out to the modified figure four leglock for the victory . 
 The predominant rivalry on the SmackDown ! brand was between Edge and The Undertaker , over the World Heavyweight Championship . On the May 11 , 2007 , episode of SmackDown ! , the Undertaker was defending his first World Championship against Batista ( who he defeated for the World title at WrestleMania 23 ) in a Steel Cage match , which resulted in a draw when both men escaped the cage and both of their feet touched the floor at the same time . After the match , Mark Henry made his unexpected return from an injury and ambushed the Undertaker . As Henry left the ring , Edge , who defeated Mr. Kennedy a few days earlier on Raw to win the Money in the Bank contract , entered the SmackDown ! brand to cash it in and defeated the Undertaker to win his first World Championship . At Armageddon , Edge won his second World Championship when he pinned then @-@ champion , Batista in a Triple Threat match that also involved Undertaker due to interference by the Major Brothers ( rechristened as the " Edge @-@ heads " on the December 21 episode of SmackDown ! ) . Then at the Royal Rumble event , Edge successfully defended the World title against Rey Mysterio . On the February 1 episode of SmackDown , Assistant General Manager Theodore Long announced that at No Way Out , an Elimination Chamber match would be held to determine the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania . The Undertaker won the match by last eliminating Batista . On the following episode of SmackDown , Edge predicted that The Undertaker 's 15 – 0 undefeated streak at WrestleMania would come to an end once he defeated him . Two weeks later , on the March 7 episode of SmackDown , the team of Edge and Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder defeated The Undertaker in a Handicap match , in which one wrestler faces a team of two or more wrestlers , after Edge pinned The Undertaker following a takedown variation called the spear . The following week , Edge , Hawkins , Ryder , and Chavo Guerrero , a group of aligned wrestlers , defeated Ric Flair and Shawn Michaels in a Steel Cage match , where the ring was surrounded by walls of steel . During the match , Undertaker interfered and attacked Hawkins , Ryder , and Guerrero . The Undertaker used a Double chokeslam on Hawkins and Ryder and a Tombstone Piledriver on Guerrero . As Undertaker was attacking Guerrero , however , Edge escaped the cage and won the match for his team . The next week on SmackDown , Edge , along with Vickie Guerrero , Hawkins , and Ryder , held a mock burial , entitled " Burial of The Undertaker 's WrestleMania Undefeated Streak , " to celebrate Edge 's early victory over The Undertaker . During the " burial " , however , The Undertaker emerged from a casket , which was inside the ring , and attacked Edge , Hawkins , and Ryder , knocking Hawkins and Ryder outside the ring and chokeslamming Edge through the casket . 
 At No Way Out , Big Show made a return to the company after taking time off for injuries beginning in December 2006 . In his return promotional interview , Big Show threatened to give Rey Mysterio a chokeslam . Professional boxer and WBC Welterweight Champion Floyd Mayweather , Jr . , who was in attendance and a close friend of Mysterio 's , came to his aid and confronted Big Show . After Big Show dropped to his knees , Mayweather attacked him with a combination of punches , which caused Big Show to bleed from the nose and mouth . The following night on Raw , Big Show challenged Mayweather to a wrestling match , which Mayweather accepted . As part of the storyline , Big Show arranged an exhibition match with fighter Brandon Hill , who was similar in size and stature to Mayweather . Unimpressed with Show 's display of dominance over Hill , Mayweather told Show that " at WrestleMania , I 'm going to break your jaw " . At their weigh @-@ in for their WrestleMania match , Show threw Mayweather into a crowd of wrestlers to emphasise the disparity in size . 
 On the February 25 episode of Raw , 2008 WWE Hall of Fame Inductee Ric Flair challenged Shawn Michaels to a match at WrestleMania . Michaels accepted after some reluctance , knowing that due to a previous announcement from WWE chairman Mr. McMahon the next match Flair lost would result in his forced retirement . Flair said that " it would be an honor for [ him ] to retire at the hands of Shawn Michaels . " 
 On February 18 , WWE announced via its website that the fourth annual Money in the Bank ladder match would take place at WrestleMania XXIV , a match where the objective is to retrieve a briefcase suspended in the air using a ladder . The match involved wrestlers from all three WWE brands . The winner would earn a contract to challenge for any of the three WWE World Championships ( the WWE Championship of Raw , the World Heavyweight Championship of SmackDown , or the ECW Championship of ECW ) at any time and any place over a one @-@ year period . Qualifying matches occurred to determine the participants in the match at WrestleMania , starting on that night 's Raw with Jeff Hardy and Mr. Kennedy defeating Snitsky and Val Venis respectively to qualify . Shelton Benjamin became the third participant when he defeated Jimmy Wang Yang on the following episode of SmackDown . During the next two weeks on Raw , Chris Jericho defeated Jeff Hardy , and Carlito defeated Cody Rhodes to qualify . At a non @-@ televised SmackDown / ECW house show held on March 8 , Montel Vontavious Porter qualified when he defeated Jamie Noble . On the March 11 episode of ECW , CM Punk became the seventh entrant when he defeated Big Daddy V. John Morrison was the final person to qualify when he beat The Miz on the March 14 episode of SmackDown . Jeff Hardy was later removed from the match after a legitimate suspension by WWE for a drug violation of the company 's Wellness Policy . WWE decided not to add another superstar in his place , making that year 's Money in the Bank ladder match the first year to have seven participants . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On March 21 , 2007 , a press conference was held at City Hall in Orlando , Florida , formally announcing the event for Orlando at the Citrus Bowl . According to an interview with The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal at the press conference , WWE chairman Vince McMahon mentioned Orlando being one of three front @-@ runners to host the event , the other two being Las Vegas and Paris . McMahon explained that Orlando was chosen as geographically , a WrestleMania was never held in the southeast before . 
 As the second WrestleMania to be held entirely outdoors , Vince McMahon also announced that the show would have taken place regardless of the weather conditions . In the March 2008 issue of WWE Magazine , WWE set designer Jason Robinson revealed that a steel rig with a tarpaulin roof would be built above the ring itself to prevent rain from falling on the ring . In that same issue , an initial design of the ring setup was revealed showing a larger rig surrounding the tarpaulin rig , with lighting and two giant screens attached . The final design had the lighting and video screens on the tarpaulin rig , as well as the sound system . During an interview , WWE production manager Brian <unk> mentioned that video reinforcement should prevent anyone 's view from being obstructed by the steel structure . Up to seven generators were used to power up the show . 
 The set design for the entrance stage was at the north end of the stadium and consisted of another steel structure with various video screens hanging from it . The steel beams for the structure were custom built in Belgium and shipped over to Orlando . According to WWE Magazine , the amount of pyrotechnics used would be ten times that of the amount used on Raw . Without the restriction of a roof , the pyrotechnics for the show shot as high as 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) as compared to WrestleMania 23 's height of 150 feet ( 46 m ) . The fireworks were set off from boats on one of the lakes nearby the stadium . WWE has been said to have spent an estimated $ 300 @,@ 000 on the fireworks alone . 
 With the Citrus Bowl 's locker rooms on the south side and the entrance set on the north side , a tented 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) mini @-@ city outside the north end served as the show 's backstage area and included air conditioning , trailers , VIP areas , showers and restrooms . As a consequence , the road next to the north end zone , W. Church Street , was closed down until a day after the event . Numerous other roads were also closed to allow trucks and fork lifts to move in mega equipment for the event . The ring itself was built on the 50 @-@ yard line of the Citrus Bowl to give the best view for fans . Heavy @-@ duty plastic flooring had been put over the field , to protect the turf , provide seating , and serve as the steel structures ' foundation . 
 Development on the set design began in the middle of 2007 . The building of the actual set began in the middle of March 2008 . 100 people worked 16 hours a day to construct the set for the event . The construction finished on March 29 . WrestleMania XXIV was the first WrestleMania event to be filmed in high @-@ definition . It was also the first WWE show and sports related title to be released on the Blu @-@ ray Disc format by WWE Home Video . WrestleMania also led to an increase in sales for musical artists related to the event , including the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' album Stadium Arcadium , John Legend 's album Live from Philadelphia , Rev Theory 's single " Light It Up " , and Fuel 's single " Leave the Memories Alone " , which was used as part of a tribute to Ric Flair . 
 = = = Pre @-@ show = = = 
 Before the show aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Kane won a 24 @-@ man Interpromotional Battle Royal , an elimination style match where the last person remaining was the winner , to win an ECW Championship match against Chavo Guerrero later that night . During one point , Brian Kendrick , Kofi Kingston and Shannon Moore were eliminated . Chuck Palumbo then threw Jamie Noble over the ropes but Noble ran over top of them , and because his feet didn 't hit the floor he was not eliminated . Straight after that , Palumbo kicked him off the apron . The event officially began with John Legend singing a rendition of " America the Beautiful " . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view was a Belfast Brawl between Finlay and John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , a match in which there were no disqualifications or countouts and the match outcomes could have occurred anywhere . Finlay was accompanied to the ring by his storyline son , Hornswoggle , who was returning from a scripted injury suffered at the hands of JBL . During the match , JBL hit Finlay with a trash can lid when the latter was about to perform a suicide dive on him through the ropes on the outside . Later on , Finlay tossed JBL through a table that he had set up earlier on the turnbuckle . Hornswoggle also got involved during the match by hitting JBL with a kendo stick , while later on JBL threw a trash can at him . Attacking Finlay 's knee with a kendo stick , JBL delivered a Clothesline from Hell to Finlay to score a successful pinfall . This was an interpromotional match . 
 The next match of the evening was the fourth @-@ annual Money in the Bank ladder match , in which there were no disqualifications or countouts , and the only way to win the match was to climb a ladder in the ring and retrieve a contract briefcase hanging above . The match featured Chris Jericho , Mr. Kennedy , and Carlito from the Raw brand ; CM Punk , Shelton Benjamin and John Morrison from the ECW brand ; and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) from the SmackDown brand . Jeff Hardy was supposed to be in the match , but he violated the wellness program and was taken out of the match . Early in the match , Morrison climbed a turnbuckle and performed a moonsault onto other competitors outside the ring while holding a ladder against his chest . Later , while Kennedy and Morrison were battling on top of a ladder , Benjamin climbed another ladder placed adjacent to the first one and performed a sunset flip powerbomb on Kennedy , who in turn superplexed Morrison from the top of the ladder . Later , Carlito and Kennedy flipped Benjamin off a ladder in the ring , sending him crashing through another ladder set @-@ up between the barricade and the ring apron . When MVP was close to retrieving the contract briefcase , Matt Hardy ( returning to action after suffering a legitimate injury ) , entered the ring from the crowd , climbed the ladder , and delivered a Twist of Fate to MVP off that ladder . As soon as Morrison started to climb a ladder , see @-@ sawing with another ladder , Jericho flipped the other one and Morrison landed on the ring @-@ ropes groin @-@ first . Jericho even performed a Codebreaker on Punk using a ladder . In the end , Jericho and Punk fought each other on a ladder , but Punk trapped Jericho 's one leg in the ladder 's steps and retrieved the briefcase to win the match . This was an interpromotional match . 
 The next match , which was billed as a " Battle for Brand Supremacy " , was between SmackDown 's Batista and Raw 's Umaga . Early in the match , both Batista and Umaga exchanged blows and Batista knocked Umaga outside with a shoulder block . Umaga later kicked Batista in the face , which caused him to fall back @-@ first outside the ring from the ring @-@ apron . As a result , Umaga started targeting Batista 's injured back . In the end , however , when Umaga tried to hit his Samoan Spike , Batista countered the attempt and gave him a spinebuster . Batista won the match by pinning Umaga after a Batista Bomb . This was an interpromotional match . 
 The fourth match for the event featured Chavo Guerrero defending his ECW Championship against Kane . Kane surprised Chavo by emerging from underneath the ring instead of from the entrance stage during his ring entrance . Kane instantly pinned Chavo after a chokeslam and won the ECW Championship in eleven seconds . This was the only ECW match on the show . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Ric Flair 's " Career Threatening " match against Shawn Michaels was next , which stipulated that Flair would have to retire from wrestling if he had lost . At the start of the match , both superstars engaged in a series of counters , and then Flair shoved Michaels in a corner , making " Old Yeller " comments to him . In retaliation , Michaels slapped Flair in the face , which caused him to start bleeding from the mouth . Later , Michaels tried to go for his Sweet Chin Music , but stopped in the process and Flair capitalized by trapping him in his figure four leglock . Afterward , Michaels finally delivered the Sweet Chin Music to Flair , but the latter kicked out to the pinfall attempt . Michaels then trapped Flair in his modified figure four leglock , but Flair delivered a thumb to the eye to Michaels to break the submission . As Flair was delivering chops to Michaels ' chest , Michaels hit a second Sweet Chin Music . After getting up on his feet with a worried face , Michaels said to Flair " I 'm sorry , I love you , " before nailing a final Sweet Chin Music and thus pinning Flair to end his 35 @-@ year @-@ long wrestling career . After the match , Michaels left quickly and Flair got a standing ovation from the crowd . An emotional Flair embraced his family at ringside and then , as he proceeded to go backstage , he thanked the crowd for their support . 
 The sixth match was the Playboy BunnyMania Lumberjack match , in which Maria and Ashley faced Beth Phoenix and Melina , who were accompanied to the ring by Santino Marella . Rapper Snoop Dogg served as the official " Master of Ceremonies " for the match . In the match , several WWE Divas surrounded the ring and were able to interfere in the match without disqualifications . Due to some technical difficulties , the lights at Citrus Bowl temporarily went out during the match . Near the end , a pin attempt by Maria was prevented when Marella pulled Maria 's leg . In response , Raw commentator Jerry Lawler approached and knocked Marella down with a punch . Phoenix hooked Maria 's leg and vertically lifted and slammed her to the mat and pinned Maria to win the match . After the match , Snoop Dogg hit Marella with his forearm in the ring and kissed Maria , before leaving with her and Ashley . 
 The first of the three main events was Randy Orton defending his WWE Championship against Triple H and John Cena in a triple threat match , which is a standard match involving three wrestlers with no disqualifications . For his entrance , Cena had the Jones High School Marching Tigers marching band perform an instrumental version of his theme song " The Time Is Now " live . During the match , when Triple H had held Orton in a sleeper hold , Cena picked up both Orton and Triple H for an FU , but Triple H dropped down and low blowed him . Orton then dominated the match for some time ; one highlight of the match featured Orton performing a crossbody from the top rope on Cena , while the latter was held on Triple H 's shoulders in a seating position . Orton also performed DDT from the second rope to both Cena and Triple H simultaneously . Orton then tried to perform an RKO on Cena , but he countered and threw Orton onto Triple H. Triple H then started targeting Orton 's legs and using some submissions on him . The match came to an end when Cena had Triple H on his shoulders for the FU , but was countered into a Pedigree . As Triple H was in the pin , Orton come across and punted Triple H in the head and pinned Cena to win the match and retain the WWE Championship . 
 The next match was the No Disqualification match between Big Show and Floyd Mayweather , Jr .. Early in the match , Mayweather repeatedly escaped Big Show 's grasp and delivered body shots to him . Mayweather and his accomplices tried to " walk out " of the match , but Big Show walked up the ramp and brought Mayweather back in the ring . As Big Show was about to chokeslam Mayweather , one of Mayweather 's accomplices struck a steel chair on Big Show 's back , and the latter chokeslammed him in retaliation . Capitalizing from this distraction , Mayweather grabbed that chair and hit Big Show multiple times on the head with it . Finally , Mayweather removed his right glove and put on a pair of brass knuckles to hit Big Show in the face . As a result , Big Show was knocked out as he could not answer the referee 's ten count , and Mayweather was declared the winner . 
 The main event of the night saw Edge putting his World Heavyweight Championship on the line against The Undertaker . The early going of the match was slow @-@ paced , in which both superstars countered each other 's maneuvers . During the match , Undertaker ran and leapt over the top rope from the ring onto Edge on the outside . Then throughout the match , Edge was able to counter Undertaker 's numerous signature moves , including the Chokeslam , Old School and the Last Ride , a variation of the powerbomb . Near the end , Edge hit Undertaker with a television camera while the referee was knocked down . When he proceeded to deliver a Tombstone Piledriver to Undertaker , the latter countered it into his own version and successfully delivered it to Edge for a two @-@ count . Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder came to the ring for Edge 's aid , but Undertaker took them out . Because of their distraction , Edge was able to hit a spear on Undertaker , but was unable to pin him . When Edge delivered another spear to Undertaker , the latter caught him in his Hell 's Gate submission hold and forced Edge to tap out to become the new World Heavyweight Champion and improve his WrestleMania record to 16 – 0 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the show , WWE was criticized for a malfunction in the pyrotechnics during The Undertaker 's victory celebration . During the celebration , a hot cable for pyrotechnics was sent flying into audience members in the upper seating bowl of the stadium , leaving 45 injured , with some hospitalized . The accident was apparently due to a cable which fireworks were traveling across snapping , thus resulting in the fireworks exploding into the top rows of the upper bowl of the stadium . WWE 's corporate website released a statement afterward stating that they would investigate the incident , but the results of the investigation were never released . 
 On the following episode of Raw , Ric Flair made his farewell speech , which led to Triple H introducing various people from Flair 's past , such as the Four Horsemen , Ricky Steamboat , and others , each coming out to give an emotional farewell . Afterward , the entire WWE roster came out to say thank you to Flair ( Including Undertaker , who came out after Raw went off the air and hugged Flair and did his kneeling stance ) . Shawn Michaels , who was clearly upset about retiring Flair , was forgiven by Flair . Despite Flair 's forgiveness , his former protégé Batista later started a feud with Michaels , citing Michaels ' " selfishness " at WrestleMania for not laying down for Flair . The two had a match booked at Backlash , WWE 's next scheduled pay @-@ per @-@ view event , and after a confrontation between Michaels and Chris Jericho , Jericho was later added into the match as a Special Guest Referee . Michaels won with a superkick . 
 The feud between Randy Orton , John Cena and Triple H continued after WrestleMania with the added involvement of John " Bradshaw " Layfield leading to a Fatal Four @-@ Way Elimination match between all four at Backlash , an elimination style match where the last person remaining is the winner . At the event , Triple H won his seventh WWE Championship by last pinning Orton . With Matt Hardy 's return at WrestleMania , his feud with Montel Vontavious Porter over the WWE United States Championship , that had started in July 2007 , was revived with a match booked at Backlash , which Hardy won . The rivalries between The Undertaker and Edge and the one between Kane and Chavo Guerrero both continued with successful title defenses at Backlash . On the May 2 episode of SmackDown , General Manager Vickie Guerrero stripped The Undertaker of the World Heavyweight Championship because of his continued use of his illegal chokehold , claiming she did it to protect the other wrestlers . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event has received critical acclaim . Approximately 1 @,@ 058 @,@ 000 people ordered WrestleMania XXIV , grossing $ 23 @.@ 8 million in revenue . This number was fewer than the 1 @,@ 188 @,@ 000 buys that WrestleMania 23 achieved . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section gave the entire event 9 out of 10 stars . The rating was higher than WrestleMania 23 which received 8 out of 10 stars . The main event between The Undertaker and Edge for the World Heavyweight Championship was rated a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars . The Career Threatening match between Ric Flair and Shawn Michaels was rated a perfect 10 out of 10 . Big Show vs. Floyd " Money " Mayweather Jr. was rated 7 out of 10 stars , and the Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship between Randy Orton , Triple H and John Cena was rated 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars . 
 = = = DVD / Blu @-@ ray release = = = 
 The event was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc by WWE Home Video in the U.S. on May 20 , 2008 , after it had completed broadcast on pay @-@ per @-@ view . It was the first WWE event to be released via the Blu @-@ ray format . As well as the event , the DVD / BD release features bonus material in the form of the 2008 Hall of Fame ceremony in its entirety and the battle royal that took place before the event . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = 24 @-@ Man Battle Royal = = = 
 = Something New ( Girls Aloud song ) = 
 " Something New " is a song recorded by British girl group Girls Aloud from their second compilation album , Ten ( 2012 ) . It was released by Polydor Records on 16 November 2012 , as the first single from the album and the official single for Children in Need 2012 and also serves as their final official single . In February 2009 , the group signed a new record deal with Fascination Records that would see the group release another three studio albums ; however , they announced that they were taking a hiatus to pursue solo projects . In April 2012 , bandmate Cheryl Cole revealed the girls had been in talks to regroup for the group 's tenth anniversary later that year . In October 2012 , a countdown was activated on Girls Aloud 's official website , which would last until 19 October 2012 , when " Something New " would be premiered on radio . However the date was brought forward to 16 October 2012 following an early online leak of the track . 
 " Something New " is a dance song produced by Girls Aloud 's long @-@ time collaborator Brian Higgins . Music critics were mostly positive towards the production , and compared it to songs by David Guetta , Nicki Minaj and Lady Gaga . They also noted that the track 's structure follow the group 's signature style . " Something New " debuted and peaked at number 2 on the UK Singles Chart , becoming Girls Aloud 's 16th top five hit in the country . The song also peaked inside the top five in Ireland and Scotland . The accompanying music video was directed by Ray Kay , and features a mixture of black @-@ and @-@ white and coloured shots of the entire group , while also showcasing each member in a separate set @-@ up . Girls Aloud performed " Something New " in few programmes , such as Strictly Come Dancing and Top of the Pops , and in 2013 's Ten : The Hits Tour . 
 This is the second Children in Need song that the band have released , the first being " I 'll Stand by You " in 2004 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 2009 , Girls Aloud signed a new record deal with Fascination Records that would see the group release another three studio albums . However , in July 2009 , the group announced that they were taking a year @-@ long hiatus to pursue solo projects but would reunite for a new studio album in 2010 ; this did not happen , however . Two months later , the hiatus was briefly interrupted when they did two shows supporting Coldplay along with Jay @-@ Z at Wembley Stadium . In April 2012 , during an interview with Chris Moyles on Radio 1 , Cheryl Cole revealed the girls had been in talks to regroup for the group 's tenth anniversary later that year . In August 2012 , Nicola Roberts was also featured on the same radio show , and said , " It 's our tenth birthday in November so we will definitely celebrating . I wanna tell you everything but I really can 't ! " 
 The comeback was confirmed when Girls Aloud 's official website posted on 9 October a countdown that would last until 19 October , when the girls would make a special announcement . It was speculated that they would make an appearance on BBC 's Strictly Come Dancing , where bandmate Kimberley Walsh joined as a contestant . However , on 15 October , the surprise , a single titled " Something New " , leaked online in full . The official radio premiere of the song was then brought forward to the following day , with Girls Aloud posting on their website , " It 's here ! The finished version of Something New will be played on radio from midday and will also be on YouTube to listen in full . " " Something New " was released on 16 November 2012 by Polydor Records through digital download , serving as the official Children in Need 2012 single . When asked about how she felt with the group being back together and the reception from the public , Walsh said , " I 'm kind of flattered people actually care if we come back or not . I think we are all quite proud that we made enough of an impact to be able to a comeback . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Something New " was recorded in May 2012 and produced by Girls Aloud 's long @-@ time collaborator Brian Higgins . The uptempo dance song and was written in A major with a time signature in common time and a tempo of 115 beats per minute . " Something New " opens with Cole and Nadine Coyle singing " Go , girls , g @-@ g @-@ go , go , go / We girls gonna take control / You boys better know , know , know / We girls gonna run this show " over a piano melody . According to The Sun contributor Alison Maloney , " after a generic dance beat kicks in , the rest of the track is a mish @-@ mash of rap and mixed solos . " As the chorus begins , the five girls join together and sing , " All I want is something new / Something I can hold on to / I don ’ t wanna talk / I just wanna dance / Baby let it drop / Catch me if you can . " Maloney deemed that the moment where the track 's style returns " to the more recognisable Girls Aloud sound . " It ends with the group shouting , " Boy you better watch your back / Cause we 're the leaders of the pack . " A reviewer for Heat notice similarities to David Guetta productions and compared it to songs by Nicki Minaj and Lady Gaga . Michael Cragg of The Guardian compared the verse 's structure to the one of " Sexy ! No No No ... " ( 2007 ) , and thought that " Something New " echoed the group 's previous single , " Something Kinda Ooooh " ( 2006 ) , not only because of the title , " but it also has the same slightly demented feel to it , all distorted backing vocals , strange rap sections and a brilliantly effortless chorus that soars out of an amazing bridge bit . " Most critics also had a similar perception to Cragg regarding the song 's " odd " structure , which is noted as " typical " and the group 's " signature style " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 According to a Metro publication , " Something New " had a generally positive reaction from fans . Susana Novo Vásquez of The Huffington Post stated that " the indisputable team of Xenomania / Girls Aloud have been the ones to set the trends over the years for others to follow , " adding that the song " continues down that path . " Vásquez continued saying that the group returned into a moment where the " pop scene ... isn 't the same as when they left , " but thought that they were " doing it in a very intelligent way : by adopting some of the Calvin Harris electronic massive sound that is current right now , yet creating an intricate song structure . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy said that " like most Girls Aloud singles , a few listens are required to get our heads around it . " Copsey criticized the distorted vocals and the fact that " there probably won 't be a full album of new tracks to accompany it , " but admitted that " it sounds modern enough for today 's charts without compromising their signature sound " and praised its " massive chorus . " Douglas Wolk of Pitchfork Media thought that the track " is a game approximation of the Girls Aloud of seven years ago , " while BBC Music reviewer Ian Wade concluded that , " as its title suggests , Something New is just that , a fanfare @-@ like call to arms announcing the group ’ s return . " 
 Phill <unk> of State said that , with the song , Girls Aloud " have managed to maintain the quality " they had prior to the release of Ten , and commented that " the other three new songs are nowhere near up to the same standard . " Idolator blogger Sam Lansky commented that , for the fans , " Something New " is " a welcome relief to have an injection of fresh energy into the stagnant girl group scene , " and concluded that , " given that this may be the group 's final single before disbanding for good , they 're certainly going out on a high note , with a track that feels quintessentially Aloud but retooled for 2012 . " Rebecca Twomey of Marie Claire said that the group is " on key with the current trend for dance music with their new song , " while noting that they have " clearly taken inspiration from Cheryl 's Call My Name . " Katy Brand of The Daily Telegraph was critical towards the song . Brand said that the lyrics " are the usual post @-@ Spice fare , " but commented that " the images weren 't quite matching the words . I was hearing the battle cry of enraged queens who will be oppressed no longer ; I was watching five young women wearing identical orange mini @-@ dresses , strutting up and down in perfect synchronicity , like catwalk models . " 
 In 2013 it was nominated for the Popjustice £ 20 Music Prize . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Something New " debuted and peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart with sales of 70 @,@ 000 units , becoming Girls Aloud 's 16th top five hit in the country , but being held off the top spot by Olly Murs 's " Troublemaker " ( 2012 ) , which sold a total of 121 @,@ 000 units . The following week , the song fell out of the top ten , reaching number 14 . It also debuted at number four in Ireland , falling to number 17 the following week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Amidst rumors that Girls Aloud were preparing the release of a new single , Daily Mirror reported that the group reunited for the video shoot on 2 October 2012 . On 15 October 2012 , they uploaded a teaser video on YouTube , in which we see the five girls wearing matching bright orange tulip @-@ skirt dresses as they march away from the camera on a monochrome set . On 19 October 2012 , the video was officially released through VEVO . Directed by Ray Kay , the video features a mixture of black @-@ and @-@ white and colored shots , and also showcases each member in a separate set @-@ up – based around a triangle @-@ enthused backdrop , while being accentuated by a projection of light . These shots are primarily beauty shots , with the group singing , while dancing alone . The bridge features Harding sitting in front of a white background , wearing a nude bodysuit while abstract images are projected onto her . The video intercalates with stylized lyrics of the song , and builds throughout , until the last section , where the group abandon their various stages of walking and begin to dance together . Carl Williott of Idolator said the video " matches [ the song 's ] swagger with the UK quintet mugging for the camera , strutting around in those orange dresses and declaring ' We ’ re the leaders of the pack ' . " James Robertson of Daily Mirror deemed the video " perfect " , praising the " sexy faces and high @-@ tempo choreography . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Girls Aloud first performed " Something New " on 16 November 2012 at Children in Need 2012 . Emily Sheridan of Daily Mail summarized the performance saying , " wearing the same orange off @-@ the @-@ shoulder tulip dresses from the Something New video , the girl group strutted about on stage with a troupe of hunky male dancers in suits . " The group also performed the song at the Wembley special of Strictly Come Dancing , aired on 18 November 2012 . Girls Aloud also joined Capital FM 's 2012 Jingle Bell Ball , and they included " Something New " on the setlist . On 31 December 2012 , they also performed it at the New Year 's Eve special of Top of the Pops . In 2013 , " Something New " was the last song performed during the Ten : The Hits Tour before the encore . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Something New " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Mixed at MixStar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 Mastered at 360 Mastering , Fulham , London . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Ten . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Edgar Quinet @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Edgar Quinet class was the last type of armored cruiser built for the French Navy . The two ships of this class — Edgar Quinet and Waldeck @-@ Rousseau — were built between 1905 and 1911 . They were based on the previous cruiser , Ernest Renan , the primary improvement being a more powerful uniform main battery of 194 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) guns . The Edgar Quinet class was the most powerful type of armored cruiser built in France , but they entered service more than two years after the British battlecruiser HMS Invincible , which , with its all @-@ big @-@ gun armament , had rendered armored cruisers obsolescent . 
 Both ships operated together in the Mediterranean Fleet after entering service , and they remained in the fleet throughout World War I. They participated in the blockade of the Adriatic to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy contained early in the war . During this period , Edgar Quinet took part in the Battle of Antivari in August 1914 , and Waldeck @-@ Rousseau was unsuccessfully attacked twice by Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ boats . Waldeck @-@ Rousseau participated in the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in the Black Sea in 1919 – 22 , while Edgar Quinet remained in the Mediterranean during the contemporaneous Greco @-@ Turkish War . 
 Edgar Quinet was converted into a training ship in the mid @-@ 1920s before running aground off the Algerian coast in January 1930 . She could not be pulled free and sank five days later . Waldeck @-@ Rousseau served as the flagship of the Far East fleet from 1929 to 1932 and was decommissioned after returning to France . She was hulked in 1936 and scrapped in 1941 – 44 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the 1890s , naval theorists of the Jeune École ( Young School ) in France , particularly Admiral Ernest François Fournier , advocated building a fleet of armored cruisers based on the first French ship of that type , Dupuy de Lôme . The ships were to be capable of long @-@ range commerce raiding , action in the line of battle against older battleships , and reconnaissance for the main fleet . The French Navy subsequently built a series of twenty @-@ four armored cruisers after Dupuy de Lôme , culminating in the two Edgar @-@ Quinet @-@ class ships . The design for these last two ships was based heavily on their predecessor , Ernest Renan . And like Ernest Renan , the design was repeatedly reworked during construction , which produced very lengthy construction times . The Edgar <unk> were the most powerful armored cruisers built by France , but they entered service two years after the British battlecruiser HMS Invincible — the British ship 's all @-@ big @-@ gun armament and turbine propulsion rendered all armored cruisers obsolescent . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Edgar Quinet class were 158 @.@ 9 meters ( 521 ft ) long overall , with a beam of 21 @.@ 51 m ( 70 @.@ 6 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 41 m ( 27 @.@ 6 ft ) . They displaced 13 @,@ 847 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 628 long tons ; 15 @,@ 264 short tons ) . The hulls were constructed with mild steel and were fitted with bilge keels to improve stability . The ships had a military foremast with a fighting top and a pole mainmast . The forecastle deck extended for most of the ship , as far back as the main mast . They had a crew of between 859 and 892 officers and enlisted men . 
 Their power plant consisted of three 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion engines powered by forty coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers in Edgar Quinet and forty @-@ two Niclausse boilers in Waldeck @-@ Rousseau . The boilers were trunked into six funnels in two groups of three . The engines were rated at 36 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and produced a top speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The engines were divided into individual watertight compartments , while the boilers were grouped in pairs in watertight compartments . Maximum coal capacity amounted to 2 @,@ 300 t ( 2 @,@ 300 long tons ; 2 @,@ 500 short tons ) , which permitted a cruising range of 5 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 400 km ; 5 @,@ 900 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied by six electric generators . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The Edgar Quinet @-@ class ships were armed with a main battery of fourteen 194 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) 50 @-@ caliber M1902 guns ; four were in twin gun turrets forward and aft , with three single gun turrets on either broadside . The turret mountings allowed for loading at any angle of elevation , and were electrically operated . The forward turrets had a range of train of about 280 degrees . The last four guns were mounted in casemates abreast the main and aft conning towers , on the upper and main decks , respectively . The 194 mm gun had a rate of fire of up to four rounds per minute . The ships ' ammunition magazines were equipped with refrigeration , which was standardized in French warships following the accidental destruction of the battleship Iéna by an overheated propellant magazine in 1907 . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) 9 @-@ pounder guns in casemates in the ship 's hull . In 1918 , twelve of the ships ' 65 mm guns were removed and a pair of 65 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns ( AA ) and a pair of 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) AA guns were installed . Edgar Quinet and Waldeck @-@ Rousseau were also equipped with two 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . 
 The ships were protected with an armored belt that was 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick amidships and reduced to 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) forward and 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) aft . They had two armored decks ; the lower , main deck was 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the upper deck was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) . The gun turrets had 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick plating , with 200 mm thick barbettes , while the casemates had marginally thinner protection , at 194 mm . The two pairs of casemates were linked by transverse armored bulkheads ; the outer bulkhead was 194 mm thick while the inner bulkhead was 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The main conning tower had 200 mm thick sides . Underwater protection consisted of a cofferdam built into the lower hull with a longitudinal watertight bulkhead behind it . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 After entering service in early and mid @-@ 1911 , respectively , Edgar Quinet and Waldeck @-@ Rousseau were assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet . In 1913 , Edgar Quinet participated in an international naval demonstration that also included British , German , and Austro @-@ Hungarian vessels off Albania . The demonstration was a protest of the Siege of Scutari during the First Balkan War ; it succeeded in forcing the Serbian army to withdraw and allowing an international force to occupy the city . 
 Both Edgar Quinet and Waldeck @-@ Rousseau saw service in the Mediterranean during World War I. Edgar Quinet joined the hunt for the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben in August 1914 , and both ships participated in the blockade of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the Adriatic . Later in August , Edgar Quinet was present at the Battle of Antivari , which saw the sinking of the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta . While on patrol at the mouth of the Adriatic , Waldeck @-@ Rousseau was attacked twice by Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ boats , though neither submarine was able to hit the cruiser . During the first action in October , several Austro @-@ Hungarian destroyers briefly skirmished with Waldeck @-@ Rousseau after the U @-@ boat attacked her . Both cruisers were involved in the seizure of Corfu in January 1916 . 
 After the end of the war , both ships continued service in the eastern Mediterranean and Black seas . Waldeck @-@ Rousseau joined the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War and operated in support of the White Russians against the Red Bolsheviks ; shortly after arriving , her crew mutinied over poor conditions but quickly resumed their duties . Edgar Quinet meanwhile remained in the Mediterranean during the Greco @-@ Turkish War , and during the Great Fire of Smyrna , at the climax of the conflict , she rescued 1 @,@ 200 people from the city . 
 Edgar Quinet was converted into a training ship in the mid @-@ 1920s , a role she filled for the remainder of the decade . On 4 January 1930 , she ran aground off the Algerian coast and could not be freed . She sank five days later . Waldeck @-@ Rousseau had meanwhile been assigned as the flagship of the Far East fleet in 1929 , where she remained until 1932 , when she returned to France . She was decommissioned upon arrival , hulked in 1936 , and broken up for scrap in 1941 – 44 . 
 = 2007 United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident = 
 The 2007 United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident occurred on 29 – 30 August 2007 . Six AGM @-@ 129 ACM cruise missiles , each loaded with a W80 @-@ 1 variable yield nuclear warhead , were mistakenly loaded onto a United States Air Force ( USAF ) B @-@ 52H heavy bomber at Minot Air Force Base and transported to Barksdale Air Force Base . The nuclear warheads in the missiles were supposed to have been removed before taking the missiles from their storage bunker . The missiles with the nuclear warheads were not reported missing and remained mounted to the aircraft at both Minot and Barksdale for a period of 36 hours . During this period , the warheads were not protected by the various mandatory security precautions for nuclear weapons . 
 The incident was reported to the top levels of the United States military and referred to by observers as a Bent Spear incident , which indicates a nuclear weapon incident that is of significant concern but does not involve the immediate threat of nuclear war . 
 In response to the incident , the United States Department of Defense ( DoD ) and USAF conducted an investigation , the results of which were released on 19 October 2007 . The investigation concluded that nuclear weapons handling standards and procedures had not been followed by numerous USAF personnel involved in the incident . As a result , four USAF commanders were relieved of their commands , numerous other USAF personnel were disciplined and / or decertified to perform certain types of sensitive duties , and further cruise missile transport missions from — and nuclear weapons operations at — Minot Air Force Base were suspended . In addition , the USAF issued new nuclear weapons handling instructions and procedures . 
 Separate investigations by the United States Defense Science Board and a USAF " Blue Ribbon " panel reported that concerns existed on the procedures and processes for handling nuclear weapons within the Department of Defense but did not find any failures with the security of United States nuclear weapons . Based on this and other incidents , on 5 June 2008 , Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and Chief of Staff of the Air Force General T. Michael Moseley were asked for their resignations , which were given . In October 2008 , in response to recommendations by a review committee , the USAF announced the creation of Air Force Global Strike Command to control all USAF nuclear bombers , missiles , and personnel . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 2007 , Minot Air Force Base is the home of the 5th Bomb Wing and Barksdale Air Force Base the home of 2d Bomb Wing , both of which fall under the 8th Air Force , also based at Barksdale . The 8th was part of Air Combat Command ( ACC ) in the USAF . At the time of the incident , the 5th Bomb Wing was commanded by Colonel Bruce Emig , the 2d Bomb Wing by Colonel Robert Wheeler , the 8th Air Force by Lieutenant General Robert Elder Jr . , and ACC by General Ronald Keys . 
 The 5th Bomb Wing , according to the USAF 's statement on the wing 's mission , served with its B @-@ 52 bombers as part of the USAF 's conventional and strategic combat force . The " strategic " portion of the 5th 's mission included the ability to deliver nuclear weapons against potential targets worldwide . Thus , Minot Air Force Base stored and maintained a ready arsenal of nuclear bombs , nuclear warheads , and associated delivery systems , including the AGM @-@ 129 Advanced Cruise Missile . 
 The AGM @-@ 129 was fielded in 1987 as a stealthy cruise missile platform to deliver the W80 @-@ 1 variable yield nuclear warhead . Although originally designed to equip the B @-@ 1 bomber , the AGM @-@ 129 was redesignated so that it would only be carried by the B @-@ 52 , mounted on external pylons on the wings or internally in the bomb bay . In March 2007 , the USAF decided to retire its AGM @-@ 129 complement in order to help comply with international arms @-@ control treaties and to replace them with AGM @-@ 86 missiles . In order to do so , the USAF began to transport its AGM @-@ 129s stored at Minot to Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana by B @-@ 52s for ultimate disposal . According to the Washington Post , by 29 August 2007 , more than 200 AGM @-@ 129s had been shipped from Minot to Barksdale in this manner . 
 = = Incident = = 
 Between 0800 and 0900 ( local time ) on 29 August 2007 , a group of USAF airmen , called the breakout crew , entered one of the weapons storage bunkers at Minot to prepare AGM @-@ 129 missiles for transport to Barksdale . That day 's missile transport , the sixth of twelve planned ferry missions , was to have consisted of 12 AGM @-@ 129s , installed with training warheads , with six missiles per pylon and one pylon mounted under each wing of a Barksdale @-@ assigned , 2d Bomb Wing B @-@ 52 aircraft . When the airmen entered the bunker , six live warheads were still installed on their missiles , as opposed to having been replaced with the dummy training warheads . A later investigation found that the reason for the error was that the electronic production system for tracking the missiles " had been subverted in favor of an informal process that did not identify the pylon as prepared for the flight . " The airmen assigned to handle the missiles used outdated materials that contained incorrect information on the status of the missiles . The missiles originally planned for movement had been replaced by missiles closer to expiration dates for limited life components , which was standard procedure . The change in missiles had been reflected on the movement plan but not in the documents used for internal work coordination processes in the bunker . 
 Although the breakout crew in the weapons storage began to inspect the missiles , an early @-@ arriving transport crew hooked up the pylons and towed them away without inspecting or ensuring that the missiles had been inspected or cleared for removal . The munitions control center failed to verify that the pylon had received proper clearance and inspection and approved the pylon for loading on the B @-@ 52 at <unk> . After taking eight hours to attach the pylons to the aircraft , the aircraft with the missiles loaded then remained parked overnight at Minot for 15 hours without special guard as required for nuclear weapons . 
 On the morning of 30 August , one of the transport aircraft 's flight officers , a Barksdale @-@ assigned B @-@ 52 instructor radar navigator closely inspected the six missiles on the right wing only , which were all properly loaded with training warheads . The B @-@ 52 command pilot did not do a final verification check , before signing the manifest listing the cargo as a dozen unarmed AGM @-@ 129 missiles to depart Minot . 
 The B @-@ 52 departed Minot at 0840 and landed at Barksdale at 1123 ( local times ) on 30 August . The aircraft remained parked and without special guard until 2030 , when a munitions team arrived to remove the missiles . After a member of the munitions crew noticed something unusual about some of the missiles , at 2200 a " skeptical " supervisor determined that nuclear warheads were present and ordered them secured and the incident reported , 36 hours after the missiles were removed from the bunker at Minot . 
 The incident was reported to the National Military Command Center as a Bent Spear incident , which indicates a nuclear weapon incident that is of significant concern but does not involve the immediate threat of nuclear war ( Pinnacle – <unk> ) , or the accidental detonation of or severe damage to a nuclear weapon ( Pinnacle – Broken Arrow ) . General T. Michael Moseley , Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force , quickly called United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates , on 31 August to inform him about the incident . Gates requested daily updates regarding the investigation and informed President Bush about the incident . The USAF has yet to officially designate what type of incident actually occurred , Bent Spear or otherwise . The incident was the first of its kind in 40 years in the United States and was later described by the media as " one of the worst breaches in U.S. nuclear weapons security in decades " . 
 = = Response by the U.S. government = = 
 The USAF and Department of Defense at first decided to conceal the incident , in part because of the USAF policy not to comment on the storage or movement of nuclear weapons and an apparent belief that the incident would not generate much public concern . In fact , the initial DoD incident report contained the statement , " No press interest anticipated . " Details of the incident were then leaked by unknown DoD officials to the Military Times newspaper , which published a small article about the incident on 5 September 2007 . 
 In response , a 5 September news briefing at the Pentagon by Press Secretary Geoff Morrell stated that at no time was the public in any danger and that military personnel had custody of the weapons at all times . The USAF announced that within days of the incident , the USAF relieved the Minot munitions squadron commander of duty and eventually disciplined 25 airmen . USAF Major General Doug <unk> was assigned by General Keys to lead an investigation into the incident . The USAF inventory of nuclear warheads was checked to ensure that all warheads were accounted for . In addition , the DoD announced that a Pentagon @-@ appointed scientific advisory panel , called the Defense Science Board , would study the mishap as part of a larger review of procedures for handling nuclear weapons . On 28 September , the USAF announced that General Keys was retiring and would be replaced as ACC commander by General John Corley , effective 2 October . 
 On 19 October 2007 , United States Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and USAF Major General Richard Newton , deputy chief of staff for operations , plans , and requirements , announced the investigation report findings , stating that , " there has been an erosion of adherence to weapons @-@ handling standards at Minot Air Force Base and at Barksdale Air Force Base " and that " a limited number of airmen at both locations failed to follow procedures . " Colonel Emig , the commander of the 5th Bomb Wing , Colonel Cynthia Lundell , the commander of the 5th Maintenance Group at Minot , and Colonel Todd <unk> , the commander of Barksdale 's 2d Operations Group , and four senior non @-@ commissioned officers from the 5th Munitions Squadron " received administrative action " and were relieved of their commands or positions and reassigned . All of the 5th Bomb Wing personnel were stripped of their certifications to handle nuclear and other sensitive weaponry and to conduct " specific missions " . Sixty @-@ five airmen of varying ranks lost their Personnel Reliability Program certifications . Tactical ferry operations were suspended . The inspector general offices of all USAF Major Commands that handle nuclear weapons were directed to conduct immediate " Limited Nuclear Surety Inspections ( <unk> ) at every nuclear @-@ capable unit " with oversight provided by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency . 
 The new ACC commander , General Corley , referred the matter to USAF Lieutenant General Norman Seip , commander of the 12th Air Force , as a court @-@ martial convening authority to determine if additional charges or actions would be taken against any of the personnel involved in the incident . Seip later closed the investigation without recommending criminal charges against anyone involved . 
 Retired USAF Chief of Staff General Larry Welch was asked by Gates , who had reportedly raised concerns with USAF officials that the original investigation may have unfairly limited blame to midlevel officers , to lead the Defense Science Board advisory panel that would study the mishap as part of a larger review of procedures and policies for handling nuclear weapons . In addition , the USAF chartered a " Blue Ribbon Review " chaired by USAF Major General Polly Peyer and consisting of 30 additional personnel to " make recommendations as to how we can improve the Air Force 's capability to safely and securely perform our nuclear weapons responsibility " . Furthermore , the United States Congress requested that the DoD and the United States Department of Energy conduct a bottom @-@ up review of nuclear procedures . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = USAF actions = = = 
 On 24 October 2007 , Secretary of the Air Force Wynne told the House Armed Services Committee that he believed that the 5th Bomb Wing could be recertified and could resume ferrying the AGM @-@ 129 cruise missiles to Barksdale for retirement . He did not provide a timeline for that <unk> process . On 1 November 2007 Colonel Joel Westa took command of the 5th Bomb Wing . That same day , General Keys retired from the Air Force . 
 Personnel from Barksdale 's 2d Bomb Wing temporarily took over maintenance duties of Minot 's nuclear stockpile until the 5th Bomb Wing could be recertified . A nuclear surety inspection ( NSI ) , required for <unk> , originally scheduled for the 5th Bomb Wing for 23 January 2008 was postponed after the wing failed an initial NSI that took place on 16 December 2007 . Another initial NSI was completed on 29 March and Corley recertified the wing on 31 March 2008 . A full NSI was scheduled for May 2008 . The wing needed to regain its certification in order to hold the full NSI . Units handling nuclear weapons must pass <unk> every 18 months in order to retain their certifications . 
 The USAF issued a new policy directive regarding the handling of nuclear weapons and delivery systems , which prohibits the storing of nuclear armed and nonnuclear armed weapons in the same storage facility . The directive further instructs that all nonnuclear munitions and missiles must be labeled with placards clearly stating that they are not armed with nuclear warheads . Wing commanders are now charged with approving any movement of nuclear weapons from weapons storage areas and must appoint a single individual as a munitions accountability system officer and weapons custodian . All units that handle nuclear weapons must develop a coordinated visual inspection checklist . The policy further directs that airmen charged with handling or maintaining nuclear weapons cannot be on duty for longer than 12 hours , unless during an emergency , when their duty period can be extended to a maximum of 16 hours . The USAF has since instituted a program of surprise inspections at nuclear @-@ armed bases . 
 = = = Review reports = = = 
 Welch and Peyer briefed the results of their reviews before the United States Senate Committee on Armed Services on 12 February 2008 . In addition to Welch and Peyer , Lieutenant General Daniel Darnell , USAF Deputy Chief of Staff for Air , Space and Information Operations and Major General <unk> testified and answered questions from the Senate committee 's members . During the hearing , Welch stated that , " the military units responsible for handling the bombs are not properly inspected and , as a result , may not be ready to perform their missions . " He added , " If you look at all the areas and all the ways that we have to store and handle these weapons in order to perform the mission , it just requires , we believe , more resources and more attention than they 're getting . " Welch 's report concluded that the combining of DoD nuclear forces with nonnuclear organizations has led to " markedly reduced levels of leadership whose daily focus is the nuclear enterprise and a general devaluation of the nuclear mission and those who perform the mission . " Nevertheless , neither Welch 's nor Peyer 's reports found any failures with the security of United States nuclear weapons . 
 Responding to Welch 's and Peyer 's reports , USAF officials stated that they were already implementing many of the recommendations contained in the reports but added that existing regulations governing nuclear procedures were satisfactory . During his testimony before the senate committee , Darnell stated that " the Air Force portion of the nuclear deterrent is sound , and we will take every measure necessary to provide safe , secure , reliable nuclear surety to the American public . " 
 = = = Inspections , resignations , and further discipline = = = 
 Minot 's full NSI took place beginning on 17 May 2008 , and was conducted by inspectors from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency ( <unk> ) and the USAF 's Air Combat Command ( ACC ) . On 25 May , the <unk> issued the 5th Bomb Wing an " unsatisfactory " rating , the lowest rating possible , from the inspection . The 5th passed the inspection in nine of ten areas , but failed in the area of nuclear security . Following the inspection , Westa stated that , " overall , their assessment painted a picture of some things we need to work on in the areas of training and discipline " . The 5th Bomb Wing Security Forces Squadron Commander , Lieutenant Colonel John Worley , was replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Stephen Weaver on 16 June 2008 . In spite of failing the NSI , the wing kept its nuclear certification . Said Hans Kristensen , director of the Nuclear Information Project at the Federation of American Scientists about the 5th 's failure in the inspection , " It makes you wonder what 's going on elsewhere , like the nuclear weapons stationed at bases overseas , and at Barksdale Air Force Base and Whiteman Air Force Base . " Minot passed the follow @-@ up inspection on 15 August 2008 . 
 On 5 June 2008 , Robert Gates announced the results of an investigation into the <unk> of four MK @-@ 12 forward @-@ section reentry vehicle assemblies to Taiwan . The investigation , conducted by Admiral Kirkland H. Donald , director of U.S. Naval Propulsion , found that the Taiwan missile incident was , in Gates ' words , " a degradation of the authority , standards of excellence and technical competence within the nation 's ICBM force . Similar to the bomber @-@ specific August 2007 Minot @-@ Barksdale nuclear weapons transfer incident , this incident took place within the larger environment of declining Air Force nuclear mission focus and performance " and that " the investigation identified commonalities between the August 2007 Minot incident and this [ the Taiwan ] event . " In his investigation report , Donald stated that the issues identified by his investigation were , " indicative of an overall decline in Air Force nuclear weapons stewardship , a problem that has been identified but not effectively addressed for over a decade . Both the Minot @-@ Barksdale nuclear weapons transfer incident and the Taiwan <unk> , while different in specifics , have a common origin : the gradual erosion of nuclear standards and a lack of effective oversight by Air Force leadership . " 
 As a result of the investigation , Gates announced that , " a substantial number of Air Force general officers and colonels have been identified as potentially subject to disciplinary measures , ranging from removal from command to letters of reprimand , " and that he had accepted the resignations of Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and USAF Chief of Staff T. Michael Moseley . Gates added that he had asked James R. Schlesinger to lead a senior @-@ level task force to recommend improvements in the stewardship and operation of nuclear weapons , delivery vehicles and sensitive components by the Department of Defense . Members of the task force came from the Defense Policy Board and the Defense Science Board . 
