 On 13 September 2008 , Gates announced Schlesinger 's task force 's recommendations by calling on the USAF to place all nuclear weapons under a single command . The task force suggested that the new command be called Air Force Strategic Command , which would replace the current Air Force Space Command , and make it accountable for the nuclear mission . It also called for all USAF bombers to be placed under a single command . In addition , the task force recommended that the USAF move an additional 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 airmen into nuclear @-@ related jobs . Gates announced that acting Air Force Secretary Michael B. Donley and Chief of Staff General Norton A. Schwartz were " reviewing the recommendations " for disciplinary action against USAF officers previously involved in the nuclear mission . The task force found an , " unambiguous , dramatic and unacceptable decline in the Air Force 's commitment to perform the nuclear mission and , until very recently , little has been done to reverse it . " 
 On 25 September 2008 , the United States Department of Defense announced that six Air Force generals , two Army generals , and nine colonels had received letters of reprimand , admonishment , or counseling . Two Air Force major generals were asked to stay in their current position and the others either retired , planned to retire , or were removed from their position . Air Force Chief of Staff Norton Schwartz met with each officer personally before issuing the letters . He noted they committed no offense under the UCMJ , but " did not do enough to carry out their leadership responsibilities for nuclear oversight " and that " for that they must be held accountable . " The Air Force stated that the discipline was in response to the mistaken shipment of nuclear fuzes to Taiwan , not for the Minot nuclear weapons incident . 
 One of those reprimanded was Lieutenant General Kevin Sullivan , Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics , Installations and Mission Support at the Pentagon . Sullivan was demoted and retired at the rank of Major General in November 2008 . Lieutenant General Michael Hamel , commander of the Space and Missile Systems Center , received a letter of admonishment and also retired in November 2008 . Major General Roger Burg , commander of the Twentieth Air Force , Major General Kathleen Close , commander of the Ogden Air Logistics Center , Brigadier General Francis Bruno , Director of Logistics , Air Force Material Command , and Brigadier General Arthur Cameron III , Air Force director of resource integration , also received letters of admonishment . 
 In November 2008 , the 341st Missile Wing at <unk> Air Force Base failed its nuclear surety inspection . The 90th Missile Wing at F. E. Warren Air Force Base , failed its nuclear surety inspection one month later . In November 2009 at Kirtland Air Force Base the 377th Air Base Wing , commanded by Colonel Michael S. Duvall , and <unk> Nuclear Systems Wing , commanded by Colonel Richard M. Stuckey , failed their nuclear surety inspections . 
 On 30 October 2009 Westa was relieved as commander of the 5th Bomb Wing by Major General Floyd L. Carpenter , commander of 8th Air Force . Carpenter stated that Westa was relieved due to his " inability to foster a culture of excellence , a lack of focus on the strategic mission and substandard performance during several nuclear surety inspections , including the newly activated 69th Bomb Squadron . " 
 On 8 January 2009 Schlesinger 's task force released its report regarding the overall DoD 's management of the country 's nuclear weapons mission . The report criticized the DoD for a lack of focus and oversight on its nuclear weapons programs and recommended that the DoD create a new assistant secretary position to oversee its nuclear management . The task force found that within the DoD only the United States Navy was effectively managing its nuclear arsenal . The panel stated that it found , " a distressing degree of inattention to the role of nuclear weapons in deterrence among many senior DoD military and civilian leaders . " 
 = = = New command = = = 
 On 24 October 2008 new USAF Secretary Michael Donley announced the creation of Air Force Global Strike Command . The new command became operational on 7 August 2009 . The USAF 's intercontinental nuclear missile force was moved from Air Force Space Command to the new command . Barksdale Air Force Base was selected as the location of the new command 's headquarters . The new major command is led by a three @-@ star general and controls all USAF nuclear @-@ capable bombers , missiles and personnel . 
 = Battle of Hill 70 = 
 The Battle of Hill 70 was a battle of World War I between the Canadian Corps and five divisions of the German 6th Army . The battle took place along the Western Front on the outskirts of Lens in the Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais region of France between 15 and 25 August 1917 . 
 The objectives of the assault were to inflict casualties and to draw German troops away from the 3rd Battle of Ypres , rather than to capture territory . The Canadian Corps executed an operation designed to first occupy the high ground at Hill 70 quickly and then establish defensive positions , from which combined small @-@ arms and artillery fire , some of which used the technique of predicted fire for the first time , could be used to repel German counter @-@ attacks and inflict as many casualties as possible . A later attempt by the Canadian Corps to extend its position into the city of Lens itself failed . Both sides suffered high casualties and Lens remained under German control . In both the German and the Canadian assessments of the battle it succeeded in its attrition objective . 
 The battle consisted of extensive use of poison gas by both sides , including the newly introduced German Yellow Cross shell containing the blistering agent sulfur mustard . Ultimately , the goals of the Canadian Corps were only partially accomplished . The Canadians were successful in preventing German formations from transferring local men and equipment to aid in defensive operations in the Ypres Salient but failed to draw in troops from other areas . 
 = = Background = = 
 The industrial coal city of Lens , France had fallen under German control in October 1914 during the Race to the Sea . Consequently , the Germans also controlled the heights at Hill 70 to the north of the city and <unk> Hill to the southeast , both of which had commanding views over the surrounding area as well as the city itself . Hill 70 was a treeless expanse at the end of one of the many spurs . In September 1915 , the British had overrun the hill during the Battle of Loos but had not managed to hold it . 
 British First Army commander General Henry Horne ordered the Canadian Corps to relieve I Corps from their position opposite the city of Lens on 10 July 1917 and directed Canadian Corps commander Arthur Currie to develop a plan for capturing the town by the end of July 1917 . The operation was intended to engage as many German formations as possible and to prevent them from reinforcing the Ypres sector during the Third Battle of Ypres . 
 Command of the Canadian Corps had only recently changed . A month earlier , Canadian Corps commander Julian Byng was promoted to the rank of General and replaced General Edmund Allenby as commander of the British Third Army . In turn , 1st Canadian Division commander Arthur Currie was promoted to Lieutenant @-@ General and assumed command of the Canadian Corps . 
 = = Tactical plan = = 
 Currie regarded control of either Hill 70 or <unk> Hill as tactically more important than control of the city of Lens . Merely to occupy the city while the Germans held the high ground , would place the attackers in an unfavourably lower and more exposed position than the ones they occupied . At a conference of corps commanders , Currie persuaded the First Army commander General Henry Horne to make Hill 70 , not Lens , the main objective of the limited offensive . Controlling Hill 70 would provide excellent observation over the German lines , in preparation for more offensives . Currie believed the Germans would attempt to counter @-@ attack if Hill 70 were captured , largely because of its observational importance . Nevertheless , Currie believed that the advantageous observational position of Hill 70 would permit well directed artillery to effectively deal with any counter @-@ attacks . The plan was therefore to occupy the high ground quickly , establish defensive positions and utilize combined small arms and artillery fire to repel expected counter @-@ attacks and inflict as many casualties as possible . 
 In an attempt to further deceive the Germans , minor operations were conducted in an effort to suggest a forthcoming attack by the British First Army south of La Bassée Canal . This included an attack by the 9th Canadian Brigade against units of the German 36th Reserve Division at <unk> Trench and a British First Army poison gas attack north of Loos , both in late July 1917 . 
 Bad weather led to the postponement of the attack on Hill 70 from late July until mid @-@ August . In the interim , special companies of the Royal Engineers augmented the regular level of harassment by firing a total of 3 @,@ 500 gas drums and 900 gas shells into Lens by 15 August . The artillery neutralized 40 out of an estimated 102 German batteries in the area by zero hour , partly with the technique of predicted fire for the first time , using datum points and calibrated guns , which greatly improved the accuracy of the artillery . Troops were rotated through the reserve area to conduct training and rehearsals in preparation for the assault . These obvious preliminary actions to an attack did not go unnoticed by the Germans , which made it impossible to conceal the First Army 's general intentions or even , as it turned out , the date of the assault . The best that could be done was to attempt to mislead the Germans with respect to time and place . To this end I Corps staged exercises with dummy tanks on 14 August , directly west of Lens . 
 = = The battle = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 Canadian Corps commander Lieutenant @-@ General Arthur Currie had three attacking divisions , one division in reserve and numerous support units under his command . 
 German 6th Army commander General der Infanterie Otto von Below was responsible for the area between Lille and Cambrai . Hill 70 , and the area surrounding it was defended by the ad hoc Gruppe Loos . The defending elements of the German 6th Army consisted of the 7th Division , 4th Guards Division , 185th Division , 11th Reserve Division and 220th Division . 
 = = = Assault on Hill 70 = = = 
 The plan to capture Hill 70 called for the 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions to attack on a front of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . Their objective was to capture the main enemy defensive positions on the eastern or reverse slope of Hill 70 . The objectives were marked off in depth by three stages . In the first stage , the assaulting troops would capture the German front @-@ line trenches . The German second position on the crest of the hill during the second stage and the final stage , marked by the German third line , on the reverse side of the slope , some 1 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) from the starting position . The 1st Canadian Division 's 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade would attack north of Hill 70 while the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade would attack the summit . The 2nd Canadian Division 's 4th and 5th Canadian Infantry Brigades would attack the rubble remains of the suburbs of Cité St. Édouard , St. Laurent and St. Émile directly south of Hill 70 . 
 The assault began at 4 : 25 a.m. on the morning of 15 August , just as dawn was breaking . Special companies of the Royal Engineers fired drums of burning oil into the suburb of Cité St. Élisabeth and at other selected targets to supplement the artillery creeping barrage and build up a smoke @-@ screen . Divisional field artillery positions executed a creeping barrage directly in advance of the assaulting troops while field howitzers shelled German positions 400 m ( 440 yd ) in advance of the creeping barrage and heavy howitzers shelled all other known German strong @-@ points . Artillery Forward Observation Officers moved forward with the infantry and artillery observation aircraft flew overhead and sent 240 calls for artillery fire by wireless . The Germans had moved up their reserve units on the previous night in anticipation of an attack and the main assembly of Canadian troops was detected by 3 : 00 a.m. and within three minutes of the attack commencing , the German artillery brought down defensive fire at widely scattered points . The affected forward positions of the German 7th Division and 11th Reserve Division were quickly overwhelmed . Within twenty minutes of the attack beginning , both Canadian divisions had reached their first objective . By 6 : 00 a.m. the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade had reached the second objective line , while units in the other three brigade had in some cases already reached their final objective . Only the flanking companies of the two battalions attacking Hill 70 managed to reach their objectives . The remainder of the both units were forced to retreat up the slope and consolidate their position at the intermediate objective line . 
 On the right flank of the 2nd Canadian Division , the 12th Canadian Infantry Brigade of the 4th Canadian Division executed a diversionary operation which proved successful in drawing German retaliatory fire away from the main operation . Four hours later , the 11th Canadian Infantry Brigade of the 4th Canadian Division attempted to exploit the weakened German force by pushing strong patrols towards the centre of Lens . This ultimately failed as the Germans used local counter @-@ attacks across the 4th Canadian Division 's front to drive the patrols back to the city 's outskirts . 
 = = = Initial counter @-@ attacks = = = 
 In preparation for German counter @-@ attacks , the 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions began to reinforce and construct strong points immediately after capturing the first objective line . Within two hours of the start of the battle , the Germans began using their immediate reserves to mount local counter @-@ attacks . Between 7 : 00 a.m. and 9 : 00 a.m. on the morning of 15 August , the Germans executed four local attacks against Canadian positions . Each attack was repulsed due in large part to the work of forward artillery observers , who could now overlook some of the German positions . On one occasion , the counter @-@ attack was only repulsed after engaging in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . The Germans rapidly brought up seven additional battalions from the 4th Guards Division and 185th Division to reinforce the eight line battalions already in place . Over the following three days , the Germans executed no less than 21 counter @-@ attacks against Canadian positions . A frontal attack against the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade on the afternoon of 15 August ultimately failed . A German attack against the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade was initially successful with the Germans re @-@ capturing Chicory Trench but were repulsed later the same afternoon . 
 = = = Capture of Hill 70 and additional counter @-@ attacks = = = 
 The morning of 16 August was relatively quiet , with only a few attempts made by small German parties to approach the Canadian lines . After having failed to capture all their objectives the previous day and having postponed additional attacks a number of times , the 2nd Canadian Brigade attacked and captured the remainder of its final objective line on the afternoon of 16 August . The assault lasted a little over an hour but the troops were then forced to defend against a dozen German counter @-@ attacks during the day . 
 Attempts by the 4th and 11th Canadian Infantry Brigades to eliminate an enemy salient between Cité St. Élisabeth and Lens on 17 August failed and as had been foreseen the Germans continued to mount determined counter @-@ attacks . The German command began to realize that the Canadian and British artillery would need to be neutralized before a counter @-@ attack could succeed . The Germans began a series of counter @-@ attacks against a chalk quarry under Canadian control outside of Cité St. Auguste but also sought to wear down the Canadian artillery resources by sending up false flare signals or provoking the infantry to call for unnecessary artillery fire . The Germans also began to use poison gas in earnest . From 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 of the new Yellow Cross shells containing the blistering agent sulfur mustard were fired in addition to an undetermined number of shells containing <unk> . The Canadian 1st and 2nd Artillery Field Brigades and the Canadian front line were heavily gassed . Many artillery men became casualties after gas fogged the goggles of their respirators and they were forced to remove their masks to set the fuses , lay their sights and maintain accurate fire . The Germans used the cover of gas to make a number of attempts against the Canadian controlled chalk quarry and Chicory Trench on the night of 17 August and early morning of 18 August . All attempts against the chalk quarry failed and only one company of the 55th Reserve Infantry Regiment ( on loan to the 11th Reserve Division ) managed to breach the Canadian defences at Chicory Trench before being repulsed . German troops employing flamethrowers managed to penetrate the Canadian line north of the quarry on the morning of 18 August before being driven out . 
 = = = Attack on Lens = = = 
 The front quieted significantly after the final attack against the chalk quarry . For the Canadian Corps , the following two days consisted largely of consolidation activities . The front line was drawn back 300 yards ( 270 m ) , midway between the original intermediate and final objective lines . The 4th Division slightly advanced its forward posts on the outskirts of Lens and extended its front northward to include the Lens – Bethune road . Currie wished to further improve the position around Hill 70 and ordered an attack against enemy positions along a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) front , opposite the 2nd and 4th Canadian Divisions . 
 The operation was scheduled for the morning of 21 August , the tasks being divided between the 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade on the left and the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade on the right . The attack was to begin at 4 : 35 a.m. but the Germans began shelling the Canadian positions at 4 : 00 a.m. and just before the Canadian attack , the 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade 's left flank was attacked by units of the German 4th Guards Division . Both forces met between their respective objectives , fought hand @-@ to @-@ hand and with the bayonet . In the melee the 6th Brigade advance was stopped ; communication between the forward units and brigade headquarters had broken down at the beginning of the attack and could not be restored due to heavy German shelling , making it all but impossible to co @-@ ordinate the infantry and artillery . 
 Counter @-@ attacks by the 4th Guards Division , reinforced by a battalion of the 220th Infantry Division , forced the 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade back to the start line . On the right flank , in the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade , one unit suffered a large number of shellfire casualties while assembling for the attack and were met the massed artillery and machine @-@ gun fire , as they neared their objective . Only three small parties , the largest of not more than twenty men , reached their goal . The other two attacking units captured their objectives late in the evening and a salient was created in the 4th Canadian Division line . On the evening of 21 August , three parties went forward to bomb the German position from the flanks but were only moderately successful . An additional attack planned for 22 August failed to materialize , due to battalion @-@ level misunderstandings . A brigade reserve unit was ordered to remedy the situation , by attacking a slag heap called Green <unk> and the mine complex at Fosse St. Louis . The attack was repulsed , with the majority of the attackers being killed , wounded or taken prisoner . The Germans held on to the possession until the beginning of the final German retreat in 1918 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The Germans refrained from attempts to recapture the lost ground at Lens , due to the demands of defensive operations of the Third Battle of Ypres and the need to avoid the diversion of forces from the main effort . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 The remainder of August , all of September and the beginning of October were relatively quiet , with Canadian efforts devoted mainly to preparations for another offensive , although none took place , largely because the British First Army lacked sufficient resources for the task . Instead , the Canadian Corps was transferred to the Ypres sector in early October in preparation for the Second Battle of Passchendaele . Soon after the battle , German <unk> commander General der Infanterie Otto von Below was transferred to the Italian front , where he took command of the newly formed Austro @-@ German 14th Army . In this capacity , he executed an extremely successful offensive at the Battle of Caporetto in October 1917 . General der Infanterie Ferdinand von Quast took over command of the German <unk> until the end of the war . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 Six Victoria Crosses , the highest military decoration for valour awarded to British and Commonwealth forces , were awarded to members of the Canadian Corps for their actions during the battle ; 
 Private Harry Brown of the 10th ( Canadian ) Battalion 
 Company Sergeant @-@ Major Robert Hill Hanna of the 29th ( Vancouver ) Battalion 
 Sergeant Frederick Hobson of the 20th ( Central Ontario ) Battalion 
 Corporal Filip <unk> of the 47th ( British Columbia ) Battalion ( the only Ukrainian to ever be awarded the Victoria Cross ) 
 Acting Major <unk> Massey Learmonth of the 2nd ( Eastern Ontario ) Battalion 
 Private Michael James O 'Rourke of the 7th ( British Columbia ) Battalion 
 = Liviu Librescu = 
 Liviu Librescu ( Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; August 18 , 1930 – April 16 , 2007 ) was a Romanian @-@ born Israeli and American scientist and engineer . He was a professor whose major research fields were <unk> and aerodynamics . A prominent academic in addition to being a survivor of the Holocaust , he is most widely known for his actions during the Virginia Tech shootings , in which he held off the gunman , giving all but one of his students enough time to escape through the windows . Shot and killed during the attack , Librescu was posthumously awarded the Order of the Star of Romania , Romania 's highest civilian honor . At the time of his death , he was Professor of Engineering Science and Mechanics at Virginia Tech . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Liviu Librescu was born in 1930 to a Jewish family in the city of Ploiești , Romania . After Romania allied with Nazi Germany in World War II , his family was deported to a labor camp in Transnistria , and later , along with thousands of other Jews , was deported to a ghetto in the Romanian city of Focșani . His wife , Marlena , who is also a Holocaust survivor , told Israeli Channel 10 TV the day after his death , " We were in Romania during the Second World War , and we were Jews there among the Germans , and among the anti @-@ Semitic Romanians . " Dorothea <unk> , a cousin of Librescu living in Romania , said in an interview to Romanian newspaper <unk> : " He was an extraordinarily gifted person and very altruistic . When he was little , he was very curious and knew everything , so that I thought he would become very conceited , but it did not happen so ; he was of a rare modesty . " 
 After surviving the Holocaust , Librescu was repatriated to Communist Romania . He studied aerospace engineering at the Polytechnic University of Bucharest , graduating in 1952 and continuing with a Master 's degree at the same university . He was awarded a Ph.D. in fluid mechanics in 1969 at the Academia de <unk> din România . From 1953 to 1975 , he worked as a researcher at the Bucharest Institute of Applied Mechanics , and later at the Institute of Fluid Mechanics and the Institute of Fluid Mechanics and Aerospace Constructions of the Academy of Science of Romania . 
 His career stalled in the 1970s because he refused to swear allegiance to the Romanian Communist Party and was forced out of academia for his sympathies towards Israel . When Librescu requested permission to emigrate to Israel , the Academy of Science of Romania fired him . In 1976 , a smuggled research manuscript that he had published in the Netherlands drew him international attention in the growing field of material dynamics . 
 After years of government refusal , Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin personally intervened to get the Librescu family an emigration permit by directly asking Romanian President Nicolae Ceaușescu to let them go . They moved to Israel in 1978 . 
 From 1979 to 1986 , Librescu was Professor of Aeronautical and Mechanical Engineering at Tel Aviv University and taught at the Technion in Haifa . In 1985 , he left on sabbatical for the United States , where he served as Professor at Virginia Tech in its Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics , where he remained until his death . He served as a member on the editorial board of seven scientific journals and was invited as a guest editor of special issues of five other journals . Most recently , he was co @-@ chair of the International Organizing Committee of the 7th International Congress on Thermal Stress , Taipei , Taiwan , June 4 – 7 , 2007 , for which he had been scheduled to give the keynote lecture . According to his wife , no Virginia Tech professor has ever published more articles than Librescu . 
 = = = Fields of research = = = 
 Librescu 's major fields of study included : 
 Foundation and applications of the modern theory of shells incorporating non @-@ classical effects and composed of advanced composite materials 
 Foundation of the theory and applications of sandwich type structures 
 <unk> stability of flight vehicle structures 
 Nonlinear <unk> of structures in supersonic and hypersonic flow fields 
 <unk> and structural tailoring 
 Dynamic response and instability of elastic and viscoelastic laminated composite structures subjected to deterministic and random loading systems 
 Mechanical and thermal <unk> of flat and curved shear @-@ deformable elastic panels 
 Static , dynamic and aeroelastic feedback control of adaptive structures 
 <unk> aerodynamics and <unk> of supersonic flows with applications 
 Optimization problems of aeroelastic structural systems 
 Theory of composite thin @-@ walled beams and its application in aeronautical and mechanical constructions 
 Nonlinear structural deformation of compressible composite materials under shear stress 
 Response and behavior of structures to underwater and in @-@ air explosions 
 Multifunctional and functionally graded material structures . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 At age 76 , Librescu was among the 32 people who were murdered in the Virginia Tech shootings . On April 16 , 2007 , a student entered the Norris Hall Engineering Building and opened fire on classrooms . Librescu , who taught a solid mechanics class in Room 204 in the Norris Hall during April 2007 , held the door of his classroom shut while the gunman attempted to enter it . Although he was shot through the door , Librescu managed to prevent the gunman from entering the classroom until most of his students had escaped through the windows . He was struck by five bullets , with a shot to the head proving to be fatal . Of the 23 registered students in his class , one , <unk> Panchal , died . 
 A number of Librescu 's students have called him a hero because of his actions . Caroline <unk> , a senior , said she and about 20 other students scrambled through the windows as Librescu shouted for them to hurry . <unk> said , " I don ’ t think I would be here if it wasn 't for [ Librescu ] . " Librescu 's son Joe said he had received e @-@ mails from several students who said he had saved their lives and regarded him as a hero . 
 Following the murder of Librescu , at the request of his family and with the assistance of Gov. Tim Kaine , his body was released on April 17 and he received a funeral service at an Orthodox Jewish funeral home in Borough Park , Brooklyn , New York City , New York . On April 20 , he was interred in Israel . In his native Romania , his picture was placed on a table at the Polytechnic University of Bucharest , and a candle was lit . People laid flowers nearby . 
 The massacre took place on Holocaust Remembrance Day ( Yom HaShoah ) . On April 18 , 2007 , President of the United States George W. Bush honored Librescu at a memorial service held at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum , attended by a crowd that included many Holocaust survivors : 
 That day we saw horror , but we also saw quiet acts of courage . We saw this courage in a teacher named Liviu Librescu . With the gunman set to enter his class , this brave professor blocked the door with his body while his students fled to safety . On the Day of Remembrance , this Holocaust survivor gave his own life so that others may live . And this morning we honor his memory and we take strength from his example . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Librescu received many academic honors during his work in the Engineering Science and Mechanics Department at Virginia Tech , serving as chair or invited as a keynote speaker of several International Congresses on Thermal Stresses and receiving several honorary degrees . He was elected member of the Academy of Sciences of the Shipbuilding of Ukraine ( 2000 ) and Foreign Fellow of the Academy of Engineering of Armenia ( 1999 ) . He was a recipient of Doctor Honoris Causa of the Polytechnic Institute of Bucharest ( 2000 ) , of the 1999 Dean 's Award for Excellence in Research , College of Engineering at Virginia Tech , and a laureate of the Traian Vuia Prize of the Romanian Academy ( 1972 ) . He was a member of the Board of Experts of the Italian Ministry of Education , University and Scientific Research . He was awarded the Frank J. Maher Award for Excellence in Engineering Education ( 2005 ) and an ASME diploma ( 2005 ) expressing " deep appreciation for the valuable services in advancing the engineering profession " . 
 Posthumously , Professor Librescu was commended by Traian <unk> , the President of Romania , with the Order of the Star of Romania with the rank of Grand Cross , " as a sign of high appreciation and gratitude for the entire scientific and academic activity , as well as for the heroism shown in the course of the tragic events which took place on April 16th , 2007 , [ ... ] through which he saved the lives of his students , sacrificing his own life . " The Chabad Hasidic Movement named its Jewish Student Center at Virginia Tech after him . 
 The street in front of the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest was named in his honor . 
 Professor Librescu was also awarded the 2007 <unk> Award by Stetson University College of Law ’ s Center for Excellence in Higher Education Law and Policy . 
 A gift to Columbia Law School from alumnus Ira Greenstein ’ 85 honored Professor Librescu ’ s heroism during the Virginia Tech shooting and established a professorship in his name — the “ Liviu Librescu Professor of Law . ” This professorship is awarded at the discretion of the Dean , who seeks to appoint to the Librescu Professorship a member of the faculty with an expertise in national security or social justice . Matthew Waxman currently holds the Librescu Professorship . He is an expert in national security law and international law , including issues such as executive power , international human rights and constitutional rights , military force and armed conflict , terrorism , cybersecurity , and maritime disputes . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Books authored by Librescu include : 
 Librescu , Liviu ; <unk> Song ( 2006 ) . Thin @-@ walled composite beams : Theory and Application . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4020 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , G. ; <unk> , I ; <unk> , J. ; Librescu , L. ( 1992 ) . Random Vibrations and Reliability of Composite Structures . Lancaster @-@ Basel : Technomic Publishing Co . 
 Librescu , Liviu ( 1976 ) . <unk> and Kinetics of <unk> and Heterogeneous Shell @-@ Type Structures . Leyden : <unk> International . ISBN 978 @-@ 90 @-@ 286 @-@ 0035 @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Librescu , Liviu ( 1969 ) . <unk> şi <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> şi <unk> ( in Romanian ) . Bucharest : Editura <unk> <unk> <unk> România . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Bump Elliott = 
 Chalmers W. " Bump " Elliott ( born January 30 , 1925 ) is a former American football player , coach , and college athletics administrator . He played halfback at Purdue University ( 1943 – 1944 ) and the University of Michigan ( 1946 – 1947 ) . Elliott grew up in Bloomington , Illinois , enlisted in the United States Marine Corps as a senior in high school and was assigned to the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program at Purdue University . He received varsity letters in football , baseball , and basketball at Purdue , before being called into active duty in late 1944 , serving with the Marines in China . 
 After being discharged from the military , he enrolled at the University of Michigan in 1946 and joined the football team for whom his brother Pete Elliott played quarterback . In 1947 , he played for an undefeated and untied Michigan football team known as the " Mad Magicians " , led the Big Nine Conference in scoring , won the Chicago Tribune Silver Football trophy as the Most Valuable Player in the Conference , and was selected as an All @-@ American by the American Football Coaches Association . 
 After graduating from Michigan in 1948 , Elliott spent ten years as an assistant football coach at Oregon State , Iowa , and Michigan . He was appointed as Michigan 's head football coach in 1959 and held that position until 1968 , leading the team to a Big Ten Conference championship and Rose Bowl victory in the 1964 season . For a period of 21 years , from 1970 to 1991 , he was the athletic director at the University of Iowa . During his tenure as athletic director , he hired coaches Dan Gable , Hayden Fry , Lute Olson , C. Vivian Stringer , and Dr. Tom Davis , and the Iowa Hawkeyes won 41 Big Ten Conference championships and 11 NCAA titles . In 1989 , Elliott was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elliott was born in Detroit , but grew up in Bloomington , Illinois . His father , Dr. J. Norman Elliott , was an ears , nose and throat doctor who also coached football at Illinois Wesleyan University from 1930 to 1934 . Elliott 's given name is Chalmers , but he has been known by the nickname " Bump " since he was six months old , though nobody remembers how he got the nickname , " not even his mother . " 
 Elliott and his younger brother , Pete Elliott , both played football together for Bloomington High School , where Bump was an All @-@ State halfback in 1942 , and Pete made it as a fullback in 1943 . Had it not been for World War II , Bump and Pete likely would have attended the University of Illinois , which was about 50 miles from their home in Bloomington . However , both brothers wanted to get into the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program , and Illinois did not have such a program . Bump enlisted in the United States Marine Corps while still a senior in high school and was called to active duty in 1943 . He was assigned to the V @-@ 12 officer training program at Purdue University . His brother , Pete , also enlisted and was assigned to officer training at Michigan . 
 = = Purdue University and military service = = 
 Elliott attended Purdue from 1943 – 1944 . In his freshman year , Elliott earned varsity letters in football , basketball and baseball . He played three games for the unbeaten and untied 1943 Purdue football team where he was described as " a capable triple @-@ <unk> and stellar defensive performer . " He scored a touchdown against Minnesota in his first game , and made a key interception at Purdue 's ten @-@ yard line in the season 's final game against Indiana . A May 1944 newspaper article reported that the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Elliott , who had been a " high school sensation last year , " had won three major athletic letters in his first year as a Naval V @-@ 12 student at Purdue . " A speedy 160 @-@ pound , five foot 10 @-@ inch performer , he lost little time making his mark in football last fall once he became eligible upon completion of his first V @-@ 12 term . " Elliott appeared in the final three games of the football season , and his performance in the season 's final game against Indiana " provided one of the highlights of the Boilermaker season . " 
 In basketball , he was " consistent as a guard on Purdue 's cage combination . " In baseball , Elliott played shortstop and center field , where he was " a steady fielder with a strong arm . " In a May 1944 game , Elliott led the Boilermakers to a 17 – 4 win over Wisconsin , with five hits , five stolen bases , four RBIs , three runs scored , and four putouts in center field . His performance against Wisconsin was " one of the biggest baseball days ever turned " by a Big Ten baseball player . 
 Elliott played in the first six games of the 1944 football season for Purdue before being transferred by the Marine Corps . In a game against Marquette in late September , he broke up a 7 – 7 tie with successive touchdown runs of 24 and 71 yards . He was also the only defensive player in 1944 to pull down Illinois ' Claude " Buddy " Young from behind . Elliott received orders to report for active duty in October 1944 , and he played his last game in a Purdue uniform against the Michigan Wolverines on October 28 , 1944 . In November 1944 , Elliott was sent to Parris Island . He was later sent to China and emerged from the war as a Marine lieutenant . 
 = = University of Michigan = = 
 Elliott and his younger brother , Pete Elliott , were teammates at Bloomington High School in 1943 and again at Michigan in 1946 and 1947 . After his discharge from the military , Bump joined Pete at Michigan , where Pete played quarterback and Bump was the right halfback for the undefeated 1947 team . Before the 1948 Rose Bowl , one article noted that the two brothers roomed together at Michigan and arranged their programs so that their classes were identical . The article observed : " They look alike , act alike and think alike and in Ann Arbor , Mich . , when they walk down the street any Michigan student can recognize Bump and Pete , the inseparable Elliott Brothers , Wolverines right half and quarterback respectively . " The brothers shared the same distinctive golden red hair , and the two were so close that they told a reporter in 1947 that a girl had to receive " the Bumper stamp of approval " before passing Pete 's test . 
 = = = 1946 season = = = 
 After being discharged from the Marine Corps , Elliott attended the University of Michigan , where he joined his brother , Pete , in Michigan 's backfield . Elliott " practically stepped off a World War II transport from Marine Corps duty in China to Michigan 's Ferry Field and stardom . " With less than a week of conditioning after his discharge from the Marines , he was reported to be giving Michigan 's coaching staff " something lovely to look at . " 
 In a 14 – 14 tie with Northwestern in mid @-@ October 1946 , Elliott scored all 14 of Michigan 's points . He scored the first touchdown late in the first quarter on a 37 @-@ yard pass from Bob Chappuis in the corner of the end zone . In the fourth quarter , Michigan fullback Bob Wiese intercepted a pass on Michigan 's 1 @-@ yard line , and <unk> to Elliott on the Michigan 40 @-@ yard line . From that point , Elliott ran it back 60 yards down the sideline for his second touchdown . He again scored two touchdowns in Michigan 's 21 @-@ 0 win over Minnesota on November 2 , 1946 . He also helped Michigan to a 28 – 6 win over Wisconsin with a bullet pass to end Bob Mann in the end zone . 
 = = = Big Nine MVP in 1947 = = = 
 In 1947 , Elliott played for the Wolverines team known as the " Mad Magicians " that went undefeated and untied , and defeated the Southern Cal Trojans , 49 – 0 in the 1948 Rose Bowl . The team is considered to be the greatest Michigan team of all time . Along with Bob Chappuis , Elliott was one of the key players in Michigan 's undefeated season . He led the Big Nine in scoring , made the All @-@ American team picked by the American Football Coaches Association , and was voted Most Valuable Player in the Big Nine Conference to win the Chicago Tribune Silver Football trophy . Elliott was one of two Michigan players in 1947 ( the other was fullback Jack <unk> ) who played both offense and defense . Indeed , Elliott was actually a four @-@ way threat as he contributed in rushing , receiving , punt returns , and defense . He scored a total of 12 touchdowns in 1947 — eight rushing , two receiving , one on a punt return , and another on an interception return . He contributed 911 all @-@ purpose yardage – 438 rushing , 318 receiving , and 155 on punt returns . He averaged 6 @.@ 4 yards per carry as a rusher , 19 @.@ 9 yards per reception , and 17 @.@ 2 yards per punt return . Michigan head coach Fritz Crisler called Elliott the greatest right halfback he had ever seen . 
 Elliott had a breakthrough season that began with the team 's " Blue " versus " White " exhibition game in mid @-@ September in which he scored four touchdowns , including 50- and 60 @-@ yard runs . He scored touchdowns in each of the team 's early season wins over Michigan State ( 55 – 0 ) , Stanford ( 49 @-@ 13 ) , and Pitt ( 69 @-@ 0 ) . His touchdown against Pitt came on defense , as he intercepted a pass and ran it back 37 yards . In the Big Nine opener against Northwestern , Elliott scored on a nine @-@ yard run less than two minutes after the game started , as the Wolverines won , 49 @-@ 21 . In Michigan 's closest contest of the 1947 season , a 13 @-@ 6 win over Minnesota , Elliott caught a 40 @-@ yard pass from Bob Chappuis on his fingertips at the Minnesota 15 @-@ yard line and went on to score with a minute and 15 seconds to go in the first half . Said one reporter : " It was the exceptional speed of Elliott on this play that turned the tide . He completely outmaneuvered the Minnesota secondary . " 
 The biggest challenge of the 1947 season came in a 14 – 7 win over Illinois . The Associated Press described Elliott as Michigan 's " Big Cog " in the Illinois game , and the United Press proclaimed : " Bump Elliott Steals Show in 14 to 7 Defeat of Illinois Saturday . " In the first quarter , he ran back a punt 75 yards for a touchdown , as Bob Mann " bulldozed the path with a vicious block " , and " the Bloomington blaster scampered down the sidelines . " Elliott also set up the Wolverines second score with a long reception to the Illinois four @-@ yard line . He also played a key role on defense , intercepting a pass at the Michigan nine @-@ yard line to halt an Illinois drive . Another article concluded : " The individual hero was Bump Elliott , a 168 @-@ pound halfback who <unk> 74 yards for one touchdown and caught a pass for a 52 yard gain to set up the second and winning marker . " 
 He finished the season scoring two touchdowns each in games against Indiana and Ohio State . At the end of the season , Elliott and Bob Chappuis both received 16 of 18 possible points in voting by the AP for the All @-@ Big Nine football team . Elliott weighed only 160 pounds ( 72 @.@ 6 kg ; 11 st 6 @.@ 0 lb ) during his All @-@ American season in 1947 . Asked later about how he managed to compete at his weight , Elliott noted , " I was awful lucky to get by at that weight . " 
 = = = 1948 Rose Bowl against Southern Cal = = = 
 As the Big Nine Conference champions , the 1947 Wolverines were invited to play in the 1948 Rose Bowl game against the Southern Cal Trojans . Michigan dominated the game , winning 49 – 0 , as " the shifty Chappuis and the speedy Elliott began to fake ( the Trojans ) out of their shoes . " Elliott scored on an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Chappuis . In August 1948 , Elliott was chosen as the captain of the College All @-@ Stars in their game against the Chicago Cardinals at Soldier Field . Injured in practice , Elliott was unable to play as the Cardinals beat the All @-@ Stars , 28 – 0 . 
 = = = Application for 1948 eligibility denied = = = 
 Elliott applied for an extra year of eligibility in 1948 . Due to his military service , he played in only three games as a freshman and six games in his sophomore season . Under the Big Nine conference code , he was eligible for a fifth season due to a war @-@ caused stay at Purdue in 1943 – 1944 . However , his request was denied by the Big Nine Conference . The decision was criticized by Michigan 's representative on the Big Nine faculty committee as a " grave injustice . " Nonetheless , Elliott set the Michigan career interception return yards record that stood for five years until Don Oldham pushed the record from 174 yards to 181 yards . His 174 career yards still ranks fifth in school history . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 The Elliott brothers served as assistant coaches together at Oregon State in 1949 and 1950 , before going their separate ways . The <unk> ' coached against each other in the early 1960s while Bump was the head football coach at Michigan and Pete held the same position at the University of Illinois . In November 1963 , Pete Elliott 's Illinois team was ranked No. 2 in the country and the favorite for the Rose Bowl when it faced off against Bump Elliott 's Michigan team . Michigan had a record of 2 – 3 – 1 when the brothers met in 1963 , but Michigan came out on top , 14 – 8 , marking the fourth time in four games that Bump 's Wolverines came out on top of brother Pete 's Illini . 
 After graduating from Michigan , Bump turned down an offer to play professional football for the Detroit Lions , saying he said he had obtained a job in Chicago outside of football . Elliott also considered going into medicine as his father had done , but he chose instead to go into coaching . He started his coaching career at Michigan in the fall of 1948 as assistant backfield coach . In the spring of 1949 , he was hired as an assistant coach under Kip Taylor at Oregon State , where he remained for three seasons , from 1949 – 1951 . Elliott later recalled , " I was only 24 when Kip Taylor hired me as backfield coach at Oregon State , and it bothered me a little because there were two backs on the squad who were older than I was . " It was even worse for his brother Pete , who was 22 when he was hired to coach the ends . Bump recalled : " After practice one night some players noticed Pete light up a <unk> . One of his ends drew Pete aside and said in a fatherly voice , ' You shouldn 't smoke , coach ; I didn 't do it when I was your age . " Oregon State had an overall record of 14 – 15 in Elliott 's three years as an assistant coach . 
 In 1952 , Elliott was hired as an assistant at the University of Iowa under its head coach , Forest Evashevski , another former All @-@ American at the University of Michigan . On being hired at Iowa , Elliott said , " I should feel at home back in the Big Ten . I grew up in Bloomington – 40 miles from Illinois . I played at Purdue and Michigan and coached at Michigan . My father went to Iowa and Northwestern and now I ’ m coaching at Iowa . " He stayed at Iowa until 1957 . Elliott was with the Hawkeyes in 1956 when they went 9 – 1 , won the Big Ten championship , and defeated his former team , Oregon State , 35 – 19 , in the 1957 Rose Bowl game . 
 He returned to Michigan in 1957 as a backfield coach under Bennie Oosterbaan . In 1959 , Elliott was elevated to head football coach at Michigan . He was the head coach for ten years from 1959 to 1968 , posting a career record of 51 – 42 – 2 , for a <unk> winning percentage . In Big Ten Conference play , his record was 32 – 34 – 2 ( .485 ) . 
 Although his tenure at Michigan was unsuccessful by the school 's historic standards , he did lead the 1964 Wolverines to a 9 – 1 record , a Big Ten title and a win in the Rose Bowl against Oregon State . His final team , in 1968 , won eight of its first nine games but then suffered a humiliating 50 – 14 loss against Ohio State . Despite having a 36 @-@ point lead , Ohio State Coach Woody Hayes passed for , and failed to get , a two @-@ point conversion after the final score and with 1 : 23 remaining in the game . When asked why he went for the two @-@ point conversion , Hayes reportedly said , " Because we couldn 't go for three ! " Shortly after the game , Elliott resigned , and athletic director Don Canham hired Bo Schembechler to replace him as head coach . Schembechler would use the memory of the 1968 Ohio State loss to motivate his team the following season . 
 There were reports during the 1968 season that Elliott had been given an ultimatum : " Either win or face the possibility of being kick upstairs . " There were also reports when Don Canham was hired that Elliott had expected to be named athletic director and that there was " bad blood " between Canham and Elliott . 
 However , Canham later denied that Elliott was " eased out " of his job . In an interview with Joe Falls , Canham said : " Bump and I are close personal friends . Bump is not naïve – he knows that when you work at a place for 10 years and you ’ re not winning consistently , it doesn ’ t become fun for anybody – the coach , the alumni , the players or anybody else . We talked about this and we talked about it openly . If Bump had said to me , ‘ Look , give me a couple of more years , ’ I would have given it to him . I mean that . I didn ’ t fire Bump Elliott . My first year as director Bump had an 8 and 2 record . Anyone could live with that . " 
 According to Canham , he met with Elliott in December 1968 and offered him the job of associate athletic director . Canham told Elliott he could stay on as coach if he wanted , but Canham could not promise him that the job of associate athletic director would still be open in another couple of years . Canham said : " Bump smiled at me and said , ‘ I don ’ t have to think about it . ’ He was ready to get out . I did not force him , and I mean that in all honesty . But the job had ceased to be fun for him . " 
 Schembechler later recalled that he remained loyal to Elliott when he took over as Michigan 's head coach in 1969 . When Schembechler won the Big Ten championship in 1969 , he said , " I made certain I let everyone know I won with Bump 's kids . Bump was a man of great class and he showed it to me again and again in that first year , never getting in the way , always trying to be helpful , always trying to encourage me . " After Michigan won the 1969 Ohio State game , the team presented the game ball to Elliott , and Schembechler noted that " I don ’ t remember when I felt happier about anything in my life . " 
 From 1969 to 1970 , Elliott was the associate director of athletics at Michigan . 
 = = Athletic director at Iowa = = 
 Elliott became the Men 's athletic director at the University of Iowa in 1970 , succeeding Forest Evashevski . He came to Iowa in the midst of a feud between athletic director Forest Evashevski and football coach Ray Nagel . Evashevski resigned in May 1970 , and Elliott was hired to replace him . On accepting the job , Elliott noted : " It 's difficult to leave a town where you ’ ve lived for 13 years ( Ann Arbor , Michigan ) , but the opportunity is so good at Iowa with the people and the school that no one could pass it up . " 
 During Elliott 's tenure , the school 's teams won 34 Big Ten championships and 11 NCAA titles , as well as making three Rose Bowl appearances and one trip to the Final Four in basketball . The university also built a basketball arena ( Carver @-@ Hawkeye Arena ) , erected an indoor workout center for football and added more than 10 @,@ 000 seats to its football stadium . His career at Iowa was marked by a general resurgence in the competitiveness of Iowa athletics . Elliott hired a number of notable coaches , including Lute Olson , Dan Gable , Hayden Fry , and Dr. Tom Davis . During Elliott 's 21 years as athletic director , the Iowa Hawkeyes won 41 Big Ten championships in football ( 1981 , 1985 , 1990 ) , wrestling ( 1974 – 1990 ) , men 's basketball ( 1970 , 1979 ) , baseball ( 1972 , 1974 , 1990 ) , men 's gymnastics ( 1972 , 1974 , 1986 ) , men 's swimming ( 1981 , 1982 ) . See Iowa Hawkeyes for complete list of championships . 
 Elliott was known as " a coach 's AD . " " He hired coaches he trusted , then gave them the resources , latitude and support they needed to operate as they saw fit – providing they played by the rules . " Iowa wrestling coach Dan Gable said his wife cried on learning that Elliott had retired . In 1999 , Gable wrote : " Right after I came to coach at the University of Iowa , I had a meeting with Bump Elliott , who was the Athletic Director . I ’ ll never forget what Bump said to me : ‘ Don ’ t ask for the moon . Strive to get there , sure , but do it wisely through continuing to build upon what you already have . As you build , come see me , and we ’ ll see how I can help you out . ’ I now call that bit of wisdom the Bump Elliott Rule , and it serves a good reminder to keep things in perspective . Gradual , solid growth is better than any quick fix . " " The one thing we emphasized from the start was that our staff had to make sure we were 100 percent loyal to each other and the university , " Elliott said at the time of his retirement . " There could be no jealousy between the coaches and various programs . I wanted no one talking behind anyone 's backs . I wanted absolute loyalty . If not , then that person could leave any time . " 
 Elliott was also the one who hired Hayden Fry as Iowa 's football coach in 1979 . Fry later said that Elliott was one of the principal reasons he chose to coach at Iowa . In his autobiography , Fry wrote : " Iowa had one thing in its favor as far as I was concerned : Bump Elliott was its athletic director . Bump had a reputation as being a fair , honest and well @-@ liked administrator . " Elliott told Fry that he would be the last football coach Bump ever hired . Fry was puzzled and asked Elliott what he meant . Elliott said , " Simple , I don ’ t think they ’ ll give me a chance to hire another coach , so if you don ’ t make it , neither will I. " He is the only person to have been with Rose Bowl teams in five capacities – player , assistant coach , head coach , assistant athletic director , and athletic director . 
 = = Family = = 
 Elliott and his wife Barbara met while he was with the Marine Corps at Purdue and she was studying pre @-@ school education there . They married in 1949 , and have three children , Bill ( born October 1951 ) , Bob ( born May 1953 ) , and Betsy ( born c . 1955 ) . Son Bob Elliott was Iowa 's defensive coordinator under Hayden Fry in the 1990s . 
 = = Honors and accolades = = 
 Elliott has received numerous honors and accolades , including the following : 
 Recipient of the Chicago Tribune Silver Football as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Nine Conference in 1947 ; 
 Selected as an All @-@ American by the American Football Coaches Association in 1947 ; 
 Inducted into the University of Michigan Hall of Honor in 1986 for his contributions in football , basketball , baseball , and as a football coach ; 
 Inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1989 ; 
 Inducted into the National Iowa Varsity Club Hall of Fame in 1997 ; 
 Inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame in 2002 ; and 
 Elliott Drive , the Iowa City street on which Carver @-@ Hawkeye Arena is located , is named in his honor . The sculpture of the 12 ' stainless steel hawk , Strike Force , is located in a small park just south of Carver @-@ Hawkeye arena . In addition to the street in his name and the sculpture , a scholarship in Elliott 's name were all spearheaded by his good friend Earle Murphy to honor Bump and future Iowa athletes . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = Chris Bosh = 
 Christopher Wesson Bosh ( born March 24 , 1984 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . A high school " Mr. Basketball " in Texas , Bosh left college at Georgia Tech after one season with the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets men 's basketball team to enter the 2003 NBA draft . He was selected fourth overall by the Toronto Raptors in a very competitive draft class that included multiple future NBA superstars such as LeBron James , Dwyane Wade , and Carmelo Anthony . While at Toronto , Bosh emerged as one of the young stars in the league ; he became a five @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star , was named to the All @-@ NBA second team once , appeared for the US national team ( with whom he won a gold medal at the 2008 Olympics ) , and supplanted former fan @-@ favorite Vince Carter as the face and leader of the Raptors franchise . 
 In the 2006 – 07 season , Bosh led the Raptors to their first NBA Playoffs berth in five years , and their first ever division title . He left Toronto for the Miami Heat in 2010 as its all @-@ time leader in points , rebounds , blocks , double doubles , free throws made and attempted , and minutes played . Bosh won his first NBA title after Miami defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder 4 – 1 in the 2012 NBA Finals . He won his second title in 2013 as the Heat defeated the San Antonio Spurs in the 2013 NBA Finals . 
 Bosh was nicknamed CB4 by then @-@ Toronto Raptors play @-@ by @-@ play commentator Chuck Swirsky , a combination of Bosh 's initials and then jersey number . Seeking to promote sports and education amongst youths in Dallas and Toronto , Bosh set up the Chris Bosh Foundation and regularly speaks to youths about the benefits of reading . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Dallas , Texas , to Noel and Freida Bosh , Chris Bosh grew up in Hutchins , Texas . A family @-@ oriented person , Bosh often played basketball in the house with his younger brother , Joel . By four years of age , he began learning how to dribble a basketball in the gym where his dad played pick @-@ up games . Although Bosh was always tall since youth and this allowed him to out @-@ rebound others in basketball games , he only started learning the game around fourth grade at a playground near his grandmother 's house . Apart from basketball , Bosh also played baseball up until high school , preferring to play as a first baseman . Growing up , Bosh names his parents as the biggest influences on his personality and considered NBA superstar Kevin Garnett as his favorite athlete , modeling his play after him . Academically , Bosh always did well in school but he began to garner significant attention from college recruiters when he led Lincoln High School in Dallas to the number one ranking in the country and the USA Today National Championship with a perfect 40 – 0 season . 
 The teenager went on to lead Lincoln High to win the Class 4A state title before 16 @,@ 990 fans as he racked up 23 points , 17 rebounds and nine blocks . Bosh was subsequently named High School Player of the Year by Basketball America , Powerade Player of the Year in Texas , a First @-@ team all @-@ American by Parade , McDonald 's and EA Sports , a Second @-@ team all @-@ American by USA Today and SLAM Magazine , a First @-@ team all @-@ state player , and " Mr. Basketball " in Texas by the Texas Association of Basketball Coaches . With his combination of grades and basketball skills , Bosh was on a number of college recruiting lists . The University of Florida and the University of Memphis made serious attempts , but it was Paul Hewitt , coach of Georgia Tech , who made the best impression . Bosh felt Hewitt would look out for his best interests and respect his aspirations to play professional basketball ; moreover , Georgia Tech 's transition offense impressed the teenager . 
 = = College career = = 
 Bosh eventually chose to follow the footsteps of his cousin and aunt and attended Georgia Tech to study graphic design and computer imaging , and subsequently , management . There , he led the Yellow Jackets in averaging 15 @.@ 6 points , 9 @.@ 0 rebounds and 2 @.@ 2 blocks in 31 games , and led the Atlantic Coast Conference in field goal percentage ( .560 ) , joining Antawn Jamison as the only freshmen ever to do so . Bosh originally intended to complete his degree , but by the end of the 2002 – 03 season , his strong performances convinced him that he was ready for the NBA . He left Georgia Tech after his freshman season and entered the 2003 NBA draft . Bosh said in future interviews that although he misses his college days , he believes he made the right decision to pursue a professional career . He said he intends to obtain a college degree in the future , to fulfill a promise made to his mother . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Toronto Raptors ( 2003 – 2010 ) = = = 
 = = = = Rookie year ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 In a strong draft class including future All @-@ Stars LeBron James , Carmelo Anthony , and Dwyane Wade , Bosh was selected fourth overall by the Toronto Raptors in the 2003 NBA draft and was signed on July 8 , 2003 . Prior to his signing , however , other NBA teams made offers for Bosh as they knew Toronto needed a veteran scorer , and Raptors star Vince Carter himself pressed for a trade . General Manager Glen Grunwald turned everyone down . 
 In his rookie season Bosh was forced to play out of position as the Raptors ' starting center after Antonio Davis was traded to the Chicago Bulls . Night after night , the teenager with the " slim frame " battled against opponents who had a significant size and strength advantage over him . Bosh — who cited teammate Michael Curry as his mentor — was often praised by his coaches for his heart , and willingness to play through pain and injuries resulting from his lack of body strength compared to some of the league 's strong forwards and centers . Bosh 's contributions were not unnoticed by teammates either , as he averaged 11 @.@ 5 points , 7 @.@ 4 rebounds , 1 @.@ 4 blocks , and 33 @.@ 5 minutes in 75 games , leading all rookies in rebounding and blocks , and setting a franchise record for most rebounds in a rookie season with 557 . Bosh was rewarded by being selected to the All @-@ Rookie First Team for the 2003 – 04 season . 
 = = = = Heralded as the new hope ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 With the departure of the disenchanted franchise face of the team , Vince Carter , in December 2004 , Bosh was simultaneously anointed as the new leader around whom Toronto would build . In the remaining games following Carter 's departure , the power forward averaged 18 @.@ 4 points , 9 @.@ 5 rebounds , 1 @.@ 6 blocks , and 38 @.@ 1 minutes per game , improving in every major statistical category . He was awarded his first ever NBA Eastern Conference Player of the Week for games played between 3 and 9 January 2005 . As the season drew to a close , analysts predicted that Bosh would become an All @-@ Star one day . Bosh ended the 2004 – 05 season as the leading scorer and leading rebounder for the team on 21 and 46 occasions respectively . 
 Prior to the 2005 – 06 season , Bosh was named as one of Toronto 's team captains . Bosh continued to work on his game as he consistently chalked up double doubles , leading the team in scoring , rebounding , and field goal percentage for the first half of the season . On February 9 , 2006 , for the first time in his career , Bosh was selected to play in the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Game in Houston , Texas as a reserve forward for the Eastern Conference . He was only the third Raptor to make an All @-@ Star game , after Carter and Antonio Davis . Bosh 's selection was just three days after he was named NBA Eastern Conference Player of the Week for the second time in his career . In March 2006 , following a season @-@ ending injury to Bosh , the Raptors hit a 1 – 10 skid . This highlighted Bosh 's importance as the centerpiece of the offense , as well as the leader of the team . The Raptors finished the season 27 – 55 and Bosh averaged 22 @.@ 5 points , 9 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 6 assists per game . 
 Despite a major off @-@ season revamp of the Raptors roster — including the departure of good friends Mike James and Charlie Villanueva — Bosh officially signed a three @-@ year contract extension with a player option for a fourth year on July 14 , 2006 . The deal was reportedly worth US $ 65 million over four years . Upon signing the contract , Bosh said " I think the future is very positive for the franchise ... change was needed ... we have a lot of guys who just want to win and are willing to work hard . " During the same press conference , Bosh also announced a donation of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to a Toronto charity , known as Community Legacy Programs . 
 = = = = Leader of the division champions ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 After a shaky start to the Raptors ' 2006 – 07 campaign , the Raptors managed to surpass the 0 @.@ 500 mark as the All @-@ Star break approached . Bosh 's play and leadership were pivotal to this run and as an increasing recognition of his abilities , on January 25 , 2007 , he was named an All @-@ Star starter for the East in the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Game . Bosh received the second highest number of votes among all Eastern Conference forwards . This was his first All @-@ Star start and second overall All @-@ Star appearance , having averaged over 22 points and 11 rebounds in the first half of the season . On January 31 , 2007 , in a game against the Washington Wizards , Bosh scored a 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) buzzer @-@ beating shot to end the third quarter of the game . He shot 15 @-@ of @-@ 15 after missing his first four shots . Bosh 's in @-@ form streak enabled him to be selected Eastern Conference Player of the Month for January 2007 . He had averaged 25 @.@ 4 points and 9 @.@ 1 rebounds while leading the Raptors to a 10 – 5 record in that month . On February 7 , 2007 , Bosh 's career @-@ high 41 points prompted the home fans to chant " MVP " — an unprecedented event in the Air Canada Centre . Two days later , Bosh collected 29 points and 11 rebounds against the Los Angeles Lakers , shooting 10 @-@ of @-@ 10 in the second half . 
 On March 28 , 2007 , Bosh became the new franchise record holder for double doubles in a home win against the Miami Heat . He was named Eastern Conference Player of the Week for the third time in his career shortly after , having led Toronto to clinch their first NBA Playoffs berth in five years . Toronto went on to win its first ever division title , and concluded the regular season with a 47 – 35 record , including a 30 – 11 home record , both franchise records . As third seed , the Raptors played sixth seed New Jersey Nets in the first round of the 2007 NBA Playoffs . The series drew much media attention as Carter , who left had Toronto under acrimonious circumstances , was back at the ACC as a Net . In the opening game , while Carter was constantly booed by the home crowd and was not an offensive threat , Toronto 's inexperience was evident as they struggled offensively and were down 65 – 78 going into the fourth quarter . A late rally by Toronto in the fourth quarter was not enough as they eventually lost 91 – 96 . The Raptors won Game 2 at the ACC to tie the series 1 – 1 , as Bosh recorded 25 points and a game @-@ high 13 rebounds . The Nets won games 3 and 4 to lead 3 – 1 , but Toronto forced Game 6 when they narrowly won 98 – 96 in Game 5 . New Jersey won Game 6 , however , and sent Toronto out of the first round . Bosh averaged a double @-@ double with 22 @.@ 6 ppg and 10 @.@ 7 rpg for the regular season , both career @-@ highs , and posted 17 @.@ 5 ppg and 9 @.@ 0 rpg for the playoffs . He was named to the All @-@ NBA Second Team at the end of the 2006 – 07 campaign . 
 = = = = Struggles ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Before the 2007 – 08 season began , Andrea Bargnani , the number one pick in the 2006 NBA draft , was slated to start at center and Bosh at power forward to form a strong Toronto frontcourt and Jason Kapono , a three @-@ point specialist , was acquired via free agency from the Miami Heat to add offensive firepower ; however , as the season unfolded , neither plans materialized as hoped . Bosh himself had a slow start to the season , but as mid @-@ season approached , his form picked up and he was named Player of the Week for the second week of January . On January 31 , 2008 , he was selected to be on the Eastern Conference team for the 2008 NBA All @-@ Star Game . In the meantime , Toronto continued to struggle and their problems were exacerbated when regular starting point guard T. J. Ford returned from injury and became frustrated playing backup to José Calderón . Nevertheless , even with injuries to Bosh ( 15 games ) , Jorge Garbajosa ( 75 games ) and Ford ( 31 games ) , the Raptors concluded the regular season with a 41 – 41 record , and clinched the sixth seed for the 2008 NBA Playoffs . However , they were defeated by the Orlando Magic in the first round , losing 4 – 1 . 
 The first @-@ round series against the Magic was touted as the matchup between two of the league 's best young big men in Dwight Howard and Bosh , but the Raptors were perceived to have an advantage because of their dual @-@ point guard play . But Orlando held home court advantage , and the Raptors were unable to win the first two games in Amway Arena . In Game 1 , Bargnani started at small forward . This did not matter , as Orlando took a huge lead in the first quarter . Howard dominated the game , finishing with 22 points , 25 rebounds and 5 blocks . The stifling defense held Toronto to 37 @.@ 6 % shooting . Bosh finished 4 for 11 from the field ( 13 of 13 in <unk> ) and the Raptors lost by 14 . Game 2 started similarly to Game 1 , with Howard 's dominance propelling the Magic to a sizeable lead , but solid plays from Bosh , Kapono and Calderón put the Raptors in front late in the fourth quarter . The Magic came back , and with 9 seconds left on the clock , Bosh missed 18 @-@ foot jumper as time expired , giving the Magic a one @-@ point win . In Game 3 , Ford and Calderón stepped up , and the Raptors preserved some hope with a 108 – 94 home win . In Game 4 , the teams were almost tied going into the fourth quarter . Despite Bosh recording 39 points and 15 rebounds , deadly shooting by the Magic in the final few minutes ensured victory for the visitors . Back on the road in Game 5 , Toronto was outplayed by the Magic in the second half , and the Raptors eliminated from the first round four games to one . General Manager Bryan Colangelo said at a press conference thereafter , " Whether it 's protecting [ Bosh ] inside the paint , getting a little bit more of a presence in there , to just getting him another scorer that 's going to shoulder some of that burden , it 's something that 's clear we have to get better " , hinting that the roster was in need of an overhaul . Bosh said after the loss , " They played a great series , they executed on offence and defense better than we did and when it came to the small things , they did a better job ... I can 't sit here and bark in protest that the better team didn 't win . That 's pretty obvious . They beat us pretty good . " Unlike the previous campaign , Bosh was not named to any of the All @-@ NBA teams . 
 To provide Bosh with an experienced frontcourt partner , the Raptors pulled blockbuster trade prior to the 2008 – 09 campaign : six @-@ time All @-@ Star Jermaine O 'Neal was acquired from the Indiana Pacers in exchange for Ford , Rasho Nesterovič , and Roy Hibbert , the 17th pick in the 2008 NBA draft . Bosh — who had won an Olympic gold medal with the national team at Beijing 2008 — started the season strong and playing better defense than ever . He averaged 26 points , 10 rebounds and 3 @.@ 7 assists in his first three games and was named Eastern Conference Player of the Week for the fifth time in his career . A week later , he became Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in offensive rebounds , surpassing Antonio Davis 's record . While Bosh and O 'Neal formed a formidable partnership in the frontcourt , the Raptors struggled to surpass the .500 mark . The principal deficiency of previous campaigns — wing players — continued to upend Toronto 's progress . With the Raptors at 8 – 9 , head coach Sam Mitchell was sacked and replaced by Jay Triano . Under the new regime , Bargnani finally blossomed as a player , but injuries and weaknesses in the roster meant that the Raptors entered the All @-@ Star break 13 games under .500 . On January 29 , 2009 , Bosh was named an All @-@ Star reserve , but an injury ruled him out of the game . Two weeks later , in a bid to bring in a wing player and create greater salary flexibility , O 'Neal and Jamario Moon were traded to Miami for Shawn Marion and Marcus Banks . The trade did not improve the team 's win – loss record , however , and the Raptors were eliminated from contention with seven games of the regular season remaining . The bright spark in Bosh 's campaign was his career @-@ high 22 @.@ 7 points per game , as well as his being one of two players in the league that season ( the other being Dwight Howard ) to average a 20 / 10 in points and rebounds . On April 20 , 2009 , Colangelo announced that he would offer Bosh a contract extension during the summer , which Bosh later refused to sign . 
 = = = = Overhauling the roster ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 To prepare for the 2009 – 10 season , Bosh worked out under Ken Roberson , looking to add 20 pounds and bring his weight up to 250 . Following the failure of the 2008 – 09 campaign , Colangelo knew that he had to shake up the roster to persuade Bosh to stay , and the Raptors were one of the busiest teams in the pre @-@ season market . Toronto 's lack of wing players was addressed by the drafting of DeMar DeRozan . They then managed to get Hedo Türkoğlu to renege on a verbal commitment to sign with the Portland Trail Blazers and obtained him in a sign @-@ and @-@ trade with the Orlando Magic . They also traded for Antoine Wright and Marco Belinelli , while Bosh 's former Georgia Tech teammate and then @-@ Indiana point guard Jarrett Jack was also signed as a free agent . Reggie Evans , Amir Johnson , Sonny Weems and former Raptors Rasho Nesterovič and Pops Mensah @-@ Bonsu were acquired in separate transactions to add front court depth . They opened their season with a win against the heavily favored Cleveland Cavaliers , in which Bosh scored 21 points and pulled down 16 rebounds . Bosh went on a tear , averaging 25 @.@ 4 points and 11 @.@ 9 rebounds in the first 16 games , but the Raptors were only able to win seven of those games . In that period , Bosh was also the league leader in rebounds , rebounds per game , free throws made and attempted , and double doubles . 
 The Raptors crossed into 2010 with a 16 – 17 record , and on January 3 , 2010 , Bosh overtook Vince Carter as Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in total points scored . After pulling together a string of wins , Toronto were .500 after 40 games , and Bosh remained the league leader in double doubles , being only one of two players in the league who averaged at least 20 points and 10 rebounds a game . On January 20 , 2010 , he scored a career @-@ high 44 points in a loss against the Milwaukee Bucks , while collecting his 220th career double double . That same month , Bosh was named a reserve for the Eastern Conference All @-@ Star team , and was Eastern Conference Player of the Week . After the All @-@ Star break , the Raptors went on several losing streaks and injuries to Bosh and Türkoğlu exacerbated the situation . As the regular season came to a close , the Raptors went from being the fifth seed before the All @-@ Star break to fighting for the eighth and final playoff spot with the Chicago Bulls . After recording his 44th double double on March 22 , 2010 , Bosh became the Raptors ' all @-@ time leader in number of double doubles in a season . On April 5 , 2010 , he was named the Eastern Conference Player of the Week , winning the honor for the seventh time in his career ( tying Carter for the most in franchise history ) . However , Bosh was unable to play in a pivotal match against the Bulls on April 11 , 2010 . The blowout loss cost Toronto their tie @-@ breaker and ultimately the eighth seed , as the Bulls finished with 41 wins to Toronto 's 40 . 
 = = = Miami Heat ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Joining the Heat = = = = 
 After the 2009 – 10 season was over , there was much speculation over whether coveted free agents such as LeBron James , Dwyane Wade , and Bosh would sign with new teams for the 2010 – 11 season . Bosh was active on the social media front , posting his thoughts on Twitter and having a documentary crew record his meetings with the teams interested in signing him . On July 10 , 2010 , Bosh officially completed a sign @-@ and @-@ trade deal with the Miami Heat , teaming up with Wade and James . The Raptors received two first @-@ round draft picks in the sign @-@ and @-@ trade , using one to draft Jonas Valančiūnas and trading another to the Chicago Bulls for James Johnson ; the Bulls used that pick to draft Norris Cole . Bosh 's parting message to the Raptors on his website said , " [ K ] now that this was my toughest decision , mostly because Toronto has been so great to me . I 've loved every minute here and I just wanted to thank you from the bottom of my heart ... " Not only did Bosh leave Toronto as its all @-@ time leader in virtually all major statistical categories , he was one of only three players in the league who accrued 10 @,@ 000 points , 4 @,@ 500 rebounds , and 600 blocks in his seven seasons with the Raptors . 
 = = = = Debut season ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 Despite being widely tipped as contenders , the Heat got off to a tentative 9 – 8 start , and Bosh was perceived to be under @-@ performing . The Heat managed to go on to compile a 21 – 1 record , however , and were jostling with the Boston Celtics and Chicago Bulls for pole position in the Eastern Conference as mid @-@ season approached . Miami finished the regular season with 58 wins and faced Philadelphia in the first round of the playoffs . Miami won the series in five games , and also prevailed in five games in the semi @-@ finals against Boston . In the Conference Finals against Chicago , Bosh was particularly instrumental , averaging 23 @.@ 2 points in the 4 – 1 series win . He was slow off the blocks in the Finals against Dallas , shooting below .300 in the first two games , but scored the winning shot in Game 3 to give Miami a 2 – 1 lead . That was the last game Miami won , as Dallas won the next three to win its first ever championship . Bosh was seen sobbing as he walked to the locker room following the loss . 
 = = = = Consecutive championships ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On January 5 , 2012 , Bosh , who was playing and filling in for an injured James and Wade , led the Heat to a 116 – 109 triple overtime win against the Atlanta Hawks , highlighted by a three @-@ point shot he made to force the game into overtime with 0 @.@ 06 seconds left to play in the fourth quarter . Bosh finished the game with 33 points , 14 rebounds , 5 assists , 2 steals , and 2 blocked shots . By season 's end , the Heat had embraced a small ball strategy that featured Bosh at the center position . In the playoffs , Bosh started at center and averaged 14 @.@ 0 points and 7 @.@ 8 rebounds a game . In game 1 of the East Semifinal against the Indiana Pacers , he suffered a lower abdominal strain that forced him to miss the rest of the series and the first four games of the Eastern Conference Finals against Boston . Boston pushed Miami to 7 games , and in the final game Bosh scored 19 points , including 3 of 4 shooting from three point range , to help the Heat advance to their second straight NBA Finals , this time against the Oklahoma City Thunder . The Thunder won the first game of the series before Miami rolled to a 4 @-@ 1 victory , giving Bosh and James their first NBA title . Bosh scored 24 points in the deciding game 5 and averaged 14 @.@ 6 points and 9 @.@ 4 rebounds in the Finals . 
 Bosh remained the Heat 's starting center during the 2012 – 13 season . On February 15 , 2013 , Bosh was picked as an All @-@ Star starter over the injured Rajon Rondo by coach Erik Spoelstra . The Heat achieved the league 's best record and swept through the first round of the playoffs against the Milwaukee Bucks before defeating the Chicago Bulls in 5 games , with Bosh scoring 20 points to go with 19 rebounds in a crucial game 3 win in Chicago . Bosh averaged 12 @.@ 1 points per game throughout the playoffs as the Heat advanced to the NBA Finals to face the San Antonio Spurs following a grueling seven game series against Indiana . 
 The Heat and Spurs split the first two games before the Spurs blew out Miami in game 3 to take a 2 @-@ 1 series lead . In game 4 , Bosh scored 20 points and grabbed 13 rebounds to complement Wade 's 32 points and James ' 33 points to bolster the Heat 's win , tying the series . San Antonio would bounce back in game 5 to force the Heat to win the final two games at home . In the final seconds of game 6 , LeBron James missed a three pointer , and Bosh grabbed the offensive rebound and found a wide open Ray Allen in the corner . Allen hit the shot to tie the game , and in overtime the Heat had a three @-@ point lead with seconds left . San Antonio inbounded the ball to Danny Green , who attempted a corner three , but Green 's shot was blocked by Bosh to secure the Heat 's victory . Bosh was held scoreless in Game 7 by Tim Duncan but the Miami Heat still won game 7 and their 2nd consecutive , 3rd overall , NBA Championship . 
 = = = = Coming up short ( 2013 – 2014 ) = = = = 
 In the 2013 – 14 season , Bosh played and started in 79 games , averaging 16 @.@ 2 points and 6 @.@ 6 rebounds per game . He also hit a career @-@ high 74 three point shots on 33 percent shooting from beyond the arc . In the playoffs Bosh scored 20 points in game 2 of Miami 's first round series against the Charlotte Bobcats and posted 15 points with 11 rebounds against the Brooklyn Nets in the second game of the semifinal series . In game 4 against Brooklyn , Bosh hit a late corner three @-@ pointer to help Miami take a 3 – 1 lead over the Nets , and hit four three @-@ pointers in game 5 as the Heat advanced to play the Pacers for the second year in a row in the Eastern Conference Finals . Against the Pacers , Bosh struggled offensively through the first three games , scoring 9 points in each contest before scoring 25 points on 3 @-@ for @-@ 5 shooting from beyond the three point arc in a game 4 victory . Bosh would follow that up with 20 points and 10 rebounds in game 5 as the Pacers won and forced a sixth game in Miami . In game 6 , Bosh scored 25 points as the Heat advanced to their fourth straight NBA Finals . The Heat would again face the San Antonio Spurs in the 2014 NBA Finals , but Miami lost the series in five games . 
 = = = = Post Big 3 era ( 2014 – present ) = = = = 
 On July 30 , 2014 , Bosh re @-@ signed with the Heat after LeBron James announced he was leaving Miami to sign with the Cleveland Cavaliers . After averaging 21 @.@ 6 points , 8 @.@ 2 rebounds , 2 @.@ 1 assists and 1 @.@ 1 steals over the first 23 games of the 2014 – 15 season , Bosh was ruled out indefinitely on December 15 with a strained calf . He went on to miss eight games before returning on December 29 against the Orlando Magic . In just under 33 minutes of action , he recorded 20 points and 8 rebounds in the 101 @-@ 102 loss . 
 After playing in the 2015 All @-@ Star Game , Bosh was admitted to a Miami hospital for lung tests during the All @-@ Star break . On February 21 , 2015 , he was ruled out for the remainder of the season due to a blood clot on one of his lungs . 
 On October 28 , 2015 , Bosh made his return to the court in the Heat 's season opener against the Charlotte Hornets , recording 21 points and 10 rebounds in a 104 – 94 win . On November 10 , he scored a then season @-@ high 30 points in a 101 – 88 win over the Los Angeles Lakers . On December 28 , he recorded 24 points and 12 rebounds against the Brooklyn Nets , and hit a career @-@ best 5 @-@ of @-@ 5 from three @-@ point range . On January 4 , he recorded a season @-@ high 31 points and 11 rebounds in a 103 – 100 overtime win over the Indiana Pacers . Though he was voted to play in the 2016 NBA All @-@ Star Game , and selected to compete in the Three @-@ Point Contest , due to a calf injury , Bosh was forced to withdraw from both . A blood clot in his leg again forced Bosh to miss time following the All @-@ Star break . He faced increasing pressure from physicians and the Heat organization to sit out the rest of the season because of the potential dangers of the recurring medical condition . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = National team career = = 
 Bosh 's national team career began in 2002 when he was selected as a member of the 2002 USA Basketball Junior World Championship Qualifying Team that finished with a 4 – 1 record and the bronze medal . 
 After his NBA career began , Bosh was named in March 2006 to the 2006 – 2008 United States men 's national basketball team program , and helped lead the team to a 5 – 0 record during its pre @-@ World Championship tour . In August 2006 , Bosh was named as a member of the 2006 USA World Championship Team . Together with fellow 2003 draftees Dwyane Wade , LeBron James , Carmelo Anthony , and Kirk Hinrich , this team competed in the 2006 FIBA World Championship . The team won the bronze medal , defeating former 2004 Olympic champion Argentina . Bosh was ranked sixth in field goal percentage . 
 Following the 2006 – 07 season , Bosh was named to the team that would compete in the 2007 FIBA Americas Championship . However , he sustained a foot injury and withdrew from the squad . On June 23 , 2008 , he was named to the team that would compete in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing . During the tournament itself , Bosh operated as the main backup to center Dwight Howard as Team USA went unbeaten in all eight games en route to the gold medal , defeating Spain in the final . He averaged 9 @.@ 1 points per game , and led the team in rebounds with 6 @.@ 1 a game . 
 On June 29 , 2012 , Bosh called men 's national team coach Mike Krzyzewski and chairman Jerry Colangelo to tell them that he would not participate in the 2012 Olympics in London to recover from a lower abdominal strain that kept him out of some playoff games . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Bosh has traditionally played the power forward position , including during his first season with the Miami Heat , however starting in the 2011 @-@ 2012 season he began to start at center and has played the position during the team 's consecutive championships and most recent run to the Finals in 2014 . Listed at 6 ft 11 in ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) and 235 pounds ( 107 kg ) , Bosh possesses excellent speed , athleticism , and ball handling for a player of his size . He is particularly noted for his ability to drive to the basket and finish strong or get to the free throw line — where he is also proficient — but he is also known for his well @-@ developed jump shot . Indiana Pacers coach Jim O 'Brien once commented on the match @-@ up problems Bosh posed for opposing defenders : " We 've tried over the years to put big guys on him . It doesn 't work . We 've tried to put small guys on him . It doesn 't seem to work either . I don 't know if we have somebody to play Bosh , to tell you the truth . " When he was the centerpiece of the Raptors ' offense , Bosh was often double teamed , and he was noted to unselfishly pass the ball to team mates who were in better shooting positions . He improved his shooting range when he worked on his three point shooting during the summer of 2006 and showed improvement in the 2006 – 07 season . On November 8 , 2006 , against the Philadelphia 76ers , he hit a game @-@ winning three @-@ point shot with 6 @.@ 1 seconds left . It was reminiscent of the shot that marked his " arrival " to the NBA in his first season , when he hit a game @-@ tying three @-@ pointer against Houston to send the game to overtime . When the 2006 – 07 season concluded , Bosh had shot .343 from the three point arc for the season ; he improved to .400 the following season . Despite his ability to hit three @-@ pointers , it was during his tenure with the Miami Heat that he began to be relied upon as one of the team 's outside shooters , taking multiple three pointers throughout the 2012 championship run , the 2012 @-@ 2013 season and the 2013 title run . During the 2013 @-@ 2014 Bosh shot and made more three pointers than at any point during his career , and continued to make crucial shots during the playoffs . Bosh has stepped up in games whenever Lebron James or Dwyane Wade are out with injury , even gaining a reputation for hitting clutch three pointers during the regular season . Such examples include the January 5th 2012 game tying three pointer against the Hawks in Atlanta with both James and Wade out , and a game winning three pointer on March 31 , 2013 against the Spurs , also without James and Wade . A similar scenario occurred on December 28 , 2013 , as Bosh scored 37 points including a game winning three pointer with 0 @.@ 5 seconds left against the Portland Trail Blazers with James sidelined . 
 In terms of leadership , Bosh has always led by example . When he was the leader of the Raptors , he was not known for being vocal on the court , preferring to maintain his quiet and humble demeanor but expecting his team mates to match his work ethic . However , Bosh was also known to deliver stern rebukes to team mates who make bad calls on the court . Throughout his career , comparisons have been made between him and Kevin Garnett due to their similar style of play and physique . Whereas the former does not possess the latter 's defensive abilities , Bosh was observed to have adopted a greater defensive dimension to his game after his stint with Team USA at the 2008 Olympics where they won the gold medal . 
 = = Honors and achievements = = 
 NBA Eastern Conference Player of the Month : January 2007 
 9 × NBA Eastern Conference Player of the Week : January 3 , 2005 ; January 30 , 2006 ; March 26 , 2007 ; January 7 , 2008 ; October 28 , 2008 ; February 1 , 2010 ; April 5 , 2010 ; December 23 , 2013 ; October 28 , 2014 
 NBA Atlantic Division Champion : 2007 
 4 × NBA Southeast Division Champion : 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 
 2 × NBA Champion : 2012 , 2013 
 11 × NBA All @-@ Star : 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 All @-@ NBA Second Team : 2007 
 NBA All @-@ Rookie Team : 2004 
 2 × NBA Rookie All @-@ Star Game : 2004 , 2005 
 Bronze medal winner with Team USA at the 2006 FIBA World Championship 
 Gold medal winner with Team USA at the 2008 Summer Olympics 
 = = = Other achievements = = = 
 Third @-@ youngest player in NBA history to record 1 @,@ 000 rebounds 
 Fourth @-@ youngest player in NBA history to record 20 points and 20 rebounds in a game 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in minutes played 
 Toronto 's first player to achieve 10 @,@ 000 points 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in points scored 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in rebounds 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in defensive rebounds 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in offensive rebounds 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in rebounds per game 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in rebounds per game in a season 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in blocks 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in free throws made 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in free throws made in a season 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in free throws attempted 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in free throws attempted in a season 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in double @-@ doubles 
 Toronto 's all @-@ time leader in double @-@ doubles in a season 
 NBA Sportsmanship Award ( divisional winner ) : 2007 – 08 
 = = Off the court = = 
 Besides his on @-@ the @-@ court exploits , Bosh was a National Honor Society member and graduated with honors from Lincoln . He is also a member of the National Society of Black Engineers and the Dallas Association of Minority Engineers . Following his success in the NBA , Bosh soon had his own YouTube channel , and has since made various TV appearances . In December 2009 , First Ink , a DVD featuring comedic digital shorts and a documentary about Bosh was released . The DVD was filmed during the summer of 2009 . A fan of the X @-@ Men cartoon as a child , Bosh voiced the Marvel character Heimdall in an episode of Hulk and the Agents of <unk> in 2014 . He has also made appearances of episodes of Entourage and Parks and Recreation . 
 In the field of philanthropy , Bosh established the Chris Bosh Foundation in 2004 . Remembering the challenges he faced as a youth , Bosh founded the organization to help younger people in academics and athletics . The Foundation , with programs in Toronto and Dallas , has worked closely with organizations such as the Toronto Special Olympics to raise important funding for community projects . Bosh 's mother , Freida , has served as CEO of the Foundation . As an avid reader , Bosh also regularly speaks to groups of children about the benefits of reading , and has received the NBA Community Assist Award for his active contributions for the Raptors community development program in Toronto and Dallas during the course of the NBA campaign . In November 2008 , Bosh pledged to donate $ 75 @,@ 000 to the Boys and Girls Clubs of Canada . He is also an advocate for increased computer literacy in schools , supporting the non @-@ profit <unk> 
 In July 2011 , Bosh married Adrienne Williams . The couple have four children , three sons and one daughter . 
 = = = Paternity lawsuit = = = 
 On March 24 , 2009 , it was reported that Bosh 's former girlfriend , Allison Mathis , was seeking child support and sole custody of their daughter , Trinity ( born November 2 , 2008 ) . Mathis alleged that when she was seven months pregnant , Bosh stopped supporting her financially and tried to remove her from their home . Three days later , it was reported that the dispute was only over the amount Bosh paid . Mathis ' lawyer also told the press , " My client very much wanted this dispute to remain private . Certainly this thing did not get started by anything on our side ... She is very distressed that somehow this thing got into the newspapers . She wants Trinity to have a good relationship with her dad , Chris Bosh , and adverse publicity makes that more difficult . " 
 = Casting Crowns ( album ) = 
 Casting Crowns is the first studio album by the American Christian rock band Casting Crowns . Produced by Mark A. Miller and Steven Curtis Chapman , the album was released on October 30 , 2003 , by Beach Street Records . It incorporates a pop rock and rock sound , with the main instruments used in the album being guitar , keyboard and violin . Casting Crowns received positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised the album 's lyrics and production quality . It was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards , while its singles were nominated for and received various awards . 
 Preceded by a lead single , " If We Are the Body " , which peaked at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and Christian CHR charts in the US , Casting Crowns debuted at number 198 on the Billboard 200 . The album eventually peaked at number 59 on that chart , also peaking at number 2 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart and at number 1 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums chart . Two other singles , " Who Am I " and " Voice of Truth " , also went to number 1 . The album ranked as one of the best @-@ selling Christian albums of 2004 and 2005 in the United States and was the 11th best @-@ selling Christian album of the 2000s in the United States . Casting Crowns ' has sold more than 1 @.@ 9 million copies since its release and has been certified 2 × Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , one of 8 Christian albums to reach that milestone . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Casting Crowns was formed in 1999 by Mark Hall ( lead vocals ) , Hector Cervantes ( guitar , vocals ) , Juan DeVevo ( guitar , vocals ) , and Melodee DeVevo ( violin , vocals ) as a student worship band . The band is originally from Daytona Beach , Florida but relocated to Eagle 's Landing First Baptist Church in McDonough , Georgia in 2001 , where they recruited Megan Garrett ( piano / vocals ) , Andy Williams ( drums ) , and Chris Huffman ( bass guitar ) as members . One of their independent records was discovered by Mark A. Miller , the lead vocalist for country band Sawyer Brown . Although Casting Crowns had not released their independent records with intentions of receiving a record deal , Miller offered the band the opportunity to become the first artists signed to his record label . The band agreed to join and signed with the as @-@ yet @-@ unnamed record label , an imprint of Provident Label Group , and began work on their debut album . As a group , Casting Crowns was unusual in several ways , such as having seven members , never having toured before , and their producer ( Miller ) having no history in the Christian music industry . However , Christian singer and songwriter Steven Curtis Chapman was brought in to co @-@ produce the album with Miller , giving the project a greater amount of support in the Christian music industry . Terry Hemmings , Provident Label Group CEO / President and a personal friend of Miller , openly predicted success for Casting Crowns and made them one of his top priorities at the label . While most artists in a similar situation would have received nine months for artist development , Hemmings gave the band four months and sped up the album 's release . Casting Crowns was recorded at Glow in the Dark Studio in Decatur , Georgia and Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee . The album was engineered by Matt Goldman and Sam Hewitt . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 To promote the album prior to its release , lead single " If We Are the Body " was released to Christian AC and Christian CHR radio on July 26 , 2003 . The single was a significant hit at Christian radio stations , peaking at number 1 on the Radio & Records Christian AC and Christian CHR charts and at number 3 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . Casting Crowns was released on October 7 , 2003 and debuted at number 198 on the Billboard 200 selling 6 @,@ 000 units ; it also debuted at number 11 on the Christian Albums chart and number 9 on the Heatseekers Albums chart . By March 2004 , the album had sold 168 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , in large part due to the success of " If We Are the Body " . For the chart week of March 6 , 2004 , Casting Crowns reached its peak position of number 2 on the Christian Albums chart . The following week , the album reached the number 1 position on the Heatseekers Albums chart . " Who Am I " , the album 's 2nd single , was released on February 22 , 2004 to Christian AC , Christian CHR , and Soft AC / Inspirational radio . The song topped the Radio & Records Christian AC , Christian CHR , and Soft AC / Inspirational charts as well as the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . In May 2004 the album reached its peak position of number 59 on the Billboard 200 . " American Dream " was serviced to Christian Rock radio on June 24 , 2004 while " Voice of Truth " , the album 's 3rd single , was released to Christian AC , Christian CHR , and Soft AC / Inspirational radio on September 18 , 2004 . " Voice of Truth " peaked atop the Radio & Records Christian AC and Soft AC / Inspirational charts as well as the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 By the end of 2004 , Casting Crowns had sold over 710 @,@ 000 copies . It ranked as the 2nd best @-@ selling Christian album and the 126th best @-@ selling album of 2004 in the United States . Casting Crowns ranked as the 5th best @-@ selling Christian album and the 179th best @-@ selling album of 2005 in the United States . By September 10 , 2005 the album had sold over 1 million copies . Casting Crowns received re @-@ releases in 2006 and 2007 , both of them featuring bonus DVD content . After first charting on the Billboard Catalog Albums chart in 2005 the album reached a peak position of number 7 on the chart for the chart week of September 5 , 2009 . The album ranked as the 11th best @-@ selling Christian album of the 2000s decade and had sold around 1 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States by December 5 , 2009 . The album received a 2 × Platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2012 , signifying shipments of over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units . It is one of only 8 Christian albums to reach that certification . As of March 2014 , the album has sold more than 1 @.@ 9 million copies . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Casting Crowns is noted as having a Christian rock , pop rock and rock sound . Some critics noted that the album sounds somewhat similar to the work of Chapman . The album 's main instrumentation consists of guitar , keyboard , and violin . The album 's lyrics , which have been described by music critics as " bold " and " straightforward " , take an approach which was described by Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today as " no @-@ nonsense ... tell [ ing ] it like it is , simply and with conviction " . 
 Album opener " What If His People <unk> " , described as a pop song challenges the listener ; the couplet " What if the church , for heaven 's sake / Finally stepped up to the plate / Took a stand upon God 's promise / And stormed hell 's rusty gates ? " has been cited as an example . " If We Are the Body " , an acoustic rock song , features the mandolin , violin , and accordion in its arrangement . Inspired by a verse in the second chapter of James where the writer " admonishes the church for giving preferential treatment to any one particular group over another " , the song questions why the church does not minister impartially to everyone . The song 's chorus , which references the Christian concept of the body of Christ , asks " If we are the body / why aren 't his arms reaching ? / Why aren 't his hands healing ? / Why aren 't his words teaching ? / And if we are the body / Why aren 't his feet going ? / Why is his love not showing them there is a way ? " 
 " Voice of Truth " was written around Hall 's struggles with dyslexia and learning issues as a child . Co @-@ written by Chapman , the track is a pop rock ballad , encouraging listeners to tackle their personal fears and replace them with faith . The song " Who Am I " has been described as a pop rock , adult contemporary and pop country song . The ballad incorporates orchestral sounds and lyrically explains emptiness without Christ . 
 " American Dream " , considered a rock anthem , features an arena rock sound . Cited as an example of Hall 's " in @-@ your @-@ face " approach to songwriting by Breimeier , the track challenges the fixation of society with wealth , even at the cost of personal relationships . It encourages listeners to not neglect their families in pursuit of their careers and challenges fathers to spend a greater amount of their time with their families . 
 " Here I Go Again " relates the story of a Christian , who instead of " sharing the gospel " with a friend , engages in " mindless conversation " . The song encourages listeners to overcome their fear of spreading the gospel in the chorus . The album 's final 4 songs are all worship songs , with folk instruments incorporated in several of them . " Praise You with the Dance " , sung by the female members of the band , has been described as a country rock song . The song also incorporates a violin solo of " Lord of the Dance " . " Glory " , described as a worship song , has been noted as displaying the " distinctive production touch " of Chapman . The album closes with a cover of Darrell Evans ' song " Your Love Is Extravagant " ; it features harmony vocals from the band . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Casting Crowns received positive reviews from music critics . Particular praise was given to the album 's lyrical content and production quality . Ashleigh Kittle of Allmusic gave it 3 out of 5 stars , comparing the album 's overall sound to that of Chapman , Caedmon 's Call , and Phillips , Craig & Dean . Andy Argyrakis of CCM Magazine gave the album a B grade , praising the album as a " promising freshman effort " but critiquing its " tendency to occasionally reflect its primary muse a bit too liberally " . Belinda S. Ayers of Christian Broadcasting Network praised the album 's lyrics and sound . Steve Best of Cross Rhythms gave Casting Crowns ten out of ten squares , saying , " The passion of lead vocalist and youth pastor Hall jumps out of each set of lyrics , while Chapman 's distinctive production touch ... makes this a must listen album " . While praising the album 's overall production and lyrical content , Breimeier said the album " too readily recalls the work of its producers , leaving us to wonder how much of it is really Casting Crowns " – he gave the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . The album received positive reviews from Brian Mansfield of USA Today , Robin Parrish of <unk> , and Michael Herman of Christianity Today . 
 Casting Crowns was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards . " If We Are the Body " was nominated for the Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year at the same event . At the 36th GMA Dove Awards , " American Dream " was nominated for Rock / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year and " Who Am I " was nominated for Worship Song of the Year . " Who Am I " won the awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year while " Voice of Truth " won the award for Inspirational Recorded Song of the Year . " Voice of Truth " was nominated for Song of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics are written by Hall except where noted , and all music is composed by Casting Crowns . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits taken from Allmusic 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Album charts = = = 
 = = = Single charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Iron Man 2 = 
 Iron Man 2 is a 2010 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Iron Man , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Paramount Pictures.1 It is the sequel to 2008 's Iron Man , and is the third film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . Directed by Jon Favreau and written by Justin Theroux , the film stars Robert Downey Jr . , Gwyneth Paltrow , Don Cheadle , Scarlett Johansson , Sam Rockwell , Mickey Rourke , and Samuel L. Jackson . Six months after the events of Iron Man , Tony Stark is resisting calls by the United States government to hand over the Iron Man technology while also combating his declining health from the arc reactor in his chest . Meanwhile , rogue Russian scientist Ivan Vanko has developed the same technology and built weapons of his own in order to pursue a vendetta against the Stark family , in the process joining forces with Stark 's business rival , Justin Hammer . 
 Following the successful release of Iron Man in May 2008 , Marvel Studios announced and immediately set to work on producing a sequel . In July of that same year Theroux was hired to write the script , and Favreau was signed to return and direct . Downey , Paltrow and Jackson were set to reprise their roles from Iron Man , while Cheadle was brought in to replace Terrence Howard in the role of James Rhodes . In the early months of 2009 , Rourke , Rockwell and Johansson filled out the supporting cast , and the film went into production that summer . Like its predecessor the film was shot mostly in California , except for a key sequence in Monaco . 
 Iron Man 2 premiered at the El Capitan Theatre on April 26 , 2010 , and was released internationally between April 28 and May 7 before releasing in the U.S. on May 7 , 2010 . The film received generally positive reviews and was commercially successful , grossing over $ 623 @.@ 9 million at the worldwide box office . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray were released on September 28 , 2010 . The third installment of the Iron Man series , Iron Man 3 , was released on May 3 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Russia , the media covers Tony Stark 's disclosure of his identity as Iron Man . Ivan Vanko , whose father Anton Vanko has just died , sees this and begins building a miniature arc reactor similar to Stark 's . Six months later , Stark is a superstar and uses his Iron Man suit for peaceful means , resisting government pressure to sell his designs . He <unk> the Stark Expo to continue his father Howard 's legacy . 
 The palladium core in the arc reactor that keeps Stark alive and powers the armor is slowly poisoning him , and he cannot find a substitute . Growing increasingly reckless and despondent about his impending death , and choosing not to tell anyone about his condition , Stark appoints his personal assistant Pepper Potts CEO of Stark Industries , and hires Stark employee Natalie Rushman to replace her as his personal assistant . Stark competes in the Monaco Historic Grand Prix , where he is attacked in the middle of the race by Vanko who wields electrified whips . Stark dons his Mark V armor and defeats Vanko , but the suit is severely damaged . Vanko explains his intention was to prove to the world that Iron Man is not invincible . Impressed by Vanko 's performance , Stark 's rival , Justin Hammer , fakes Vanko 's death while breaking him out of prison and asks him to build a line of armored suits to upstage Stark . During what he believes is his final birthday party , Stark gets drunk while wearing the Mark IV suit . Disgusted , U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes dons Stark 's Mark II prototype armor and tries to restrain him . The fight ends in a stalemate , so Rhodes confiscates the Mark II for the U.S. Air Force . 
 Nick Fury , director of S.H.I.E.L.D. , approaches Stark , revealing " Rushman " to be Agent Natasha Romanoff and that Howard Stark was a S.H.I.E.L.D. founder whom Fury knew personally . Fury explains that Vanko 's father jointly invented the arc reactor with Stark , but when Anton tried to sell it for profit , Stark had him deported . The Soviets sent Anton to the gulag . Fury gives Stark some of his father 's old material ; a hidden message in the diorama of the 1974 Stark Expo proves to be a diagram of the structure of a new element . With the aid of his computer J.A.R.V.I.S. , Stark synthesizes it . When he learns Vanko is still alive , he places the new element in his arc reactor and ends his palladium dependency . 
 At the Expo , Hammer unveils Vanko 's armored drones , led by Rhodes in a heavily weaponized version of the Mark II armor . Stark arrives in the Mark VI armor to warn Rhodes , but Vanko remotely takes control of both the drones and Rhodes ' armor and attacks Iron Man . Hammer is arrested while Romanoff and Stark 's bodyguard Happy Hogan go after Vanko at Hammer 's factory . Vanko escapes , but Romanoff returns control of the Mark II armor to Rhodes . Stark and Rhodes together defeat Vanko and his drones . Vanko seemingly commits suicide by blowing up his suit . 
 At a debriefing , Fury informs Stark that because of his difficult personality , S.H.I.E.L.D. intends to use him only as a consultant . Stark and Rhodes receive medals for their heroism . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Phil Coulson reports the discovery of a large hammer at the bottom of a crater in a desert in New Mexico . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man : 
 A billionaire who escaped captivity in Afghanistan with a suit of armor he created , he now struggles to keep his technology out of the government 's hands . Downey and Favreau , who had been handed a script and worked from it on the first movie , conceived of the film 's story themselves . On Stark being a hero , Downey said " It 's kind of heroic , but really kind of on his own behalf . So I think there 's probably a bit of an imposter complex and no sooner has he said , ' I am Iron Man – ' that he 's now really wondering what that means . If you have all this cushion like he does and the public is on your side and you have immense wealth and power , I think he 's way too insulated to be okay . " Downey put on 20 pounds of muscle to reprise the role . Six @-@ year @-@ old Davin Ransom portrays Tony Stark as a child . 
 Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts : 
 Stark 's closest friend , budding love interest , and business partner ; Pepper is promoted to CEO of Stark Industries . On her character 's promotion , Paltrow opined " When we start Iron Man 2 Pepper and Tony are very much in the same vibe ... as the movie progresses , Pepper is given more responsibility and she 's promoted and it 's nice to see her sort of grow up in that way . I think it really suits her , the job fits her really well . " Paltrow expressed excitement about working with Johansson . 
 Don Cheadle as James " Rhodey " Rhodes : 
 An officer in the U.S. Air Force and Tony Stark 's close personal friend . Cheadle replaces Terrence Howard from the first film . Cheadle only had a few hours to accept the role and did not even know what storyline Rhodes would undergo . He commented that he is a comic book fan , but had not previously participated in comics @-@ themed films due to the scarcity of black superheroes . Cheadle said he thought Iron Man was a robot before the first film came out . On how he approached his character , Cheadle stated " I go , what 's the common denominator here ? And the common denominator was really his friendship with Tony , and that 's what we really tried to track in this one . How is their friendship impacted once Tony comes out and owns ' I am Iron Man ' ? " . Cheadle said his suit was 50 pounds of metal , and that he couldn 't touch his face while wearing it . 
 Scarlett Johansson as Natalie Rushman / Natasha Romanoff : 
 An undercover spy for S.H.I.E.L.D. posing as Stark 's new assistant . Johansson dyed her hair red before she landed the part , hoping that it would help convince Favreau that she was right for the role . On why she chose the role , Johansson said , " the Black Widow character resonated with me ... [ She ] is a superhero , but she ’ s also human . She ’ s small , but she ’ s strong ... She is dark and has faced death so many times that she has a deep perspective on the value of life ... It ’ s hard not to admire her . " She stated that she had " a bit of a freak @-@ out moment " when she first saw the cat @-@ suit . When asked about fighting in the costume , Johansson responded " a big part of me is like ' can I move in this ? Can I run in it ? Can I like throw myself over things with this ? ' And I think just the prep , you just have to put in the hours . That 's what I realized is that just putting in the hours and doing the training and repetition and basically just befriending the stunt team and spending all day , every day , just over and over and over and over until you sell it . " 
 Sam Rockwell as Justin Hammer : 
 A rival weapons manufacturer . Sam Rockwell was considered for the role of Tony Stark in the first film , and he accepted the role of Hammer without reading the script . He had never heard of the character before he was contacted about the part , and was unaware Hammer is an old Englishman in the comics . Rockwell said , " I worked with Jon Favreau on this film called Made . And Justin Theroux , who wrote the script , is an old friend of mine , they sort of cooked up this idea and pitched it to Kevin Feige . What they did , they were maybe going to do one villain like they did with Jeff Bridges , but then they decided to split the villains . And really Mickey [ Rourke ] is the main [ villain ] , but I come to his aid . " Rockwell described his character as " plucky comic relief , but he 's got a little bit of an edge " . 
 Mickey Rourke as Ivan Vanko : 
 A Russian physicist and ex @-@ convict who builds his own arc reactor @-@ based weapon to exact vengeance on the Stark family . The character is an amalgam of Whiplash and Crimson Dynamo . Rourke visited <unk> prison to research the role , and he suggested half of the character 's dialogue be in Russian . He also suggested the addition of tattoos , gold teeth and a fondness for a pet cockatoo , paying for the teeth and bird with his own money . Rourke explained that he did not want to play a " one @-@ dimensional bad guy " , and wanted to challenge the audience to see something redeemable in him . Not knowing anything about computers , Rourke described pretending to be tech @-@ savvy as the hardest part of the role . 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury : 
 Director of S.H.I.E.L.D. ; Jackson signed a nine @-@ film contract to play the character . On the subject of his character not seeing any action in the film , Jackson said " We still haven 't moved Nick Fury into the bad @-@ ass zone . He 's still just kind of a talker . " 
 The director , Jon Favreau , reprises his role as Happy Hogan , Tony Stark 's bodyguard and chauffeur , while Clark Gregg and Leslie Bibb reprise their roles as S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Phil Coulson and reporter Christine Everhart , respectively . John Slattery appears as Tony 's father Howard Stark and Garry Shandling appears as United States Senator Stern , who wants Stark to give Iron Man 's armor to the government . Favreau stated that Shandling 's character was named after radio personality Howard Stern . Paul Bettany again voices Stark 's computer , J.A.R.V.I.S. Olivia Munn has a small role as Chess Roberts , a reporter covering the Stark expo , and Stan Lee appears as himself ( but is mistaken for Larry King ) . 
 Additionally , news anchor Christiane <unk> and political commentator Bill O 'Reilly play themselves in newscasts . Adam Goldstein appears as himself and the film is dedicated to his memory . Further cameos include Tesla Motors CEO Elon Musk and Oracle Corporation CEO Larry Ellison . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Jon Favreau said it was originally his intent to create a film trilogy for Iron Man , with Obadiah Stane ( Jeff Bridges ) becoming Iron Monger during the sequels . After a meeting between Favreau and various comic book writers , including Mark Millar , Stane became the main villain in Iron Man . Millar argued the Mandarin , whom Favreau originally intended to fill that role , was too fantastical . Favreau concurred , deciding , " I look at Mandarin more like how in Star Wars you had the Emperor , but Darth Vader is the guy you want to see fight . Then you work your way to the time when lightning bolts are shooting out of the fingers and all that stuff could happen . But you can 't have what happened in Return of the Jedi happen in A New Hope . You just can 't do it . " Favreau also discussed in interviews how the films ' version of Mandarin " allows us to incorporate the whole pantheon of villains " . He mentioned that S.H.I.E.L.D. will continue to have a major role . 
 During development , Favreau said the film would explore Stark 's alcoholism , but it would not be " the ' Demon in a Bottle ' version " . While promoting the first film , Downey stated that Stark would probably develop a drinking problem as he is unable to cope with his age , the effects of revealing he is Iron Man , and Pepper getting a boyfriend . Downey later clarified that the film was not a strict adaptation of the " Demon in a Bottle " storyline from the comic book series , but was instead about the " interim space " between the origin and the " Demon " story arc . Shane Black gave some advice on the script , and suggested to Favreau and Downey that they model Stark on J. Robert Oppenheimer , who became depressed with being " the destroyer of worlds " after working on the Manhattan Project . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Immediately following Iron Man 's release , Marvel Studios announced that they were developing a sequel , with an intended release date of April 30 , 2010 . In July 2008 , after several months of negotiating , Favreau officially signed on to direct . That same month Justin Theroux signed to write the script , which would be based on a story written by Favreau and Downey . Theroux co @-@ wrote Tropic Thunder , which Downey had starred in , and Downey recommended him to Marvel . Genndy Tartakovsky storyboarded the film , and Adi Granov returned to supervise the designs for Iron Man 's armor . 
 In October 2008 , Marvel Studios came to an agreement to film Iron Man 2 , as well as their next three films , at Raleigh Studios in Manhattan Beach , California . A few days later , Don Cheadle was hired to replace Terrence Howard . On being replaced , Howard stated , " There was no explanation , apparently the contracts that we write and sign aren 't worth the paper that they 're printed on sometimes . Promises aren 't kept , and good faith negotiations aren 't always held up . " Entertainment Weekly stated Favreau did not enjoy working with Howard , often re @-@ shooting and cutting his scenes ; Howard 's publicist said he had a good experience playing the part , while Marvel chose not to comment . As Favreau and Theroux chose to reduce the role , Marvel came to Howard to discuss lowering his salary – Howard was the first actor hired in Iron Man and was paid the largest salary . The publication stated they were unsure whether Howard 's representatives left the project first or if Marvel chose to stop negotiating . Theroux denied the part of the report which claimed the size of the role had fluctuated . In November 2013 , Howard stated that , going into the film , the studio offered him far less than was in his three @-@ picture contract , claiming they told him the second will be successful , " with or without you , " and , without mentioning him by name , said Downey " took the money that was supposed to go to me and pushed me out . " 
 In January 2009 , Rourke and Rockwell entered negotiations to play a pair of villains . A few days later , Rockwell confirmed he would take the role , and that his character would be Justin Hammer . Paul Bettany confirmed that he would be returning to voice J.A.R.V.I.S. Marvel entered into early talks with Emily Blunt to play the Black Widow , though she was unable to take the role due to a previous commitment to star in Gulliver 's Travels . Samuel L. Jackson confirmed that he had been in discussions to reprise the role of Nick Fury from the first film 's post @-@ credits scene , but that contract disputes were making a deal difficult . Jackson claimed that " There was a huge kind of negotiation that broke down . I don 't know . Maybe I won 't be Nick Fury . " 
 In February , Jackson and Marvel came to terms , and he was signed to play the character in up to nine films . Downey and Rourke discussed his part during a roundtable discussion with David Ansen at the 2009 Golden Globes , and Rourke met with Favreau and Theroux to discuss the role . Rourke almost dropped out due to Marvel 's initial salary offer of $ 250 @,@ 000 , but the studio raised the offer , and in March Rourke signed on . Later that same day Scarlett Johansson signed on to play the Black Widow . Her deal included options for multiple films , including potentially The Avengers . In April , Garry Shandling , Clark Gregg , and Kate Mara joined the cast . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began April 6 , 2009 , at the Pasadena Masonic Temple . The fake working title was Rasputin . The bulk of the production took place at Raleigh Studios , though other locations were also used . Scenes were filmed at Edwards Air Force Base from May 11 through May 13 . The location had also been used for Iron Man , and Favreau stated that he felt the " real military assets make the movie more authentic and the topography and the beauty of the desert and flightline open the movie up " . The Historic Grand Prix of Monaco action sequence was shot in the parking lot of Downey Studios , with sets constructed in May and filming lasting through June . Permission to film in Monaco prior to the 2009 Monaco Grand Prix had initially been awarded , but was later retracted by Bernie Ecclestone . The filmmakers shipped one Rolls @-@ Royce Phantom there , and filmed a track sequence in which race cars were later digitally added . Tanner Foust took on the role of driving Stark 's racing car . Also in June , it was reported that John Slattery had joined the film 's cast as Howard Stark . Olivia Munn was also cast , in an unspecified role . 
 A massive green screen was constructed at the Sepulveda Dam to film a portion of the Stark Expo exterior , with the rest either shot at an area high school or added digitally . To construct the green screen , hundreds of shipping containers were stacked , covered in plywood and plaster , and then painted green . For the conclusion of that climactic scene , which the crew dubbed the " Japanese Garden " scene , a set was built inside Sony Studios in Los Angeles . 
 Filming lasted 71 days , and the film 's production officially wrapped on July 18 , 2009 . A post @-@ credits scene depicting the discovery of a large hammer was filmed on the set of Thor , and some of it was reused in the film . Jon Favreau revealed that the scene was filmed with anamorphic lenses to match Thor . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Janek <unk> was the film 's visual effects supervisor , and Industrial Light & Magic again did the bulk of the effects , as it did on the first film . ILM 's visual effects supervisor on the film , Ben Snow , said their work on the film was " harder " than their work on the first , stating that Favreau asked more of them this time around . Snow described the process of digitally creating the suits : 
 On the first Iron Man , we tried to use the Legacy [ Studios , Stan Winston 's effects company ] and Stan Winston suits as much as we could . For the second one , Jon [ Favreau ] was confident we could create the CG suits , and the action dictated using them . So , Legacy created what we called the " football suits " from the torso up with a chest plate and helmet . We 'd usually put in some arm pieces , but not the whole arm . In the house fight sequence , where Robert Downey Jr. staggers around tipsy , we used some of the practical suit and extended it digitally . Same thing in the Randy 's Donuts scene . But in the rest of the film , we used the CG suit entirely . And Double Negative did an all @-@ digital suit for the Monaco chase . 
 ILM created 527 shots for the film , using programs such as Maya . Perception worked on over 125 shots for the film . They crafted gadgets , such as Tony Stark 's transparent LG smartphone , and created the backdrops for the Stark Expo as well as the computer screen interfaces on the touch @-@ screen coffee table and the holographic lab environment . In total , 11 visual effect studios worked on the film . 
 In January 2010 , IMAX Corporation , Marvel , and Paramount announced that the film would receive a limited release on digital IMAX screens . It was not shot with IMAX cameras , so it was converted into the format using the IMAX DMR technology . The film underwent reshoots in February . Olivia Munn 's original role was cut , but she was given a new role during the reshoots . 
 The post @-@ credits scene where Coulson finds Mjölnir in the desert was directed by Kenneth Branagh , director of Thor . 
 = = Music = = 
 A soundtrack album featuring AC / DC was released by Columbia Records on April 19 , 2010 , in at least three different versions : basic , special and deluxe . The basic edition includes the CD ; the special edition contains a 15 @-@ track CD , a 32 @-@ page booklet and a DVD featuring interviews , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , and music videos ; and the deluxe includes a reproduction of one of Iron Man 's first comic book appearances . Only 2 songs on the soundtrack actually appear in the movie . Although not included on the soundtrack album the film includes songs by The Average White Band , The Clash , Queen , Daft Punk , 2Pac and Beastie Boys . 
 The film score was released commercially as Iron Man 2 : Original Motion Picture Score on July 20 , 2010 , featuring 25 songs . John Debney composed the score with Tom Morello . 
 = = Release = = 
 Iron Man 2 premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles , California on April 26 , 2010 , and was released in 54 countries between April 28 and May 7 before going into general release in the U.S. on May 7 , 2010 . The international release date of the film was moved forward to increase interest ahead of the 2010 FIFA World Cup association football tournament . Since the film was included in a predetermined legacy distribution deal that was signed before the Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel , Paramount Pictures distributed the film and collected 8 % of the box office , while the remaining portion went to Disney . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 At the 2009 San Diego Comic Con , a five @-@ minute trailer for the movie was shown . Actors portraying Stark Industries recruiters handed out business cards with an invitation to apply . A website for Stark Industries went online , with an attached graphic of a " napkin memo " from Stark to Potts announcing that Stark Industries no longer made weapons . Another section featured an online application . It was confirmed that the first theatrical trailer would premiere in front of Sherlock Holmes ( another Robert Downey , Jr. film ) . This trailer was released online on December 16 , 2009 . A new trailer was shown by Robert Downey , Jr. on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on March 7 after the Academy Awards . Promotional partners included Symantec , Dr Pepper , Burger King , 7 Eleven , Audi , LG Electronics and Hershey . 
 Author Alexander C. Irvine adapted the script into a novel , also titled Iron Man 2 , that was released in April 2010 . Prior to the film release , Marvel Comics released a four issue miniseries comic book titled Iron Man vs Whiplash , which introduced the film 's version of Whiplash into the Marvel Universe . A three issue prequel miniseries titled Iron Man 2 : Public Identity was released in April . 
 An Iron Man 2 video game was released by Sega on May 4 , 2010 in North America , written by The Invincible Iron Man scribe Matt Fraction . The Wii version was developed by High Voltage Software and all console versions were published by Sega , while Gameloft published the mobile game . The game 's Comic @-@ Con trailer showed that the Crimson Dynamo was set to appear as a villain . Cheadle and Jackson voice their respective characters in the games . The trailer revealed that <unk> , Roxxon Energy Corporation , and Ultimo ( depicted as a man named <unk> DeWitt in a large armor ) are enemies in the game as well as reveal that the wearer of the Crimson Dynamo armor is General Valentin <unk> . The game received generally unfavorable reviews , with a Metacritic score of 41 % for both the PS3 and Xbox 360 versions . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 On September 28 , 2010 , the film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc . The film was also collected in a 10 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on April 2 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Iron Man 2 earned $ 312 @.@ 4 million in North America , as well as $ 311 @.@ 5 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 623 @.@ 9 million . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The film grossed $ 128 @,@ 122 @,@ 480 in its opening weekend in the United States at 4 @,@ 380 theaters , the fifth @-@ highest opening weekend ever , at the time , behind The Dark Knight , Spider @-@ Man 3 , The Twilight Saga : New Moon and Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest . It also had the highest opening for a 2010 movie . The film yielded an average of $ 29 @,@ 252 per theater . It grossed $ 51 @,@ 239 @,@ 677 on opening day ( including $ 7 @.@ 5 million from midnight showings at about 3 @,@ 000 locations ) and became the eleventh highest opening day on record at the time . Iron Man 2 generated $ 9 @.@ 8 million from 181 IMAX venues . That was the highest opening weekend for a 2D IMAX film , surpassing Star Trek 's previous record of $ 8 @.@ 5 million . Iron Man 2 was the third @-@ highest grossing film of 2010 in the United States and Canada , behind Toy Story 3 and Alice in Wonderland . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Iron Man 2 launched in six European markets with number @-@ one openings on Wednesday , April 28 , 2010 , for a total $ 2 @.@ 2 million from 960 venues . It earned $ 100 @.@ 2 million its first five days from 6 @,@ 764 theaters in 53 foreign markets for a strong average of $ 14 @,@ 814 per site . IMAX Corporation reported grosses of $ 2 @.@ 25 million at 48 IMAX theaters overseas , for an average of $ 46 @,@ 875 . This surpassed the previous record @-@ holder for an IMAX 2D release , 2009 's Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen ( $ 2 @.@ 1 million ) . It was the seventh @-@ highest grossing film of 2010 internationally , behind Toy Story 3 , Alice in Wonderland , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 , Inception , Shrek Forever After , and The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 72 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 5 / 10 based on 276 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " It isn 't quite the breath of fresh air that Iron Man was , but this sequel comes close with solid performances and an action @-@ packed plot . " Metacritic gave the film 57 / 100 based on a normalized rating of 40 reviews . 
 Brian Lowry of Variety stated , " Iron Man 2 isn 't as much fun as its predecessor , but by the time the smoke clears , it 'll do " . Anthony Lane of The New Yorker said , " To find a comic @-@ book hero who doesn 't agonize over his <unk> , and would defend his constitutional right to get a kick out of them , is frankly a relief " . David Edelstein of New York Magazine wrote , " It doesn 't come close to the emotional heft of those two rare 2s that outclassed their ones : Superman II and Spider @-@ Man 2 . But Iron Man 2 hums along quite nicely " . Roger Ebert gave it 3 stars out of 4 , stating that " Iron Man 2 is a polished , high @-@ octane sequel , not as good as the original but building once again on a quirky performance by Robert Downey Jr " . Frank Lovece of Film Journal International , a one @-@ time Marvel Comics writer , said that , " In a refreshing and unexpected turn , the sequel to Iron Man doesn 't find a changed man . Inside the metal , imperfect humanity grows even more so , as thought @-@ provoking questions of identity meet techno @-@ fantasy made flesh . " 
 Conversely , Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter stated , " Everything fun and terrific about Iron Man , a mere two years ago , has vanished with its sequel . In its place , Iron Man 2 has substituted noise , confusion , multiple villains , irrelevant stunts and misguided story lines . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequel = = 
 After the release of Iron Man 2 , The Walt Disney Studios agreed to pay Paramount at least $ 115 million for the worldwide distribution rights to Iron Man 3 and The Avengers . Disney , Marvel and Paramount announced a May 3 , 2013 release date for Iron Man 3 . Shane Black directed Iron Man 3 , from a screenplay by Drew Pearce . Downey , Paltrow , Cheadle , and <unk> reprised their roles , while Ben Kingsley played Trevor Slattery , Guy Pearce played Aldrich Killian , and Rebecca Hall played Maya Hansen . 
 = Coming of Age ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Coming of Age " is the 19th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . It first aired in broadcast syndication on March 14 , 1988 . Sandy Fries originally wrote the episode , but Hannah Louise Shearer performed an uncredited re @-@ write . It is the only episode of the series directed by Mike Vejar , who went on to direct episodes of Deep Space Nine , Voyager and Enterprise . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet crew of the Federation starship Enterprise @-@ D. In the episode , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) takes a Starfleet Academy entrance exam while Adm. Gregory Quinn ( Ward Costello ) and Lt. Cdr . Dexter Remmick ( Robert Schenkkan ) investigate the senior staff of the Enterprise . 
 The episode marked the first appearance of a shuttlecraft in the series , and the first speaking role for a Vulcan . The events of the episode continued in " Conspiracy " and " Samaritan Snare " . 10 @.@ 1 million viewers watched the episode during the first broadcast , with critics giving it a mixed response . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) greets his friend Admiral Gregory Quinn ( Ward Costello ) and his assistant Lt. Commander Dexter Remmick ( Robert Schenkkan ) aboard the Enterprise . For classified reasons , Quinn has ordered Remmick to perform an investigation of the Enterprise and its crew and expects Picard to fully co @-@ operate . Remmick 's query causes tension in the crew , particularly when he questions the trustworthiness of the senior staff based on their personal logs and past actions . A young cadet , having failed the Starfleet Academy entrance examination , attempts to run away in a shuttlecraft but ends up drifting . Picard is able to direct the cadet to pilot the shuttle away from a planet by bouncing off the atmosphere . 
 The investigation is completed , and Remmick informs both Picard and Quinn that there is no sign of wrongdoing , and expresses his interest in joining its crew in the future . Quinn tells Picard that he feels there is an unknown force that has infiltrated Starfleet , and he was seeking to assure himself of his trust in Picard and the Enterprise crew . To help combat this threat , Quinn offers Picard a promotion to Admiral and a job overseeing Starfleet Academy which would place Picard near Quinn at all times . Picard mulls the offer for some time , but eventually declines . 
 Meanwhile , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) prepares to take the Academy entrance exam himself . He succeeds in passing several parts of the exam , and helps Mordock ( John Putch ) , a highly talented <unk> and fellow competitor , to solve a difficult test problem so that they may both advance . Wesley is worried about the psychological part of the exam , and he is directed to a room to wait for the test to start . 
 While waiting , he hears an explosion nearby , and leaves the room to investigate . He finds two men trapped by fallen components in a fire @-@ engulfed room . Wesley helps to release one man wounded under a heavy pipe , and tries to coax the other man to leave the burning room , but the man refuses . Wesley is forced to leave the scared man inside and drags the other man to safety . Outside the room , he soon realizes this was the psychological test . Eventually , the cadets are told of the results , and Mordock is granted admission into Starfleet Academy , while Wesley is encouraged to try again next year . Mordock thanks Wesley for his help and wishes him future success . After Wesley returns to the Enterprise , Picard confides in him that he also failed the examination the first time . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although Mike Vejar directed only this single episode of The Next Generation , he later directed several episodes of Deep Space Nine , Voyager and Enterprise . Hannah Louise Shearer conducted an uncredited script re @-@ write , and left the details of the conspiracy deliberately open as plans were already underway for a follow @-@ up story . " Coming of Age " featured several firsts for The Next Generation , including the first appearance of a shuttlecraft in the series and the first appearance of a Vulcan in a speaking role within the series . 
 Only a quarter of the shuttlecraft set was built for " Coming of Age " with the set expanded gradually according to the scene requirements in season two . Due to construction errors with the full @-@ scale model , it failed to match the miniature . A smaller shuttlepod with a new shuttle design was later used , first appearing in " <unk> " . Several previous episodes are referenced during Remmick 's investigation , including " Where No One Has Gone Before " , " The Battle " , " Angel One " and " Justice " . In a scene cut from the episode , the crew celebrate Wesley 's 16th birthday on the presumption that he wouldn 't be on the ship at the time due to joining the Academy . 
 Guest stars included Robert Schenkkan as Remmick , who had been a fan of The Original Series . He later won a Pulitzer Prize for his nine @-@ act play The Kentucky Cycle . Robert Ito had previously been a main cast member on Quincy , <unk> .. Guest stars Daniel Riordan and John Putch later appeared in the franchise in different roles . Riordan appeared as a Bajoran in the Deep Space Nine episode " Progress " . Putch returned as a different <unk> later in The Next Generation episode " A Matter of Honor " , and in the film Star Trek Generations . The events of the episode are followed up in " Conspiracy " which also features the return of Costello and Schenkkan as Quinn and Remmick . Wesley would re @-@ take his Starfleet Academy exam in " Samaritan Snare " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 The episode first aired on March 14 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 1 million on the first broadcast , which was an increase of over a million viewers from the previous episode " Home Soil " , which was watched by 9 million viewers some three weeks prior . The following week 's episode , " Heart of Glory " , was watched by 10 @.@ 7 million viewers . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Writing for Tor.com , Keith DeCandido questioned why the <unk> wasn 't guarded , comparing it to a similar situation in The Original Series episode , " The Doomsday Machine " . He also felt that the sequence where the shuttle is bounced off an atmosphere resembled the " Premiere " episode of Farscape . DeCandido said that the exam made no sense , and that there were no surprises as it was obvious that Wesley and Picard were not due to leave the series . Despite Remmick representing " the ultimate cliché of the jackass interrogator " , DeCandido liked the episode . He credited the strong performance by the cast and called Wheaton 's performance the best of the first season . DeCandido gave the episode a score of five out of ten . 
 In his review for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen thought the episode was like " getting a two @-@ parter with no ' To Be Continued ... ' in the end credits " and felt the episode was " clunky " . He felt that the Wesley storyline was clichéd , and that having two unconnected storylines would never have happened in The Original Series . Handlen gave the episode a grade of C. 
 James Hunt of Den of Geek said that it was a " very good episode " despite being " Wesley @-@ heavy " . He recommended that readers watch the episode and described the Remmick interviews and the shuttlecraft sequence as " fantastic " . Michelle Erica Green , whilst writing for TrekNation , described the episode as " <unk> " and Wesley as " intolerable " . She said that knowing about the " insane " alien parasite conspiracy in " Conspiracy " ahead of time made her look negatively on the episode . 
 " Coming of Age " was first released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on November 11 , 1992 . The episode was included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . The season one Blu @-@ ray set was released on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = New York State Route 99 = 
 New York State Route 99 ( NY 99 ) was a state highway in Franklin County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route was at an intersection with NY 30 in Duane . Its eastern terminus was at a junction with NY 3 near the Franklin community of Merrillsville . NY 99 was known as the Port Kent – Hopkinton Turnpike and maintained by Franklin County , which co @-@ designated the highway as County Route 26 ( CR 26 ) . The narrow , winding route passed through isolated and heavily wooded areas of Adirondack Park . 
 The routing of NY 99 was originally part of the Port Kent and Hopkinton Turnpike , a 19th @-@ century toll road that began in the town of Hopkinton and passed through central Franklin County on its way to the hamlet of Port Kent on the shores of Lake Champlain . The portion of the turnpike between Duane Center and Merrillsville was designated as NY 99 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It remained unchanged until September 26 , 1994 , when the NY 99 designation was removed from the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 99 began at an intersection with NY 30 west of the hamlet of Duane Center in the town of Duane . The route headed eastward as the Port Kent – Hopkinton Turnpike , passing through the small community of Duane Center before entering an isolated , wooded area of Franklin County and Adirondack Park . At the Franklin town line , NY 99 curved southeastward , roughly paralleling Hatch Brook as it climbed up the northeastern portion of <unk> Mountain . Past the mountain 's summit , the route continued onward , winding its way southward along Hatch Brook to a small lake known as Duck Pond . 
 Past Duck Pond , the route turned to the southeast , passing by a series of small ponds and crossing under an old railroad grade as it ran along the base of a series of peaks known as the Loon Lake Mountains . NY 99 continued to follow the range to the northwestern edge of Loon Lake , where it veered to the northeast and ran along the northern and eastern shores of the lake to the hamlet of Loon Lake at its southeastern tip . NY 99 passed generally northwest – southeast through the small lakeside community before reentering another sparsely developed area of the town of Franklin . The highway progressed southeastward , crossing over the northern branch of the Saranac River and passing through the largely undeveloped community of Merrillsville before ending at an intersection with NY 3 . 
 = = History = = 
 On April 18 , 1829 , the New York State Legislature passed an act that allowed construction to begin on the Port Kent and Hopkinton Turnpike , a toll road that was to begin in the town of Hopkinton and end at the hamlet of Port Kent on the western shore of Lake Champlain . Construction began later that year and was completed in 1832 . The 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) highway opened in 1833 . The turnpike operated for only five years before it was dissolved on March 30 , 1838 , at which time maintenance of the highway was transferred to the towns it ran within . The 19 @-@ mile ( 31 km ) segment of the turnpike between then @-@ NY 10 near the Duane hamlet of Duane Center and NY 3 near the Franklin hamlet of Merrillsville was designated as NY 99 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 Although NY 99 was signed as a state highway , maintenance on the route was performed by Franklin County , which designated the roadway as CR 26 . All of NY 99 was initially a gravel road ; however , most of the road was paved in the early 1970s through the use of state funds procured by New York State Senator Ronald Stafford of Plattsburgh . The western and eastern extents of the road were paved soon afterward ; however , the road was left unpaved in the vicinity of Loon Lake — a lake near the midpoint of the route — even though the necessary gravel base was applied to the entire highway . The unpaved section deteriorated as a result , and the NY 99 designation was removed from the roadway on September 26 , 1994 . 
 CR 26 has continued to deteriorate in the years since , with one 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) , limited maintenance segment seeing the most wear . This section , situated midway between NY 30 and NY 3 , has become both littered with potholes and extremely narrow due to the erosion of the highway 's shoulders . In mid @-@ 2009 , residents of Loon Lake petitioned the county to repair all of CR 26 and to continuously maintain the highway , citing the road 's regional importance as a through route for commuters traveling to and from the village of Malone . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Franklin County . 
 = Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker is a downloadable content pack developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts for the action role @-@ playing video game Mass Effect 2 . It was released on September 7 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 . The pack is included in the PlayStation 3 edition of Mass Effect 2 , which was released on January 18 , 2011 . Lair of the Shadow Broker introduces a new mission in which the player assumes the role of Commander Shepard , an elite human soldier who must help former squad member Liara T 'Soni to find an information dealer known as the Shadow Broker . 
 Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker was announced to be in development on July 22 , 2010 . BioWare stated that some decisions the player makes in the pack affect the story of Mass Effect 3 . The pack received very positive reviews from critics , with an aggregate score of 87 out of 100 for the Xbox 360 version at Metacritic . Reviewers generally praised the narrative between the main characters and considered it the greatest downloadable content pack of the game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mass Effect 2 is an action role @-@ playing game in which the player controls Commander Shepard . Shepard 's gender , appearance , history and combat @-@ training are determined by the player before the game begins . The game features a variety of missions that the player must complete to progress . Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker adds a new assignment that involves defeating enemies and interacting with NPCs . During the mission , Shepard is accompanied by two AI squad members that the player can indirectly control through orders . Combat takes place in real @-@ time , but the player can pause the action at any time to calmly target enemies and select different powers for the squad members to use . 
 At one point in the mission , a new temporary squad member , Liara T 'Soni , with a different set of powers joins the squad , and the player must choose who of the previous two members will remain for the rest of the mission . The relationship between Shepard and Liara can vary depending on whether they were romantically involved in the original Mass Effect . The mission includes two bosses and a chase scene in which the player must control a high @-@ speed vehicle through the skies of a city . The player may also find numerous in @-@ game upgrades that enhance aspects of the game 's weapons and armor . 
 After completing Lair of the Shadow Broker , a new location , the Shadow Broker 's Base , becomes visitable . Inside the base , the player can use several terminals with numerous functions . Some terminals show surveillance footage , dossiers on Shepard 's crew members , and a video archive which contains clips taken from around the galaxy . The player may also purchase mining manifests which are useful to mark mineral @-@ rich planets on the game 's Galaxy Map , and invest credits in various mini @-@ missions which allow the player to receive upgrades and resources from the Shadow Broker 's contacts , depending on the player 's personal alignment . The pack also adds five new achievements that are awarded for completing specific tasks , such as completing the mission on one of the two highest difficulties . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker is set two years after the events of Mass Effect : Redemption . Elite human soldier Commander Shepard is sent on a mission to help former squad member Liara T 'Soni to find an information dealer known as the Shadow Broker . Liara asks Shepard to meet her at her apartment to discuss plans regarding the location of the Shadow Broker , but when Shepard arrives , the apartment is locked down , and agent Tela Vasir is conducting an investigation into Liara 's disappearance . Shepard and Vasir learn that Liara went to an office building to meet with an informant . Upon arriving at the building , Shepard and the squad fight their way up from the bottom while Vasir lands on the roof of the building and proceeds downward . When Shepard reaches the office , Vasir is already there and Liara 's contact is dead . Liara suddenly appears , pointing a gun at Vasir . She says that Vasir was the one who tried to kill her , and that Vasir has the disk with the Shadow Broker 's location , having taken it from the dead informant . In the ensuing confrontation , Vasir escapes but is eventually hunted by Shepard and Liara , who manage to defeat her on the roof of a hotel . 
 Having recovered the disk from Vasir , Shepard and Liara learn that the Shadow Broker is located inside a massive ship near a planet called <unk> . Upon boarding the ship , they rescue Liara 's long @-@ lost partner , Feron , who was imprisoned in the ship 's prison cells after the events of Redemption . When they finally reach the Shadow Broker 's office , the Shadow Broker engages Shepard and Liara in combat . Shepard distracts the Broker , while Liara brings down a liquid that was contained in the ceiling onto the Shadow Broker . The liquid causes the Broker 's protections to malfunction , and he dies in the subsequent explosion . Liara now assumes the position of the Shadow Broker , and promises Shepard that she will turn the organization around . She also mentions that she will be able to provide Shepard with more information thanks to the Broker 's extensive networks . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker was developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts . During development of Mass Effect 2 , Bioware stated that downloadable content was becoming a fundamental part of the company 's overall philosophy . The pack was announced to be in development on July 22 , 2010 with the release of three brand @-@ new screenshots of the game . BioWare stated that the decisions players make in the pack would affect certain storylines in the then @-@ upcoming Mass Effect 3 . Animating the Shadow Broker 's face was a challenge for the developers . According to BioWare , the game 's default digital @-@ acting system " could not handle the stresses of the new face , so custom work had to be done to animate his multiple eyes and triangular mouth . " The pack was released on September 7 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 . Like Mass Effect 2 's earlier downloadable content packs Kasumi - Stolen Memory and Overlord , Lair of the Shadow Broker is freely included in the PlayStation 3 edition of the game , which was released on January 18 , 2011 . The soundtrack was composed by Christopher Lennertz , who previously penned the music for the Overlord downloadable content . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Lair of the Shadow Broker received very positive reviews from critics , who considered it to be the greatest downloadable content pack of the game . Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer considered Lair of the Shadow Broker " a solid , thrilling , satisfying addition to an already expansive universe ; one that leaves you on an appropriate note of hopeful melancholy . " He praised the amount of content in the pack , stating that it " adds far more to the game than some of its disappointingly slender predecessors . " Game Revolution 's Eduardo Reboucas said that the pack is " a blast , especially for fans who want to catch up with Liara and dissect the bits of story that were omitted in the main game . " 
 The narrative and story received high marks . Critics praised the fact that some decisions from the original Mass Effect impact the storytelling experience . Kristine Steimer of IGN stated that the storytelling " effectively communicates the strong bond between [ Shepard and Liara ] , even if they weren 't romantically involved in your game . " The graphics received similar praise . Brad Gallaway , a reviewer for GameCritics , noted that they " make the action feel like a more organic part of the story and engage the player in some superb atmosphere . " The Shadow Broker 's ship exterior was seen by some critics as the most impressive battle environment of the pack . Steimer remarked that " approaching the Shadow Broker 's ship is simply stunning as lightning storms envelope [ sic ] the massive vessel . " 
 Kevin VanOrd , a reviewer for GameSpot , praised the pack 's atmosphere and combat sequences , particularly in the second portion of the mission . According to him , " enemies attack at just the right pace , so individual battles never drag on too long , nor are they over so quickly that they end up being unsatisfying . " He also highlighted the vehicle chase scene , comparing it favorably to Blade Runner and The Fifth Element , but also admitted that the controls in the Xbox 360 version of the game are not very precise . The bosses received similar praise , with Steimer stating that both of them " have unique traits that make them a formidable opponent . " The Shadow Broker 's base was highlighted as a valuable addition to the game . Whitehead noted that marking mineral @-@ rich planets alleviates the scanning , which was seen as a tedious feature in the main game . VanOrd concluded that Lair of the Shadow Broker is " worthy of your time ( more than two hours ) and your money . " The pack was nominated for Best DLC ( downloadable content ) at the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , but lost to Red Dead Redemption : Undead Nightmare . It won the Inside Gaming Award for Best DLC . 
 = Uruguayan War = 
 The Uruguayan War ( 10 August 1864 – 20 February 1865 ) was fought between Uruguay 's governing Blanco Party and an alliance consisting of the Empire of Brazil and the Uruguayan Colorado Party , covertly supported by Argentina . Since its independence , Uruguay had been ravaged by intermittent struggles between the Colorado and Blanco factions , each attempting to seize and maintain power in turn . The Colorado leader Venancio Flores launched the Liberating Crusade in 1863 , an insurrection aimed at toppling Bernardo Berro , who presided over a Colorado – Blanco coalition ( Fusionist ) government . Flores was aided by Argentina , whose president Bartolomé Mitre provided him with supplies , Argentine volunteers and river transport for troops . 
 The Fusionism movement collapsed as the Colorados abandoned the coalition to join Flores ' ranks . The Uruguayan civil war quickly escalated , developing into a crisis of international scope that destabilized the entire region . Even before the Colorado rebellion , the Blancos within Fusionism had sought an alliance with Paraguayan dictator Francisco Solano López . Berro 's now purely Blanco government also received support from Argentine Federalists , who opposed Mitre and his Unitarians . The situation deteriorated as the Empire of Brazil was drawn into the conflict . Almost one fifth of the Uruguayan population were considered Brazilian . Some joined Flores ' rebellion , spurred by discontent with Blanco government policies that they regarded as harmful to their interests . Brazil eventually decided to intervene in the Uruguayan affair to reestablish the security of its southern frontiers and its regional ascendancy . 
 In April 1864 , Brazil sent Minister Plenipotentiary José Antônio Saraiva to negotiate with Atanasio Aguirre , who had succeeded Berro in Uruguay . Saraiva made an initial attempt to settle the dispute between Blancos and Colorados . Faced with Aguirre 's intransigence regarding Flores ' demands , the Brazilian diplomat abandoned the effort and sided with the Colorados . On 10 August 1864 , after a Brazilian ultimatum was refused , Saraiva declared that Brazil 's military would begin exacting reprisals . Brazil declined to acknowledge a formal state of war , and for most of its duration , the Uruguayan – Brazilian armed conflict was an undeclared war . 
 In a combined offensive against Blanco strongholds , the Brazilian – Colorado troops advanced through Uruguayan territory , taking one town after another . Eventually the Blancos were left isolated in Montevideo , the national capital . Faced with certain defeat , the Blanco government capitulated on 20 February 1865 . The short @-@ lived war would have been regarded as an outstanding success for Brazilian and Argentine interests , had Paraguayan intervention in support of the Blancos ( with attacks upon Brazilian and Argentine provinces ) not led to the long and costly Paraguayan War . 
 = = Uruguayan Civil War = = 
 = = = Blanco – Colorado strife = = = 
 The Oriental Republic of Uruguay in South America had been , since its independence in 1828 , troubled by strife between the Blanco Party and the Colorado Party . They were not political parties in the modern sense , but factions that engaged in internecine rebellion whenever the other dominated the government . The nation was deeply divided into Colorado and Blanco camps . These partisan groups formed in the 1830s and arose out of patron – client relationships fostered by local caudillos in the cities and countryside . Rather than a unity based upon common nationalistic sentiments , each had differing aims and loyalties informed by their respective , insular political frameworks . 
 Uruguay had a very low population density and a weak government . Ordinary citizens were compelled by circumstances to seek the protection of local caudillos — landlords who were either Colorados or Blancos and who used their workers , mostly gaucho horsemen , as private armies . The civil wars between the two factions were brutal . Harsh tactics produced ever @-@ increasing alienation between the groups , and included seizure of land , confiscation of livestock and executions . The antagonism caused by atrocities , along with family loyalties and political ties , made reconciliation unthinkable . European immigrants , who came in great numbers during the latter half of the nineteenth century , were drawn into one party or the other ; both parties had liberal and conservative wings , so the social and political views of newcomers could be reconciled with either . The feuding blocs impeded development of a broadly supported central national administration . 
 = = = Liberating Crusade of 1863 = = = 
 In the latter half of the 1850s , leading members of the Colorados and Blancos attempted a reconciliation . With the approval of many from both parties efforts were made to implement " Fusionist " policies , which began to show results in cooperation in government and military spheres . The attempt at healing the schism was dealt a setback in 1858 when reactionaries in the Colorado Party rejected the scheme . The revolt was put down by Gabriel Pereira , a former Colorado and Uruguayan president under the Fusionist government . The rebellious leaders were executed at Paso de Quinteros along the Río Negro , sparking renewed conflict . The Colorados suspected Fusionism of promoting Blanco aims to their own detriment and called for the " martyrs of Quinteros " to be avenged . 
 With the internal weaknesses of Fusionism now exposed , the Colorados moved to oust its supporters from the government . Their leader Brigadier General Venancio Flores , a caudillo and an early proponent of Fusionism , found himself without sufficient military resources to mount a sustained revolt and resorted to asking for intervention by Argentina . 
 Argentina was a fragmented nation ( since the 1852 downfall of Argentine dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas ) , with the Argentine Confederation and the State of Buenos Aires each vying for supremacy . Flores approached the Buenos Aires Minister of War , Bartolomé Mitre , agreeing to throw the support of the Colorados behind Buenos Aires in exchange for subsequent Argentine assistance in their fight against the Fusionist government in Montevideo ( the Uruguayan capital ) . Flores and his Colorado units served Buenos Aires with fierce determination . They played a decisive role in the Battle of Pavón on 17 September 1861 , in which the Confederation was defeated and all Argentina was reunited under the government in Buenos Aires . 
 In fulfillment of his commitment , Mitre arranged for the Colorado militia , Argentine volunteer units and supplies to be carried aboard Argentine vessels to Uruguay in May and June 1863 . Ships of the Argentine navy kept Uruguayan gunships away from the operation . Back on his native soil , Flores called for the ouster of the constitutional government , by that time headed by Bernardo Berro . Flores accused the Montevideo government of Blanco sympathies and framed his " Liberating Crusade " ( as he called his rebellion ) in the familiar terms of a Colorado vs. Blanco struggle . Colorados from rural areas joined defectors from the military in responding to his call . 
 = = International crisis = = 
 = = = Paraguayan – Blanco ties = = = 
 Although the Colorados had defected to the Flores insurgency , the National Guard continued to support the Fusionist government . Blanco partisans filled its depleted ranks . They also replaced army officers who had deserted to Flores . The Blancos received aid from several Argentine Federalists who joined their cause . As in Uruguay , Argentina had long been a battleground of rival parties , and Bartolomé Mitre 's victory at Pavón in 1861 had signaled the triumph of his Unitarian Party over the Federal Party led by Justo José de Urquiza . Mitre denied any involvement in the Flores rebellion , even though his complicity was widely known and taken for granted . 
 Relations between Argentina and Uruguay worsened , and both nations came close to declaring war on each other , although neither could afford a direct military conflict . Argentina had only recently emerged from a long civil war , and was still struggling to suppress a Federalist rebellion in its western province of La Rioja . Uruguay was too weak militarily to engage in a fight unaided . 
 Since 1862 , the Blancos had made repeated overtures to Paraguay , governed by dictator Carlos Antonio López , in an attempt to forge an alliance that might advance both their interests in the Platine region . Upon the death of Carlos Antonio López , his son Francisco Solano López succeeded him as Paraguayan dictator . Unlike the elder López , who strove to avoid encumbering alliances , Solano greeted the Blanco 's proposal with enthusiasm . He believed Argentina was working towards the annexation of both Uruguay and Paraguay , with the goal of recreating the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , the former Spanish colony that once encompassed the territories of all three nations . Solano López had , as far back as 1855 , expressed this concern , commenting to the Uruguayan Andrés Lamas that " the idea of reconstructing [ the old viceroyalty ] is in the soul of the Argentines ; and as a result , it isn 't just Paraguay that needs to stand guard : your country , the Oriental Republic [ of Uruguay ] , needs to get along with my own in order to prepare for any eventualities . " In late 1863 , Solano López was mobilizing his army and was in talks with Urquiza , the leader of the dissident Argentine Federalists , to convince him to join the proposed Paraguayan – Uruguayan alliance . 
 = = = Brazil and the civil war = = = 
 The developments in Uruguay were closely watched by the Empire of Brazil , which had vital interests in the Río de la Plata Basin . After Rosas fell in 1852 , Brazil became the dominant regional power . Its foreign policy included the covert underwriting of opposition parties in Uruguay and Argentina , preventing strong governments that might threaten Brazil 's strategic position in the area . Brazilian banking and commercial firms also had ventures in the area , furthering ties within the region . In Uruguay , the bank run by Irineu Evangelista de Sousa ( then @-@ Baron and later Viscount of <unk> ) became so heavily involved in commercial enterprises that the economy depended on this source of continued capital flow . 
 About 18 percent ( 40 @,@ 000 ) of the Uruguayan population ( 220 @,@ 000 ) spoke Portuguese and regarded themselves as Brazilian rather than Uruguayan . Many within Flores ' ranks were Brazilians , some hailing from the nearby Brazilian province of Rio Grande do Sul . Life along the frontier between Rio Grande do Sul and Uruguay was often chaotic , with hostilities erupting between partisans of various cattle barons , cattle @-@ rustling and random killings . Large landowners on both sides of the border had long been antagonistic toward Berro 's policies . The Uruguayan president attempted to tax the cattle coming from Rio Grande do Sul and to impose curbs on the use of Brazilian slaves within Uruguayan territory ; slavery had been outlawed years before in Uruguay . 
 Among the Brazilian land barons were David Canabarro and Antônio de Sousa Neto , both allies of Flores and former separatist rebels during the Ragamuffin War that had ravaged Rio Grande do Sul from 1835 until 1845 . Canabarro , a frontier military commander , misled Brazil 's government by denying that Brazilians were crossing the border to join Flores . Sousa Neto went to the Brazilian capital to request immediate government intervention in Uruguay , claiming that Brazilians were being murdered and their ranches robbed . The " fact that Uruguayan citizens had just as valid claims against Brazil as Brazilians had against Uruguay was ignored " , said historian Philip Raine . Although Sousa Neto had ties with the governing political party , his claims , including that he could amass a force of 40 @,@ 000 to invade Uruguay , were not taken seriously by all . The Uruguayan crisis arrived at a difficult moment for Brazil , which was on the verge of a full @-@ blown war with the British Empire for unrelated reasons . Brazil 's government decided to intervene in Uruguay , fearful of showing any weakness in the face of an impending conflict with Britain , and believing that it would be better for the central government to take the lead rather than allow the Brazilian ranchers on the frontier to decide the course of events . 
 = = Early engagements = = 
 = = = Brazilian ultimatum = = = 
 On 1 March 1864 , Berro 's term of office ended . The ongoing civil war prevented elections ; therefore Atanasio Aguirre , president of the Uruguayan senate and a member of the <unk> ( the radical wing of the Blanco Party ) replaced Berro , on an interim basis . In April , José Antônio Saraiva was appointed Minister Plenipotentiary by the Brazilian government and charged with quickly reaching an accord that would settle Brazil 's claims and ensure the safety of Brazilian citizens . His focus soon shifted from satisfying Brazil 's terms to a more immediate goal of hammering out a deal between the antagonists in the civil war , with the expectation that only a more stable regime would be able to reach a settlement with Brazil . 
 The government in Montevideo was at first reluctant to consider Saraiva 's proposals . With backing from Paraguay , it saw little advantage in negotiating a close to the civil war or in seeking to comply with Brazil 's demands . The main factor , as historian Jeffrey D. Needell summarized , was that the " Uruguayan president had been unwilling to resolve these , particularly because the Brazilians whose grievances were at issue were allies of Venancio Flores , a client of the Argentines , and a man who was seeking his overthrow . " A mutual enmity between Brazil and its Hispanic @-@ American neighbors compounded the difficulties , the result of a long @-@ standing distrust and rivalry between Spain and Portugal that had been carried over to their former American colonies . Brazil and Uruguay exhibited loathing for one another ; as Robert <unk> Cunninghame Graham put it : " the Brazilians holding the Uruguayans as bloodthirsty savages , and the Uruguayans returning their contempt for the unwarlike ways of the Brazilians , whom they called monkeys , and looked down upon , for their mixed blood . " 
 Eventually , in July 1864 , Saraiva 's persistent diplomacy moved the Uruguayan government to agree to mediated talks including Edward Thornton ( the British resident minister in Buenos Aires ) , Argentine Foreign Minister Rufino de Elizalde and Saraiva himself . Initially , the negotiations seemed promising , but soon bogged down . On 4 August , convinced that the government in Montevideo was unwilling to work toward a settlement , a frustrated Saraiva delivered an ultimatum , which the Uruguayans rebuffed . On 10 August , Saraiva informed Aguirre that the Brazilian military commanders would receive orders to begin retaliation , marking the beginning of the war . 
 = = = Alliance with rebel Colorados = = = 
 Under the orders of Vice @-@ Admiral Joaquim Marques Lisboa ( then Baron of Tamandaré ) , a Brazilian fleet was stationed in Uruguayan territorial waters . The naval force comprised twelve steamships : one frigate , six corvettes and five gunboats . On 11 August 1864 , Tamandaré , as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Brazilian naval and land forces in the war , received orders from Saraiva to begin retaliatory operations . Brazilian warships were deployed to the Uruguayan towns of Salto , Paysandú and Maldonado , ostensibly to " protect Brazilian subjects , " while Uruguay 's only warships , the small steamers Villa del Salto and General Artigas , were to be neutralized . When Tamandaré demanded these steamships remain at their docks , only the crew of General Artigas complied . 
 Tamandaré created a naval command assigned to Captain of Sea and War Francisco Pereira Pinto ( later Baron of <unk> ) . Consisting of two corvettes and one gunboat , the division was sent to patrol the Uruguay River , a tributary of the Río de la Plata and part of the Platine region . On 24 August , Pereira Pinto sighted the Villa del Salto , which was conveying troops to fight the Colorados . The Villa del Salto ignored warning shots and a demand to surrender ; after a desperate run from the Brazilian warships , it escaped to Argentine waters . This first skirmish of the war prompted the Uruguayan government to sever all diplomatic ties with Brazil on 30 August . On 7 September , Pereira Pinto again encountered the Villa del Salto sailing from Salto to Paysandú . The two Brazilian corvettes attacked the Uruguayan ship as it again tried to escape to Argentina . The battle ended when the Villa del Salto ran aground near Paysandú , where its crew set it on fire to prevent it falling into Brazilian hands . Meanwhile , the General Artigas had been sold to prevent its capture by the Brazilians . 
 To Flores , Brazil 's military operations against the Blanco government represented a priceless opportunity , since he had been unable to achieve any lasting results during the rebellion . He entered talks with Saraiva , winning the Brazilian government over , after promising to settle their claims refused by the Blanco government . The Brazilian plenipotentiary minister gave instructions to Tamandaré to form a joint offensive with the Colorado leader and overthrow the Blancos . On 20 October , after a swift exchange of letters , Flores and the Brazilian vice @-@ admiral formed a secret alliance . 
 = = Colorado – Brazil joint offensive = = 
 = = = Sieges of Uruguayan towns = = = 
 The Brazilian naval fleet in Uruguay was supposed to work in conjunction with a Brazilian land force . But months passed , and the " Army of the South " ( called the " Division of Observation " until the ultimatum ) stationed in <unk> Grande ( in Rio Grande do Sul ) was still not ready to cross into Uruguayan territory . Its main objectives were to occupy the Uruguayan towns of Paysandú , Salto and Melo ; once taken , they were to be handed over to Flores and his Colorados . 
 On 12 October , a brigade led by Brigadier José Luís Mena Barreto detached from the main army . Two days later , near the Brazilian town of Jaguarão , the force invaded Uruguay 's Cerro Largo Department . After skirmishes failed to halt their march , the Blancos abandoned Melo , and the brigade entered this capital of Cerro Largo unopposed , on 16 October . After handing over control of Melo to the Uruguayan Colorados , the Brazilians withdrew on 24 October , to rejoin their Army of the South . The next Brazilian target was Salto . Pereira Pinto sent two gunboats under First Lieutenant Joaquim José Pinto to blockade the town . On 24 November , Flores arrived with his troops and began the siege . Colonel José Palomeque , commander of the Uruguayan garrison , surrendered almost without firing a shot , on the afternoon of 28 November . Flores ' army captured and incorporated four artillery pieces and 250 men ; 300 Colorados and 150 Brazilians were left behind to occupy Salto . 
 Paysandú , the last Brazilian target , was already under blockade by Pereira Pinto . Tamandaré , who had been in Buenos Aires until this point , took charge of the blockade on 3 December . It was enforced by one corvette and four gunboats . Paysandú was garrisoned by 1 @,@ 274 men and 15 cannons , under the command of Colonel Leandro Gómez . Flores , who had come from Salto , headed a force of 3 @,@ 000 men , mostly cavalry . He invested Paysandú , deploying 800 infantrymen , 7 cannons ( 3 of which were rifled ) , and detachments of an additional 660 Brazilians . Gómez declined the offer to surrender . From 6 December until 8 December , the Brazilians and Colorados made attempts to storm the town , advancing through the streets , but were unable to take it . Tamandaré and Flores opted to wait for the arrival of the Army of the South . Meanwhile , Aguirre had sent General Juan <unk> with 3 @,@ 000 men and 4 cannons to relieve the besieged town , forcing the Brazilians and Colorados to briefly lift the siege while dealing with this new threat . <unk> abandoned his advance before encountering the enemy force , and fled north of the Río Negro . 
 = = = Army of the South in Paysandú = = = 
 Rather than the show of force that had been intended by the Brazilian government , the war revealed the Empire 's lack of military readiness . The Army of the South , stationed in <unk> Grande , was commanded by Field Marshal João Propício Mena Barreto ( later Baron of São Gabriel ) with two divisions . The 1st Division , under Brigadier Manuel Luís Osório ( later Marquis of Erval ) , was formed by regular army units . The 2nd Division , under Brigadier José Luís Mena Barreto ( who had since returned from his attack on Melo ) , was composed entirely of national guardsmen . Altogether , it numbered only 5 @,@ 711 men — all ( except some officers ) native to Rio Grande do Sul . The army was poorly equipped for siege operations : it brought along no engineers ( who could direct the construction of trenches ) ; it was under @-@ equipped , lacking even hatchets ( necessary to cut fences , break through doors and scale walls ) ; and its 12 cannons ( a mix of La Hitte and <unk> ) were of small calibers ill @-@ suited to attacking fortifications . 
 On 1 December , almost four months after Saraiva presented the ultimatum , the Army of the South invaded Uruguay . Its troops were accompanied by a semi @-@ independent militia unit , consisting of no more than 1 @,@ 300 Brazilian gaucho cavalrymen , under the former Ragamuffin Antônio de Sousa Neto . The 7 @,@ 011 @-@ strong force ( with 200 supply carts ) marched through Uruguayan territory unopposed , heading toward Paysandú in the southwest . The disorganized and undisciplined bands of gauchos , who formed the armies of both Blancos and Colorados , were no match for the Brazilian troops . The Uruguayan gauchos " had combat experience but no training and were poorly armed save for the usual muskets , <unk> , and <unk> knives " , remarked historian Thomas L. Whigham . " Fire arms he [ the Uruguayan gaucho ] rarely possessed , " said Cunninghame Graham , " or if by chance he owned a pair of long brass @-@ mounted pistols or a flintlock blunderbuss , they were in general out of order and unserviceable . Upon the other hand , a little training made him a formidable adversary with the sabre and the lance . " 
 Field Marshal João Propício Mena Barreto reached Paysandú on 29 December with two infantry brigades and one artillery regiment under Lieutenant Colonel Émile Louis Mallet ( later Baron of <unk> ) . The Army of the South 's cavalry established its camp a few kilometers away . Meanwhile , Gómez beheaded forty Colorados and fifteen Brazilian prisoners and " hung their still @-@ dripping heads above his trenches in full view of their compatriots . " On 31 December , the Brazilians and Colorados recommenced their attack and overran the city 's defenses , after a bitter struggle , on 2 January 1865 . The Brazilians captured Gómez and handed him over to the Colorados . Colonel Gregorio " Goyo " Suárez shot Gómez and three of his officers . According to Whigham , " Suárez 's actions were not really unexpected , as several members of his immediate family had fallen victim to Gómez 's wrath against the Colorados . " 
 = = Blanco capitulation = = 
 = = = Further operations = = = 
 On 12 November 1864 , before the siege of Paysandú , the Paraguayan dictator Solano López seized the Brazilian steamer <unk> de Olinda , beginning the Paraguayan War . While the Army of the South crossed Uruguay heading toward Paysandú , Brazil 's government sent José Maria da Silva Paranhos ( later Viscount of Rio Branco ) to replace Saraiva . He arrived in the Argentine capital of Buenos Aires on 2 December and a few days later sought a formal alliance with Mitre against the Blancos . The Argentine president refused , insisting that neither he nor his government had any role in Flores ' rebellion , and that Argentina would remain neutral . On 26 December , the Paraguayans invaded the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso , laying waste to towns and the countryside . 
 As the situation deteriorated , the Brazilian government mobilized army units from other regions of the Empire . On 1 January 1865 , one brigade ( composed of two infantry battalions and one artillery battalion ) with 1 @,@ 700 men from the Brazilian province of Rio de Janeiro disembarked and occupied the Uruguayan town of Fray Bentos . Paranhos , along with Tamandaré , met Flores in Fray Bentos and decided to launch a combined attack against Montevideo . It was apparent that the Paraguayans would take too long to reach Uruguay and no help would come from Urquiza and his Argentine Federalists . Increasingly isolated , Aguirre hoped that the foreign powers could intervene , but when , on 11 January , he asked the diplomatic corps in Montevideo whether they would provide military assistance to him and his government , none responded positively . João Propício Mena Barreto sailed from Fray Bentos on 14 January with the Brazilian infantry , bound for a landing near the mouth of the Santa Lucía River near Montevideo . On the way , he occupied the Uruguayan town of Colonia del Sacramento , garrisoning it with 50 soldiers . 
 The cavalry and artillery were placed under Osório and went overland . They met João Propício Mena Barreto and the infantry at their landing place . From there , the reunited Army of the South marched on Montevideo . On 31 January , Brazil and the Colorados besieged the Uruguayan capital . In the meantime , on 19 January , Paranhos attempted to clarify the nature of the Brazilian operations against the Blancos . He issued notes to the foreign diplomatic corps in Buenos Aires declaring that a state of war existed between Brazil and Uruguay . Until then , there had been no formal declaration of war , and the Empire 's military operations in Uruguay since August 1864 had been mere " reprisals " — the vague term used by Brazilian diplomacy since the ultimatum . 
 = = = Armistice = = = 
 In an attempt to divert the attention of Brazil from the siege of the capital , the Blanco government ordered the " Vanguard Army of the Republic of Uruguay " , composed of 1 @,@ 500 men under General Basilio Muñoz , to invade Brazilian soil . On 27 January 1865 , Muñoz crossed the border and exchanged fire with 500 cavalrymen from Brazil 's National Guard units . The Brazilians retreated to the town of Jaguarão , where they were joined by 90 infantrymen also from the National Guard , and hurriedly constructed trenches . There were also two small steamers and one other large vessel , each equipped with one artillery piece , to protect Jaguarão . The Blanco army attacked the town in the Battle of Jaguarão , but were repelled . Muñoz established a brief siege and asked Colonel Manuel Pereira Vargas ( the commander of the Brazilian garrison ) to surrender , but to no effect . In the early hours of 28 January , Muñoz retreated with his men toward Uruguay , ransacking property and taking all the slaves they could find . 
 On 2 February , Tamandaré declared to foreign diplomats that Montevideo was under siege and blockade . The Uruguayan capital was defended by between 3 @,@ 500 and 4 @,@ 000 armed men with little to no combat experience and 40 artillery pieces of various calibers . On 16 February , the Army of the South was further reinforced by 1 @,@ 228 men from the 8th Battalion of Caçadores ( Sharpshooters ) arriving from the Brazilian province of Bahia , raising its numbers to 8 @,@ 116 . Sousa Neto and his gauchos had detached from the main force weeks before to pursue Muñoz and his army . British and French nationals were evacuated to Buenos Aires . The " general exodus of foreigners that followed caused those who remained in Montevideo to feel terror for the first time . All agreed that a full @-@ scale assault against the city could not be postponed . " However , neither Paranhos nor his government were willing to risk the destruction of Montevideo and face the inevitable outcry from other nations that would follow it . 
 On 15 February , Aguirre 's term of office expired . Against the wishes of the <unk> , the moderate Tomás Villalba was elected by the Senate to replace Aguirre . French , Italian and Spanish troops landed in Montevideo at Villalba 's request to dissuade the radical Blancos from attempting a coup to retake power . Villalba entered into talks with Flores and Paranhos . With the Italian resident minister Raffaele Ulisse <unk> serving as intermediary , an agreement was reached . Flores and Manuel Herrera y <unk> ( representing Villalba 's government ) signed a peace accord on 20 February at the Villa de la Unión . A general amnesty was granted to both Blancos and Colorados , and Villalba handed over the presidency to Flores on an interim basis until elections could be held . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In early March , Flores assembled a cabinet composed entirely of Colorados , among them a brother of the Blanco Leandro Gómez . The new Uruguayan president purged government departments of employees with Fusionist or Blanco associations . All Blanco officers and enlisted men were eliminated from the army and replaced by those Colorado and Brazilian loyalists who had remained with Flores throughout the conflict . Public commemorations glorified the Colorados , and a monument dedicated to the " Martyrs of Quinteros " was erected . The costs of the Liberating Crusade are unknown . Flores ' losses amounted to around 450 dead and wounded ; there are no estimates of the number of civilians who died of famine and disease , nor is it known how much damage was sustained by the national economy . The effects of the Uruguayan War have received little attention from historians , who have been drawn to focus on the dramatic devastation suffered by Paraguay in the subsequent Paraguayan War . 
 News of the war 's end was brought by Pereira Pinto and met with joy in Rio de Janeiro . Brazilian Emperor Dom Pedro II found himself waylaid by a crowd of thousands in the streets amid acclamations . But public opinion quickly changed for the worse , when newspapers began running stories painting the accord of 20 February as harmful to Brazilian interests , for which the cabinet was blamed . The newly raised Viscount of Tamandaré and Mena Barreto ( now Baron of São Gabriel ) had supported the peace accord . Tamandaré changed his mind soon afterward and played along with the allegations . Paranhos ( a member of the opposition party ) was used as a scapegoat by the Emperor and the government , and was recalled in disgrace to the imperial capital . Subsequent events show the accusation was unfounded . Not only had Paranhos managed to settle all Brazilian claims , but by avoiding the death of thousands , he gained a willing and grateful Uruguayan ally , not a dubious and resentful one — who provided Brazil an important base of operations during the war with Paraguay that followed . 
 Victory brought mixed results for Brazil and Argentina . As the Brazilian government had expected , the conflict was a short @-@ lived and relatively easy affair that led to the installation of a friendly government in Uruguay . The official estimates included 549 battlefield casualties ( 109 dead , 439 wounded and 1 missing ) from the navy and army and an unknown number who died from disease . Historian José Bernardino Bormann put the total at 616 ( 204 dead , 411 wounded and 1 missing ) . The war would have been deemed an outstanding success for Brazil , had it not been for its terrible consequences . Instead of demonstrating strength , Brazil revealed military weakness that an emboldened Paraguay sought to exploit . From the Argentine viewpoint , most of Bartolomé Mitre 's expectations were frustrated by the war 's outcome . He had succeeded in bringing to power his friend and ally , but the minimal risk and cost to Argentina he had envisioned at the outset proved to be illusory . The resulting attack by Paraguay on Brazilian and Argentine provinces sparked the long and devastating Paraguayan War . 
 = The Neutral Zone ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " The Neutral Zone " is the 26th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired within the United States on May 16 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The episode originated as a piece of fan fiction by Deborah McIntyre and Mona Clee , and was turned into a teleplay by Maurice Hurley . Because of the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike , Hurley created the script in a day and a half , and the timescale forced both the abandonment of the idea of a two @-@ part episode and the first appearance of the Borg which was delayed until the following season episode " Q Who " . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship USS Enterprise @-@ D. In " The Neutral Zone " , the Enterprise is sent to investigate the destruction of Federation outposts near space controlled by the Romulan Star Empire , discovering a derelict Earth satellite with <unk> frozen humans aboard . 
 This episode saw the introduction of the redesigned Romulans , with prosthetic forehead pieces designed by makeup supervisor Michael Westmore , and the first appearance of the Romulan Warbird which was designer Andrew Probert 's final work for the Star Trek franchise . The episode was mildly received by critics who viewed it after the end of the season , who criticised the two @-@ plot nature of the episode and the general lack of excitement . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Captain Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) is away at an emergency Federation conference , the Enterprise crew discovers an ancient space capsule from Earth . Inside they find three humans in cryonic chambers . Lt. Cdr . Data ( Brent Spiner ) asks to move the chambers to the Enterprise and Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) agrees . Picard returns and orders the Enterprise to the Neutral Zone , as several Federation outposts nearby have not responded to communications . He explains that the conference was about the potential threat of the Romulans , who have not been seen for the last several decades . As Data and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) work to thaw the <unk> preserved humans , Picard admonishes Data for bringing them aboard during a crucial time , and puts Riker in charge of looking after them . 
 The survivors – Claire Raymond ( Gracie Harrison ) , a housewife ; Ralph Offenhouse ( Peter Mark Richman ) , a financier ; and L. Q. " Sonny " Clemmons ( Leon Rippy ) , a musician – are from the late 20th Century . All died of incurable illnesses and were placed in cryogenic suspension after their deaths in the hope that cures might be found in the future . Dr. Crusher , in reviving them , successfully cures them of their illnesses . They deal with the culture shock of awakening in a distant future , while Counselor Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) searches for the living descendants of Claire . Of the three , Clemmons seems to fare the best at adapting to life in the future and befriends Data . Raymond is distraught at the thought of losing everyone she ever knew , particularly her children . Offenhouse is irritated by the loss of his wealth , and lack of access to news or other information . Picard assures him that all questions will be answered , but that their current situation with the Romulans requires Picard 's full attention . 
 The Enterprise reaches the Neutral Zone and confirms that the outposts have been destroyed . They are soon met by a Romulan Warbird and Commander <unk> ( Marc Alaimo ) questions why the Enterprise has approached the zone . As Picard tries to explain his actions , Offenhouse arrives on the bridge and threatens to disrupt the tense situation , though he correctly ascertains that the Romulans are also seeking answers . Picard and the Romulans agree to pool their resources to discover the culprit . Picard later comments that while the encounter went favorably , the Romulans may be a significant threat in future engagements . Picard arranges to transport the 20th @-@ Century humans to Earth , where one of Raymond 's descendants lives . Clemmons expresses enthusiasm for the future , and Picard sets Offenhouse the challenge of improving himself . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 Due to the impending Writers Guild of America strike , writer and co @-@ executive producer Maurice Hurley developed the teleplay in a day and a half from fan fiction written by Deborah McIntyre and Mona Clee . Due to the strike , certain story ideas were removed from the plot including the planned first appearance of the Borg which was subsequently delayed until the second season episode " Q Who " . This was because " The Neutral Zone " was originally intended to be the first of a two @-@ part episode , but due to the strike there wasn 't enough time to write the second part and so the story was shortened . The second episode would have seen the Enterprise and the Romulans team up against the Borg . The script that was shot was a first draft , and due to the writer 's strike in place , no amendments were subsequently made . Director James L. Conway later explained , " If there hadn 't been a strike , I think it would have been a better script . " It was the second episode of The Next Generation directed by Conway , the first being " Justice " earlier in the first season . He didn 't direct another episode until " Frame of Mind " during season six . 
 In the writers and directors ' guide for the series , written by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry prior to the first season , Romulans were covered by one of the main writing rules which stated " No stories about warfare with Klingons and Romulans and no stories with Vulcans . We are determined not to copy ourselves and believe there must be other interesting aliens in a galaxy filled with billions of stars and planets . " Following the perceived failure of the Ferengi as the main villains of TNG by the production staff , the Romulans became the main villains during the early years of the series . This was in addition to the Borg , who were originally developed as an insectoid race for this episode but became a race of cyborgs by the time they first appeared in " Q Who " . While the Romulans made their first TNG appearance in this episode , they were previously mentioned in " Angel One " and " Heart of Glory " . The episode was the final one of season one to be completed , with production wrapping ten months after it began on " Encounter at Farpoint " . 
 The episode featured an appearance by Gene Roddenberry 's production assistant Susan Sackett as a Starfleet science officer . Her appearance was the result of winning a bet over her weight loss . She would go on to write two episodes of The Next Generation alongside Fred Bronson , " Ménage à Troi " and " The Game " . Peter Mark Richman appeared as Ralph Offenhouse , and had appeared in a guest star capacity in over 500 roles on television . Leon Rippy appeared as <unk> " Sonny " <unk> , having previously appeared alongside Jonathan Frakes in North and South . Marc Alaimo made his second Star Trek appearance in this episode , having appeared in " Lonely Among Us " as the Antican leader , and would go on to appear in season four 's " The Wounded " as Cardassian Gul Macet before being cast once more as a Cardassian in the recurring role of Gul Dukat on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . 
 Two of the time @-@ displaced humans returned in Star Trek literature , with Ralph Offenhouse appearing in The Next Generation novel Debtor ’ s Planet as the Federation Ambassador to the Ferengi and again in the Star Trek : Destiny trilogy as the Secretary of Commerce for the Federation . Clare Raymond made a further appearance in the Star Trek : Department of Temporal Investigations novel Watching the Clock as a counsellor for time @-@ displaced people . Offenhouse , Raymond and " Sonny " Clemmons also appeared in the two @-@ part Star Trek : The <unk> Wars by Greg Cox which was set prior to their appearance in this episode . 
 = = = Make @-@ up and design = = = 
 Michael Westmore developed a new appearance for the Romulans in this episode , being required to take into account the concepts introduced for them in the original series episodes " Balance of Terror " and " The Enterprise Incident " . There was also a desire to ensure that they appeared different to the Vulcans , with default appearance of the Romulans to look more aggressive and warlike . Westmore developed prosthetic forehead pieces , taking careful steps to ensure that they don 't look like Neanderthals . Rather than create individual designs for each forehead as he did with the Klingons , a number of standard designs were created . 
 The Romulan Warbird made its first appearance in this episode , with it being the final design of Andrew Probert for the Star Trek franchise , having previously designed both the Enterprise in Star Trek : The Motion Picture and the Enterprise @-@ D for The Next Generation . The double hulled nature of the starship originated in early designs , however the wings were originally vertical rather than horizontal , with the size of the ship made to be deliberately larger than that of the Enterprise . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Neutral Zone " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing May 20 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 2 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the highest ratings received by the series since " Symbiosis " four episodes earlier . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched Star Trek : The Next Generation after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido on Tor.com felt that the episode did not really work , saying that the " smug moralizing with regard to the three 20th century refugees is laid on a bit too thick " , and that the appearance of the Romulans tried too hard to be reminiscent of their first appearance in " Balance of Terror " . Overall he said that the " first season ends , not with a bang , but with a whimper " . Zack Handlen of the A.V. Club felt that the previous episode , " Conspiracy " , would have served better as an end to the first season as " The Neutral Zone " wasn 't the worst so far , " but it may possibly be the most frustrating , because it has two storylines " . He felt that the Romulan plot would have been sufficient alone and described the storyline featuring the cryogenic survivors as " extremely painful comic relief " . He gave the episode a grade of C- . 
 The first home media release of " The Neutral Zone " was on VHS cassette was on May 26 , 1993 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Angels with Dirty Faces ( Sugababes song ) = 
 " Angels with Dirty Faces " is a song by English girl group Sugababes from their second studio album of the same name . It was written by the Sugababes in collaboration with the Xenomania members Brian Higgins , Bob Bradley , Tim Powell and Matthew Del Gray . Higgins , Bradley , Powell and Gifford Noel produced the song . An uptempo pop and R & B record with dance influences , it was released on 11 November 2002 as a double A @-@ side with " Stronger " , as the album 's third single . The song received generally favourable reviews from critics , who praised its composition and highlighted it as one of the album 's better tracks . 
 Upon release as a double A @-@ side , the song peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart and inside the top forty on the Australian and New Zealand charts . " Angels with Dirty Faces " was heavily promoted through Cartoon Network 's animated television series The Powerpuff Girls . Merchandise was created to promote the release of the series ' 2002 film of the same name , while Cartoon Network Studios produced the song 's music video , a reworking of the episode " Nano of the North " from the series ' fourth season . The Sugababes performed the song at London 's Scala Theatre , and Liverpool 's Royal Court Theatre and King 's Dock . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 " Angels with Dirty Faces " is the title track of the Sugababes ' second studio album . The group began working on the album soon after the departure of original member Siobhán Donaghy , who was replaced by former Atomic Kitten member Heidi Range in September 2001 . Within seven months , they composed forty tracks for the album , ten of which made the final cut . " Angels with Dirty Faces " was written by the Sugababes in collaboration with members of the British songwriting and production team Xenomania , including Brian Higgins , Bob Bradley , Tim Powell and Matthew Del Gray . Higgins , Bradley , Powell and Gifford Noel produced the song . 
 " Angels with Dirty Faces " is an uptempo fusion of pop and R & B. It is backed by a dance beat and contains elements of hip hop . According to the digital sheet music published by EMI Music Publishing , the song was composed in common time at a tempo of 110 beats per minute . " Angels with Dirty Faces " features a girl power theme , and according to the Sugababes , is about being naughty . Phil Udell from Hot Press magazine compared the song to American girl group Destiny Child 's music , specifically their 2001 single " Bootylicious " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Angels with Dirty Faces " was released as the album 's third single as part of a double A @-@ side with " Stronger " . The double A @-@ side was made available as a CD single , cassette tape and 12 @-@ inch single on 11 November 2002 . An Audio Drive remix of the song appears on the 12 @-@ inch and CD releases , the latter of which features the music video . According to Julie <unk> of Daily Record , the version which appears on the single release is " grittier " compared to the album version . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from critics . NME critic Barry Nicholson suggested it was the better track from the double A @-@ side and commended its " sleek garage sexiness " . He additionally praised the song as smooth and tantalising . A critic from the Daily Mirror described " Angels with Dirty Faces " , as well as the album track " Virgin Sexy " , as " alive with wry palpitations " . Julie <unk> of Daily Record commended the song 's pop and R & B mixture , which she noted as " proof that there is nothing sweeter than the Sugababes " . Phil Udell from Hot Press admitted that although it is reminiscent of Destiny 's Child 's music , the song " lacks the American 's sense of style " . The Village Voice 's Jess Harvell criticised " Angels with Dirty Faces " as " generic in the post @-@ <unk> sense " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Angels with Dirty Faces " appeared on singles charts as part of its double A @-@ side release with " Stronger " . In the 23 November 2002 issue of the UK Singles Chart , the single debuted and peaked at number seven , granting the band their third consecutive top ten hit from the album . It appeared in the chart for thirteen weeks , and by April 2010 , sold 125 @,@ 000 copies in the UK , placing it twelfth on the group 's best @-@ selling songs list . The double A @-@ side peaked at number thirty @-@ four on the Australian Singles Chart , where it charted for nine weeks . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , it debuted on 23 February 2003 at number forty @-@ three and peaked at number twenty @-@ four sixteen weeks later . The single spent a total of eighteen weeks on the chart , and gave the Sugababes their third consecutive top forty hit in the country . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Products = = = 
 The Sugababes ' record label , Universal Island , heavily promoted " Angels with Dirty Faces " through Cartoon Network 's animated television series The Powerpuff Girls , and its 2002 film of the same name . 250 @,@ 000 posters which feature the Sugababes and the Powerpuff Girls were distributed throughout cinemas , while an additional 500 @,@ 000 posters were delivered to stores of the supermarket chain Asda . In total , Universal Island obtained the equivalent of an estimated £ 1 @.@ 5 million worth of media coverage . The label 's stint with the series resulted in an animated music video for the song , produced by Cartoon Network Studios . It was played before all screenings of the film during its cinema release as a support feature . The video was also included on the PlayStation 2 video game The Powerpuff Girls : Relish Rampage . The Sugababes ' cartoon characters from the video were featured on the desktops of custom computers that were promoted by the group . 
 The video channels " Nano of the North " , an episode from the fourth season of The Powerpuff Girls , in which each Sugababes member portrays a Powerpuff Girl . The video opens with a clip of Professor Utonium driving in his car . Meanwhile , a dark cloud hovers over Townsville and it soon begins to rain and dissolves the town . When Professor Utonium arrives home , The Powerpuff Girls are shown watching the Sugababes on television , although the clip is interrupted with a News Flash that reads " Robot Rain <unk> Townsville " . Professor Utonium manages to retrieve the Sugababes and infuses them with Chemical X. He shrinks them to a microscopic size , places them in a glass jar and drives off in the car with them . He exits the car but trips over , causing the jar to drop and break . The Sugababes , playing the roles of The Powerpuff Girls , fight off the Nanobots with their superpowers . However , a gigantic <unk> soon appears , and subsequently defeats the Sugababes through superior strength . Professor Utonium witnesses the incident and crushes the <unk> with his foot . The rain subsequently stops and the sun appears , in which the people of the town start to celebrate . When the Sugababes were questioned about their reaction to the video and its animation , group member Keisha Buchanan responded : " It was so funny seeing us like that and the Powerpuff Girls cartoon itself . The video so much resembled our personalities with these three characters so it was very funny to watch actually . " 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 The Sugababes performed " Angels with Dirty Faces " at the Scala Theatre in London on 11 November 2002 . The Guardian 's Betty Clarke described the group 's vocals during the performance as " clean and pristine " , and noted the presence of change in the group 's sound and image . The band performed it at the Royal Court Theatre , Liverpool on 27 March 2003 as the first show of their UK tour . It was the opening song of the show , which contained a crowd of one thousand people . " Angels with Dirty Faces " was also the first song they performed during their eighty @-@ minute set on 11 July 2003 at the King 's Dock , Port of Liverpool , as part of the Liverpool Summer Pops music festival . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = The Little Mother = 
 The Little Mother is an American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film stars Marie Eline who goes to her mother 's employer and asks for her mother 's job after she dies . Her employer is an artist with a kind heart and though the girl does not do the chores well . One of the artists models plot against him makes false charges against him , leading to his arrest . The little girl follows them and learns that they were out to obtain a large amount of money to have the false case dropped . She reports it to the police and the artist is freed , whereby he adopts the girl out of gratitude . Released on February 28 , 1911 , the film received mixed reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The official summary synopsis of the film was published in The Moving Picture World . It states , " A poor widow who supports her two children , one a baby and the other girl of six , by scrubbing , weakens under her hard work , and finally dies . Marie , the ' little mother , ' anxious that her home may not be broken up , calls on one of her mother 's employers and requests that she be given a chance to take the dead woman 's place . The artist , a wealthy , good @-@ hearted man , pleased with the child 's pluck , laughingly employs her , and makes her believe that she is really doing all the ' chores . ' The artist 's kindness , much to his surprise , brings him recompense one thousand fold [ sic ] . One of his models plots to fleece him . She calls at his studio , faints in his arms , and when her confederate rushes in with a policeman , she makes charges that lead to the arrest of the innocent artist . Just as the policeman is leading her benefactor away , the little scrub woman sees what is happening . She follows the party to the police station , but is afraid to enter . When the complainant and her husband come out , the child is impressed with the fact that they seem to be on the best of terms . Her suspicions are aroused , and she shadows them like a regular detective . What crook would ever imagine that a little girl , wheeling a baby carriage , was a sleuth ? This pair certainly did not , for when they meet a new friend in the park , they stop to tell him how they successfully arranged to trim a rich artist , never doubting that he would pay liberally to have the case dropped . The little girl , from her place in hiding , heard the story . So the little girl found a policeman , and told him about it . And the policeman went with her to the hiding place , and heard enough to warrant him in making what he afterward described as a ' two handed collar . ' The adventurous and her confederate were hailed to the police station and locked up , while the artist was set free in a hurry . The result is that there is now a ' scrub woman ' whose duties are a sinecure although the wages are high , and the future of the ' little mother ' and her baby are assured . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The only credit known in the production is that of Marie Eline in the role of the little mother . Known and advertised prominently as the " Thanhouser Kid " , Marie Eline received more attention then other Thanhouser staff . Historian Q. David Bowers wrote , " Her versatile acting was a major contributor to the success that the Thanhouser Company enjoyed during its formative years . " The film harkens back to the role played by Eline in her film debut , A 29 @-@ Cent Robbery , in which she played a child detective to capture a thief . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 990 feet long , was released on February 28 , 1911 . The film received mixed reviews by critics with the sharpest criticism of the improbable and illogical feats the " little mother " would perform . The Billboard said , " There is too much of the made @-@ to @-@ order situations in this film , causing the spectator to stretch his imagination to the straining point . That a little tot can accomplish in a way of detective work the feat set to ' kid ' actor in this film performs , is hardly logical . The acting of the Thanhouser tot is great , giving the picture the greater part of the interest it contains . The other players acquit themselves well . " The Moving Picture World largely agreed , but stated that the film only had one or two parts of the film were weak and the photography and acting were good . The Morning Telegraph found that the film would have been more logical should a scene with a police court to release the artist , for the police would not have been able to release them otherwise after the charges had been brought forth . The New York Dramatic Mirror review however states that this scene did occur with Marie acting outside the room and being consulted by an officer , whereupon the action take place off camera . The reviewer also stated that the production was admirably staged and acted . 
 The film is presumed lost because the film is not known to be held in any archive or by any collector . 
 = Interstate 696 = 
 Interstate 696 ( I @-@ 696 ) is an east – west auxiliary Interstate Highway in the US state of Michigan . The state trunkline highway is also known as the Walter P. Reuther Freeway , named for the prominent auto industry union head by the Michigan Legislature in 1971 . I @-@ 696 is a bypass route , detouring around the city of Detroit through the city 's northern suburbs in Oakland and Macomb counties . It starts by branching off I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 275 at its western terminus in Novi , and runs through suburbs including Southfield , Royal Oak and Warren before merging into I @-@ 94 at St. Clair Shores on the east end . It has eight lanes for most of its length and is approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of downtown Detroit . I @-@ 696 connects to other freeways such as I @-@ 75 ( Chrysler Freeway ) and M @-@ 10 ( Lodge Freeway ) . Local residents sometimes refer to I @-@ 696 as " The Autobahn of Detroit . " 
 Planning for the freeway started in the 1950s . Michigan state officials proposed the designation I @-@ 98 , but this was not approved . Construction started on the first segment in 1961 , and the Lodge Freeway was designated Business Spur Interstate 696 ( BS I @-@ 696 ) the following year . The western third of the freeway opened in 1963 , and the eastern third was completed in January 1979 . The central segment was the subject of much controversy during the 1960s and 1970s . Various municipalities along this stretch argued over the routing of the freeway such that the governor locked several officials into a room overnight until they would agree to a routing . Later , various groups used federal environmental regulations to force changes to the freeway . The Orthodox Jewish community in Oak Park was concerned about pedestrian access across the freeway ; I @-@ 696 was built with a set of parks on overpasses to accommodate their needs . The Detroit Zoo and the City of Detroit also fought components of the freeway design . These concessions delayed the completion of I @-@ 696 until December 15 , 1989 . Since completion , the speed limit was raised from 55 to 70 miles per hour ( 90 to 115 km / h ) . In addition , some interchanges were reconfigured in 2006 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 696 , which has been called " Detroit 's Autobahn " by some residents reflecting a reputation for fast drivers , begins in the west in the city of Novi as a left exit branching off I @-@ 96 . This ramp is a portion of the I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 696 / I @-@ 275 / M @-@ 5 interchange that spans the north – south , Novi – Farmington Hills city line linking together five converging freeways . The freeway curves southeasterly and then northeasterly through the complex as it runs eastward through the adjacent residential subdivisions . I @-@ 696 passes south of 12 Mile Road in the Mile Road System through Farmington Hills , passing south of Harrison High School and north of Mercy High School . After crossing into Southfield , I @-@ 696 passes through the Mixing Bowl , another complex interchange that spans over two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) near the American Center involving M @-@ 10 ( the Lodge Freeway and Northwestern Highway ) and US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) between two partial interchanges with Franklin Road on the west and Lahser Road on the east . The carriageways for I @-@ 696 run in the median of M @-@ 10 from northwest to southeast . East of this interchange , cargo restrictions have been enacted for the next 10 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 km ) segment of I @-@ 696 ; no commercial vehicles may carry flammable or explosive loads . 
 After passing through the Mixing Bowl , I @-@ 696 follows 11 Mile Road , which forms a pair of service drives for the main freeway . The Interstate passes through the city of Lathrup Village before turning southward and then easterly on an S @-@ shaped path to run along 10 Mile Road . This segment of freeway is known for its extensive use of retaining walls , with three large landscaped plazas forming short tunnels for freeway traffic near the Greenfield Road exit . The freeway passes next to the Jewish Community Center of Metropolitan Detroit as it passes under the third pedestrian plaza . The Interstate then picks up 10 Mile Road , which forms a pair of service drives , as the Reuther runs along the border between the cities of Oak Park and Huntington Woods . I @-@ 696 follows the southern edge of the Detroit Zoo . Immediately east of the zoo , the Interstate intersects M @-@ 1 ( Woodward Avenue ) , and crosses a line of the Canadian National Railway that also carries Amtrak passenger service between Detroit and Pontiac . 
 East of the rail crossing , I @-@ 696 has a four @-@ level stack interchange with I @-@ 75 over the quadripoint for Royal Oak , Madison Heights , Hazel Park and Ferndale . This interchange marks the eastern end of the cargo restrictions . I @-@ 696 jogs to the northeast near the Hazel Park Raceway , leaving 10 Mile Road . Crossing into Warren in Macomb County at the Dequindre Road interchange , the freeway begins to follow 11 Mile Road again . Near the Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant , I @-@ 696 has another stack interchange for Mound Road ; through the junction , the freeway makes a slight bend to the south . The freeway continues east through the northern edge of Center Line , crossing a line of Conrail Shared Assets and heading back into Warren . The Interstate crosses into Roseville near the M @-@ 97 ( Groesbeck Highway ) interchange and then meets M @-@ 3 ( Gratiot Avenue ) just west of the eastern terminus at I @-@ 94 ( the Edsel Ford Freeway ) in St. Clair Shores . The service drives merge in this final interchange and 11 Mile Road continues due east to Lake <unk> 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , I @-@ 696 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 185 @,@ 700 vehicles used the freeway daily east of I @-@ 75 and 38 @,@ 100 vehicles did so each day in part of the Mixing Bowl , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . As an Interstate Highway , all of I @-@ 696 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and initial construction = = = 
 I @-@ 696 is part of the original Interstate Highway System as outlined in 1956 – 58 . As originally proposed by the Michigan State Highway Department , the freeway would have been numbered I @-@ 98 . Construction started in 1961 . The Lodge Freeway , the first segment of which opened in 1957 , was given the Business Spur I @-@ 696 designation in 1962 . The first segment of I @-@ 696 built was the western third of the completed freeway which opened in 1963 – 64 at a cost of $ 16 @.@ 6 million ( equivalent to $ 259 million in 2015 ) . This section ran from the I @-@ 96 in Novi east to the Lodge Freeway in Southfield . The then @-@ unfinished freeway was named for Walter P. Reuther , former leader of the United Auto Workers labor union after he and his wife died in a plane crash on May 9 , 1970 . The next year the Michigan Legislature approved the naming by passing Senate Concurrent Resolution 57 . 
 In the late 1970s , during the second phase of construction , lobbying efforts and lawsuits attempted to block construction of the central section . If successful , the efforts would have left the freeway with a gap in the middle between the first ( western ) and second ( eastern ) phases of construction . During this time , MDOT assigned M @-@ 6 to the eastern section of the freeway under construction . Signs were erected along the service roads that followed 11 Mile Road to connect the already built stack interchange at I @-@ 75 east to I @-@ 94 . By the time the eastern freeway segment was initially opened in January 1979 between I @-@ 94 and I @-@ 75 , the signage for M @-@ 6 was removed and replaced with I @-@ 696 signage ; it cost $ 200 million ( equivalent to $ 954 million in 2015 ) to complete . Later in 1979 , a closure was scheduled to allow work to be completed on three of the nine interchanges on the segment . 
 = = = Controversies over middle segment = = = 
 The central section was the most controversial . Governor James Blanchard was 15 years old and a high school sophomore in neighboring Pleasant Ridge when the freeway was proposed and purchased a home in the area in 1972 . He joked during remarks at the dedication in 1989 , " The unvarnished truth about this freeway ? I wasn 't even alive when it was first proposed , " and added , " frankly , I never thought it would go through . " Total cost at completion for the entire freeway at the end of the 30 @-@ year project was $ 675 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 65 billion in 2015 ) . 
 Arguments between local officials were so intense that during the 1960s , then @-@ Governor George W. Romney once locked fighting bureaucrats in a community center until they would agree on a path for the freeway . During the 1970s , local groups used then @-@ new environmental regulations to oppose the Interstate . The freeway was noted in a Congressional subcommittee report on the " Major Interstate System Route Controversy in Urban Areas " or the controversies in 1970 . Before 1967 , local communities had to approve highway locations and designs , and the debates over I @-@ 696 prompted the passage of an arbitration statute . That statute was challenged by Pleasant Ridge and Lathrup Village before being upheld by the Michigan Supreme Court . Lathrup Village later withdrew from a planning agreement in 1971 ; had that agreement been implemented , construction on the central section was scheduled to commence in 1974 and finish in 1976 . 
 The community of Orthodox Jews in Oak Park wanted the freeway to pass to the north of their suburb . When this was deemed to be futile , the community asked for changes to the design that would mitigate the impact of the freeway to the pedestrian @-@ dependent community . Final approval in 1981 of the freeway 's alignment was contingent on these mitigation measures . To address the community 's unique needs , the state hired a rabbi to serve as a consultant on the project . In addition , a series of landscaped plazas were incorporated into the design , forming the tunnels through which I @-@ 696 passes . These structures are a set of three 700 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 210 m ) bridges that cross the freeway within a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . They allow members of the Jewish community to walk to synagogues on the Sabbath and other holidays when Jewish law prohibits driving . These plazas had their length limited ; if they were longer they would be considered tunnels that would require ventilation systems . 
 The Detroit Zoo was concerned that noise and air pollution from the Interstate would disturb the animals . They were satisfied by $ 12 million ( equivalent to $ 29 @.@ 3 million in 2015 ) spent on a new parking ramp and other improvements . The City of Detroit tried to stop I @-@ 696 as well , but in the end the city was forced to redesign its golf course . A refusal to grant an additional nine feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) of right @-@ of @-@ way by Detroit forced additional design and construction delays during the 1980s . 
 One of the last obstacles to construction of the freeway was a wetlands area near Southfield . MDOT received a permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources to destroy 6 1 ⁄ 2 acres ( 2 @.@ 6 ha ) of wetland and create a replacement 11 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) area . In the process , some prairie roses and wetlands milkweed were transplanted from the path of I @-@ 696 in 1987 . The final section of the eight @-@ lane freeway opened at a cost of $ 436 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 06 billion in 2015 ) on December 15 , 1989 . At the time , one caller to a Detroit radio show commented , " do you realize we have been to the moon and back in the time it has taken to get that road from Ferndale to Southfield ? " 
 = = = Since completion = = = 
 As part of the overall rehabilitation to the Mixing Bowl interchange , a new interchange at Franklin Road was to be constructed in 2006 . An exit ramp from I @-@ 696 eastbound to American Drive opened in April 2006 . An entrance ramp from Franklin Road to I @-@ 696 westbound opened in July 2006 . The Franklin Road overpass , which had been closed during this time , re @-@ opened in October 2006 . On November 9 that year , the speed limit was increased from 55 to 70 mph ( 90 to 115 km / h ) along the length of I @-@ 696 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Related trunkline = = 
 Business Spur Interstate 696 ( BS I @-@ 696 ) was the designation given to the Lodge Freeway in the Detroit area in 1962 . This 17 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) freeway was renumbered as part of US 10 in 1970 , when that highway designation was shifted off Woodward Avenue . 
 = John Edward Brownlee as Attorney @-@ General of Alberta = 
 John Edward Brownlee served as Attorney @-@ General of the province of Alberta in western Canada from 1921 until 1926 , in the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) government of Herbert Greenfield . As Brownlee was the only lawyer in a caucus formed almost entirely of farmers , his role extended beyond the traditional expectations of an attorney @-@ general , and ranged from providing legal advice to explaining how to write a business letter ; he also became the government 's de facto leader in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . 
 UFA members held widely disparate political views , and Brownlee quickly became identified with the government 's conservative faction . He opposed radical changes to the structure of government and urged thrift in public spending . As part of the government 's attempts to balance its budget , Brownlee favoured selling its money @-@ losing railways and concluding an agreement with the federal government to give Alberta control over its natural resources ; he was unsuccessful at both while Attorney @-@ General . As a member of a farmers ' government , he was also involved in attempts to alleviate drought @-@ induced poverty in southern Alberta and in investigations into the establishment of a provincial wheat pool . 
 UFA Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) began to see Brownlee as a better leader than the indecisive Greenfield . A group of them attempted to force Greenfield to resign in Brownlee 's favour . Though Brownlee opposed these attempts , initially threatening to resign if Greenfield did , he was eventually persuaded to accept the premiership if Greenfield willingly relinquished it . Brownlee became premier November 23 , 1925 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brownlee began his legal career in Calgary , and the UFA was one of his firm 's major clients . One of the projects he undertook for it was the creation of the United Grain Growers ( UGG ) , of whose securities division he became general manager in 1919 . He also travelled around Alberta with UFA president Henry Wise Wood answering UFA members ' legal questions while Wood spoke to them about politics and the farmers ' movement . Though Brownlee was not initially interested in the UFA 's political activities , this changed through his association with Wood and Progressive Party of Canada leader Thomas Crerar . 
 Until 1919 , the UFA 's political activities were limited to advocacy , but that year it decided to run candidates in the 1921 provincial election . Despite Brownlee 's burgeoning interest in politics , he did not view himself as part of the UFA 's political branch , and did not run as a candidate ; indeed , he was on vacation in Victoria , British Columbia , for most of the campaign . 
 The UFA contested the election without a leader , so when it won 38 of the 61 seats in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta it did not know who it would recommend to form a government as Premier of Alberta . Wood was not interested and suggested that Brownlee should take the position , to the latter 's astonishment . Brownlee did not believe that , as an <unk> and lawyer , he would be acceptable to the rural UFA caucus , and declined ; the position went to Herbert Greenfield . 
 = = Entry into cabinet and legislature = = 
 Though the UFA MLAs were not willing to accept a non @-@ farmer as premier , many of them realized that the post of Attorney @-@ General should go to a lawyer . Others were less convinced , and Brownlee was invited to address the UFA caucus . He acknowledged that there was no constitutional requirement on the question , but advised that a non @-@ lawyer attorney @-@ general would be wholly reliant on the advice of the lawyers on his staff . With the caucus convinced , Greenfield asked Brownlee to accept the position . Brownlee demurred , reluctant to take the resulting cut in income , not eager to leave his family in Calgary to work in Edmonton ( the provincial capital ) , and leery of the high expectations invested in the new government by the province 's farmers . Ultimately , a combination of duty , loyalty , and ambition convinced him to accept the position . Though the choice of cabinet ministers is traditionally the prerogative of the premier , as part of the UFA 's agenda of democratic reform Greenfield agreed to present his choices to the caucus for vetting . Brownlee was approved August 11 , 1921 , and was sworn in two days later . 
 Neither he nor Greenfield had run as a candidate in the election , and neither was a member of the legislature . Percival Baker , the UFA member elected for Ponoka , had died on election day , opening up a seat for one of them . A second seat , Peace River , became available when incumbent Donald MacBeth Kennedy resigned to run in the 1921 federal election . Greenfield seemed a more reasonable candidate for that rugged northern riding than the urban lawyer Brownlee , and so Brownlee was acclaimed as Ponoka 's MLA December 9 , 1921 . 
 = = Advisor to the government = = 
 Brownlee was the only lawyer in a government composed primarily of farmers , and the rest of the cabinet drew heavily on his expertise . Its reliance on him extended beyond legal issues to such matters as how to write a business letter . Greenfield was among the most dependent , and forwarded most controversial issues to his attorney @-@ general for a draft response ; Greenfield often signed the draft and sent it out unchanged . The premier eventually relied on Brownlee so heavily that Brownlee set the agenda for cabinet meetings . The government also relied on Brownlee in the legislature , where it found itself under relentless attack from the John R. Boyle @-@ led Liberals . Brownlee had the widest debating experience of the UFA members , and he was increasingly called upon to counter these attacks . His maiden speech was typical of him : " I came into this House with considerable trepidation , because I knew that sitting opposite would be the former giants of this House , men with ability , experience , and skill . Since coming in I 've listened to all these men — giving their best — and now I blush at my own modesty . " 
 When Greenfield was asked a difficult question in the legislature , he often leaned over to Brownlee , his <unk> , who supplied him with an answer in full view of the legislature . Many UFA members found this practice humiliating . Brownlee 's importance to the government in the legislature was illustrated by an incident in 1922 . Brownlee was on vacation in Victoria during a special sitting of the legislature . While his presence was usually considered crucial , the only item of business scheduled for the session was uncontroversial , and passed by a large margin . However , once this item was dispensed with , some members complained that the C $ 100 payment that they were to receive for the special session was too low . Greenfield brought a motion to double it ; the amount was increased to $ 250 in committee . At a time when many farmers earned less than $ 250 per year , the move cost the UFA dearly in the eyes of its supporters . Many UFA MLAs privately suggested that the incident would have been avoided had Brownlee been present . On another occasion , in 1924 , Brownlee was absent from the legislature due to illness . Boyle called him to assure him that he could rest easy , since the Liberals would not raise any difficult issues in his absence . While Brownlee appreciated the gesture , all involved recognized it as an admission that the government was helpless in the legislature without its strongman . 
 Brownlee 's work as an MLA extended beyond the legislature . He gave close attention to correspondence from his constituents , especially those alleging improper treatment at Ponoka 's psychiatric hospital . He prepared thoroughly for speaking engagements in his riding , trying to anticipate all possible questions . These measures were reflected in his support in the largely rural riding , where the Calgary lawyer became a popular and well @-@ respected MLA . 
 = = Advocate for conservatism = = 
 Many of the elected UFA members espoused radical political doctrines calculated to transform the provincial government . Brownlee quickly became identified with the caucus 's conservative faction . At the caucus meeting that approved his appointment , he put an end to discussion of whether nominations for justices of the peace should come from UFA locals or its central political committee by asserting that they would continue to be handled by the office of the Attorney @-@ General . Later , many UFA MLAs argued that only motions explicitly declaring a lack of confidence in the government should be treated as motions of non @-@ confidence . They were concerned that supporters of the government who nonetheless disagreed with it on a specific issue might be pressured to refrain from voting their consciences on motions , such as money bills , that were conventionally considered tests of the government 's confidence . Brownlee warned these MLAs that regardless of their beliefs , the Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Alberta was free to request the government 's resignation any time he considered that it lacked or did not merit the legislature 's confidence . Despite this warning , UFA MLAs John Russell Love and Alex Moore proposed a resolution in the legislature changing the convention . The proposal attracted notice from across Canada ; R. B. Bennett advised Brownlee , his former clerk , to warn Moore and Love that it was unconstitutional and demand that they withdraw it . Brownlee was reluctant to do so , since a similar proposal had been part of the UFA 's election platform , and instead moved successful amendments weakening the motion to a vague " statement of intent " . 
 Brownlee clashed again with the UFA 's radical elements on the question of a provincial bank . The writings of C. H. Douglas advocating an economic system that he called social credit were attracting notice in Alberta , and his adherents included many UFA members . Led by George Bevington , they sponsored a resolution at the UFA convention in January 1923 calling for the creation of a government @-@ owned bank . After Bevington 's introduction , support for the resolution was running high ; Brownlee cooled enthusiasm with a speech of his own warning delegates that Alberta 's debt load could not manage the programs that Bevington proposed that a provincial bank should undertake . Even so , the convention passed a resolution calling on the provincial government to apply for a bank charter from the federal government , which was responsible for banking under the British North America Act , 1867 . At Brownlee 's recommendation , the Greenfield government struck a commission under the leadership of University of Alberta economist D. A. MacGibbon , which strongly recommended against the establishment of a provincial bank . This mirrored Brownlee 's own conclusion , reached after investigating state @-@ run banks in New Zealand and New South Wales . At the 1924 UFA convention , Bevington and his followers reaffirmed their demands ; Brownlee responded by pointing to the findings of the MacGibbon commission and to his contention that the proposal was unconstitutional and would bankrupt the province . In this he was supported by Henry Wise Wood , whom Bevington was challenging for the UFA presidency . Brownlee proposed instead that the government 's treasury branches should begin to accept deposits . 
 Brownlee also advocated a conservative approach on budgetary issues . The UFA government inherited a large budget deficit , and Brownlee was dissatisfied with Greenfield 's early efforts at reducing it . In 1922 , he warned the premier that unless the government sharply cut expenditures , he would find it difficult to defend its fiscal policy in that year 's session of the legislature . In 1924 , unsatisfied with Greenfield 's response , he made an example of his own department , cutting staff and taking a strict approach to spending . In 1923 , he found an ally for his position in new provincial treasurer Richard Gavin Reid , who impressed on his cabinet colleagues the need for thrift and recommended the creation of a purchasing department for coordinating government expenditures . 
 = = Railways and natural resources = = 
 The province 's poor financial situation was due in part to its $ 5 million annual expenditure on railways , comprising 37 percent of the 1922 budget . These expenditures resulted from the collapse of four small @-@ railroad syndicates , which left the government to finance the rail construction . Brownlee believed that these lines , the largest of which was the Edmonton , Dunvegan and British Columbia ( ED & BC ) line , should be sold to either the Canadian National Railway or the Canadian Pacific Railway . Though neither was interested in purchasing the lines , in 1925 both expressed an interest in leasing the ED & BC . However , the Royal Bank of Canada , which held the mortgage on the ED & BC , refused to consent to any lease arrangement unless the Alberta government redeemed its stock in the railway as security for the mortgage . Brownlee was inclined to agree with Minister of Railways Vernor Smith that the government should buy the mortgage from the Royal Bank and become the owner and operator of the line , but Greenfield was resistant to this approach and resolution of the railways question had to wait until Brownlee was premier . 
 Brownlee was also active on natural resource issues . Alberta , along with Saskatchewan and Manitoba , had been admitted into Confederation without being granted the control over its natural resources that the older provinces enjoyed over theirs . While the federal government did provide a compensatory grant in lieu of resource rights , Alberta sought control over the resources not only because it believed that this would yield higher revenues than the grant , but out of sheer pride . In 1920 , Prime Minister Arthur Meighen committed the federal government in principle to transferring resource rights ; all that remained to discuss were the terms . Alberta , while willing to forgo the annual subsidy , wanted compensation for some of the land and resources previously awarded by the federal government to private interests , including 6 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ha ) of land granted to eastern railway companies , mineral leases that deprived the government of royalties for more than half of the 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 short tons ( 5 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 t ) of coal extracted from Alberta annually , and assorted areas with hydroelectric potential that had been yielded to private companies . 
 Brownlee became the province 's chief negotiator on resource questions in October 1921 . Though early attempts at reaching agreement were hampered by the unwillingness of the Maritime provinces to agree to the necessary constitutional amendments unless their own annual subsidies were increased , negotiations between the provincial and federal government continued intermittently throughout the 1920s . Liberal Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King occasionally appeared receptive to Alberta 's demands , but never fully agreed to them . A possible explanation for this is found in a 1924 letter from Alberta Liberal Party leader John R. Boyle to King , explaining that the UFA was likely to lose the next provincial election to Boyle 's Liberals " unless something extraordinary happens . That extraordinary thing which Greenfield wants to happen now is obtaining from you the natural resources at once . " Despite this letter , the sides seemed close to agreement in early 1925 : at a January conference Alberta accepted in principle a federal offer of three years of continuing subsidy after the transfer of resource rights . After an exhaustive series of meetings between Brownlee and the federal counsel , the agreement went back to the governments for approval . As Greenfield and Brownlee expressed their impatience with federal inaction , an intergovernmental meeting was convened in May . The meeting proceeded at a leisurely pace into June , after which King announced that his cabinet would like the summer to consider the agreement in greater detail . The Albertans returned home in disgust . 
 The consequences of continued control of Alberta 's resources by the federal government extended beyond the merely financial . As Alberta 's smaller towns and rural areas were being connected to the electrical grid , Calgary Power made an application to the federal government for hydroelectric rights on the upper Bow River . Not wanting these rights to fall into private hands , Brownlee made an application of his own on behalf of the Alberta government . It was denied by Charles Stewart , federal Minister of the Interior and the Premier of Alberta whom the UFA had defeated in 1921 . 
 In 1924 , the UFA government passed the Mineral Tax Act , which taxed mineral rightsholders at a rate of three cents per acre . The two largest such rightsholders , the Canadian Pacific Railway and the Hudson 's Bay Company , urged the federal government to use its power of disallowance to put a stop to the legislation . When the federal government complied , Brownlee protested its action on three grounds : first , as a direct tax the proposed levy was within Alberta 's rights under section 92 of the British North America Act , 1867 , and it was constitutional convention for the federal government to exercise disallowance only when the impugned legislation was clearly unconstitutional . Second , disallowance allowed the province no recourse to the courts , where the constitutionality of the legislation could be tested . Third , the federal government 's stated reasons for disallowing the legislation , which were released belatedly by justice minister Ernest Lapointe , were ( according to Brownlee ) erroneous and led Brownlee to suggest that Lapointe , a Québécois lawyer trained in the civil law tradition of his home province rather than the common law system used in the rest of Canada , must be unfamiliar with the land @-@ holding system outside of Quebec . Brownlee 's attacks were rejected , and the disallowance stood . 
 = = Agricultural policy = = 
 The UFA took office at a time of drought in the southern regions of the province . At Brownlee 's instigation , the government appointed a three @-@ person panel , led by Charles Alexander Magrath , to investigate the problem . In 1922 the government passed the Drought Relief Act . The Act , a Brownlee brainchild , created a Drought Relief Commissioner to whom farmers in affected areas could turn for financial counselling and asset administration . It authorized the adjustment of farmers ' debts to levels that were within the debtors ' means , but still sufficiently acceptable to creditors that their willingness to make loans would not disappear altogether . Brownlee hoped that this system would provide affected farmers with sound financial advice and facilitate the fair division of farmers ' assets among competing creditors without forcing farmers to pay high legal fees . In 1923 this was replaced by the Debt Adjustment Act , which strengthened the commissioner 's powers and was intended to extend his jurisdiction over the entire province ; due to opposition from lenders , the portions of the act dealing with other than drought @-@ stricken areas were never proclaimed . 
 The name change of the legislation reflected Brownlee 's growing belief that farmers ' financial troubles were due to factors more systemic than lack of rain . Angry over the federal government 's decision to allow the first incarnation of the Canadian Wheat Board ( CWB ) to lapse , many Albertan farmers began to advocate the " pooling " of their wheat , which would render individual farmers less susceptible to the machinations of grain speculators by introducing collective marketing , with each farmer receiving an averaged , identical price . Farmers in Saskatchewan and Manitoba were more adamant about the return of the CWB ; Prime Minister King eventually agreed to its re @-@ creation , provided that at least two of Alberta , Saskatchewan , and Manitoba passed enabling legislation and found the personnel necessary to sit on the Board . By June 1923 , the provinces had not found anybody suitable . Interest in pooling experienced a resurgence . In July , a UFA meeting , which Brownlee attended as the government 's representative , endorsed the creation of a wheat pool as soon as practicable . Brownlee and his cabinet colleague Richard Gavin Reid undertook an investigation of how soon this might be , which included a trip to San Francisco to meet with Aaron Sapiro , an American agricultural cooperative leader . Sapiro proclaimed that a wheat pool could be organized in a few weeks , though both Brownlee and Reid disagreed and returned to Canada committed to caution . However , in their absence the Edmonton Journal and Calgary Herald had invited Sapiro to tour Alberta , and his speeches stirred up extravagant expectations among UFA members for immediate action , in time for the new organization to market the 1923 crop . 
 Faced with the zeal of its membership , the UFA leadership appointed a 17 @-@ person committee , including Brownlee , to create the Alberta Cooperative Wheat Producers Limited . The membership fee was to be three dollars , and the organization was to work with similar organizations in Saskatchewan and Manitoba . The provincial government — at Brownlee 's insistence — and the UGG both provided startup loans . The UGG also took the lead in agreeing to let its grain elevators be used by the pool , which allowed Brownlee to defeat those committee members who thought the new company should acquire its own elevators . 
 By the end of August it was obvious that the organizations in Saskatchewan and Manitoba were not going to be ready in time for the 1923 crop , and the committee decided to proceed alone . It determined that if farmers representing half of Alberta 's total wheat acreage agreed to pool their crop by September 15 , the pool would proceed . Brownlee believed that this was an impossible objective . Despite the experimental and unproven nature of the model and the as @-@ yet nonexistent organization that was to execute it , this objective was met . The Alberta Wheat Pool was born . By the following year 's harvest , comparable organizations had formed in Saskatchewan and Manitoba , and a Central Selling Agency ( CSA ) was formed to sell all three provinces ' wheat . The CSA 's first president , Alexander James McPhail ( whom Brownlee helped select ) , offered Brownlee the position of CSA general manager , at the attractive salary of $ 20 @,@ 000 per year ( a figure that Brownlee had helped set ) . At the urging of his government colleagues and the UFA leadership , both of who felt his continued presence in Edmonton was vital to the UFA government 's hold on power , he declined ; he was instead made the CSA 's general counsel . Brownlee was also heavily involved in the creation of a livestock pool and three dairy pools , as a sort of " <unk> " hit Alberta farmers . 
 = = Prohibition and Sunday shopping = = 
 As Attorney @-@ General , Brownlee inherited the prohibition implemented by the previous Liberal government . While the UFA base and public opinion both favoured prohibition , the existing law was full of loopholes and unevenly enforced . Some judges , opponents of prohibition , refused to convict defendants charged with liquor offences . The UFA had pledged during the election campaign to introduce prohibition in fact as well as in law , and the task fell to Brownlee . He initially cooled expectations by announcing that he had no interest in making " any hasty or ill @-@ considered move " , either in changing the law or altering enforcement of the existing one . 
 On September 21 , 1922 , Constable Steve Lawson of the Alberta Provincial Police was murdered at his Blairmore home by bootlegger Emil Picariello and his companion Florence Lassandra . He was the third policeman killed in Alberta in liquor @-@ related incidents in 1922 . The murder opened up a rift between Albertans of British descent , who saw bootlegging as an affront to the rule of law even if they did not support prohibition , and Albertans of southern and eastern European descent , who found prohibition to be something of a joke and accepted bootlegging . Brownlee authorized the deployment of special constables to apprehend Picariello and Lassandra . Once they were arrested , he appeared personally at the prosecution 's bench alongside A. A. McGillivray , reputedly Alberta 's best courtroom lawyer , whose services he secured specifically for the case . Picariello and Lassandra were convicted and sentenced to death by hanging . 
 By the time of their executions in May 1923 , public opinion was turning against prohibition . The sentiment that criminal activities such as Picariello 's were the inevitable result of prohibition laws became a popular one , as did the view that the government should legalize and regulate liquor sales . Brownlee , morally supportive of prohibition , began to personally support this course , believing that prohibition was unenforceable in the face of widespread public opposition . A 1923 referendum opted for the end of prohibition . In 1924 Brownlee guided the Government Liquor Control Act — drafted with the assistance of R. B. Bennett , who received $ 1 @,@ 000 for his services — through the legislature . 
 As Attorney @-@ General , Brownlee was responsible for administration of the Lord 's Day Act , which forbade most commerce on Sundays . Charles Huestis of the Lord 's Day Alliance took issue with the Edmonton Orchestra 's Sunday concerts , on the grounds that by opening them only to its subscription holders it was de facto charging admission , and that by paying its musicians <unk> it was gainfully employing them in their regular professions on Sundays . Brownlee declined to prosecute , since courts had previously held that the concerts were legal . Huestis retorted that as Attorney @-@ General Brownlee should make them illegal , to which Brownlee responded that he fully appreciated the importance of the Sabbath and did not need to be lectured on the subject by Huestis . There were also complaints about farmers violating the act by working Sundays ; Brownlee felt that such complaints were often more about conflicts between neighbours than preservation of the Sabbath , and prosecuted only the most gratuitous and flagrant cases . 
 = = Political machinations and succession = = 
 In the 1921 federal election , 65 of the Canadian House of Commons ' 235 seats were won by Progressives and allied factions , including the UFA , which won both seats it contested . Liberal Prime Minister @-@ designate William Lyon MacKenzie King had only a minority , and expected to rely on the support of these Progressives to govern . Progressive leader Thomas Crerar envisioned forming a coalition government with the Liberals , and knew that he would be expected to provide cabinet members from Alberta , which had been swept by Progressives and allied parties . Seeing no " cabinet material " among the elected members , he sent an emissary to Edmonton to convince Greenfield or Brownlee to enter federal politics . Brownlee refused and advised Greenfield to do the same , on the grounds that their abandonment of provincial politics soon after the UFA 's election would be seen as a betrayal . 
 As Greenfield 's shortcomings became obvious , Brownlee found himself fielding propositions closer to home : in 1924 a group of UFA MLAs dissatisfied with Greenfield — including George Johnston , George MacLachlan , William Shield , Donald Cameron , Oran McPherson , and Austin Claypool — approached Brownlee to advise him that they planned to ask the premier to resign in favour of his attorney @-@ general . To their surprise , Brownlee immediately told them that if Greenfield resigned , so would he . Faced with Brownlee 's refusal to cooperate with their coup , the dissidents relented . They made another attempt in 1925 ; Brownlee again threatened to resign , but this time was persuaded by Henry Wise Wood to accept the crown if Greenfield relinquished it willingly . Greenfield assured Brownlee that he had not wanted the job of premier in the first place and would happily see Brownlee take it from him . Faced with these assurances , Brownlee agreed to form a government , and became Premier of Alberta November 23 , 1925 . He remained Attorney @-@ General until after the 1926 election , when he appointed the newly elected John Lymburn to replace him . 
 = Scottish Terrier = 
 The Scottish Terrier ( also known as the Aberdeen Terrier ) , popularly called the Scottie , is a breed of dog . Initially one of the highland breeds of terrier that were grouped under the name of Skye Terrier , it is one of five breeds of terrier that originated in Scotland , the other four being the modern Skye , Cairn , Dandie Dinmont , and West Highland White Terrier . They are an independent and rugged breed with a wiry outer coat and a soft dense undercoat . The First Earl of Dumbarton nicknamed the breed " the diehard " . The modern breed is said to be able to trace its lineage back to a single female , named Splinter II . 
 They are a small breed of terrier with a distinctive shape and have had many roles in popular culture . They have been owned by a variety of celebrities , including the 32nd President of the United States , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , whose Scottie " Fala " is included with FDR in a statue in Washington , D.C. , as well as the 43rd President George W. Bush . They are also well known for being a playing piece in the board game Monopoly . Described as a territorial , feisty dog , they can make a good watchdog and tend to be very loyal to their family . <unk> , Scottish Terriers can be more prone to bleeding disorders , joint disorders , autoimmune diseases , allergies , and cancer than some other breeds of dog and there is a condition named after the breed called Scotty cramp . They are also one of the more successful dog breeds at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show with a recent best in show in 2010 . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The Scottish Terrier is a small , compact , short @-@ legged , sturdily @-@ built terrier of good bone and substance . They have a hard , wiry , weather @-@ resistant coat and a thick @-@ set , <unk> body which is hung between short , heavy legs . These characteristics , joined with his very special keen , piercing , " <unk> " expression , and his erect ears and tail are salient features of the breed . The Scottish Terrier 's bold , confident , dignified aspect exemplifies power in a small package . The eyes should be small , bright and piercing , and almond @-@ shaped not round . The color should be dark brown or nearly black , the darker the better . The ears should be small , prick , set well up on the skull and pointed , but never cut . They should be covered with short velvety hair . 
 Height at withers for both genders should be roughly 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) , and the length of back from withers to tail is roughly 28 cm ( 11 in ) . Generally a well @-@ balanced Scottie dog should weigh from 8 @.@ 5 to 10 kg ( 19 to 22 lb ) and a female from 8 to 9 @.@ 5 kg ( 18 to 21 lb ) . It is about 10 to 11 inches ( 25 to 28 cm ) in height . 
 = = = Coat = = = 
 The Scottish Terrier typically has a hard , wiry outer coat with a soft , dense undercoat . The coat should be trimmed and blended into the furnishings to give a distinct Scottish Terrier outline . The longer coat on the beard , legs and lower body may be slightly softer than the body coat but should not be or appear fluffy . 
 The coat colours range from dark gray to jet black and brindle , a mix of black and brown . Scotties with <unk> ( straw to nearly white ) coats sometimes occur , and are similar in appearance to the Soft @-@ Coated Wheaten Terrier or West Highland White Terrier . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 Scotties are territorial , alert , quick moving and feisty , perhaps even more so than other terrier breeds . The breed is known to be independent and self @-@ assured , playful , intelligent and has been nicknamed the ' Diehard ' because of its rugged nature and endless determination . The " Diehard " nickname was originally given to it in the 19th century by George , the fourth Earl of Dumbarton . The Earl had a famous pack of Scottish Terriers , so brave that they were named “ <unk> ” . They were supposed to have inspired the name of his Regiment , The Royal Scots , " Dumbarton ’ s <unk> " . 
 Scotties , while being described as very loving , have also been described as stubborn . They are sometimes described as an aloof breed , although it has been noted that they tend to be very loyal to their family and are known to attach themselves to one or two people . 
 It has been suggested that the Scottish Terrier can make a good watchdog due to its tendency to bark only when necessary and because it is typically reserved with strangers , although this is not always the case . They have been described as a fearless breed that may be aggressive around other dogs unless introduced at an early age . Scottish Terriers were originally bred to hunt and fight badgers . Therefore , the Scottie is prone to dig as well as chase small vermin , such as squirrels , rats , and mice . 
 = = Health = = 
 Two genetic health concerns seen in the breed are von Willebrand disease ( vWD ) and craniomandibular osteopathy ( CMO ) ; Scottie cramp , patellar luxation and cerebellar abiotrophy are also sometimes seen in this breed . Common eye conditions seen in a variety of breeds such as cataracts and glaucoma can appear in Scotties as they age . There are no specific conditions relating the skin that affect the breed , but they can be affected by common dog related conditions such as parasites and mange . Scotties typically live from 11 to 13 years . 
 = = = Cancer in Scottish Terriers = = = 
 Scottish Terriers have a greater chance of developing some cancers than other purebreds . According to research by the Veterinary Medical Data Program ( 1986 ) , six cancers that Scotties appeared to be more at risk for ( when compared to other breeds ) are : ( in descending order ) bladder cancer and other transitional cell carcinomas of the lower urinary tract ; malignant melanoma ; gastric carcinoma ; squamous cell carcinoma of the skin ; <unk> and nasal carcinoma . Other cancers that are known to commonly affect Scotties include mast cell sarcoma and <unk> . 
 Research has suggested that Scottish Terriers are 20 times more likely to get bladder cancer than other breeds and the most common kind of bladder cancer is transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder ( TCC ) . Dr. Deborah Knapp of Purdue University School of Veterinary Medicine has commented " TCC usually occurs in older dogs ( average age 11 years ) and is more common in females ( 2 : 1 ratio of females to males ) . " Symptoms of TCC are blood in the urine , straining to urinate , and frequent urination — although owners noticing any of these symptoms should also be aware that the same symptoms may also be indicative of a urinary tract infection . 
 The most common and effective form of treatment for TCC is <unk> , a non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drug that " allows the cancer cells to kill themselves . " In order to help prevent cancer in a dog , an owner should ensure that their dog has minimal exposure to herbicides , pesticides , solvents and cigarette smoke ; use caution when treating dogs with some flea medications ; provide a healthy , vitamin @-@ rich diet ( low in carbohydrates , high in vegetables ) and plenty of exercise . 
 = = = Scottie cramp = = = 
 Scottie cramp is an autosomal recessive hereditary disorder which inhibits the dog 's ability to walk . It is caused by a defect in the pathways in the brain that control muscle contraction due to a low level of serotonin in the body . Typically symptoms only show when the particular dog is under some degree of stress . The front legs are pushed out to the side , the back arches and the rear legs <unk> , causing the dog to fall should they be moving at speed . The condition is not seizure related , and the dog remains conscious throughout the event , with symptoms abating once the cause of the stress has been removed . 
 Vitamin E , Diazepam and Prozac have all been shown to be effective treatments should it be required . Scotty cramp is found in other breeds of terrier , including the <unk> Terrier . " Episodic Falling " , a condition found in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels is considered to be similar to this disorder . 
 = = = <unk> osteopathy = = = 
 Also known as " Lion Jaw " , " Westy Jaw " or " Scotty Jaw " , this condition of craniomandibular osteopathy is caused by excessive bone growth in the bottom jaw , usually occurring between four and seven months of age . Like Scottie Cramp , it is an autosomal recessive hereditary disorder , and can cause discomfort to the dog when it attempts to chew . The progression of the condition usually slows down between eleven and thirteen months of age , and is sometimes followed by a slow partial or complete regression . 
 This condition has also been seen in other breeds of dog , such as the West Highland White Terrier , Cairn Terrier , Boston Terrier , as well as some larger breeds such as <unk> . 
 = = = von Willebrand 's disease = = = 
 Von Willebrand 's disease is a hereditary bleeding disorder found in both dogs and humans . It is caused by a lack of von Willebrand factor which plays a role in the clotting process of blood . This can cause abnormal platelet function and prolonged bleeding times . Affected dogs can be prone to nose bleeds , and increased bleeding following trauma or surgery . There are three types of this condition with Type I being the most common , while Type II and III being rarer , but more severe . Type I von Willebrand 's disease is relatively common in the Scottish Terrier . 
 Type I is more widespread in Doberman Pinscher , but is as common in the Shetland Sheepdog as the Scottish Terrier . The condition appears in most breeds to some extent , but other breeds with an increased risk include the Golden Retriever , German Shepherd Dog , Basset Hound and Manchester Terrier . 
 = = History = = 
 Initial grouping of several of the highland terriers ( including the Scottie ) under the generic name Skye Terriers caused some confusion in the breed ’ s lineage . There is disagreement over whether the Skye Terriers mentioned in early 16th century records actually descended from forerunners of the Scottie or vice versa . It is certain , however , that Scotties and West Highland White Terriers are closely related — both their forefathers originated from the <unk> region of Perthshire and the Moor of Rannoch . Scotties were originally bred to hunt and kill vermin on farms and to hunt badgers and foxes in the Highlands of Scotland . 
 The actual origin of a breed as old as the Scottish Terrier is obscure and undocumented . The first written records about a dog of similar description to the Scottish Terrier dates from 1436 , when Don Leslie described them in his book The History of Scotland 1436 – 1561 . Two hundred years later , Sir Joshua Reynolds painted a portrait of a young girl caressing a dog similar in appearance to the modern @-@ day Scottie . King James VI of Scotland was an important historical figure featuring in the Scottish Terrier 's history . In the 17th century , when King James VI became James I of England , he sent six terriers — thought to be forerunners of the Scottish terrier — to a French monarch as a gift . His love and adoration for the breed increased their popularity throughout the world . 
 Many dog writers after the early 19th century seem to agree that there were two varieties of terrier existing in Britain at the time — a rough @-@ haired so @-@ called Scotch Terrier and a smooth @-@ haired English Terrier . Thomas Brown , in his Biological Sketches and Authentic Anecdotes of Dogs ( 1829 ) , states that " the Scotch terrier is certainly the purest in point of breed and the ( smooth ) English seems to have been produced by a cross from him " . Brown went on to describe the Scotch Terrier as " low in stature , with a strong muscular body , short stout legs , a head large in proportion to the body " and was " generally of a sandy colour or black " with a " long , matted and hard " coat . Although the Scotch Terrier described here is more generic than specific to a breed , it asserts the existence of a small , hard , rough @-@ coated terrier developed for hunting small game in the Scottish Highlands in the early 19th century ; a description that shares characteristics with what was once known as the Aberdeen Terrier and is today known as the Scottish Terrier . In addition , the paintings of Sir Edwin Landseer and an 1835 lithograph entitled " Scottish Terriers at Work on a Cairn in the West Highlands " both depict Scottie type terriers very similar to those described in the first Scottish Terrier Standard . 
 In the 19th century , the Highlands of Scotland , including the Isle of Skye , were abundant with terriers originally known by the generic term " short @-@ haired terriers " or " little Skye Terriers . " Towards the end of the 19th century , it was decided to separate these Scottish terriers and develop pure bloodlines and specific breeds . Originally , the breeds were separated into two categories : Dandie Dinmont Terriers and Skye Terriers ( not the Skye Terrier known today , but a generic name for a large group of terriers with differing traits all said to originate from the Isle of Skye ) . The Birmingham England dog show of 1860 was the first to offer classes for these groups of terriers . They continued to be exhibited in generic groups for several years and these groups included the ancestors of today 's Scottish Terrier . Recorded history and the initial development of the breed started in the late 1870s with the development of dog shows . The exhibition and judging of dogs required comparison to a breed standard and thus the appearance and temperament of the Scottie was written down for the first time . Eventually , the Skye Terriers were further divided into what are known today as the Scottish Terrier , Skye Terrier , West Highland White Terrier and Cairn Terrier . 
 While fanciers sought to identify and standardize the breed and its description through the late 19th century , the Scottish Terrier was known by many different names : the Highland , the Cairn , Diehard , and most often , the Aberdeen Terrier — named because of the abundant number of the dogs in the area and because a J. A. Adamson of Aberdeen successfully exhibited his dogs during the 1870s . Roger Rough , a dog owned by Adamson , Tartan , a dog owned by Mr Paynton Piggott , Bon Accord , owned by Messrs Ludlow and Bromfield , and Splinter II owned by Mr Ludlow , were early winners of dog exhibitions and are the four dogs from which all Scottish Terrier pedigrees ultimately began . It is often said that all present day Scotties stem from a single bitch , Splinter II , and two sires . In her book , The New Scottish Terrier , Cindy Cooke refers to Splinter II as the " foundation matron of the modern Scottish Terrier . " Cooke goes on to say " For whatever reason , early breeders line bred on this bitch to the virtual exclusion of all others . Mated to Tartan , she produced Worry , the dam of four champions . Rambler , her son by <unk> , sired the two founding sires of the breed , Ch . Dundee ( out of Worry ) and Ch . Alistair ( out of a Dundee daughter ) " Show champions on both sides of the Atlantic descend from Splinter and her sires . 
 Captain Gordon Murray and S.E. Shirley were responsible for setting the type in 1879 . Shortly afterwards , in 1879 , Scotties were for the first time exhibited at Alexander Palace in England , while the following year they began to be classified in much the same way as is done today . The first written standard of the breed was drafted by J.B. Morrison and D.J. Thomson Gray and appeared in Vero Shaw 's Illustrated Book of The Dog , published in 1880 ; it was extremely influential in setting both breed type and name . The standard described the breed 's colouring as " Grey , Grizzle or Brindle " , as the typically Black colouring of Scotties did not become fashionable or favoured until the 20th century . 
 In 1881 the " Scottish Terrier Club of England " was founded , being the first club dedicated to the breed . The club secretary , H.J. Ludlow , is responsible for greatly popularising the breed in the southern parts of Great Britain . The " Scottish Terrier Club of Scotland " was not founded until 1888 , seven years after the English club . Following the formation of the English and Scottish clubs there followed several years of disagreement regarding the breed 's official standard . The issue was finally settled by a revised standard in 1930 , which was based on four prepotent dogs . The dogs were Robert and James Chapman 's Heather Necessity , <unk> Barty , bred by AG Cowley , <unk> Annie Laurie , bred by Miss Wijk and Miss Wijk 's Marksman of <unk> ( the litter brother of Annie Laurie ) . These four dogs and their offspring modified the look of the Scottie , particularly the length of the head , closeness to the ground and the <unk> of body . Their subsequent success in the show ring led to them becoming highly sought after by the British public and breeders . As such , the modified standard completely revolutionized the breed . This new standard was subsequently recognised by the Kennel Club UK circa 1930 . 
 Scotties were introduced to America in the early 1890s , but it was not until the years between World War I and World War II that the breed became popular . The Scottish Terrier Club of America ( <unk> ) was formed in 1900 and a standard written in 1925 . The Scottish Terrier was recognized by the United Kennel Club in 1934 . By 1936 , Scotties were the third most popular breed in the United States . Although they did not permanently stay in fashion , they continue to enjoy a steady popularity with a large segment of the dog @-@ owning public across the world . The <unk> founded its Health Trust Fund ( <unk> ) in 1995 which supports research on health issues in the breed . 
 Scottish Terriers have won best in show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show more than any other breed except for the Wire Fox Terrier , a total of nine times . These victories began in 1911 with a win by Ch . Tickle Em Jock and include recent victories such as in 1995 when Ch . <unk> Post Script ( Peggy Sue ) won , and in 2010 with a victory by Ch . <unk> Mercedes Of <unk> . 
 = = Famous Scotties and popular culture = = 
 The Scottie and the German Shepherd are the only breeds of dog that have lived in the White House more than three times . President Franklin D. Roosevelt was renowned for owning a Scottie named Fala , a gift from his distant cousin , Margaret <unk> . The President loved Fala so much that he rarely went anywhere without him . Roosevelt had several Scotties before Fala , including one named Duffy and another named Mr. Duffy . Eleanor Roosevelt had a Scottish Terrier named Meggie when the family entered the White House in 1933 . More recently , President George W. Bush has owned two black Scottish Terriers , Barney and Miss Beazley . Barney starred in nine films produced by the White House . 
 Other famous people who are known to have owned Scotties include : Queen Victoria , Eva Braun , Dwight D. Eisenhower , Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , Ed Whitfield , Rudyard Kipling and President of Poland , Lech Kaczynski . Actress Tatum O 'Neal owned a Scottish Terrier . She was said to be so saddened by her dog 's death to cancer and old age that she relapsed into drugs . 
 The Scottie is also renowned for being featured in the popular board game , Monopoly , as a player token . When the game was first created in the 1930s , Scotties were one of the most popular pets in the United States , and it is also one of the most popular Monopoly game tokens , according to Matt Collins , vice president of marketing for Hasbro . A Scottish Terrier named Dulcinea is a scene @-@ stealer in the 1998 Latin American novel Yo @-@ Yo Boing ! by Giannina Braschi . 
 In May 2007 , Carnegie Mellon University named the Scottish Terrier its official mascot . The Scottie had been a long @-@ running unofficial mascot of the university , whose founder 's Scottish heritage is also honored by the official athletic nickname of " Tartans " . Agnes Scott College in Decatur , Georgia also uses the Scottie as their mascot . The dog 's image is a symbol for the Radley brand of bags . The amateur athletics organisation <unk> has an anthropomorphic Scottish Terrier as its mascot . 
 = Wallis Simpson = 
 Wallis , Duchess of Windsor ( previously Wallis Simpson , Wallis Spencer , and Wallis Warfield ; 19 June 1896 – 24 April 1986 ) was an American socialite . Her third husband , Prince Edward , Duke of Windsor , formerly King Edward VIII , abdicated his throne to marry her . 
 Wallis 's father died shortly after her birth , and she and her widowed mother were partly supported by their wealthier relatives . Her first marriage , to U.S. naval officer Win Spencer , was punctuated by periods of separation and eventually ended in divorce . In 1934 , during her second marriage , to Ernest Simpson , she allegedly became the mistress of Edward , Prince of Wales . Two years later , after Edward 's accession as king , Wallis divorced her second husband in order to marry Edward . 
 The King 's desire to marry a woman who had two living ex @-@ husbands threatened to cause a constitutional crisis in the United Kingdom and the Dominions , and ultimately led to his abdication in December 1936 to marry " the woman I love " . After the abdication , the former king was created Duke of Windsor by his brother and successor , King George VI . Edward married Wallis six months later , after which she was formally known as the Duchess of Windsor , without the style " Her Royal Highness " . She was instead styled as " Her Grace " , a style normally reserved only for non @-@ royal dukes and duchesses . 
 Before , during , and after World War II , the Duke and Duchess of Windsor were suspected by many in government and society of being Nazi sympathisers . In 1937 , they visited Germany and met Adolf Hitler . In the 1950s and 1960s , she and the Duke shuttled between Europe and United States living a life of leisure as society celebrities . After the Duke 's death in 1972 , the Duchess lived in seclusion , and was rarely seen in public . Her private life has been a source of much speculation , and she remains a controversial figure in British history . 
 = = Early life = = 
 An only child , Bessie Wallis ( sometimes written " <unk> " ) Warfield was born in Square Cottage at Monterey Inn , a hotel directly across the road from the Monterey Country Club , in Blue Ridge Summit , Pennsylvania . A summer resort close to the Maryland – Pennsylvania border , Blue Ridge Summit was popular with Baltimoreans escaping the season 's heat , and Monterey Inn , which had a central building as well as individual wooden cottages , was the town 's largest hotel . Her father was Teackle Wallis Warfield , fifth and youngest son of Henry <unk> Warfield , a flour merchant described as " one of the best known and personally one of the most popular citizens of Baltimore " who ran for mayor in 1875 . Her mother was Alice Montague , a daughter of insurance salesman William Montague . Wallis was named in honour of her father ( who was known as Wallis ) and her mother 's elder sister , Bessie ( Mrs D. Buchanan Merryman ) , and was called Bessie Wallis until at some time during her youth the name Bessie was dropped . 
 According to a wedding announcement in the Baltimore Sun ( 20 November 1895 ) , her parents were married , by Reverend C. Ernest Smith , at Baltimore 's Saint Michael and All Angels ' Protestant Episcopal Church on 19 November 1895 , though Wallis claimed her parents were married in June 1895 . Her father died of tuberculosis on 15 November 1896 . For her first few years , she and her mother were dependent upon the charity of her father 's wealthy bachelor brother Solomon Davies Warfield , postmaster of Baltimore and later president of the Continental Trust Company and the Seaboard Air Line Railway . Initially , they lived with him at the four @-@ story row house , 34 East Preston Street , that he shared with his mother . 
 In 1901 , Wallis 's aunt Bessie Merryman was widowed , and the following year Alice and Wallis moved into her four @-@ bedroom house on West Chase Street , Baltimore , where they lived for at least a year until they settled in an apartment , and then a house , of their own . In 1908 , Wallis 's mother married her second husband , John Freeman <unk> , son of a prominent Democratic party boss . On 17 April 1910 , Wallis was confirmed at Christ Episcopal Church , Baltimore , and between 1912 and 1914 her uncle Warfield paid for her to attend Oldfields School , the most expensive girls ' school in Maryland . There she became a friend of heiress Renée du Pont , a daughter of Senator T. Coleman du Pont , of the du Pont family , and Mary Kirk , whose family founded Kirk Silverware . A fellow pupil at one of Wallis 's schools recalled , " She was bright , brighter than all of us . She made up her mind to go to the head of the class , and she did . " Wallis was always immaculately dressed and pushed herself hard to do well . A later biographer wrote of her " Though Wallis 's jaw was too heavy for her to be counted beautiful , her fine violet @-@ blue eyes and petite figure , quick wits , vitality , and capacity for total concentration on her interlocutor ensured that she had many admirers . " 
 = = First marriage = = 
 In April 1916 , Wallis met Earl Winfield Spencer , Jr . , a U.S. Navy aviator , at Pensacola , Florida , while visiting her cousin Corinne Mustin . It was at this time that Wallis witnessed two airplane crashes about two weeks apart , resulting in a lifelong fear of flying . The couple married on 8 November 1916 at Christ Episcopal Church in Baltimore , which had been Wallis 's parish . Win , as her husband was known , was an alcoholic . He drank even before flying and once crashed into the sea , but escaped almost unharmed . After the United States entered World War I in 1917 , Spencer was posted to San Diego as the first commanding officer of a training base in Coronado , known as Naval Air Station North Island ; they remained there until 1921 . In 1920 , Edward , the Prince of Wales , visited San Diego , but he and Wallis did not meet . Later that year , Spencer left his wife for a period of four months , but in the spring of 1921 they were reunited in Washington , D.C. , where Spencer had been posted . They soon separated again , and in 1922 , when Spencer was posted to the Far East as commander of the Pampanga , Wallis remained behind , continuing an affair with an Argentine diplomat , Felipe de <unk> . In January 1924 , she visited Paris with her recently widowed cousin Corinne Mustin , before sailing to the Far East aboard a troop carrier , USS Chaumont ( AP @-@ 5 ) . The Spencers were briefly reunited until she fell ill , after which she returned to Hong Kong . 
 Wallis toured China , and while in Beijing stayed with Katherine and Herman Rogers , who were to remain long @-@ term friends . According to the wife of one of Win 's fellow officers , Mrs Milton E. Miles , in Beijing Wallis met Count Galeazzo Ciano , later Mussolini 's son @-@ in @-@ law and Foreign Minister , had an affair with him , and became pregnant , leading to a botched abortion that left her unable to conceive . The rumour was later widespread but never substantiated and Ciano 's wife , Edda Mussolini , denied it . The existence of an official " China dossier " ( detailing the supposed sexual and criminal exploits of Wallis in China ) is denied by most historians and biographers . Wallis spent over a year in China . By September 1925 , she and her husband were back in the United States , though living apart . Their divorce was finalised on 10 December 1927 . 
 = = Second marriage = = 
 By the time her marriage to Spencer was dissolved , Wallis had become involved with Ernest Aldrich Simpson , an Anglo @-@ American shipping executive and former officer in the Coldstream Guards . He divorced his first wife , Dorothea ( by whom he had a daughter , Audrey ) , to marry Wallis on 21 July 1928 at the Register Office in Chelsea , London . Wallis had telegraphed her acceptance of his proposal from Cannes where she was staying with her friends , Mr and Mrs Rogers . 
 The Simpsons temporarily set up home in a furnished house with four servants in Mayfair . In 1929 , Wallis sailed back to the United States to visit her sick mother , who had married legal clerk Charles Gordon Allen after the death of <unk> . During the trip , Wallis 's investments were wiped out in the Wall Street Crash , and her mother died penniless on 2 November 1929 . Wallis returned to England and with the shipping business still buoyant , the Simpsons moved into a large flat with a staff of servants . 
 Through a friend , Consuelo Thaw , Wallis met Consuelo 's sister Thelma , Lady Furness , the then @-@ mistress of Edward , Prince of Wales . On 10 January 1931 , Lady Furness introduced Wallis to the Prince at Burrough Court , near Melton Mowbray . The Prince was the eldest son of King George V and Queen Mary , and heir apparent to the British throne . Between 1931 and 1934 , he met the Simpsons at various house parties , and Wallis was presented at court . Ernest was beginning to encounter financial difficulties , as the Simpsons were living beyond their means , and they had to fire a succession of staff . 
 = = Relationship with Edward , Prince of Wales = = 
 In January 1934 , while Lady Furness was away in New York City , Wallis allegedly became the Prince 's mistress . Edward denied this to his father , despite his staff seeing them in bed together as well as " evidence of a physical sexual act " . Wallis soon ousted Lady Furness , and the Prince distanced himself from a former lover and confidante , the Anglo @-@ American textile heiress Freda Dudley Ward . 
 By the end of 1934 , Edward was irretrievably besotted with Wallis , finding her domineering manner and abrasive irreverence toward his position appealing ; in the words of his official biographer , he became " slavishly dependent " on her . According to Wallis , it was during a cruise on Lord Moyne 's private yacht <unk> in August 1934 that she fell in love with Edward . At an evening party in Buckingham Palace , he introduced her to his mother — his father was outraged , primarily on account of her marital history , as divorced people were generally excluded from court . Edward showered Wallis with money and jewels , and in February 1935 , and again later in the year , he holidayed with her in Europe . His courtiers became increasingly alarmed as the affair began to interfere with his official duties . 
 In 1935 , the head of the Metropolitan Police Special Branch told the Metropolitan Police Commissioner that Wallis was also having an affair with Guy Marcus Trundle , who was " said to be employed by the Ford Motor Company " . Claims of an affair were doubted , however , by Captain Val Bailey , who knew Trundle well and whose mother had an affair with Trundle for nearly two decades , and by historian Susan Williams . 
 = = Abdication crisis = = 
 On 20 January 1936 , George V died at Sandringham and Edward ascended the throne as King Edward VIII . The next day , he broke royal protocol by watching the proclamation of his accession from a window of St James 's Palace , in the company of the still @-@ married Wallis . It was becoming apparent to Court and Government circles that the new King @-@ Emperor meant to marry her . The King 's behaviour and his relationship with Wallis made him unpopular with the Conservative @-@ led British government , as well as distressing his mother and his brother , the Duke of York . The British media remained deferential to the monarchy , and no stories of the affair were reported in the domestic press , but foreign media widely reported their relationship . 
 The monarch of the United Kingdom is Supreme Governor of the Church of England — at the time of the proposed marriage , and until 2002 , the Church of England did not permit the remarriage of divorced people who had living ex @-@ spouses . Constitutionally , the King was required to be in communion with the Church of England , but his proposed marriage conflicted with the Church 's teachings . Furthermore , the British and Dominion governments felt that Wallis , as a two @-@ time divorcée , was politically , socially , and morally unsuitable as a prospective consort . She was perceived by many in the British Empire as a woman of " limitless ambition " who was pursuing the King because of his wealth and position . 
 Wallis had already filed for divorce from her second husband on the grounds that he had committed adultery with her childhood friend Mary Kirk and the decree nisi was granted on 27 October 1936 . In November , the King consulted with the British Prime Minister , Stanley Baldwin , on a way to marry Wallis and keep the throne . The King suggested a morganatic marriage , where he would remain king but Wallis would not be queen , but this was rejected by Baldwin and the Prime Ministers of Australia and South Africa . If the King were to marry Wallis against Baldwin 's advice , the Government would be required to resign , causing a constitutional crisis . 
 Wallis 's relationship with the King had become public knowledge in the United Kingdom by early December . She decided to flee the country as the scandal broke , and was driven to the south of France in a dramatic race to outrun the press . For the next three months , she was under siege by the media at the Villa Lou <unk> , near Cannes , the home of her close friends Herman and Katherine Rogers . At her hideaway , Wallis was pressured by the King 's Lord @-@ in @-@ Waiting , Lord Brownlow , to renounce the King . On 7 December 1936 , Lord Brownlow read to the press her statement , which he had helped her draft , indicating Wallis 's readiness to give up the King . However , Edward was determined to marry Wallis . John Theodore Goddard , Wallis 's solicitor , stated : " [ his ] client was ready to do anything to ease the situation but the other end of the wicket [ Edward VIII ] was determined . " This seemingly indicated that the King had decided he had no option but to abdicate if he wished to marry Wallis . 
 The King signed the Instrument of Abdication on 10 December 1936 , in the presence of his three surviving brothers , the Duke of York ( who would ascend the throne the following day as George VI ) , the Duke of Gloucester and the Duke of Kent . Special laws passed by the Parliaments of the Dominions finalised Edward 's abdication the following day , or in Ireland 's case one day later . On 11 December 1936 , Edward said in a radio broadcast , " I have found it impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility , and to discharge my duties as King as I would wish to do , without the help and support of the woman I love . " 
 Edward left Britain for Austria , where he stayed at Schloss <unk> , the home of Baron Eugen and Baroness Kitty de Rothschild . Edward had to remain apart from Wallis until there was no danger of compromising the granting of a decree absolute in her divorce proceedings . Upon her divorce being made final in May 1937 , she changed her name by deed poll to Wallis Warfield , resuming her maiden name . The couple were reunited at the Château de Candé , Monts , France , on 4 May 1937 . 
 = = Third marriage : Duchess of Windsor = = 
 Wallis and Edward married one month later on 3 June 1937 at the Château de Candé , loaned to them by French millionaire Charles <unk> . The date would have been King George V 's 72nd birthday ; Queen Mary thought the wedding had been scheduled for then as a deliberate slight . No member of Edward 's family attended . Wallis wore a " Wallis blue " Mainbocher wedding dress . The marriage produced no children . In November , Ernest Simpson married Mary Kirk . 
 Edward was created Duke of Windsor by his brother , George VI , prior to the marriage . However , letters patent , passed by the new king and unanimously supported by the Dominion governments , prevented Wallis , now the Duchess of Windsor , from sharing her husband 's style of " Royal Highness " . George VI 's firm view that the Duchess should not be given a royal title was shared by Queen Mary and George 's wife , Queen Elizabeth ( later the Queen Mother ) . At first , the British royal family did not accept the Duchess and would not receive her formally , although the former king sometimes met his mother and siblings after his abdication . Some biographers have suggested that Wallis 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , Queen Elizabeth , remained bitter towards her for her role in bringing George VI to the throne ( which she may have seen as a factor in his early death ) and for prematurely behaving as Edward 's consort when she was his mistress . These claims were denied by Queen Elizabeth 's close friends , such as the Duke of Grafton , who wrote that she " never said anything nasty about the Duchess of Windsor , except to say she really hadn 't got a clue what she was dealing with . " On the other hand , the Duchess of Windsor referred to Queen Elizabeth as " Mrs Temple " and " Cookie " , alluding to her solid figure and fondness for food , and to her daughter , Princess Elizabeth ( later Queen Elizabeth II ) , as " Shirley " , as in Shirley Temple . The Duchess bitterly resented the denial of the royal title and the refusal of the Duke 's relatives to accept her as part of the family . Within the household of the Duke and Duchess , the style " Her Royal Highness " was used by those who were close to the couple . 
 According to the wife of former British Union of Fascists leader Oswald Mosley , Diana Mitford , who knew both Queen Elizabeth and the Duchess of Windsor but was only friendly with the latter , the Queen 's antipathy toward her sister @-@ in @-@ law may have resulted from jealousy . Lady Mosley wrote to her sister , the Duchess of Devonshire , after the death of the Duke of Windsor , " probably the theory of their [ the Windsors ' ] contemporaries that Cake [ a Mitford nickname for the Queen Mother , derived from her delighted exclamation at the party at which Deborah Devonshire first met her ] was rather in love with him [ the Duke ] ( as a girl ) & took second best , may account for much . " 
 The Duke and Duchess lived in France in the pre @-@ war years . In 1937 , they made a high profile visit to Germany and met Adolf Hitler at his Berchtesgaden retreat . After the visit , Hitler said of Wallis , " she would have made a good Queen " . The visit tended to corroborate the strong suspicions of many in government and society that the Duchess was a German agent , a claim that she ridiculed in her letters to the Duke . U.S. FBI files compiled in the 1930s also portray her as a possible Nazi sympathiser . Duke Carl Alexander of Württemberg told the FBI that she and leading Nazi Joachim von Ribbentrop had been lovers in London . There were even rather improbable reports during World War II that she kept a signed photograph of Ribbentrop on her bedside table . 
 = = World War II = = 
 As the German troops advanced , the Duke and Duchess fled south from their Paris home , first to Biarritz , then in June to Spain . There , she told the United States ambassador , Alexander W. Weddell , that France had lost because it was " internally diseased " . In July , the pair moved to Lisbon , Portugal , where they stayed at the home of Ricardo de Espirito Santo e Silva , a banker who was suspected of being a German agent . In August , the Duke and Duchess travelled by commercial liner to the Bahamas , where the Duke was installed as Governor . 
 Wallis performed her role as the Bahamas ' first lady competently for five years ; she worked actively for the Red Cross and in the improvement of infant welfare . However , she hated Nassau , calling it " our St Helena " , in a reference to Napoleon 's final place of exile . She was heavily criticised in the British press for her extravagant shopping in the United States , undertaken when Britain was enduring privations such as rationing and the blackout . Her attitude towards the local population , whom she called " lazy , thriving niggers " in letters to her aunt , reflected her upbringing . In 1941 , Prime Minister Winston Churchill strenuously objected when she and her husband planned to tour the Caribbean aboard a yacht belonging to a Swedish magnate , Axel Wenner @-@ Gren , who Churchill said was " pro @-@ German " . Churchill felt compelled to complain again when the Duke gave a " defeatist " interview . Another of their acquaintances , Charles <unk> , who had hosted their marriage , was arrested on charges of treason in 1943 , and committed suicide in jail in Miami before the case was brought to trial . The British establishment distrusted the Duchess ; Sir Alexander Hardinge wrote that her suspected anti @-@ British activities were motivated by a desire for revenge against a country that rejected her as its queen . After the defeat of Nazi Germany , the couple returned to France and retirement . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1946 , when the Duchess was staying at <unk> Lodge , the home of the Earl of Dudley , some of her jewels were stolen . There were rumours that the theft had been masterminded by the royal family as an attempt to regain jewels taken from the Royal Collection by the Duke , or by the Windsors themselves as part of an insurance fraud — they made a large deposit of loose stones at Cartier the following year . However , in 1960 , Richard <unk> confessed to the crime . The stolen pieces were only a small portion of the Windsor jewels , which were either bought privately , inherited by the Duke , or given to the Duke when he was Prince of Wales . 
 Later they were offered the use of a house by the Paris municipal authorities . The couple lived at 4 route du Champ d <unk> in the Bois de Boulogne , near Neuilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine , for most of the remainder of their lives , essentially living a life of easy retirement . They bought a second house in the country , Moulin de la <unk> or " The Mill " in <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Yvette , where they soon became close friends of their neighbours , Oswald and Diana Mosley . Years later , Diana Mosley claimed that the Duke and Duchess shared her and her husband 's views that Hitler should have been given a free hand to destroy Communism ; as the Duke wrote in the New York Daily News of 13 December 1966 : " it was in Britain 's interest and in Europe 's too , that Germany be encouraged to strike east and smash Communism forever ... I thought the rest of us could be fence @-@ sitters while the Nazis and the Reds slogged it out . " 
 In 1965 , the Duke and Duchess visited London as the Duke required eye surgery for a detached retina ; Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Marina , Duchess of Kent , visited them . The Duke 's sister , the Princess Royal , also visited just 10 days before her death . They attended her memorial service in Westminster Abbey . Later , in 1967 , the Duke and Duchess joined the royal family in London for the unveiling of a plaque by Elizabeth II to commemorate the centenary of Queen Mary 's birth . Both Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Charles visited the Windsors in Paris in the Duke 's later years , the Queen 's visit coming only shortly before the Duke died . 
 = = Widowhood and death = = 
