 = = = Order of battle = = = 
 = = = = North Vietnam = = = = 
 In March 1975 the Vietnam People 's Army Central Highlands Front , under the command of General Hoang Minh Thao , were given the responsibility of carrying out Campaign 275 to capture key objectives in the Central Highlands . Major General Vu Lang was the deputy commander , Colonel Dang Vu Hiep was appointed the Front ’ s political commissar , and Colonel Phi Trieu Ham was the deputy political commissar . 
 The Central Highlands Front fielded five infantry divisions ( 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ , 10th , 316th , 320A and 968th Infantry Divisions ) and four independent regiments ( 25th , 271st , <unk> , and 95B Infantry Regiments ) . To support the aforementioned units , North Vietnam deployed the 273rd Armoured Regiment , two artillery units ( 40th and 675th Artillery Regiments ) , three air @-@ defence units ( 232nd , 234th , and 593rd Air @-@ Defence Regiments ) , two combat engineer units ( 7th and 575th Combat Engineer Regiments ) , and the 29th Communications Regiment . 
 = = = = Offensive strategy = = = = 
 Between February 17 and February 19 , 1975 , North Vietnamese field commanders in the Central Highlands Front held a conference to plan for their upcoming offensive . In order to plan their combat strategy , North Vietnamese commanders assessed the potential obstacles faced by the Vietnam People ’ s Army and the strength of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) in the Central Highlands . Following extensive discussions , North Vietnamese commanders concluded that the South Vietnamese army in the Central Highlands could mobilise about 5 – 7 regiment @-@ sized units to counter the upcoming offensive . In the worst @-@ case scenario , if South Vietnamese units were not tied up elsewhere , North Vietnamese commanders thought that South Vietnam could probably mobilise between nine and twelve regiments . North Vietnamese commanders believed South Vietnam could deploy about one or two armoured brigades , three to five battalions of artillery , and 80 aircraft per day to support the army . The North Vietnamese commanders within the Central Highlands Front discussed the possibility of the United States re @-@ entering the conflict , which they believed would see the commitment of about 100 fighter @-@ bombers from the United States Seventh Fleet . 
 Aside from dealing with the army formations which South Vietnam might have deployed , the question of where and when to strike was the main problem that concerned the North Vietnamese . After the strength of both armies had been taken into account , the Central Highlands High Command came up with two offensive options . 
 In the first option , the North Vietnamese could avoid the outlying South Vietnamese installations and strike directly at their primary target of Ban Me Thuot . For the first option to be successful , the North Vietnamese had to secure Highways 14 , 19 , and 21 to isolate Ban Me Thuot , and stop potential South Vietnamese reinforcements . The North Vietnamese favoured the first option , because it would give the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and other support units little or no time to respond . At the same time , the first option would have enabled a quick victory without inflicting large @-@ scale damage on the civilian population of Ban Me Thuot . 
 In the second option , the North Vietnamese had to destroy all the outlying South Vietnamese defences and then move on to Ban Me Thuot . The Central Highlands Front , under General Hoang Minh Thao 's command , ordered all combat units to follow the second option and destroy the defences around Ban Me Thuot , but to be ready to switch to the first option when the opportunity presented itself . 
 = = = = South Vietnam = = = = 
 The 23rd Division ( South Vietnam ) under the command of Brigadier General Tran Van Cam was the main unit defending Ban Me Thuot and the surrounding areas . Major General Pham Van Phu had at his disposal five artillery battalions equipped with 146 artillery guns , and one armoured brigade of about 117 tanks and armoured vehicles . The South Vietnamese military also stationed air force and naval units in Ban Me Thuot . 
 The Army of the Republic of Vietnam also had the 22nd Division ( South Vietnam ) , seven ranger battalions , 36 regional force battalions , eight artillery battalions equipped with 230 artillery guns , and four armoured brigades in the Central Highlands . To support those ground units , the South Vietnamese air force had 32 fighter @-@ bombers , 86 helicopters , and 32 transport and reconnaissance aircraft . 
 Across the Central Highlands of Vietnam , the South Vietnamese military enjoyed a numerical superiority of about 78 @,@ 300 soldiers against North Vietnam ’ s 65 @,@ 141 soldiers . However , within the vicinity of Ban Me Thuot , the South Vietnamese were actually outnumbered by a ratio of 5 : 1 . The North Vietnamese had more tanks , armoured vehicles , and heavy artillery , with a ratio of about 2 : 1 . North Vietnamese General Van Tien Dung believed his tank and artillery units in the Central Highlands were the key factors that guaranteed a quick victory , because South Vietnam simply lacked the capability to withstand such large numbers of heavy weaponry . 
 = = = = South Vietnamese preparations = = = = 
 On February 18 , 1975 , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu gathered all his commanders at the Independence Palace to discuss the Ly Thuong Kiet Military Plan , which was approved by the National Security Council in December 1974 . During a briefing by ARVN Colonel Hoang Ngoc Lung , Head of the ARVN General Staff , several important issues were brought to the attention of President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu and the ARVN Corps commanders . Firstly , information gathered by the South Vietnamese army showed there were seven North Vietnamese divisions in the northern areas of South Vietnam ’ s I Corps Tactical Zone . Secondly , there were signs which suggested that the North Vietnamese might launch a large @-@ scale attack during the spring @-@ summer season of 1975 . And thirdly , the II Corps Tactical Zone under the command of Major General Pham Van Phu was most likely North Vietnam ’ s first target . On February 19 General Phu returned to Pleiku to draw up a defence plan . 
 During the next few days , reports from South Vietnamese intelligence showed that North Vietnam ’ s 968th Infantry Division had arrived in South Vietnam ’ s II Corps from Laos . Two divisions ( 10th and 320A Infantry Divisions ) had taken up positions around Pleiku and Kon Tum , while two regiments ( 271st and 202nd Regiments ) had set up their base in Quang Duc . On March 2 a CIA officer flew out from Nha Trang to inform ARVN Colonel Nguyen Trong Luat of North Vietnamese preparations to attack Ban Me Thuot , without offering information on the strength of North Vietnamese formations . In response to the CIA report , General Phu ordered the 53rd Regiment to move from Quang Duc to Ban Me Thuot , and the 45th Regiment from Thuan Man to Thanh An @-@ Don Tham . General Phu did not make any further changes to the South Vietnamese order of battle in or around Ban Me Thuot . Thus , by the time the North Vietnamese opened fire on Ban Me Thuot , General Phu had simply failed to implement an effective plan to save II Corps . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Diversions = = = 
 In February 1975 , during the midst of Tet New Year celebrations , a North Vietnamese deserter surrendered himself to the ARVN 2nd Brigade Headquarters . Through extensive interrogations , the North Vietnamese soldier revealed the whereabouts of North Vietnamese units ; the 10th Infantry Division had encircled Duc Lap , while the 320A Infantry Division had arrived in Ea H ’ leo and were gearing up for an assault on Thuan Man , and an unknown unit was heading towards Ban Me Thuot . In late February , North Vietnamese artillery shells began to rain down on Pleiku , which convinced General Phu that the North Vietnamese would attack Pleiku instead of Ban Me Thuot . South Vietnamese military intelligence and information received from the American Embassy in Saigon showed the presence of about two or three North Vietnamese combat divisions positioned about 20 kilometres away from Kontum and Pleiku . Indeed , the movements around Pleiku and Kontum during the month of February were designed by the North Vietnamese Tay Nguyen Front to fool South Vietnamese military commanders in the Central Highlands . 
 Since December 1974 , the North Vietnamese prepared for the offensive by conducting raids on various South Vietnamese outposts and broadcasting fake radio messages to keep South Vietnamese commanders guessing about the location of their next assault . While the South Vietnamese units were kept occupied by Communist diversions , North Vietnamese General Hoang Minh Thao began moving his troops into attacking positions . The VPA 7th Combat Engineer Regiment was tasked with connecting Route 14 at North Vo Dinh with Highway 19 near Mang Yang Pass , which surpassed the district of Kontum . The VPA 10th Infantry Division began withdrawing from Duc Lap , and only left a small force behind to continue the bombardment of Pleiku , as artillery and tanks units took positions north of Kontum . The 320A Infantry Division deployed a small unit west of Pleiku to apply additional pressure on South Vietnamese positions at La Son , Thanh An , and Don Tam . Elements of the 95th Regiment conducted blocking operations along Highway 19 to stop South Vietnamese reinforcements from reaching their destination . The 198th Special Forces Regiment raided South Vietnamese depots at Pleiku , while the main formation of the 10th and 320A Infantry Divisions marched on Ban Me Thuot . 
 Personnel from local Viet Cong units infiltrated Kontum and Pleiku to spread rumours of a ‘ big Communist offensive ’ on the aforementioned districts . In response to the rumours , the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment was sent out to sweep the areas near Ban Me Thuot , Thuan Man , and Duc Lap . To maintain the secrecy of their operations , the North Vietnamese Tay Nguyen Front ordered the 320A Infantry Division , which had by then set up camp west of Ban Me Thuot , to avoid contact with the South Vietnamese . Upon their arrival from Laos , the 316th Infantry Division received similar orders , and was not allowed to open fire under any circumstances . As the events in South Vietnam ’ s II Corps Tactical Zone were beginning to unfold , intelligence reports from Saigon continued to warn General Phu of an imminent Communist onslaught on Ban Me Thuot . Despite the numerous warnings which he had received from the CIA and his own military intelligence , General Phu remained convinced that Pleiku would be North Vietnam ’ s next target . As a result , on February 18 , 1975 , he ordered the 23rd Infantry Division to remain at their positions in Kontum and Pleiku , thereby reversing his earlier decision to bolster South Vietnamese defences at Ban Me Thuot . 
 = = = Closing in = = = 
 On March 3 , 1975 , North Vietnam ’ s Campaign 275 against South Vietnamese military forces in the Central Highlands began . The <unk> Regiment was the first unit to go into action when they destroyed one South Vietnamese regional force battalion and successfully secured a 20 @-@ kilometre stretch of road on Highway 19 connecting Ayun with <unk> and Phu Yen . Later , elements of the North Vietnamese 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ Division secured a section of Highway 19 at Thuong An that connected with Bridge <unk> at Dong An Khe , killing about 300 South Vietnamese soldiers . On the night of March 5 , the North Vietnamese 25th Regiment ambushed a South Vietnamese transportation convoy at Chi <unk> and cut off Highway 21 west of Ban Me Thuot . To keep all the main roads open , Phu sent reinforcements to defend a section of Highway 19 at the eastern side of <unk> and ordered the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment to march back from Thuan Man to defend Route 14 at southern Pleiku . The ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Vu The Quang , was redeployed from Quang Duc Province to defend Ban Me Thuot . By March 8 , the North Vietnamese army had completely isolated the South Vietnamese II Corps Tactical Zone from the rest of the country . Route 7 , which had not been used for a long time due to neglect , was the only road still open . 
 On March 5 Quang sent one of his battalions to Ban Me Thuot in a convoy of 14 vehicles . They were ambushed by the North Vietnamese 9th Regiment , 320A Infantry Division at Thuan Man . Eight vehicles were destroyed , while two 150mm artillery guns were captured by the North Vietnamese . The remaining seven vehicles had to turn back , and Quang returned to Ban Me Thuot on a helicopter . On March 7 the North Vietnamese 48th Regiment , 320A Infantry Division , captured Chu Se and Thuan Man , and took 121 soldiers prisoner . On March 9 Phu ordered the 21st Ranger Battalion to fly out from Pleiku to support the 53rd Infantry Regiment in their efforts to retake Thuan Man . During the early hours of March 9 , as the 21st Ranger Battalion and the 53rd Infantry Regiment were repeatedly beaten back in their attempts to retake Thuan Man , the under @-@ strength North Vietnamese 10th Regiment captured Duc Lap and the surrounding areas . 
 At 11 am on March 9 , Phu flew out to Ban Me Thuot to assess the military situation with Brigadier General Le Trung Tuong , Colonel Vu The Quang , and Colonel Nguyen Trong Luat . Phu admitted that the situation at Duc Lap was irreversible . The 21st Ranger Battalion was reassigned to the north of Ban Me Thuot , the 2nd Battalion of the 53rd Infantry Regiment was to defend <unk> Sac , and when the opportunity arose they would be tasked with retaking Duc Lap . Subsequently , Quang was entrusted with the task of defending Ban Me Thuot . Despite the strong presence of two North Vietnamese divisions outside Ban Me Thuot , Phu believed the situation outside the district was only a mere diversion attempt , and the real target would be Pleiku . Thus , upon arrival at his Pleiku headquarters , he raised the level of alertness there to 100 % . While Phu was waiting for the enemy to assault Pleiku , the North Vietnamese 7th and 575th Combat Engineer Regiments cleared the main roads into Ban Me Thuot to ensure tanks and heavy artillery could be directed at the district without hindrance . By the early hours of March 10 , the North Vietnamese army was in a strong position to strike at Ban Me Thuot . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Fall of Ban Me Thuot = = = 
 At 2 am on March 10 , 1975 , the North Vietnamese army began their assault on South Vietnamese forces at Ban Me Thuot . The North Vietnamese 198th Special Forces Regiment spearheaded the attack by hitting the Hoa Binh Airfield , the district of Mai Hac De , and the headquarters of the ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment . The initial North Vietnamese attack , which was marked by heavy artillery bombardment and actions initiated by the 198th Special Forces Regiment , had shocked ARVN Colonels Nguyen Trong Luat and Vu The Quang , both subordinates of Major General Pham Van Phu . Despite the strength of the initial assault , Quang believed the North Vietnamese only wanted to cause disruption and would withdraw their forces by daybreak . By 3 : 30 am , the 4th Battalion , 198th Special Forces Regiment , had successfully secured Phan Chu Trinh Road and the southern part of Hoa Binh airport , and they waited there for the regular infantry and tank units to arrive . 
 The North Vietnamese 5th Battalion , 198th Special Forces Regiment continued their assault on South Vietnamese installations at Mai Hac De district and the headquarters of the ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment . The 5th Battalion successfully overran the nearby South Vietnamese artillery position and the tactical operations centre , thereby establishing control over the battlefield . By 5 am all main roads leading into the city of Ban Me Thuot were completely under North Vietnamese control . As the sun rose , the North Vietnamese continued to pound South Vietnamese positions around Ban Me Thuot with heavy artillery to cover the next wave of infantry assaults . During the morning of March 10 , North Vietnamese infantry units attacked Ban Me Thuot from different directions along the main roads . The 174th Regiment , with one armoured battalion in support , marched through Chi Lang , Chu Di , and Mai Hac De from the northwest . As the 95B Regiment approached Ban Me Thuot from the northeast , the main formation of the 149th Regiment secured Chu Blom and marched towards Ban Me Thuot from the southeast . The 1st Battalion , 3rd Regiment and the 1st Battalion , 149th Regiment launched an assault on Hoa Binh airfield from the northeast and southwest respectively . At the same time , the 2nd Regiment captured the South Vietnamese installation at Phuoc An . 
 In an attempt to halt the North Vietnamese assault , Luat ordered two squadrons of M @-@ 113 armoured personnel carriers to confront the enemy at Nga Sau , but they were forced to turn back by tanks from the North Vietnamese 3rd Tank Battalion , 273rd Armoured Regiment . At around 5 : 30 pm , a South Vietnamese ranger battalion was forced to abandon the nearby installation at <unk> Lac after continuous assaults from the 95B Regiment . In the northeast , the South Vietnamese 9th Ranger Battalion held off the North Vietnamese 95B Regiment until they abandoned their positions on the next day . In the western outskirts of Ban Me Thuot , eight A @-@ 37 Dragonfly bombers from the South Vietnamese 6th Air Force Division inflicted light casualties on the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment , but failed to stop their enemies ’ momentum . In the southwest , Quang tried to retake Mai Hac De by mobilising his reserve units with tactical air support . Meanwhile , in the south @-@ eastern end of Ban Me Thuot , the North Vietnamese 149th Regiment defeated the South Vietnamese 53rd Infantry Regiment , after they sustained heavy casualties from repeated air attacks from A @-@ 37 bombers . 
 Earlier in the day , at about 2 : 30 pm , South Vietnamese Colonel Trinh <unk> , Chief of the ARVN 2nd Brigade in II Corps , discovered that the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division had moved into positions south of Ban Me Thuot from their base in Laos . To stop them from advancing any further , Phu ordered his soldiers to destroy every bridge connected to Highway 14 . By the time Phu ’ s order was carried out , elements of the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division had engaged in clashes with the South Vietnamese for more than 10 hours . By 5 pm the North Vietnamese 8th Battalion , 149th Regiment , in combination with the 198th Special Forces Regiment , tried but failed to capture Hoa Binh airfield , which was defended by one South Vietnamese ranger battalion . 
 During the night of March 10 , there was a lull in the fighting around Ban Me Thuot . South Vietnamese soldiers began retreating to various points around the headquarters of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division , the Hoa Binh airfield , and the radio station . Colonel Quang , in a desperate attempt to save Ban Me Thuot , called on Brigadier General Le Trung Tuong to send reinforcements ; none were sent . In the early hours of March 11 , the North Vietnamese army resumed their assault under continuous bombing runs from South Vietnamese air force A @-@ 37 Dragonfly bombers . At 7 : 55 am , the South Vietnamese air force , while trying to stop a dozen North Vietnamese tanks from advancing toward their objective , accidentally dropped two bombs on the headquarters of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division . From that point on , the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division lost all contact with the ARVN 2nd Brigade Command Headquarters . At 11 am on March 11 , the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division established full control over Ban Me Thuot after South Vietnamese soldiers within the city realised that they had been defeated and that no reinforcements had been sent . Thus , only Hoa Binh airfield was still in South Vietnamese hands , with the under @-@ strength ARVN 21st Ranger Battalion and the 53rd Infantry Regiment defending the area . 
 = = = Counterattack = = = 
 On March 12 , all South Vietnamese soldiers who had survived the North Vietnamese assault gathered at the headquarters of the 23rd Infantry Division and Hoa Binh airfield . Unfortunately , those soldiers were without their leaders , because both Colonels Nguyen Trong Luat and Vu The Quang were captured by the North Vietnamese in the early hours of the day . From Saigon , President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered Phu to hold all South Vietnamese positions at the eastern end of Ban Me Thuot , where they could stage a counter @-@ attack . Phu drew up a plan to retake Ban Me Thuot that would involve the last two remaining regiments ( 44th and 45th Infantry Regiments ) of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and the soldiers who had gathered at the 23rd Infantry Division headquarters and Hoa Binh airfield . Thieu approved the plan at dawn , and authorised Phu to make full use of three South Vietnamese air force units ( 6th Air Force Division belonging to the ARVN 2nd Brigade , 1st Air Force Division at Da Nang Air Base , and the 4th Air Force Division at Cần Thơ ) . 
 On the afternoon of March 12 , elements of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division were dropped off at designated landing zones around Phuoc An . Initially about 100 South Vietnamese helicopters participated in the operation , and 81 fighter @-@ bombers were deployed to strike at North Vietnamese positions to cover the landings . At 3 : 10 pm , Phu took off in his Cessna U @-@ 17 to direct the operation over the skies of Ban Me Thuot . As he approached the battlefield , Phu phoned the South Vietnamese units at Hoa Binh airfield to notify them that an operation was underway , and he encouraged the soldiers to hold on to their positions . On the morning of March 13 , another 145 helicopters were used to complete the first phase of the operation with the entire 44th Infantry Regiment , the last soldiers of the 45th Infantry Regiment , and the 232nd Artillery Battalion dropped off at various points in Nong Trai , Phuoc An and along Highway 21 . At the completion of the landing operation , Phu returned to Pleiku to have a meeting with Thieu , during which they discussed the sudden appearance of the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division . 
 While the South Vietnamese air force was transporting the 23rd Infantry Division to the battlefield , their airbase at Cu Hanh was subjected to artillery bombardment from the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division . The North Vietnamese Central Highlands Front had anticipated the South Vietnamese military 's movements , so they built up their forces in and around Ban Me Thuot to prepare for a South Vietnamese counter @-@ attack . On March 13 , the North Vietnamese 24th and 28th Regiments received two companies of armoured vehicles and one artillery battalion , which had begun raining artillery shells on Phuoc An . At 7 : 07 am on March 14 , even before the ARVN 44th and 45th Infantry Regiments began their combat operations , the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment opened fire and attacked the South Vietnamese , with support from the 273rd Armoured Regiment . 
 By midday on March 14 , the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment slowly melted away , as they were squeezed from all sides by the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment . Rather than marching on to Ban Me Thuot to relieve the soldiers of the 45th Infantry Regiment , the ARVN 44th Infantry Regiment were pinned down to fight the enemies ’ 24th Regiment . On March 16 , South Vietnamese formations at Phuoc An and Nong Trai came under heavy attack . At 8 : 15 am the 3rd Battalion , the last unit from the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment , was completely wiped out . Subsequently , all South Vietnamese soldiers at Nong Trai were captured along with one helicopter . 
 On March 17 General Hoang Minh Thao ordered the 28th Regiment and the rest of the 273rd Armoured Regiment to support the 24th Regiment in their efforts to capture Phuoc An . At the same time , the North Vietnamese 66th Regiment and the 198th Special Forces Regiment began their final push on Hoa Binh airfield . At 11 : 30 am , South Vietnamese soldiers at Hoa Binh airfield , mainly drawn from the 53rd Infantry Regiment and the 21st Ranger Battalion , were finally defeated . Simultaneously , the remnants of the ARVN 44th Infantry Regiment abandoned Phuoc An , leaving the North Vietnamese in complete control of Ban Me Thuot . 
 = = = Retreat = = = 
 While battles were raging in and around Ban Me Thuot , South Vietnamese military forces in I Corps Tactical Zone were under pressure by the North Vietnamese 324th and 325th Infantry Divisions . During the period from March 8 to March 13 , there were clashes in <unk> in southern Hue , Mai Linh , Mo Tau , Thien Phuoc , and Quang Ngai . As a result of the immense pressure placed upon I Corps , the ARVN General Staff could not deploy strong units from the region to defend Ban Me Thuot and the rest of II Corps . On March 11 Thieu convened a meeting with Prime Minister Trần Thiện Khiêm , Chief of the ARVN General Staff General Cao Văn Viên , and Lieutenant General Dang Van Quang to discuss the military situation in the northern provinces of South Vietnam . In this meeting , Thieu decided to withdraw what was left of his army from the northern provinces to defend the Mekong region , where most of the nation ’ s population and vital economic resources were located . Thieu justified his decision on the basis that the South Vietnamese military could not defend every inch of South Vietnam ’ s territory , so the military had to be ‘ lightened at the top and heavy at the bottom ’ . 
 Starting at 11 am on March 14 , Thieu flew out to Cam Ranh for a briefing with General Phu . The events which took place after this briefing would go down as one of the greatest failures in military history . After Phu had outlined the military situation in the Central Highlands , he asked Thieu to bolster the South Vietnamese 6th Air Force Division with more aircraft and additional brigades to defend Kontum and Pleiku . Thieu refused to send further reinforcements because the South Vietnamese military no longer had the resources . Phu was ordered to move all his units down to the Mekong region where they could continue fighting . General Vien cautioned against moving large military formations down Highway 19 ; he reminded Thieu of the destruction suffered by the French Mobile Group 100 in the region in 1954 . Thieu and his commanders made the decision to use Route 7 instead , in an attempt to surprise the North Vietnamese , who would not expect them to use that road due to its poor condition . 
 After the briefing Phu immediately returned to his headquarters in Pleiku , where he began planning for the withdrawal with Brigadier Generals Tran Van Cam , Pham Ngoc Sang , Pham Duy Tat , and Colonel Le Khac Ly . To maintain secrecy , Phu ordered his officers to issue orders using only word of mouth instead of written documents , and not to reveal the withdrawal plan to local regional forces . Furthermore , he stated that the abandonment of II Corps Tactical Zone had to be quick , with the army taking only enough military equipment and ammunition to fight one last battle . Generals Tat and Cam were assigned the task of supervising the movements of soldiers and their dependents on the ground . Sang was responsible for the movement of vital military equipment and supplies via air transport and to sweep Route 7 using air force fighter @-@ bombers . Ly was ordered to lead a group of combat engineers to repair the road and bridges on Route 7 , as well as maintain contact with the ARVN 2nd Brigade Headquarters in Nha Trang . The plan was destined to fail , as Phu was unaware that General Ngo Quang Truong , commander of I Corps Tactical Zone , had also received similar orders to evacuate . 
 = = = Disaster on Route 7 = = = 
 Although local commanders in II Corps Tactical Zone tried their best to maintain secrecy , the unusual movement of transport aircraft in Pleiku on March 14 stirred up concern and suspicion amongst soldiers and civilians in the area . On March 15 the concerns of civilians were further heightened when a convoy of transport vehicles belonging to the 6th and 23rd Ranger Battalions headed south from Kontum . On the afternoon of March 15 , the withdrawal of South Vietnamese forces began to pick up momentum . The ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron and the 6th Ranger Battalion opened the main road which stretched from Pleiku to Phu Tuc . Behind them were various infantry , armoured vehicle , and support units . During the early phases of the operation , Phu was confident that his plan would succeed for two reasons . Firstly , he believed most North Vietnamese units were busy stopping the counter @-@ attack at Phuoc An waged by the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and would not have the time to disrupt the withdrawal . Secondly , if the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division near Pleiku was deployed to stop the operation , it would have to overcome the formidable ARVN 25th Ranger Battalion which was tasked with stopping any North Vietnamese attacks . 
 For North Vietnamese field commanders of the Tay Nguyen Front , the withdrawal of South Vietnamese military forces from II Corps Tactical Zone came as a surprise , but it was not totally unexpected . What surprised the North Vietnamese the most was the speed of the withdrawal . Indeed , it was not until the evening of March 15 , when the ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron reached Cheo Reo , that the North Vietnamese began to receive information of Saigon ’ s decision to abandon the Central Highlands . At 8 pm on March 16 , the Tay Nguyen Front Command issued the first orders to pursue the South Vietnamese . The North Vietnamese 9th Battalion , 64th Regiment , part of the 320A Infantry Division , was the first unit to be mobilised to intercept the South Vietnamese column south of Cheo Reo district . Subsequently , the entire North Vietnamese 320A Infantry Division was sent to destroy the South Vietnamese column along Route 7 , with the 2nd Tank Battalion of the 273rd Armoured Regiment , the 675th Regiment , and the 593rd Anti @-@ Aircraft Regiment in support . By the early hours of March 17 , tanks from the ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron and the 6th Ranger Battalion clashed with the North Vietnamese 9th Battalion , 64th Regiment at Tuna Pass , about 4 kilometres away from the district of Cheo Reo . 
 During the evening of March 17 , General Tat organised a counter @-@ attack against the enemy 's 9th Battalion with support from fighter @-@ bombers , tanks and artillery , but his troops were repeatedly beaten back in their attempt to keep the road open . By the early hours of March 18 , the entire North Vietnamese 64th Regiment had blocked all the routes around Tuna Pass , while the 48th Regiment and elements of the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division began closing in on Cheo Reo from three directions . In the afternoon , Phu sent the 25th Ranger Battalion and the 2nd Armoured Cavalry Brigade to reopen Route 7 . At the same time the North Vietnamese 675th Artillery Regiment began shelling the main South Vietnamese column in Cheo Reo as three infantry regiments attacked the convoy from all sides . Unfortunately for the South Vietnamese , all their attempts to organise strong resistance were stifled by the chaos created by North Vietnamese artillery bombardments . At 3 pm , General Tat was ordered to destroy all heavy weaponry so the North Vietnamese could not make use of it . About 30 minutes later , a UH @-@ 1 helicopter landed on the grounds of Phu Bon primary school to pick up Tat and flew off to Nha Trang . At 9 am on March 19 , all South Vietnamese soldiers in the district of Cheo Reo stopped fighting . The 6th Ranger Battalion and the 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron became the only units to arrive at their destination at Cung Son with only light casualties . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The loss of Ban Me Thuot and the subsequent evacuation from the Central Highlands cost South Vietnam ’ s II Corps Tactical Zone more than 75 % of its combat units — the 23rd Infantry Division , the Ranger groups , tanks , armoured cavalry , artillery , and combat engineering units . Overall about 3 / 4 of all South Vietnamese army soldiers were killed , wounded , deserted , or missing . North Vietnamese casualties were light in comparison , with 600 soldiers killed and 2 @,@ 416 wounded . Official Vietnamese history informs that during the eight days of fighting , North Vietnam 's army put 28 @,@ 514 South Vietnamese officers and soldiers out of action ; 4 @,@ 502 were killed in action and 16 @,@ 822 were captured . The North Vietnamese army destroyed 17 @,@ 183 small arms of various kinds , 79 artillery pieces , and 207 tanks and armoured vehicles ; 44 aircraft were shot down and another 110 were damaged . 
 Civilians who took part in the evacuation suffered the consequences of the military action along Route 7 . Most of the civilians who followed the military convoy were either relatives of soldiers or officers in the army , or were government civil servants . Of the estimated 400 @,@ 000 civilians who initially took part in the march , only a handful actually reached their destinations in the Mekong region . In addition to the casualties inflicted upon them by North Vietnamese artillery , the civilians were also hit by air strikes from the South Vietnamese air force . As a result of those huge losses , Route 7 became known as the ‘ convoy of tears ’ . 
 = = = South Vietnamese mistakes = = = 
 The collapse of South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands came about as a result of three major factors . Firstly , during much of the war , President Nguyen Van Thieu ’ s confidence in the ARVN ’ s intelligence could not be shaken . However , following the capitulation of Ban Me Thuot , Thieu lost all faith in his own military intelligence agencies , when it became evidently clear that the strength of North Vietnamese forces was far greater than what South Vietnamese intelligence agencies had gathered . Consequently , Thieu completely ignored his own military intelligence and the CIA , and made all military decisions by himself without consulting the Joint General Staff . Thus , when Major @-@ General Pham Van Phu requested that Thieu send reinforcements to bolster the strength of South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands , Thieu gave him two options : either carry out the President ’ s orders , or be replaced by somebody who was willing to do so . General Phu chose to implement Thieu ’ s orders and evacuated his units from II Corps . 
 The second factor which contributed to the destruction of the ARVN 2nd Brigade , II Corps Tactical Zone , was the inability of South Vietnamese commanders to coordinate the withdrawal . In the process of pulling out from the Central Highlands , large numbers of South Vietnamese soldiers and heavy military equipment were stretched out along the narrow corridor of Route 7 . Behind the military formation were huge numbers of South Vietnamese civilians who were relatives of the military personnel , as well as government officials and their families . Unfortunately for the South Vietnamese soldiers on the ground , their army simply lacked the logistical system required to maintain the element of secrecy , which South Vietnamese commanders had hoped would enable them to pull out from the region without drawing too much attention from the North Vietnamese . It is hard to fathom how South Vietnamese commanders hoped to move 400 @,@ 000 civilians in utmost secrecy . So when North Vietnamese forces attacked the South Vietnamese column along Route 7 , there was little South Vietnamese commanders could do to prevent the destruction of their units . 
 The third factor which led to the quick disintegration of II Corps was the poor state of morale amongst the soldiers of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam . By 1975 , the morale of South Vietnamese soldiers and their commanding officers had reached its lowest point as the war continued to drag on with no end in sight . The determination of the ARVN officer corps had taken a serious blow when South Vietnamese Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam returned from the United States in February 1975 , and reported that no additional military or economic aid had been offered . When the order was given to abandon the Central Highlands , the primary concern of South Vietnamese military personnel was not battlefield victories , but the welfare of their families . Consequently , when the North Vietnamese attacked South Vietnamese forces on Route 7 , large numbers of South Vietnamese soldiers left the battlefield to search for their families amidst the chaos . During the final days of South Vietnam ’ s existence , the average South Vietnamese soldier showed more loyalty to his family than to his commanding officer , which had a significant impact on his willingness to fight on . 
 During the First Indochina War ( 1945 to 1954 ) , both Viet Minh and French forces considered the Central Highlands to be their ‘ home ’ , as it was considered the key to domination in Indochina . Both sides recognised that in order to occupy the Central Highlands , they had to possess a sufficient reserve of manpower with which to control the strategic areas within the region . By 1975 , the South Vietnamese military could no longer afford to maintain a large strategic reserve . South Vietnamese units in II Corps were overstretched in various locations across the Central Highlands , and could easily be overrun by enemy forces . Although Thieu ’ s decision to abandon the region was made with the aim of saving the military formations of II Corps , the decision nonetheless turned into a death warrant for General Phu ’ s men and their families . The lack of coordination and poor organisation during the withdrawal operation not only led to the destruction of II Corps , but marked the beginning of the end for South Vietnam . 
 = Art Farmer = 
 Arthur Stewart " Art " Farmer ( August 21 , 1928 – October 4 , 1999 ) was an American jazz trumpeter and flugelhorn player . He also played flumpet , a trumpet – flugelhorn combination specially designed for him . He and his identical twin brother , double bassist Addison Farmer , started playing professionally while in high school . Art gained greater attention after the release of a recording of his composition " Farmer 's Market " in 1952 . He subsequently moved from Los Angeles to New York , where he performed and recorded with musicians such as Horace Silver , Sonny Rollins , and Gigi Gryce and became known principally as a bebop player . 
 As Farmer 's reputation grew , he expanded from bebop into more experimental forms through working with composers such as George Russell and Teddy Charles . He went on to join Gerry Mulligan 's quartet and , with Benny Golson , to co @-@ found the Jazztet . Continuing to develop his own sound , Farmer switched from trumpet to the warmer flugelhorn in the early 1960s , and he helped to establish the flugelhorn as a soloist 's instrument in jazz . He settled in Europe in 1968 and continued to tour internationally until his death . Farmer recorded more than 50 albums under his own name , a dozen with the Jazztet , and dozens more with other leaders . His playing is known for its individuality – most noticeably , its lyricism , warmth of tone and sensitivity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Art Farmer was born an hour before his twin brother , on August 21 , 1928 , in Council Bluffs , Iowa , reportedly at 2201 Fourth Avenue . Their parents , James Arthur Farmer and Hazel Stewart Farmer , divorced when the boys were four , and their steelworker father was killed in a work accident not long after this . Art moved with his grandfather , grandmother , mother , brother and sister to Phoenix , Arizona when he was still four . He started to play the piano while in elementary school , then moved on to bass tuba and violin before settling on cornet and then trumpet at the age of thirteen . His family was musical : most of them played as a hobby , and one was a professional trombonist . Art 's grandfather was a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Church . This influenced Farmer 's first choice of instrument , as his mother played piano for the church choir . The bass tuba was for use in a marching band and was Farmer 's instrument for a year , until a cornet became available . Phoenix schools were segregated , and no one at Farmer 's school could provide useful music lessons . He taught himself to read music and practiced his new main instrument , the trumpet . 
 Farmer and his brother moved to Los Angeles in 1945 , attending the music @-@ oriented Jefferson High School , where they got music instruction and met other developing musicians such as Sonny Criss , Ernie Andrews , Big Jay McNeely , and Ed Thigpen . The brothers earned money by working in a cold @-@ storage warehouse and by playing professionally . Art started playing trumpet professionally at the age of 16 , performing in the bands of Horace Henderson , Jimmy Mundy , and Floyd Ray , among others . These opportunities came about through a combination of his ability and the absence of numerous older musicians , who were still in the armed forces following World War II . Around this time in Los Angeles , there were abundant opportunities for musical development , according to Farmer : " During the day you would go to somebody 's house and play . At night there were after @-@ hours clubs [ ... and ] anybody who wanted to play was free to come up and play " . Farmer left high school early but persuaded the principal to give him a diploma , which he did not collect until a visit to the school in 1958 . 
 At this time , as an adolescent in Los Angeles , bebop and the swing era big bands both attracted Farmer 's attention . Decades later , he stated that , at that time , " I knew I had to be in jazz . Two things decided me – the sound of a trumpet section in a big band and hearing a jam session " . Farmer 's trumpet influences in the 1940s were Dizzy Gillespie , Miles Davis and Fats Navarro , but , in his own words , " then I heard Freddie Webster , and I loved his sound . I decided to work on sound because it seemed like most of the guys my age were just working on speed " . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 = = = Early career in Los Angeles and New York = = = 
 Farmer left school to tour with a group led by Johnny Otis , but this job lasted for only four months , as Farmer 's lip gave out . Performing for long periods seven days a week for this job put great pressure on his technique , which was insufficiently developed to cope with such physical demands . His lip eventually became lacerated , and he could no longer play . He then received technique training in New York , where he worked for a time as a janitor and played as a freelance musician during 1947 and 1948 . An audition for Dizzy Gillespie 's big band was unsuccessful , and Farmer returned to the West Coast in 1948 as a member of Jay <unk> 's band . Club and studio work was hard to get in Los Angeles from the late 1940s and into the 1950s , as it was dominated by white musicians . Farmer played and toured with Benny Carter , Roy Porter and Gerald Wilson , then played with Wardell Gray in 1951 – 52 . The hazards of the touring jazz musician 's lifestyle were also present : while travelling overnight by car between Phoenix and El Paso , to get to another Roy Porter @-@ led gig , the car that Farmer was in overturned at high speed , leaving him concussed and Porter with broken ribs . 
 Farmer 's first studio recording appears to have been on June 28 or July 2 , 1948 , in Los Angeles , under the leadership of vocalist Big Joe Turner and pianist Pete Johnson . They recorded " Radar Blues " , and at some point in the same or the following year they added a further seven sides ; the eight tracks were released as four singles by Swing Time Records . Farmer recorded further singles with Roy Porter and then , on January 21 , 1952 , as a member of Wardell Gray 's sextet . The latter session produced six tracks that were released as singles . These included " Farmer 's Market " , a piece that was written by Farmer and brought him greater attention . 
 = = = Career after second move to New York = = = 
 Farmer worked in Los Angeles for a time as a hotel janitor and a hospital file clerk , before joining Lionel Hampton 's orchestra in 1952 . He toured Europe with the orchestra , and shared the organization 's trumpet chairs with Clifford Brown , Quincy Jones and Benny Bailey . This aided his musical development considerably , as did his 1953 membership of Teddy Charles ' New Directions band – the compositions he encountered in this band allowed him to consider a broader range of expression during improvisation . 
 Farmer relocated to New York and , on July 2 , 1953 , had his first recording session as leader . This was combined with another recorded 11 months later to form the eight @-@ track Prestige LP , The Art Farmer Septet , featuring arrangements by Quincy Jones and Gigi Gryce . Farmer became " one of the most sought @-@ after trumpeters of the fifties " : he continued to work with Gryce ( 1954 – 56 ) , and also with Horace Silver ( 1956 – 58 ) and Gerry Mulligan ( 1958 – 59 ) , among others . One of the others was pianist Thelonious Monk , who led a sextet that included Farmer on its performances on a version of the Steve Allen Show , broadcast on television on June 10 , 1955 . The following month , Farmer played in the Charles Mingus sextet 's performance at the Newport Jazz Festival . 
 Farmer recorded only twice with Horace Silver 's group , as Silver recorded for Blue Note Records , while Farmer was signed to Prestige . Feuds between the label bosses ruled out extensive cross @-@ label collaboration . The transition from Silver 's piano @-@ led quintet to Mulligan 's piano @-@ less quartet was not straightforward : " to suddenly find yourself in a <unk> group was like walking down the street naked " , commented Farmer . As a member of Mulligan 's band , Farmer appeared on film twice – in I Want to Live ! ( 1958 ) and The Subterraneans ( 1960 ) – and again toured Europe , as part of a Jazz at the Philharmonic tour , helping him to develop an international reputation . In New York , Farmer worked with Lester Young , who told him to " tighten up and tell a ' story ' in each solo " . At this time , Farmer also rented his trumpet on a nightly basis to Miles Davis , who had pawned his own due to his drug dependency . 
 From the middle of the 1950s , Farmer featured in recordings by leading arrangers of the day , including George Russell , Quincy Jones and Oliver Nelson , being in demand because of his reputation for being able to play anything . The wide range of styles these arrangers represented was extended when Farmer took part in a series of experimental sessions with composer Edgard Varèse in 1957 . Varèse used approximate notation and wanted the musicians to improvise within its structure ; at least some of the seasoned jazz musicians present regarded this process of creation as similar to their own familiar creations of spontaneously produced head arrangements , but their efforts influenced Varèse 's composition , Poème électronique . Farmer 's playing around this time is summarized by critic Whitney Balliett , commenting on his performance on Hal <unk> 's 1957 album Hal <unk> Quintet : " Farmer has become one of the few genuinely individual modern trumpeters . ( Nine out of ten modern trumpeters are true copies of Dizzy Gillespie or Miles Davis . ) " Farmer was one of 57 jazz musicians to appear in the 1958 photograph " A Great Day in Harlem " and was later interviewed for the 1994 documentary of the same title . 
 Farmer formed the Jazztet in 1959 , with the composer and tenor saxophonist Benny Golson , after each man independently came to the conclusion that the other should be a member of his new sextet . The Jazztet lasted until 1962 , recorded several albums for Argo and Mercury Records , and assisted in the early careers of pianist McCoy Tyner and trombonist <unk> Moncur III . In the early 1960s Farmer established a trio with guitarist Jim Hall and bassist Steve Swallow ; his relationship with Hall lasted from 1962 to 1964 , and included two tours of Europe , one of which had concerts recorded for the BBC 's Jazz 625 programme , which were later released on DVD . Hall left the second tour while the quartet , which included Swallow and drummer Pete La Roca , was engaged in Berlin , and a pianist replaced him ; this was ultimately Steve Kuhn . In 1964 , this new quartet recorded the album Sing Me Softly of the Blues for the Atlantic label . These bands played laid back , melodious music during a period when avant @-@ garde jazz was becoming more common . 
 Farmer toured Europe in 1965 – 66 , then returned to the US and led a small group with Jimmy Heath . His stylistic development continued during this period of his career , in part because he " absorbed , understood , and had the technical and artistic gifts to put to personal use the [ John ] Coltrane innovations of the ' Giant Steps ' period of the early 1960s " . Work opportunities , however , were diminishing as rock became more popular in the mid @-@ 1960s , so Farmer joined the pit orchestra of Elliot Lawrence for the production of The Apple Tree on Broadway , for six months . 
 = = = Career after permanent move to Europe = = = 
 The visits to Europe continued . Farmer moved there in 1968 and ultimately settled in Vienna , where he performed with The Kenny Clarke / <unk> Boland Big Band and joined the Austrian Radio Orchestra . The latter job initially required only ten days a month of his time , so he was able to play with other well @-@ known expatriates such as Don <unk> , Dexter Gordon , and Ben Webster . As the orchestra 's music gradually changed in style from jazz to simpler forms and took up more of Farmer 's time , he found that it was getting in the way of his musical ambitions , so he left after three or four years . Pursuing these ambitions meant that Farmer traveled extensively worldwide . He said in 1976 that " I 'm traveling 90 percent of the time . I can live anywhere . It 's just a matter of getting to the airport " . A 1982 revival of the Jazztet , with Golson , led him to play more frequently in the United States than he had over the previous decade . In the 1980s Farmer also created a quintet , featuring saxophonist Clifford Jordan , that toured internationally . In the early 1980s , Farmer had also made some changes to his lifestyle . Interviewed for a 1985 article in The New Yorker , he reported losing 30 pounds in weight a couple of years earlier , and stopping smoking and drinking a couple of years before that ; Farmer " used to think he couldn 't play without drinking ; now he couldn 't play and drink " , was the interviewer 's summary of Farmer 's habits , which appear to have avoided the drug @-@ related problems of many of his contemporaries . 
 From the early 1990s , Farmer had a second house in New York and divided his time between Vienna and there . He had regular gigs with Clifford Jordan at the Sweet Basil Jazz Club and , later , with Ran Blake and Jerome Richardson at the Village Vanguard , both in New York . Farmer was awarded the Austrian Gold Medal of Merit in 1994 . In the same year , a concert in honor of his achievements was held at the Alice Tully Hall in New York . Farmer also recorded extensively as a leader throughout his later career , including some pieces of classical music with US and European orchestras . Farmer 's level of playing even towards the end of his career was noted in a review by Scott Yanow of one of his last recordings , Silk Road , from 1996 : " the warm @-@ toned and swinging Farmer is consistently the main star , and at age 68 he proves to still be in his prime " . In 1999 Farmer was selected as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master . A few months later , on October 4 , Farmer died of a heart attack at home in Manhattan , aged 71 . 
 = = Personality and family life = = 
 Farmer first married in the mid @-@ 1950s , to a woman from South America ; the couple had one son , Arthur Jr , who died in 1994 , and they divorced after about a year . Farmer 's second wife was a distant cousin ; this also ended in divorce . He married again , to a Viennese banker named <unk> <unk> , and their son , Georg , was born in the early 1970s . They lived together in a house that they had built in Vienna , and Farmer reported contentment with his lifestyle ; notably , in contrast with his homeland , he did not experience racism in Europe . Farmer described himself in 1985 as " an introvert , and kind of reclusive " ; a soundproof room in his Austrian house allowed him to practice alone for the four or five hours a day that he desired . His personality was often described by others as mirroring his playing : Leonard Feather , for instance , observed in 1990 that Farmer was " mellow , relaxed and [ ... ] gentle " . 
 Farmer was affected by the sudden death of his twin brother in 1963 : more than 20 years later , he said that he still dreamed of his sibling , and admitted that , " It seems there 's a part of him I haven 't fully gotten over " . Farmer 's third wife died from cancer in 1992 ; speaking three years later , he remarked that " I guess I never will really recover from that because we had been together for over 20 years when she died " . After his own death , he was described as being survived by his companion and manager , Lynne Mueller , and son . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Descriptions of Farmer 's playing style typically stress his lyricism and the warmth of his sound . The Los Angeles Times obituary writers noted that his playing had " a sweetly lyrical tone and a melodic approach to phrasing , neither of which minimized his capacity to produce rhythmically swinging phrases " . The equivalent comments in The Guardian were that " Farmer avoided the bright , penetrating sound of orthodox trumpet playing and was influenced by the more reserved articulation of Miles Davis and Kenny Dorham " , and that , although he could seem more restrained than Davis or Lee Morgan , " Farmer was in his way a true original . His phrasing was always distinctive , letting the beat run ahead of him rather in the manner of Billie Holiday 's vocals " . 
 Farmer moved from trumpet to playing mostly flugelhorn from the early 1960s , utilising the latter instrument 's more mellow sound and Farmer 's ability to get what he wanted from it without having to use a mute . In 1989 , he played a major part in creating a trumpet – flugelhorn hybrid , the flumpet , which was constructed for him by instrument maker David Monette . This instrument allowed him to play with more expression in a range of settings , from small groups to big bands . In 1997 , Monette presented him with a personalized flumpet , with decorations symbolising important people and places in Farmer 's life . 
 Farmer 's determination to keep exploring forms of expression continued throughout his life . One comment on a concert given when Farmer was 67 was that " his style was continuing to evolve " ; he " delivered several solos in which his characteristically flowing lines were interrupted by sudden , wide melodic leaps and disjunct rhythmic accents " . A few months before his death , although faster numbers had become perhaps too challenging , The Guardian observed , Farmer 's playing on slower tunes achieved a new level of emotional expression . 
 = = Discography and filmography = = 
 = Karim Benzema = 
 Karim Mostafa Benzema ( born 19 December 1987 ) is a French professional footballer of Algerian descent who plays for Spanish club Real Madrid and the France national team as a striker . He has been described as an " immensely talented striker " who is " strong and powerful " and " a potent finisher from inside the box " . 
 Benzema was born in the city of Lyon and began his football career with local club Bron Terraillon . In 1996 , he joined the biggest club in the city , Olympique Lyonnais , and subsequently came through the club 's youth academy . Benzema made his professional debut in the 2004 – 05 season and appeared sporadically in his first three seasons as Lyon won three titles in that span . In the 2007 – 08 season , Benzema became a starter and had a breakthrough year scoring over 30 goals as Lyon won its seventh straight league title . For his performances , he was named the National Union of Professional Footballers ( UNFP ) Ligue 1 Player of the Year and named to the organization 's Team of the Year . Benzema was also the league 's top scorer and given the Bravo Award by Italian magazine Guerin Sportivo . After another season at Lyon , in July 2009 , Benzema moved to Real Madrid in a transfer fee worth over € 35 million ( $ 50 million ) , and signed a six @-@ year contract . After struggling to establish himself in his debut season with the club , in the ensuing two seasons , Benzema reached prominence , scoring 32 goals en route to helping Real Madrid win the Copa del Rey in 2011 and the 2011 – 12 edition of La Liga . He has been named French Player of the Year thrice for his performances in 2011 , 2012 and 2014 . 
 Benzema is a former French youth international and has represented his nation from under @-@ 17 level onwards . Prior to playing for the senior team , he played on the under @-@ 17 team that won the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Championship . Benzema made his senior international debut in March 2007 in a friendly match against Austria , scoring in a 1 – 0 win . Benzema has earned over 70 caps and represented France at three major international tournaments : the 2008 and 2012 editions of the UEFA European Football Championship and the 2014 FIFA World Cup . However , Benzema has twice been intentionally left off major tournament squads ( 2010 World Cup and 2016 Euros ) due to various scandals . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Benzema began his football career at his hometown club Bron Terraillon SC at the age of eight . While at the club , he was nicknamed Coco by friends and , after scoring two goals in an under @-@ 10 match against the Lyon youth academy , began attracting attention from the biggest club in the city . According to Serge Santa Cruz , who was president of Bron Terraillon in the 1990s , Lyon officials had visited him directly in an attempt to sign the youngster ; however , Santa Cruz refused . After talking with Benzema 's father , the club allowed the player to undergo a trial with Lyon . Following the trial , Benzema officially joined Lyon and was inserted into the club 's academy . 
 = = = Lyon = = = 
 Benzema quickly ascended up the youth categories in the academy . He served as a ballboy during Lyon senior team matches and performed well in school being described as a student who was " discreet and respectful " . At under @-@ 16 level , Benzema scored 38 goals in the Championnat National des 16 ans , the domestic league for under @-@ 16 youth players in France . Ahead of the 2004 – 05 season , Benzema was promoted to the club 's reserve team , which was playing in the Championnat de France amateur , the fourth division of French football . Despite only playing with the team during the autumn campaign , he scored a team @-@ high ten goals as the Lyon reserve team finished second in its group . 
 = = = = 2004 – 2007 = = = = 
 Benzema was called up to the senior team for the first time under manager Paul Le Guen during the break leading up to the second half of the season . As is customary with new players arriving at Lyon , the young striker had to stand up and speak to his new teammates , which at that time included the likes of Michael Essien , Sylvain Wiltord , Florent Malouda and Éric Abidal . While speaking , Benzema was subjected to jokes and laughter , which prompted the youngster to declare " Do not laugh , I 'm here to take your place " . He , subsequently , made his professional debut on 15 January 2005 against Metz , appearing as a substitute for Pierre @-@ Alain Frau . Lyon won the match 2 – 0 as Benzema provided the assist on the second goal scored by Bryan <unk> . He would subsequently sign his first professional contract , agreeing to a three @-@ year deal . After making three more appearances as a substitute , on 2 April , Benzema made his first professional start in a 1 – 0 win over Lens . He finished the campaign with six appearances as Lyon won its fourth @-@ straight league title . 
 Benzema began the 2005 – 06 season under the tutelage of new manager Gérard Houllier . Under Houllier , he struggled for meaningful minutes due to the presence of newly signed Brazilian striker Fred , as well as Sylvain Wiltord . Benzema made his season debut on 2 October 2005 in a league win over Rennes , appearing as a substitute . On 6 December , he made his UEFA Champions League debut in Lyon 's final group stage match against Norwegian club Rosenborg . On his competition debut , he scored his first professional goal in a 2 – 1 win . A month later , Benzema scored his first professional double in a 4 – 0 win over Grenoble in the Coupe de France . On 4 March 2006 , Benzema scored his first professional league goal against Ajaccio in a 3 – 1 win . 
 Benzema began earning more playing time in the 2006 – 07 season and made his competitive season debut in the 2006 Trophée des Champions against Paris Saint @-@ Germain . In the French Supercup , Benzema converted a penalty which drew the match at 1 – 1 . Lyon later won the league curtain @-@ raiser 5 – 4 on penalties . Benzema opened the league campaign on a quick note scoring in the team 's first match of the season against Nantes . Three weeks later , on 26 August 2006 , Benzema appeared as a substitute and scored two goals in a 4 – 1 away win over Nice . He also converted two goals in the Champions League group stage against Romanian outfit Steaua București and Ukrainian club Dynamo Kyiv . After appearing regularly during the autumn campaign , on 10 November , Benzema suffered a severe thigh injury . The injury resulted in the striker missing three months of action before returning in February 2007 . Benzema failed to score a goal until the final league match of the season against Nantes as Lyon recorded its sixth consecutive league title . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 season = = = = 
 For the 2007 – 08 season , with the likes of Florent Malouda , John Carew and Sylvain Wiltord all departing from the club , Benzema switched to the number 10 shirt and was inserted into the lead striker role . After forming a special relationship with new manager Alain Perrin , he responded with 31 goals in 51 games . He topped the league with 20 goals , scored four goals in the Champions League , one in the Coupe de la Ligue and totaled six goals in six Coupe de France matches , helping Lyon win their first ever double . Some of his more dazzling performances that season included a hat @-@ trick against Metz on 15 September , an equalizing goal in the 90th minute from a free kick against Derby du Rhône rivals Saint @-@ Étienne , and a goal against Lens that was nominated for goal of the season by fans . 
 In the Champions League , Benzema scored an important double against Rangers at Ibrox Stadium on the last match day of the group stage . The 3 – 0 victory assured Lyon progression to the knockout rounds . In the knockout rounds , Lyon faced Manchester United and Benzema continued to score , this time it was from outside the penalty box in the first leg match which ended in a 1 – 1 draw and United eventually won the tie 1 – 2 on aggregate . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson and players praised Benzema for his performance . Lyon President Jean @-@ Michel Aulas later accused Ferguson of tapping @-@ up Benzema . 
 On 13 March 2008 , Benzema extended his contract with Lyon until 2013 with a one @-@ year extension option . After signing his new contract , Benzema became one of the highest paid footballers in France . For his efforts that season , he was named the Ligue 1 Player of the Year , selected to the Team of the Year and awarded the Trophée du Meilleur <unk> for being the league 's top scorer . He was also shortlisted by French magazine France Football for the 2008 Ballon d 'Or award , eventually won by Cristiano Ronaldo . 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 season = = = = 
 Benzema got off to a good start for the 2008 – 09 season , scoring twice in Lyon 's opening league match against Toulouse . The following three weeks , he scored goals against Rhône @-@ Alpes rivals Grenoble and Saint @-@ Étienne and scored a goal against Nice , converting a penalty in the dying seconds . Lyon won all three matches . As a result of his early goals , Olympique Lyonnais President Jean @-@ Michel Aulas quelled the many transfer rumors surrounding Benzema by placing a € 100 million price tag on the striker . He was also nominated alongside Franck Ribéry to be featured on the French cover of the video game FIFA 09 . 
 He scored his seventh goal of the league on 29 October , scoring in the 2 – 0 win over Sochaux . Benzema scored again the following weekend in a 2 – 0 win over Le Mans . He was among the top scorers in the Champions League group stage , scoring five goals , a double against Steaua București , two goals in two matches against Fiorentina , and a goal against the eventual group winners Bayern Munich on the final match day . 
 Following the winter break , Benzema endured a rough patch going scoreless the first three games before recording his 11th goal of the season against Nice in a 3 – 1 victory . Two weeks later , he scored his 12th goal against Nancy in a 2 – 0 victory . The next nine matches , both Benzema and Lyon 's form dwindled losing four matches , drawing three , and winning only two with Benzema scoring only two goals in that stretch , both of them against Le Mans in a 3 – 1 victory . The bad form resulted in Lyon losing their grip on first @-@ place position and eventually falling out of the title race , thus ending their streak of seven consecutive Ligue 1 titles . Benzema was a part of four of those title runs . 
 Despite losing the title , Benzema got back on track scoring his 15th and 16th goals of the season on 17 May in a 3 – 1 away victory over rivals Marseille , the first goal being a penalty . He scored his 17th goal the following weekend against Caen in a 3 – 1 victory moving him into third place among Ligue 1 top scorers . 
 = = = Real Madrid = = = 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 On 1 July 2009 , it was announced that Lyon had reached an agreement with Spanish club Real Madrid for the transfer of Benzema . The transfer fee was priced at € 35 million with the fee rising to as much as € 41 million based on incentives . On 9 July , Benzema successfully passed his medical and signed his contract , a six @-@ year deal , later that afternoon . He was presented officially as a Real Madrid player later that night at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium , similarly to the previous signings of Kaká and Cristiano Ronaldo . Benzema made his Real Madrid debut on 20 July in the club 's opening pre @-@ season friendly against Irish club Shamrock Rovers in Dublin , appearing as a half @-@ time substitute . He scored the lone goal in the club 's 1 – 0 win , scoring in the 87th minute . On 24 August , Benzema netted two goals in Real Madrid 's 4 – 0 victory over Norwegian club Rosenborg in an annual friendly tournament organized for the Santiago <unk> Trophy . The goals brought his total tally in the pre @-@ season with Real Madrid to five , making him the joint top scorer alongside fellow striker Raúl . 
 Benzema made his league debut for Madrid on 29 August 2009 against Deportivo La Coruña . He started the match , but was substituted out in the second half as Madrid won 3 – 2 . A month later , he scored his first goal for the club in a 5 – 0 victory against newly promoted Xerez . After missing the mid @-@ week match against Villarreal , against Tenerife at the weekend , Benzema scored his first double for Madrid in a 3 – 0 home victory . He made his Champions League debut for the club on 30 September in a group stage tie against Marseille . In the match , Benzema assisted on a Cristiano Ronaldo goal . After failing to score a goal in the month of October , in the team 's first match in November against Italian club Milan in the Champions League , Benzema scored the opener to give Madrid a 1 – 0 lead . His goal was later cancelled out by a Ronaldinho penalty . On 7 November , in the El Derbi madrileño against Atlético Madrid , Benzema assisted on Madrid 's second goal , scored by Marcelo . Madrid won the match 3 – 2 . 
 In late November , Benzema began appearing mainly as a substitute as manager Manuel Pellegrini preferred Gonzalo Higuaín in the lead striker role . To coincide with his benching , the striker was also being criticized by the Spanish media for his under @-@ performance and difficulties settling in the country as he had not yet begun learning the Spanish language . He was even declared the " new Anelka " by a Spanish newspaper Marca blogger , referring to former Real Madrid striker Nicolas Anelka who had a tumultuous year at the club before being sold . Benzema was defended by his compatriot Zinedine Zidane , who admitted " after two months , I was also criticized " and that Benzema was " a talented player and talented players in Madrid must win " . 
 On 5 December , Benzema appeared as a substitute for Rafael van der Vaart and scored the third goal in a 6 – 0 romp of Almería . The day after the match against Almería , Benzema responded to the criticism by stating , " I am totally integrated and very happy at Real Madrid , " and , " Yes , I have improved my adaptation . I have a new home and I 'm learning Spanish to understand myself better with my teammates . " After nearly a month coming off of the bench , he started alongside Higuaín away to Valencia on 12 December and responded by assisting on one of Higuaín 's two goals . A week later , Benzema returned to the bench . On his 22nd birthday , he scored in a 6 – 0 home win against Real Zaragoza . Following an injury to Higuaín in early January 2010 , Pellegrini inserted Benzema back into the starting lineup . After failing to score in his first two starts in the absence of Higuaín , against Deportivo La Coruña on 30 January , he scored a double in an important 3 – 1 away win . Following the return of Higuaín , Benzema was relegated back to a substitute 's role and finished the campaign by making eight consecutive appearances off the bench . Included in one of the those appearances was his final goal of the season against Athletic Bilbao in a 5 – 1 win . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 Ahead of the 2010 – 11 season , Benzema switched to the number nine shirt as Real Madrid were under the tutelage of new incoming manager José Mourinho . The striker immediately drew the ire of Mourinho who declared to reporters during a pre @-@ season media session that " Benzema must understand that he is extremely talented , but that in itself is not enough " , while also stating that " [ Madrid ] need a striker who is sparky , not one that is listless " . Mourinho sentiments were later echoed by incoming France national team coach Laurent Blanc who acknowledged that Benzema was " not used to working " . Blanc also stated that the striker needed to shed weight in order to fulfill his potential . 
 Due to Mourinho preferring Ronaldo and Higuaín as his forwards , Benzema began the campaign as a substitute coming off the bench in the team 's opening league match of the season against Mallorca . Following the September international break , he made his first start in a 1 – 0 win over Osasuna . On 21 September , Benzema made a substitute appearance and scored his first goal of the season in a 3 – 0 home win against Espanyol . Afterwards , the striker failed to score a domestic goal for nearly two months . The striker did assist on goals in back @-@ to @-@ back weeks against Hércules in the league and Milan in the Champions League . 
 On 10 November , Benzema scored his second goal of the campaign against Real Murcia in the 2010 – 11 edition of the Copa del Rey . In late November , Benzema was inserted into the starting eleven following a severe back injury to Higuaín , along with the team 's lack of senior strikers . In his first match since being inserted into the starting lineup permanently , he scored his first Champions League goal of the season in a group stage fixture against Dutch club Ajax . In Madrid 's final group stage tie against French outfit Auxerre , Benzema scored his first hat trick for the club in a 4 – 0 win . The first goal he scored was Real Madrid 's 300th goal in the Champions League era . Two weeks later , Benzema converted another hat trick , this time in an 8 – 0 thrashing of Levante in the Copa del Rey . In the team 's first fixture of the 2011 calendar year , he assisted on the game @-@ winning goal scored by Ronaldo in a 3 – 2 win over Getafe . In late January , for the first time in his Real Madrid career , Benzema scored goals in back @-@ to @-@ back matches . On 23 January , he scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 win at home against Mallorca . Three days later , Benzema repeated his efforts scoring the only goal in a win over Sevilla in the first leg of the team 's Copa del Rey semi @-@ final tie . Real Madrid later advanced to its 37th Copa del Rey final in club history after beating Sevilla 2 – 0 in the second leg . 
 Following the arrival of Emmanuel Adebayor on loan , Benzema went unused in two consecutive league matches in February 2011 . He returned to the starting lineup on 19 February and embarked on a run in which he scored ten goals in eight matches . Included in those ten goals were doubles in three straight matches against Málaga , Racing Santander and Hércules , as well as a goal in the first leg of Madrid 's Round of 16 tie against former club Lyon . The strike against his hometown club was the 100th goal of his professional career , and also the first goal for Real Madrid at the Stade de Gerland in six years , though despite the honours associated with netting the goal , Benzema did not celebrate out of respect for his former club . 
 On 19 March , he scored the opener in the El Derbi madrileño as Real Madrid went on to win the match 2 – 1 . Despite his form , Benzema appeared in only one of the four highly anticipated matches against El Clásico rivals Barcelona , in which the two clubs met in the league , the 2011 Copa del Rey Final and the Champions League knockout stage . In between those clashes , on 23 April 2011 , Benzema scored a goal and assisted on another in a 6 – 3 win over Valencia . On 30 April , he scored a goal in the team 's 3 – 2 loss to Real Zaragoza . It was the only match of the campaign that Real Madrid loss , in which Benzema scored . To close out the campaign , Benzema scored another double in an 8 – 1 win over Almería . He finished the campaign second on the team behind Ronaldo with 26 goals as Real Madrid captured the Copa del Rey giving Benzema his first honour with the club . For his performances during the campaign , particularly during the second half , Benzema was praised by Mourinho , club officials Florentino Pérez and Emilio Butragueño , as well as national team manager Laurent Blanc . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 Prior to the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Benzema , taking the advice of compatriots Blanc and Zidane , ventured to Merano , Italy , to attend a high performance clinic where he underwent treatment to reduce his weight . The spell at the clinic was ultimately a success after the striker arrived at pre @-@ season 8 kilograms ( 18 lb ) lighter . While at the clinic , Benzema also underwent physical training to build up his muscle mass . The striker was impressive in the pre @-@ season scoring eight goals in seven matches . His performances during the pre @-@ season resulted in Mourinho naming him the starting lead striker for the new campaign . Mourinho was later credited with Benzema 's transformation , but denied full responsibility and , instead , gave credit to the striker himself . 
 Benzema made his 2011 – 12 competitive debut for Madrid in the first leg of the 2011 Supercopa de España against Barcelona . In the match , he started and assisted on the opening goal of the match , scored by Mesut Özil . In the second leg , with Madrid trailing 4 – 3 on aggregate late in the match , Benzema scored the equalizing goal to even the tie at 4 – 4 . However , six minutes later , a Lionel Messi strike gave Barcelona the supercup . Benzema made his league debut for Madrid in the team 's 6 – 0 away win over Real Zaragoza . In the team 's next league match two weeks later against Getafe , Benzema scored a double in a 4 – 2 victory . After going scoreless in three consecutive league matches , he scored his third league goal of the campaign against Rayo Vallecano in a 4 – 2 win . In the team 's ensuing match against Ajax in the Champions League , Benzema scored Madrid 's third goal in a 3 – 0 home win . He also assisted on the opener , which was scored by Ronaldo . In the club 's next Champions League match against Lyon , Benzema scored again netting the opener . He also turned provider for the second consecutive match assisting on a goal by Sami Khedira . Madrid won the match 4 – 0 . 
 In November 2011 , Benzema scored five goals ; three in the league and two in Europe . In the league , he converted his three goals in wins over Osasuna and Valencia , while he scored his two Champions League goals in a 6 – 2 group stage win over Croatian club Dinamo Zagreb . On 10 December 2011 , Benzema scored the opener in Madrid 's 3 – 1 defeat to Barcelona in the El Clásico . The goal , scored just 21 seconds into the match , was the fastest goal ever scored in a match between the two rivals . Three days after his record @-@ breaking goal , for his performances during the 2011 calendar year , Benzema was named the France Football French Player of the Year , beating out Barcelona defender Éric Abidal and Lyon goalkeeper Hugo Lloris . He became only the second French player based in Spain to win the award , and also the second Real Madrid player to capture it . Zidane was the first to achieve both honorable mentions . Benzema expressed gratitude at winning the award , stating , " It is a pleasure to win an individual trophy . When I see the previous winners — Zidane , Henry and other major players — it makes me proud to join them on the list . " In the team 's next match after winning the award , against Sevilla , Benzema assisted on two goals in a 6 – 2 triumph . 
 Benzema opened the 2012 portion of the campaign in positive form . He scored goals against Granada and Málaga . Benzema scored against the latter club in the Copa del Rey in each leg of the Round of 16 . The 4 – 2 aggregate win advanced Real Madrid to the quarter @-@ finals where the club faced Barcelona . After failing to score in the first leg , which ended 2 – 1 in favor of Barça , in the second leg on 25 January 2012 , Benzema scored his third goal of the season against the Blaugrana , but Madrid failed to win the tie losing 4 – 3 on aggregate . On 12 February , Benzema scored his first league goal in over a month against Levante . A week later , he scored a double in a 4 – 0 shutout of Racing Santander . On 24 March , Benzema scored two goals in a league win over Real Sociedad . The two goals made him the top French scorer in La Liga history surpassing Zidane . Three days later , Benzema scored another double in a 3 – 0 first leg away win over Cypriot club APOEL in the Champions League quarter @-@ finals . On 29 April , Benzema put in a masterpiece performance scoring two goals and assisting on another in a 3 – 0 win over Sevilla . The double was his seventh of the season and allowed Madrid to close in on its first Primera Division title in four years . Los Blancos captured their 32nd league title the following week cruising to a 3 – 0 win over Athletic Bilbao . Benzema appeared as a second @-@ half substitute in the match . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 On the first matchday of the UEFA Champions League , Benzema scored an equalizer against Manchester City in 3 – 2 win at Santiago Bernabéu . On 4 October 2012 , Benzema scored a bicycle kick goal off a cross by Kaká in a 4 – 1 win against Ajax in Amsterdam . On 18 December 2012 , one day before his 25th birthday , his fine form saw him earn the award for best French footballer of 2012 , for the second year running . 
 On 2 March 2013 , Benzema opened the scoring against Barcelona in the league game at the Santiago Bernabéu . Real went on to win the game 2 – 1 , the second time they beat Barcelona in a week . On 30 April 2013 , Benzema scored one goal and assisted to Sergio Ramos against Dortmund . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 Benzema started new season by scoring in a 2 – 1 win over Real Betis at the Santiago Bernabéu . He scored again one week later in a 1 – 0 away over Granada , assisted by Cristiano Ronaldo . After four matches without scoring ( two with Real Madrid and two with France ) , he returned to goal @-@ scoring form by netting twice in a 6 – 1 away win over Galatasaray in Champions League . On 18 January 2014 , he scored his 100th goal for Madrid in a 5 – 0 victory at Real Betis . On 23 March , Benzema scored two goals against fierce rivals Barcelona in El Clásico at the Bernabéu from two crosses by Ángel Di María , taking his goal tally in La Liga to 17 goals , though Barcelona won the match 4 – 3 . 
 Benzema was part of Real Madrid 's starting eleven in the 2014 Copa del Rey Final on 16 April at the Mestalla Stadium , and assisted Di María 's opening goal before Gareth Bale hit the winner for Madrid in a 2 – 1 victory . One week later , Benzema scored the only goal of the game to win the first leg of a Champions League semi @-@ final against Bayern Munich . The club went on to win the final in May . Real Madrid 's attacking trio of Bale , Benzema and Cristiano , dubbed " BBC " , finished the season with 97 goals . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 On 6 August 2014 , Real Madrid announced that Benzema had signed a new five @-@ year deal that will keep him at the club until 2019 . On 12 August 2014 , Benzema played the whole 90 minutes in Real Madrid 's 2 – 0 win against Sevilla in Cardiff to claim the UEFA Super Cup . 
 On 16 September 2014 , Benzema scored Real Madrid 's 1,000th goal in European competition after netting a goal in a 5 – 1 victory over FC Basel in the first match of the Champions League group stage . He scored the winning goal in Real Madrid 's 2 – 1 away victory against <unk> <unk> in the Champions League after coming on as a second @-@ half substitute . The next weekend , he scored a brace in the 5 – 0 victory against Athletic Bilbao in La Liga . 
 Benzema was chosen as La Liga Player of the Month for October 2014 , with his manager Carlo Ancelotti winning the equivalent award . He scored three of Real Madrid 's 13 goals of the month , in which they won three matches and only conceded just one goal . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 Benzema scored a <unk> in an 8 – 0 thrashing against Malmö FF on 8 December 2015 . On 20 December 2015 , he scored another <unk> in a 10 – 2 victory over Rayo Vallecano . 
 He was a regular starter when the team won the 2015 – 16 UEFA Champions League . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Benzema is a former France youth international having earned caps at all levels for which he was eligible , excluding the under @-@ 16 team . He is a member of the group , commonly known in France as the Génération 1987 , a youth class that produced current internationals Hatem Ben Arfa , Jérémy <unk> and Samir Nasri , alongside himself . Benzema was the last of the four to make his youth international debut under coach Philippe <unk> and officially joined the team ahead of the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship that was played on home soil . In the competition , he appeared in two matches . On his tournament debut , Benzema scored the opening goal in a 3 – 1 win over Northern Ireland . His lone other appearance in the competition was in a 1 – 0 group stage win over Spain as France went on to win the tournament defeated the same team in the final . 
 Benzema was a regular starter in the team at under @-@ 18 level . He made his debut with the team at a local tournament in the Czech Republic . Benzema scored his first goal at under @-@ 18 level in the competition against Poland in the team 's final group stage match . In the final against the hosts , he scored the opening goal in a 2 – 0 win as France were declared champions of the competition . On 30 September 2004 , Benzema was one of three goalscorers in France 's 3 – 0 away win over Norway . In the team 's next match against Russia , he scored a double in a 3 – 1 victory . Due to France winning the 2004 U17 European title , the under @-@ 18 team was allowed participation in the 2005 edition of the UEFA @-@ CAF Meridian Cup . Benzema was called up to the team for the competition and played in all four matches scoring a tournament @-@ high five goals as France were crowned champions of the tournament . He opened the tournament by scoring two goals in a 7 – 0 victory over Cameroon . After going scoreless in the team 's next match against Sierra Leone , Benzema responded by scoring a goal in a shutout victory over Nigeria and netting another double in a 4 – 1 win against Egypt . On 19 May 2005 , in the team 's final match of the season against Slovakia , Benzema scored all four goals in a 4 – 1 victory . He finished the under @-@ 18 campaign with 18 appearances and a team @-@ high 14 goals and was , subsequently , praised by <unk> who , following the campaign , declared that Benzema was " quite efficient " . 
 The foursome of Benzema , Ben Arfa , <unk> and Nasri returned to international play together for under @-@ 19 duty . The four were joined by Issiar Dia , Blaise Matuidi and Serge Gakpé with the objective of winning the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship . The team opened the campaign with two friendly matches against Norway . Over the course of the two matches , Benzema scored one goal , which came in the first match , a 4 – 0 win . In the first round of qualification for the UEFA @-@ sanctioned tournament , he scored his only goal in the final group match against Austria . France won the match 2 – 0 , which resulted in the team progressing to the Elite Round . In the ensuing round , France were placed in a relatively easy group alongside Scotland , Bulgaria , and Belarus . In the opening group game against Bulgaria , Benzema scored a double converting a penalty and scoring in play as France won 4 – 0 . Both of his goals were scored within a minute of each other . After surprisingly drawing 0 – 0 with Belarus , France faced Scotland in the final group stage match . Benzema opened the scoring in the 11th minute , but his goal was cancelled out by Steven Fletcher in the second half . The match ultimately finished 1 – 1 and , despite finishing the round undefeated , France were eliminated after being beaten on points by the Scots . 
 Benzema made his under @-@ 21 debut for Les <unk> under coach René Girard in the team 's first match following the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship against Belgium . He started the match and was replaced at half @-@ time by Yoann Gourcuff . He featured in qualification matches for the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship and appeared as a starter and substitute in the first leg and second leg , respectively , of the team 's surprising defeat to Israel in the qualifying playoffs . Despite still being eligible to represent the under @-@ 21 team until 2009 , his appearance in the second leg defeat to Israel was Benzema 's last with the team and he finished his under @-@ 21 career with five appearances and no goals . Prior to representing France at senior international level , Benzema was courted by the Algerian Football Federation ( <unk> ) who sought for the player to represent Algeria at senior international level . In December 2006 , the striker was approached by former federation president Hamid <unk> and then @-@ national team coach Jean @-@ Michel Cavalli , but turned down the invite citing his desire to continue his international career with France . Benzema later told French radio station Radio Monte Carlo " Algeria is my parents ’ country and it is in my heart , but football @-@ wise , I will only play for the French national team " . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 = = = = Euro 2008 = = = = 
 Benzema was called up for the first time to the senior national team by Raymond Domenech on 9 November 2006 for the team 's friendly match against Greece that would be played on 15 November . Benzema described the call @-@ up as " a reward " , while also stating " I am pleased , of course , me and my family . A ( the senior national team ) , is the national team 's highest honor " . Two days before the match , he was forced to withdraw from the team due to a thigh injury , which he suffered while playing domestically for Lyon . After failing to make the squad for the team 's February 2007 match against Argentina , Benzema returned to the team in March for a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against Lithuania and a friendly against Austria . After failing to appear in the qualifier , he made his international debut on 28 March 2007 against Austria . Benzema appeared as a half @-@ time substitute for Djibril Cissé and scored the only goal of the match after a free @-@ kick from Samir Nasri . On 13 October , Benzema scored a double in a 6 – 0 win against the Faroe Islands . After appearing regularly in the team for the rest of the 2007 – 08 season , he was named to the 23 @-@ man squad to participate in UEFA Euro 2008 . 
 Benzema made his debut in the competition on 9 June 2008 in the team 's opening match against Romania . Benzema started the match , but was substituted out for Nasri in the second half after a frustrating performance . The match finished 0 – 0 and Benzema was , subsequently , criticized by the French media for his performance with newspaper Le Point declaring that Benzema was " unrecognizable " and that he " symbolized the impotence of France in the attack " . The newspaper also cited his lack of international experience for his subdued performance . In the team 's next group game against the Netherlands , Benzema played no part in the 4 – 1 defeat . He returned to the team in its final group game against Italy and was given a place in the starting lineup . However , France lost 2 – 0 and were eliminated from the competition . 
 In November 2008 , Benzema , among several other young players in the team , was accused of being insolent during the team 's campaign at the European Championship . The accusation came from international teammate William Gallas who inserted the charge in his autobiography . Though most of Gallas ' accusations were directed at Nasri , during the competition , it was reported by newspaper Le Parisien that several of the national team players described Benzema as " arrogant " and that the striker was scolded by midfielder Claude Makélélé following the team 's loss to the Netherlands . 
 = = = = 2010 World Cup = = = = 
 Despite the reports from after Euro 2008 , Benzema remained a regular in the team and , ahead of qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup , switched to the number ten shirt after previously wearing the number nine . In the team 's first match following its elimination from Euro 2008 , Benzema scored a goal in a 3 – 2 friendly win over Sweden in Göteborg . Two months later , he scored another goal in a 3 – 1 victory against Tunisia at the Stade de France . On 5 June 2009 , Benzema converted the only goal of the match , a penalty shot , in a 1 – 0 win over Turkey at the Stade de Gerland , his home stadium . He scored his first World Cup qualification goals in victories over the Faroe Islands and Austria in October 2009 . His cap against Austria would be his last of the Domenech era as he failed to make France 's preliminary 30 @-@ man squad for the World Cup . Domenech cited Benzema 's struggle for form with his new club Real Madrid , rather than his alleged involvement in a sex scandal as his reason for leaving the striker out . Prior to the list being unveiled , Benzema informed Radio Monte Carlo that if he was not selected he would be " very disappointed , but not killed " and " I will support the France team no matter what " . 
 = = = = Euro 2012 = = = = 
 Following the World Cup , Benzema returned to the national team under the reign of new coach Laurent Blanc . Blanc , an admirer of Benzema , sought to build the attack around the striker and , after going almost a year without representing France , Benzema made his return to the team in its 2 – 1 defeat to Norway in Oslo . Alongside Gourcuff , Benzema led the team in scoring in qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 netting three . He scored his three goals in wins over Bosnia and Herzegovina , Luxembourg , and Albania . On 17 November 2010 , Benzema scored the opening goal in France 's 2 – 1 win over England at Wembley Stadium . In the team 's next match against Brazil in February 2011 , he scored the only goal for France in a 1 – 0 win . After appearing regularly in qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 , on 29 May 2012 , Benzema was named to the squad to participate in the competition . On 5 June , in the team 's final warm @-@ up friendly ahead of the European Championship , Benzema scored two goals in a 4 – 0 shutout win over Estonia . At UEFA Euro 2012 , Benzema started the team 's opening match against England , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw . In the team 's ensuing group stage match against the Ukraine , he assisted on both team goals in a 2 – 0 win . 
 = = = = 2014 World Cup = = = = 
 On 11 October 2013 , Benzema scored his first goal for the France national team since June 2012 in a friendly against Australia , thus ending a scoring drought for his national team which had lasted 1 @,@ 222 minutes . In that match played at the Parc des Princes stadium in Paris , which France won 6 – 0 , Benzema scored France 's sixth and final goal in the 50th minute after turning home Franck Ribéry 's left @-@ wing cross . In the second leg of the 2014 World Cup qualification play @-@ off against Ukraine held on 19 November 2013 at the Stade de France , Benzema scored France 's second goal in the 34th minute to level the aggregate score at 2 – 2 . Benzema scored his goal when he side @-@ footed home after a huge scramble in the Ukrainian penalty box , although he was shown on television replays to be offside by almost one metre when the ball took a final touch off Mathieu Valbuena 's chest . Benzema had four minutes earlier been denied a legitimate goal , the offside flag wrongly raised when he turned in Ribéry 's low cross into the net with his torso a metre from the Ukrainian goal @-@ line . Ukraine had won the first leg of the play @-@ off 2 – 0 in Kiev just four days earlier . France would eventually win the second leg 3 – 0 to advance to the 2014 World Cup finals in Brazil with a 3 – 2 aggregate scoreline . 
 On 6 June 2014 , Benzema was named in France 's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup , making his debut in the tournament . In the team 's first match , a 3 – 0 win against Honduras in Porto Alegre on 15 June , he scored a goal in each half , the first from a penalty kick . He also assisted the team 's second goal when his shot rebounded off the post and was fumbled over the goal @-@ line by Honduran goalkeeper Noel Valladares for an own goal , the first World Cup goal given by goal @-@ line technology . He was named by FIFA as man of the match for his performance . In the second group fixture , he scored and had a penalty saved in a 5 – 2 defeat of Switzerland , as Les Bleus all but secured qualification to the knockout stage . France were later knocked out by Germany in the quarter @-@ final stage of the tournament . 
 = = = = Euro 2016 = = = = 
 On 13 April 2016 , French Football Federation announced that Benzema would not be picked for Euro 2016 tournament on home soil . He responded on 1 June 2016 in Marca , in an interview entitled ' Benzema : " Deschamps folded due to pressure from France 's racist element " ' . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 A skillful , quick , agile , and prolific forward , who is good in the air , Benzema has been described as an " immensely talented striker " who is " strong and powerful " and " a potent finisher from inside the box " with both feet , despite being naturally right footed . An atypical number 9 , although he is usually deployed as a centre @-@ forward , Benzema is also capable of playing in several other offensive positions , and has been used on the wing , or even behind the main striker . In addition to his goalscoring , Benzema is indeed known for his willingness and ability to drop into deeper or wider positions , and either link @-@ up play with midfielders as a number 10 , or use his strength and technical ability to hold up the ball to provide assists for teammates , courtesy of his vision , creativity , passing , and eye for the final ball . He has also been praised for his work @-@ rate and tactical intelligence off the ball , as well as his attacking movement as a forward , which often draws opposition defenders out of position , and in turn creates spaces for Cristiano Ronaldo to make attacking runs into the centre of the area from the left wing . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 28 May 2016 
 <unk> Coupe de France , Coupe de la Ligue , Trophée des Champions , Copa del Rey and Supercopa de <unk> UEFA Super Cup and FIFA Club World Cup 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 8 October 2015 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Lyon 
 Ligue 1 : 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 
 Coupe de France : 2007 – 08 
 Trophée des Champions : 2006 , 2007 
 Real Madrid 
 UEFA Champions League : 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2014 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2014 
 La Liga : 2011 – 12 
 Copa del Rey : 2010 – 11 , 2013 – 14 
 Supercopa de España : 2012 
 = = = International = = = 
 France 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship ( 1 ) : 2004 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Bravo Award : 2008 
 Ligue 1 Top Goalscorer : 2007 – 08 
 UNFP Ligue 1 Player of the Year : 2007 – 08 
 UNFP Ligue 1 Team of the Year : 2007 – 08 
 Étoile d 'Or : 2007 – 08 
 French Player of the Year ( 3 ) : 2011 , 2012 , 2014 
 Fastest goal in an El Clásico on 10 December 2011 ( 21 seconds ) 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Karim Benzema was born in the city of Lyon , France to French nationals of Algerian descent . As a practicing Muslim , he observes fasting during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan . His grandfather , Da <unk> Benzema , lived in the village of <unk> , located in the northern town of Beni <unk> in Algeria before migrating to Lyon , where he eventually settled in the 1950s . Benzema 's father , <unk> , was born in <unk> , while his mother , <unk> <unk> , was born and raised in Lyon ; her family originated from Oran . Benzema is the third youngest in the family and grew up with eight other siblings in Bron , an eastern suburb of Lyon . His younger brothers <unk> and Sabri are also footballers . The former currently plies his trade at the amateur level with Vaulx @-@ le @-@ <unk> in the Division d 'Honneur , the sixth division of French football , while the latter plays in the youth academy of a club in the family 's hometown of Bron . Since establishing himself as an international footballer , Benzema has been involved in numerous promotional campaigns . Since 2008 , he has regularly appeared on the cover of the French version of the annual FIFA video game . Benzema is sponsored by German sportswear company Adidas and has , subsequently , appeared in several television advertisements for the brand . 
 On 3 February 2014 , his longtime girlfriend , Chloé de Launay , gave birth to his daughter , <unk> . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 On 18 April 2010 , it was first reported by French television channel M6 that four members of the French national team were being investigated for their roles as clients in a prostitute ring operated inside of a Paris nightclub , with some of the women possibly being underage or transgender . The players were eventually revealed to be Franck Ribéry , Sidney Govou , Hatem Ben Arfa and Benzema . Benzema was alleged to have had a sexual rendezvous with a prostitute when she was 16 years of age , an act Benzema denied through his lawyer . On 20 July , Benzema was questioned by Paris police and indicted on the charge of " solicitation of a minor prostitute " . In November 2011 , prosecutors asked for the cases against Ribéry and Benzema to be dropped , saying that the players were not aware that the escort , identified as <unk> <unk> , was 16 years old . However , the case has gone on to trial . The first hearing was held in June 2013 . 
 On 4 November 2015 , Benzema was arrested by French police for his alleged part in blackmailing fellow France international player Mathieu Valbuena . During the investigation over the blackmail plot , French Prime Minister Manuel Valls stated , " A great athlete should be exemplary . If he is not , he has no place in the France team . There are so many kids , so many youngsters in our suburbs that relate to great athletes . They wear the blue jersey , the colours of France , which are so important in these moments . " 
 = Roanoke Building = 
 11 South LaSalle Street Building or Eleven South LaSalle Street Building ( formerly Roanoke Building and Tower and originally Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition or simply the Roanoke Building and Lumber Exchange Building ) is a Chicago Landmark building that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and that is located at 11 South LaSalle Street in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois , United States . This address is located on the southeast corner of LaSalle and Madison Street in Cook County , Illinois across the Madison Street from the One North LaSalle Building . The building sits on a site of a former Roanoke building ( once known as Major Block 2 ) that once served as a National Weather Service Weather Forecast official climate site and replaced Major Block 1 after the Great Chicago Fire . The current building has incorporated the frontage of other buildings east of the original site of Major Block 1 . 
 The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( under the name Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition ) on December 6 , 2007 , and named a Chicago Landmark on December 12 , 2007 . It incorporates the lands of the former DeSoto Building and former Farewell Hall . 
 = = Original Roanoke Building = = 
 A four @-@ story Major Block 1 building , designed by T. V. <unk> , sat on this location until the Great Chicago Fire . After the fire , this was replaced with the Major Block 2 , which eventually became known as the Roanoke Building . Major Block 2 stood from 1872 – 1912 as a seven @-@ story building on spread foundations . It was designed by Dixon & Hamilton and had a length of 136 feet ( 41 @.@ 5 m ) along South LaSalle Street and a width of 66 feet ( 20 @.@ 1 m ) along West Madison Street . A commonly published illustration of this building shows it as a five @-@ story building . From June 8 , 1873 to January 1 , 1887 the original Roanoke building served as the Chicago location for the National Weather Service Weather Forecast official climate site . The building is mentioned in Saul Bellow 's More Die of Heartbreak but there it is referred to as a wealthy residence building and not as an office building . 
 = = Current Roanoke Building = = 
 = = = The original current building = = = 
 The current building was designed in three phases : in 1915 Holabird & Roche 's design for the first 16 floors was built , and five floors were added in 1922 . It was built originally as the sixteen @-@ story high Lumber Exchange Building and later renamed as the 11 South LaSalle Street Building . The Holabird & Roche design had three basements and rock caissons . The original 16 @-@ floor building was a late Chicago school commercial building that incorporated arches at both the fourth and the top floor , but when the top five floors were added in 1922 under the original cornice , the top rank of arches disappeared . The building uses dark terra cotta with <unk> designs . The vaulted ceiling and marble wall lobby contribute to what is described as a classical entrance and lobby . The Palladian entrance uses contrasting white <unk> and black marble . 
 = = = Tower addition = = = 
 In 1925 , the building was built to its current 35 story height by the addition of an adjacent tower to the east of the Madison street frontage . The entire building contains 330 @,@ 000 square feet ( 31 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The 36 @-@ story tower was added east of the original structure on the site of the former DeSoto Building at 125 @-@ 129 West Madison . The tower was an early example of the use of setbacks and it uses ranks of paired windows . When the Tower was built four bronze bells were installed and were set to chime an original composition called " <unk> " which is Norse for " Tomorrow " every quarter @-@ hour . The largest of these chimes is 7 @,@ 000 pounds ( 3 @,@ 200 kg ; 500 st ) and inscribed with the name " Leander " in honor of Leander McCormick . The current Roanoke building is the city 's only example of a building in the style of Portuguese Gothic architecture . According to the press release from the city announcing the landmark promotion , the building 's terra cotta ornamentation is derived from Portuguese Gothic precedents . The building was modernized in the 1950s and went through a postmodern renovation in 1984 to evoke the original ornamentation . The building has the same frontage as the original Roanoke building plus that of the former Farewell Hall ( built by William W. Boyington at 131 @-@ 3 West Madison Street ) . 
 From 1920 until 1969 the building hosted the offices of the law firm Sidley & Austin . Today the building is leased by small service industry firms , such as second @-@ floor tenant Thomas P. <unk> & Co . , which arranges travel trips and tours for non @-@ profit organizations . 
 The building is undergoing renovation to the lobby , the façade , the elevators and the exterior lighting . The recent National Register listing has made the renovation feasible by making the building eligible for federal tax credits and reduced property taxes . The building qualified for the landmark Class L tax status , which makes it eligible for twelve years of reduced property taxes and other economic incentives for repair and rehab of historic buildings > In order to perform the renovation the owners took out a $ 43 @.@ 3 million loan against the property according to Form 8 @-@ K filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . Its National Registered Historic Places announcement listed it under the name " Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition " although its Chicago Landmark listing is under the name " Roanoke Building and Tower . " 
 = Donnie Fatso = 
 " Donnie Fatso " is the ninth episode of the twenty @-@ second season of the animated comedy series The Simpsons . It first aired on Fox in the United States on December 12 , 2010 . The plot revolves around an FBI agent , who helps Homer go undercover to infiltrate Fat Tony 's mob . Homer agrees to this in hopes of decreasing his sentence after being charged for bribery . This episode is a reference to Goodfellas as well as real @-@ life FBI agent Donnie Brasco . 
 " Donnie Fatso " was written by Chris <unk> and directed by Ralph Sosa . Critics were polarized with the episode , with criticism stemming from its main plot and cultural references . Upon its initial airing , the episode received 7 @.@ 32 million viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . " Donnie Fatso " featured guest appearances from Jon Hamm and Joe Mantegna , as well as several recurring voice actors and actresses for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Marge wake on New Year 's Day with hangovers after the family 's New Year 's Eve celebration . As Homer takes out the garbage , Chief Wiggum , Eddie , and Lou arrive and issue him multiple citations and fines - the result of recently passed , frivolous laws intended to bring in revenue for the city when broken . Taking Moe 's suggestion that he bribe a city official to clear up the fines , Homer leaves a sack full of cash on the official 's desk but is promptly arrested , convicted , and sentenced to 10 years in prison . Wiggum takes pity on Homer and tells him to meet with an FBI agent , who offers to reduce the sentence if Homer will go undercover in the prison to investigate Fat Tony , who is also serving time along with his top henchmen . 
 Homer quickly gains favor with Fat Tony , due to a confrontation engineered by the FBI agent , and Fat Tony breaks him and the entire group out of prison and offers him a chance to join the syndicate . Homer 's first task is to burn down Moe 's Tavern in revenge for Moe 's rudeness toward Fat Tony on the phone , but Homer finds that Moe has already done the deed himself . Fat Tony accepts Homer into the syndicate and the two develop a special bond ; however , complications over a scheme to import weapons put the syndicate under severe stress . Eventually Fat Tony discovers Homer 's undercover status and , emotionally devastated by his betrayal , suffers a fatal heart attack . 
 Meanwhile , Marge has begun to panic over being unable to communicate with Homer , as she knows nothing of his undercover work and cannot get any information on his whereabouts . She is surprised and thrilled when he returns home with his prison sentence lifted , but Homer feels guilt for Fat Tony 's death and bitterness toward the government over being used to bring him down . Homer visits Fat Tony 's grave to apologize , but is kidnapped by his cousin Fit Tony , who plans to kill him for revenge . However , Fit Tony spares his life after Homer tells of the time he and Fat Tony spent together , seeing that Fat Tony lives on in Homer 's memories . Fit Tony takes charge of the syndicate , but the stress of the position causes him to overeat and gain weight , becoming known first as Fit Fat Tony and then simply Fat Tony - now physically indistinguishable from the original . 
 = = Production = = 
 Donnie Fatso was written by Chris <unk> and directed by Ralph Sosa . In July 2010 , it was announced that Jon Hamm would make a guest appearance in the episode as an agent for the FBI . In his interview with Entertainment Weekly , showrunner Al Jean was pleased with Hamm 's performance , opining : " You gave him one note and he immediately did twelve great things with it . He was really funny . And handsome . He had it all . Hamm stated that appearing on the show was " an incredible experience " . In his interview with Access Hollywood , he continued , " I got to work on The Simpsons , which I watched for 20 years and the show is still fresh and still funny and the characters still resonate . It ’ s one of the best shows on television . It was an honor to be asked to be a part of it . " Joe Mantegna returned as Fat Tony , and voiced Fat Tony 's cousin Fit Tony . 
 " Donnie Fatso " features several references to music , film , media , and other pop culture phenomenon . The episode 's plot and title are parodical to that of the film Donnie Brasco . At the end of the episode , Homer 's monologue serves as a homage to monologue of Henry Hill in Goodfellas . Similarly , the parodying monologue is set to Sid Vicious ' version of " My Way " . Near the end of the episode , Fit Tony narrowly avoids a car bomb , a scene similar to that in Casino . The final scene between Fat Tony and Homer is reminiscent to that of the television show Wiseguy . 
 The opening sequence of " Donnie Fatso " featured a Fox News helicopter with the words " Merry Christmas from Fox News … But no other holidays . " It was the third episode of the season to satirize Fox News in its opening sequence , having first done so in " The Fool Monty " , in which helicopter can be seen hovering over New York City with the slogan " Fox News : Not Racist , But # 1 With <unk> " . Bill O 'Reilly , host of the The O 'Reilly Factor , harshly criticized the show , calling the producers " <unk> " . He resumed : " Continuing to bite the hand that feeds part of it , Fox broadcasting once again allows its cartoon characters to run wild . " In response , producers added a brief scene at the beginning of the opening sequence in the following episode , " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " , in which a helicopter appears bearing the slogan " Fox News : Unsuitable for Viewers Under 75 . " The scene was later removed from the opening sequence of " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " , and was replaced by one reminiscing the film King Kong . According to showrunner Al Jean , the producers of the show were pleased that they had annoyed O 'Reilly , exclaiming that it was " very entertaining for [ them ] . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Donnie Fatso " was first broadcast on December 12 , 2010 in the United States as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was succeeded by episodes of Family Guy and American Dad ! . The episode was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 32 million viewers , despite airing simultaneously with Extreme Makeover Home Edition on ABC , The Amazing Race on CBS , and a game between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Dallas Cowboys as part of the 2010 NFL season on NBC . " Donnie Fatso " garnered a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to the Nielsen ratings . The episode also became the third highest rated show of the week on Fox , only behind Glee and Family Guy . Total viewership and ratings were significantly down from the previous episode , " The Fight Before Christmas " , which received 9 @.@ 56 million viewers and achieved a 4 @.@ 2 / 11 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . 
 The episode attained mixed receptions from television critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a ' C ' grade , scoring lower than " Road to the North Pole " of Family Guy and " For Whom the Sleigh Bell Tolls " of American Dad . VanDerWerff felt that the episode was " fairly lazy " , and commented that the main plot was " too much of a mob movie pastiche . " Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic criticized the humor of the episode , opining that " for an episode with such an overdone story , we could have forgiven things if it were at least funnier . " He continued : " Unfortunately , there just weren 't enough jokes to make the episode worth it . " In conclusion of his review , Hochberger gave " Donnie Fatso " a 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . 
 Critics were also polarized with the conclusion of Fat Tony , and the addition of Fit Tony . Entertainment Weekly writer Darren Franich named Fat Tony 's death the ninth Best TV Character Death of 2010 , writing , " give the writers some credit for doing something different : In the middle of an otherwise straightforward mob @-@ themed episode , they actually went ahead and killed off Fat Tony , a character who was first introduced almost twenty years ago . " 
 Dan Castellaneta 's performance in the episode , as Homer , Barney , Krusty and Louie , was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to Maurice LaMarche , who received the award for his role in the Futurama episode " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = Hand in Glove = 
 " Hand in Glove " is a song by the British alternative rock band The Smiths , written by singer Morrissey and guitarist Johnny Marr . It was released as the band 's first single in May 1983 on independent record label Rough Trade Records . " Hand in Glove " peaked at number three on the UK Indie Chart . It did not chart ( top 75 ) but made number 124 outside the UK singles chart . A remixed version of the song was featured on the band 's debut album , The Smiths , in 1984 . That same year , a cover version recorded by singer Sandie Shaw featuring Smiths members Marr , Andy Rourke and Mike Joyce as backing musicians reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Morrissey and Marr wrote " Hand in Glove " in January 1983 , between the second and third concerts The Smiths ever played . Morrissey claimed that after Marr gave him a demo cassette of the song , he went home and wrote lyrics for it in the span of two hours , conscious of the fact that it would be the group 's first recorded work . Even prior to performing the song live , the group was unanimous in the opinion that " Hand in Glove " was their strongest song to date . 
 The Smiths asked their manager Joe Moss to fund the recording of " Hand in Glove " . In late February , the group booked a one @-@ day recording session at Strawberry Studios in Stockport at the cost of £ 250 , which they produced themselves . Morrissey claimed in later years that he was dissatisfied with his vocal and returned a week later to re @-@ record his part , the day after which the entire group travelled to London and convinced Rough Trade owner Geoff Travis to release the record . However , author Simon Goddard noted that it was not until April 1983 that Marr and bassist Andy Rourke visited the Rough Trade offices . On that occasion , Marr handed Travis a cassette featuring " Hand in Glove " and a live recording of " Handsome Devil " , telling Travis , " [ L ] <unk> to this , it 's not just another tape " . Impressed , Travis promised he would . The following Monday , Travis called the group and invited them back to London to release " Hand in Glove " as a single . Both parties agreed to release the single as a temporary arrangement before agreeing to any long @-@ term partnership . 
 Two months after the single 's release , The Smiths recorded the song again during aborted sessions for their debut album with producer Troy Tate . This version was recorded a tone lower than the original in the key of F # minor , and features a shorter introduction . The Smiths recorded the song again with producer John Porter in October at Manchester 's Pluto Studios . Morrissey rejected this version of the song . Due to impending deadlines , the version that ultimately appeared on the band 's first album The Smiths was a remix of the original master recording from the Strawberry Studios session . For this version , Porter increased the separation between Marr 's guitar tracks and Morrissey 's vocals , emphasised drummer Mike Joyce 's drum beat , pushed Rourke 's bass back in the mix , and created a more dramatic opening and conclusion to the song . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 The original recorded version of " Hand in Glove " is in the key of G minor . The song begins with an overdub of Marr playing a harmonica over the rest of the music . Simon Goddard wrote that Marr 's use of the instrument " purposefully evoked the very same ' blunt vitality of working @-@ class " <unk> " that Ian McDonald attributes to The Beatles ' parallel 1962 single ' Love Me Do ' , though infinitely more melancholy . " Of the backing music , Goddard wrote , " Marr 's redolent minor chord wash weeps with a rain @-@ soaked hopelessness while Rourke contributes one of his most inspired bass patterns " . 
 Morrissey explained that the song 's theme was " complete loneliness , " going on to state : " It was important to me that that there 'd be something searingly poetic about it , in a lyrical sense , and yet jubilant at the same time . " Goddard described " Hand in Glove " as " a bleak proclamation of doomed happiness [ . . . ] a shattering left @-@ hook of self @-@ loathing , loss and desperation " . Years later Morrissey considered the song to be the group 's " most special . " The singer said he was particularly proud of the song 's second verse , which included the lines " Though we may be hidden by rags / We have something they 'll never have . " Morrissey explained that the verse described " how I felt when I couldn 't afford clothes and used to dress in rags but I didn 't really feel mentally impoverished . " 
 In the song 's lyrics , Morrissey referenced works by playwright Shelagh Delaney , whom he would reference in several later songs . The song 's line " I 'll probably never see you again " appears in Delaney 's kitchen sink realism play A Taste of Honey and The Lion in Love . Morrissey paraphrased the line " Everything depends upon how near you stand next to me " from the 1974 Leonard Cohen song " Take This Longing " . Goddard conjectures that the song 's title was inspired by the 1947 detective novel Hand in Glove by <unk> Marsh . 
 The song starts with the lines " Hand in glove / the sun shines out of our <unk> " and then states that " No it 's not like any other love / this one 's different / because it 's us . " The lyrics then state that " the people stare " and " the Good People laugh " , " but we have something they 'll never have . " The song ends with the repeated line " I 'll probably never see you again " which is also taken from A Taste of Honey . The intro to the song uses the chords F major ( sus2 ) , Eb major and Bb major . The verse uses the chord G minor 7 , F7 ( sus2 ) and Eb major . ( The transcription cited is transposed to E minor instead of G minor . ) 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Hand in Glove " was released as The Smiths ' debut recording in May 1983 . The single sold consistently for the next 18 months . Although the single failed to reach the UK Singles Chart , it reached number three on the UK Indie Chart . Its relative success earned the group a listing in the Guinness Book of Records in January 1984 when it and the group 's next two singles ' " This Charming Man " and " What Difference Does It Make ? " ' held the top three position on the UK Indie Chart . " It should have been a massive hit " , Morrissey later said , " it was so urgent . To me , it was a complete cry in every direction . It really was a landmark . " The single did raise the band 's profile ; a week after its release the band gained its first major live reviews in the music press , which in turn led to their first radio session with BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel . 
 While reviewing a 1983 concert by The Smiths and The Go @-@ Betweens at The Venue in London , Barney Hoskyns , writing for the NME , described " Hand in Glove " as " one of the year 's few masterpieces , a thing of beauty and a joy forever " . In the 1984 edition of The Rock Yearbook , Hoskyns said the song " swept into my heart " . Bill Black , writing for Sounds , described it as a " daunting " debut . Writing for Allmusic , Ned Raggett calls the song a " stunning , surprising debut " and describes the music as " sparkling " stating that it relied on Marr 's " careful overdubbing of acoustic and electric guitars " . Raggett went on to describe Rourke 's bass and Joyce 's drumming as " sparse but effective " , and claimed that Joyce " especially shone " . 
 Reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine says lyrics to the Smiths single " Hand in Glove " contain " veiled references to homosexuality " . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Morrissey had specific instructions on how he wanted the " Hand in Glove " single to be packaged . He told Rough Trade 's art department that the single should have a paper label centre with four vents encircling the middle , in homage to singles from the 1960s . The cover to the single features a photograph of George O 'Mara by Jim French , taken from Margaret Walters ' history The Nude Male . The sleeve 's homoerotic undertones elicited the reaction Morrissey was hoping for of unease and outrage . Rourke noted when he showed the recording to his parents his father was " mortified . He said to me , ' that 's a bloke 's bum ' and I said , ' yeah ' but when he asked me why I just didn 't have an answer for him " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Both songs written by Morrissey and Johnny Marr . 
 " Hand in Glove " – 3 : 16 
 " Handsome Devil " ( live , Manchester Hacienda , 4 / 2 / 83 ) – 2 : 53 
 = = Etchings on vinyl = = 
 British 7 " : KISS MY SHADES / KISS MY SHADES <unk> 
 " Kiss my shades " is a lyric from the title track . 
 = = Sandie Shaw collaboration = = 
 Despite having established themselves as a group , Morrissey and Marr still harboured ambitions that they would be recognised as songwriters by having their songs covered by others . Their top choice was singer Sandie Shaw , who had scored several hits throughout the 1960s and was one of the most prominent British vocalists of her era . In the summer of 1983 , Marr and Morrissey began asking Shaw to cover their song " I Don 't Owe You Anything " , which they had conceived with her in mind to perform . The pair sent Shaw various letters coupled with song demos . Shaw was sceptical at first ; she was discouraged by the negative media attention that accompanied the Smiths song " Reel Around the Fountain " , and when she received a copy of " Hand in Glove " in the mail , she reportedly exclaimed to her husband " he 's started sending me pictures of naked men with their bums showing ! " 
 Shaw was eventually won over by the intervention of Geoff Travis and by Morrissey 's praise of her in the press . In January 1984 , NME announced that Shaw and The Smiths would release a collaborative recording of " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as a single on Rough Trade . In February , Shaw and The Smiths journeyed to Matrix Studios in London , where Shaw recorded three Smiths songs with Marr , Joyce and Rourke . The version of " Hand in Glove " recorded at Matrix was performed in the key of D minor , while Marr placed the intro riff 's accent on a major scale and Shaw altered some lyrics . Shaw ended up selecting their recording of " Hand in Glove " as the single 's A @-@ side , placing " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as the B @-@ side . The cover features a still of Rita <unk> from the movie A Taste of Honey , an adaptation of the play of the same name that was written by Shelagh Delaney , who appeared on the covers of the single " Girlfriend In a Coma " and the compilation album Louder Than Bombs . 
 Released as a single in April 1984 solely under Shaw 's name , the recording became Shaw 's first hit in a decade when it reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart . Marr , Rourke and Joyce backed Shaw on two mimed television performances of the song , first on Channel 4 's <unk> in March 1984 , and then on Top of the Pops on 26 April , where the band appeared barefoot in homage to the singer , who did so often in the 1960s . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 7 " 
 " Hand in Glove " – 2 : 58 
 " I Don 't Owe You Anything " – 4 : 06 
 12 " 
 " Hand in Glove " – 2 : 58 
 " I Don 't Owe You Anything " – 4 : 06 
 " Jeane " – 2 : 52 
 = = = Etchings on vinyl = = = 
 British 7 " : KISS MY SHADES / JM 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Darlington F.C. = 
 Darlington Football Club was an English football club based in Darlington , County Durham . The club was founded in 1883 , and played its games at Feethams , before moving to the Darlington Arena in 2003 . The arena is an all @-@ seater stadium with a capacity of 25 @,@ 000 , although this was restricted to 10 @,@ 000 . The cost of the stadium was a major factor in driving the club into administration . The club originally played in regionally organised leagues , and were one of the founding members of the Northern League in 1889 . They were first admitted to the Football League when the Third Division North was formed in 1921 . 
 They won the Third Division North title in 1925 , and their 15th place in the Second Division in 1926 remained their highest ever league finish . After their admission to the League , they spent most of their history in the bottom tier . They won the Third Division North Cup in 1934 ; their first victory in nationally organised cup competition . They reached the last 16 of the FA Cup twice , and the quarter @-@ final of the Football League Cup once , in 1968 . In the early 1990s they won successive titles , with the Conference National in 1990 and the Fourth Division in 1991 . In 2011 they won the FA Trophy , defeating Mansfield Town 1 – 0 at Wembley Stadium . 
 In May 2012 , the club was bought out of a period of administration without entering into a Creditors Voluntary Agreement ( CVA ) . The Football Association ruled that it should be treated as a new club , which required a change of playing name . The name chosen was Darlington 1883 , and that team was placed in the Northern League Division One , which is the ninth tier of English football , for the 2012 – 13 season . 
 The club 's main rivals were Hartlepool United . The club 's traditional colours were black and white shirts , black shorts and black and white socks . The club 's crest depicted Locomotion No 1 , referring to the town 's railway history ; as well as a stylised Quaker hat , referring to the religious movement that had a historic influence on the town , and which was the source of the team 's nickname , the Quakers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and pre @-@ war = = = 
 In July 1883 , a meeting was called in Darlington Grammar School to address concerns that so few Darlington @-@ based football clubs were entering the major competition in the region , the Durham Challenge Cup . The meeting agreed with the view expressed by the Darlington & Stockton Times newspaper , that there was " no club , urban or rural , sufficiently powerful to worthily represent Darlington " , decided to form a new club , and elected one Charles Samuel Craven , a local engineer , as secretary . Darlington Football Club duly entered the Durham Challenge Cup , reached the final in their first season , and won the trophy in 1885 . The following season Darlington entered the FA Cup for the first time , only to lose 8 – 0 to Grimsby Town . Craven was instrumental in the formation of the Northern League in 1889 . Darlington were one of the founder members , and went on to win the league title in 1896 and 1900 ; they reached the semi @-@ final of the FA Amateur Cup in the same two seasons . 
 The club turned professional in 1908 and joined the North Eastern League . The 1910 – 11 season saw Darlington reach the last 16 of the FA Cup , progressing through five qualifying rounds to lose to Swindon Town in the Third Round Proper , and two years later they won the North Eastern League . Ground improvements begun before the First World War left the club in financial difficulty during it ; the chairman of Darlington Forge Albion financed the completion of the East Stand and cleared the debts , allowing them to continue to compete . When competitive football resumed after the war , Darlington finished second in the North Eastern League , and were champions for a second time the following year . This victory was well timed , as it coincided with the formation of the Northern Section of the Football League 's Third Division , which Darlington were invited to join . 
 Their first season in the Third Division was a successful one and they ended up in second place . Three years later , in 1924 – 25 , they were champions and won promotion to the Football League Second Division . The 15th @-@ place finish in 1926 remains Darlington 's best League performance , but they were relegated back to the Third Division in 1927 , where they remained until the Second World War put an end to competitive football . They came as high as third in 1929 – 30 , but twice had to apply for re @-@ election to the League , in 1932 – 33 and 1936 – 37 , after finishing in last place in the section . In 1934 , they enjoyed their first success in a nationally @-@ organised cup competition , defeating Stockport County 4 – 3 at Old Trafford to win the Football League Third Division North Cup , and reached the final again two years later , this time losing 2 – 1 at home to Chester . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Soon after the Football Association gave permission for competitive matches to be played under floodlights , Darlington beat Carlisle United 3 – 1 in the first floodlit FA Cup match between Football League clubs , a replay held at St James ' Park , Newcastle United 's ground , in November 1955 . The 1957 – 58 season saw the club equal their previous best FA Cup run , reaching the last 16 by defeating Chelsea , Football League champions only three years earlier , in the Fourth Round . After letting slip a three @-@ goal lead at Stamford Bridge , Darlington won the replay 4 – 1 after extra time , described as " a most meritorious win , earned by a combination of sound tactics and an enthusiasm that Chelsea never equalled " by The Times ' correspondent , who felt it " surprising that extra time was necessary , for Darlington always seemed to have the match well in hand " . In the League , Darlington 's fourth place in 1948 – 49 was their only top @-@ half finish in the first twelve seasons after the war , and when the regional sections of the Third Division were merged , they were allocated to the new Fourth Division . 
 The Supporters ' Club raised £ 20 @,@ 000 to pay for a roof at one end of the Feethams ground and for floodlights , which were first used on 19 September 1960 . Later that night , the West Stand burned down due to an electrical fault . Darlington 's attendance record , of 21 @,@ 023 against Bolton Wanderers in the League Cup fourth round , was set two months later . Under the management of Lol Morgan , they won promotion to the Third Division in 1966 . A crowd of 16 @,@ 000 watched the draw against Torquay United on the last day of the season which ensured they finished as runners @-@ up , but they were relegated the following year . 
 Darlington reached the quarter @-@ finals of the 1968 League Cup ; drawn away to Brian Clough 's Derby County , they took the lead , only to lose 5 – 4 . During the 1970s the club had to apply for re @-@ election to the League five times , and by 1982 they were facing a financial crisis which they survived thanks to fundraising efforts in the town . Three years later they won promotion by finishing third in the league under manager Cyril Knowles . Darlington spent two seasons in the Third Division ; the 13th @-@ place finish in 1986 was the highest position they achieved in the Football League since the introduction of the four @-@ division structure in 1958 , but they were relegated the following season . 
 Though Brian Little 's appointment as manager in February 1989 failed to stave off relegation to the Conference , he went on to lead them to successive promotions . An immediate return to the Football League as Conference champions preceded the Fourth Division title in 1990 – 91 , but Little 's departure for Leicester City was followed by relegation and a succession of short @-@ term managers . They came close to a return to the Third Division via the play @-@ offs in 1996 ; on their first visit to Wembley , against Plymouth Argyle , they were beaten by a Ronnie Mauge goal . 
 = = = Reynolds and after = = = 
 The 1999 – 2000 season , the first under new chairman George Reynolds , was marked by Darlington becoming the first team to lose an FA Cup tie and still qualify for the next round . Manchester United 's involvement in the FIFA Club World Championship meant they did not enter the FA Cup . To decide who took their place , a " lucky losers " draw was held from the 20 teams knocked out in the second round ; Darlington were selected , and lost their third @-@ round tie 2 – 1 to Aston Villa at Villa Park . Their second Wembley appearance came later that season , facing Peterborough United in the play @-@ off final after automatic promotion had seemed certain earlier in the season . After a 3 – 0 aggregate semi @-@ final win over Hartlepool United , Quakers missed numerous chances and were again undone by a single goal , this time from Andy Clarke . 
 In 2002 , Darlington made unsuccessful approaches to sign Paul Gascoigne and Faustino Asprilla , and moved into their new stadium , named the Reynolds Arena , in summer 2003 . Reynolds had paid the club 's debts when he took over , but the cost of the stadium , partly financed with high @-@ interest loans and built without realistic expectation of filling it , drove the club into administration six months later . Reynolds resigned as a director in January 2004 with the club under threat of imminent closure . A benefit match , featuring footballers such as Gascoigne , Bryan Robson and Kenny Dalglish , played in front of a crowd of over 14 @,@ 000 , raised £ 100 @,@ 000 to help ensure survival in the short term . Despite the off @-@ field problems , David Hodgson , in his third spell as manager , and his players produced some fine performances as the team avoided relegation . 
 At the end of the season , Reynolds was obliged to hand over control to the Sterling Consortium to bring the club out of administration , Stewart Davies taking over as chairman . He and his staff adopted a fan @-@ friendly approach , in contrast to the abrasive Reynolds , before in 2006 , the club was sold to property developer George Houghton . For four consecutive seasons , under Hodgson , sacked in 2006 , and then under successor Dave Penney , the Quakers finished in the top half of the table , reaching the play @-@ off semi @-@ final in 2008 only to lose to Rochdale on penalties . In February 2009 , Darlington again went into administration , triggering an automatic 10 @-@ point deduction , without which they would have again reached the play @-@ offs . Fundraising efforts kept the club going , but when no buyer was found for the club by a May deadline , the administrators made the majority of the first @-@ team squad available for transfer and cut staff numbers to a minimum . On 20 May , Houghton returned to the club as chairman , appointed former Middlesbrough boss Colin Todd as manager , and brokered an agreement which led to the club coming out of administration and ownership passing to local businessman Raj Singh , enabling the club to compete in the 2009 – 10 season without any points deduction . Todd left the club after losing seven of his first nine games and was replaced by former Republic of Ireland manager Steve Staunton , who only won four of 23 league games . 
 The club were eventually relegated to the Conference , and suffered more managerial turmoil during the summer when Simon Davey and successor Ryan Kidd both left within 11 days , to leave Mark Cooper in charge . He led the club to victory in the 2011 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium , defeating Mansfield Town 1 – 0 with a goal from Chris Senior in the last minute of extra time . Following a succession of poor performances at the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Cooper and his assistant Richard Dryden were sacked by the club on 24 October 2011 . A little more than two months later , Singh placed the club into administration for a third time in less than a decade . A number of players were released and allowed to join other clubs for nominal fees in January before interim manager Craig Liddle and the remaining playing staff had their contracts terminated by Darlington 's administrator . Two days later , the club was spared from liquidation after a last @-@ minute injection of funding by supporters ' groups . Enough funds were raised for Darlington to complete the season , but relegation was confirmed with three matches remaining . After the club was taken over with the intention of moving into community ownership , without entering into a Creditors Voluntary Agreement ( CVA ) , Darlington were relegated four divisions , to the Northern League Division One , on the recommendation of the Football Association . Martin Gray was appointed manager . On 21 June 2012 , the Football Association rejected an appeal , confirming that the club was to be treated as a new club entered into the Northern League , and would no longer be able to play under the name Darlington F.C. The new owners opted to rename the new club Darlington 1883 . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 In 1888 , Darlington 's kit consisted of a shirt with black and white vertical stripes , black shorts and black socks . Apart from a period between the 1910s and 1936 , when blue shorts were worn , the basic colours of the home kit have remained black and white . The shirt design has varied , from the 1888 vertical stripes , through hoops , plain white , and back to hoops again in the 1990s . Sponsors ' names have appeared on Darlington 's shirts since the 1980s . A table of kit manufacturers ( since the 1970s ) and shirt sponsors appears on the right . 
 Supporters were invited to vote for the design of the 2010 – 11 kit , to be manufactured by <unk> ; options for the home shirt each had black @-@ and @-@ white hoops , while the proposed away colours were either the traditional red or sky @-@ blue and white . The front of the home shirt has black @-@ and @-@ white hoops with a curved white panel , the back is largely white , and it has black sleeves with white trim and a black collar ; shorts are white and socks have black @-@ and @-@ white hoops . The design originally chosen had to be changed to comply with Conference rules prohibiting predominantly black kit ( to avoid a clash with match officials ' colours ) . The away kit is all red with black trim on the shirt . The shirts bear the name of hotel The Morritt , winners of the right to sponsor the shirt in a draw from among seven local businesses , each of which had purchased a hospitality package . 
 The club badge is in the form of a shield , divided diagonally into two parts ; the smaller section , to the upper right , is in the club 's home colour of white , the larger is red , their traditional away colour . In the white section is a stylised Quaker hat , emblematic of the major role played by the Religious Society of Friends ( Quakers ) in the history of the town . The larger section depicts George Stephenson 's Locomotion No 1 , the steam locomotive that hauled the first train on the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825 , representing the importance of the railway industry to the area . Across the bottom of the shield is a ribbon bearing the club 's nickname , The Quakers , and the whole rests on a bed of oak leaves , symbolic of strength and endurance . 
 = = Stadia = = 
 Feethams was originally used by Darlington Cricket Club , but began to be used for football in the 1860s . Darlington F.C. began playing there when they formed in 1883 . With growing crowd figures , the ground was expanded with the construction of the West stand at the turn of the twentieth century , and the construction of the <unk> Lane end in 1905 . In 1913 , a pair of towers were built at the entrance to the ground , and in 1920 , offices and changing rooms were built underneath the East stand . Floodlights were installed in September 1960 , but after their first use an electrical fault gutted the West stand in a fire , prompting its rebuilding . In 1997 , the East stand was demolished and rebuilt as an all seater stand . The new stand brought the capacity of the stadium up to 8 @,@ 000 . However , the £ 3 million cost of the stand had a major negative effect on the club , and George Reynolds came in to stabilise the club . He initiated the construction of the 25 @,@ 000 seat Darlington Arena . The last match played at Feethams was a 2 – 2 draw with Leyton Orient on 3 May 2003 . Following the closure of the ground , the floodlights were sold to Workington A.F.C. and the stadium demolished . A 160 @-@ house housing estate was planned for the cleared site . 
 The all @-@ seater Darlington Arena was opened in 2003 , at a cost of £ 18 million . The first game at the new stadium was a 2 – 0 loss to Kidderminster Harriers on 16 August 2003 . The attendance of 11 @,@ 600 still stands as a record for the ground . Though the stadium can seat up to 25 @,@ 000 people , the club is restricted to just 10 @,@ 000 because of county and local planning regulations . The club struggled to fill the new stadium and entered administration in February 2009 . 
 Although generally known as the Darlington Arena , the ground has had a number of official names due to sponsorship reasons ; between 2003 and 2004 it was known as the Reynolds Arena , the Williamson Motors Stadium from 2004 to 2005 , the 96 @.@ 6 <unk> Darlington Arena from 2005 to 2007 , the Balfour <unk> Darlington Arena between 2007 and 2009 , and since then it has been known as The Northern Echo Darlington Arena . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 Darlington 's supporters consider Hartlepool United as their main rivals . The feeling is reciprocated : in a 2008 survey , 95 % of supporters of both clubs named the other as their bitterest rivals . The clubs , based 25 miles ( 40 km ) apart , with Middlesbrough directly between the two towns , had met 147 times ( as of 2009 – 10 ) , of which Hartlepool won 60 to Darlington 's 57 . The meeting between the two clubs in 2007 attracted a crowd of 10 @,@ 121 to the Darlington Arena , the largest attendance for that League fixture for 50 years , though the average League attendance at the stadium declined from over 5 @,@ 000 in its opening season to 2 @,@ 744 in 2009 – 10 . 
 Darlington has an official supporters ' club and an away supporters group , known as Darlington Away Far Travelling Supporters ( <unk> ) , who represent Darlington supporters from places elsewhere in the country . A supporters ' trust was founded in 2002 ; it established a Disabled Supporters Group , tried to maintain a working relationship between club and supporters , and , together with the Darlington Camera Club , staged a " Farewell to Feethams " exhibition in celebration of the club 's longtime home . Together with the supporters ' club , the trust has been actively involved in fund @-@ raising particularly during the club 's periods of administration . 
 Fanzines included Mission Impossible , first published in the early 1990s , and Where 's The Money Gone , whose teenage editor , along with the editor of website Darlo Uncovered , Scott Thornberry , were among several supporters banned from the ground by chairman George Reynolds for criticising the running of the club . 
 The team mascot was Mr Q , described as " a flat @-@ looking cartoon man with a very big hat " . In 2006 , he was joined , and later replaced , by Darlo Dog , a Dalmatian , who was once ejected from the ground for climbing on the advertising boards in front of television cameras . Darlo Dog retired at the end of the 2009 – 10 season ; his successor , a panda named Feethams , was chosen via a design competition . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Honours achieved by Darlington since their foundation in 1883 include the following : 
 = = = League = = = 
 Football League Third Division North : 1 
 1924 – 25 
 Runners @-@ up : 1921 – 22 
 Fourth Division : 1990 – 91 
 Runners @-@ up : 1965 – 66 
 Football Conference : 1 
 1989 – 90 
 Northern League : 2 
 1895 – 96 , 1899 – 1900 
 Runners @-@ up : 1896 – 97 , 1898 – 99 
 North Eastern League : 2 
 1912 – 13 , 1920 – 21 
 Runners @-@ up : 1919 – 20 
 = = = Cup = = = 
 FA Trophy : 1 
 2010 – 11 
 Football League Third Division North Cup : 1 
 1933 – 34 
 Runners @-@ up : 1935 – 36 
 Durham Challenge Cup : 6 
 1884 – 85 , 1890 – 91 , 1892 – 93 , 1896 – 97 , 1919 – 20 , 1999 – 2000 
 = = Records = = 
 Darlington 's highest league finish was fifteenth in the Football League Second Division , during the 1925 – 26 season . The club 's best performance in the FA Cup has been two appearances in the last 16 of the competition . This first was in 1910 – 11 , when they lost to Swindon Town in the third round . The second was in the 1957 – 58 season , when they beat Chelsea 4 – 1 in a replay to reach the fifth round , in which they lost 6 – 1 to Wolverhampton Wanderers . The club 's best League Cup performance was reaching the quarter @-@ final in the 1967 – 68 season . 
 The Quakers ' biggest home win was a 13 – 1 defeat of Scarborough in the FA Cup on 24 October 1891 . Their best away win was on 22 October 1921 , when they beat Durham City 7 – 3 in the Third Division North . 
 The player with the most league appearances for Darlington is Ron Greener with 439 between 1955 and 1967 . He made a total of 490 senior appearances for the club . Alan Walsh scored a club @-@ record 87 league goals between 1978 and 1984 , and scored 100 goals for Darlington overall . The most league goals scored for the club by a single player in a season is 39 , by David Brown in the 1924 – 25 season . Franz Burgmeier has the most senior international appearances while a Darlington player , with seven caps for Liechtenstein in the 2008 – 09 season . 
 = = = Dream team = = = 
 As part of the " Farewell to Feethams " celebrations , a competition in the club programme in 2003 selected the following all @-@ time " Dream Team " : Mark Prudhoe , Ron Greener , Craig Liddle , Kevan Smith , John Peverell , Andy <unk> , David McLean , Alan <unk> , Alan Walsh , Marco Gabbiadini and Colin Sinclair . Gabbiadini , scorer of 53 goals in his two seasons at Darlington , was voted greatest ever player . 
 = Andry Rajoelina = 
 Andry Rajoelina ( Malagasy : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) ( born 30 May 1974 ) was the President of the High Transitional Authority of Madagascar . He became president on 21 March 2009 during a political crisis , having held the office of Mayor of Antananarivo for one year prior , and stepped down on 25 January 2014 following internationally recognized general elections held in 2013 . Before entering the political arena , Rajoelina launched several successful enterprises , including a printing and advertising company called Injet in 1999 and the Viva radio and television networks in 2007 . He began his career as an entrepreneur in his teenage years , first as a disc jockey at local clubs and parties , and later by organizing and promoting musical events in the capital . 
 Upon rising to power , Rajoelina dissolved the Senate and National Assembly and transferred their powers to a variety of new governance structures he made responsible for overseeing the transition toward a new constitutional authority . These administrative structures repeatedly conflicted with the internationally mediated process to establish a transitional government of consensus . Voters approved a new constitution in a national referendum unilaterally organized by the Rajoelina administration in November 2010 , ushering in the Fourth Republic and putting in place the conditions enabling Rajoelina to stand in the next general election . In January 2013 he announced his decision to abstain from running in the 2013 general election , but in May 2013 he reversed this decision and submitted his candidature . A special electoral court ruled in August 2013 that his candidature was invalid and that Rajoelina would not be permitted to run in the 2013 election . He has declared an interest in presenting himself as a presidential candidate in a future election . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Andry Rajoelina was born on 30 May 1974 to a relatively wealthy family in Antananarivo . His father , now @-@ retired Colonel Roger Yves Rajoelina , held dual nationality and fought for the French army in the Algerian War . At the age of 13 , Rajoelina became the 1987 junior @-@ class national karate champion . While still in high school , Rajoelina began working as a disc jockey at parties and clubs in Antananarivo to earn pocket money . Although Rajoelina 's family could afford a college education for their son , he opted to discontinue his studies after completing his <unk> to launch a career as an entrepreneur . 
 In 1994 , Rajoelina met his future spouse <unk> <unk> , who was then completing her senior year at a high school in Antananarivo . The couple courted long @-@ distance for six years while <unk> completed her undergraduate and masters studies in finance and accounting in Paris ; they were reunited in Madagascar in 2000 and wed the same year . Their marriage produced two boys , Arena ( born 2002 ) and <unk> ( born 2005 ) , and a daughter born in 2007 that the couple named <unk> , a contraction of their own names . 
 = = Media entrepreneur = = 
 In 1993 , at the age of 19 , Rajoelina established his first enterprise : a small event production company called Show Business . The connections and influence of his father , then a prominent military officer , in combination with Rajoelina 's own knowledge of Antananarivo nightlife , were factors in the company 's success . By the following year , he had firmly established his reputation among the youth elite of the capital for organizing an annual concert called Live that brought together foreign and Malagasy musical artists . The event continued to grow in popularity with each passing year , attracting 50 @,@ 000 participants on its tenth anniversary . 
 In 1999 , he launched Injet , an advertising and digital printing company that quickly grew in prominence with its expansion of billboard advertising throughout the capital . The business was the first to make digital printing technology available on the island . Local magazine Echo Australe , which named then @-@ mayor of Antananarivo Marc Ravalomanana their Entrepreneur of the Year in 1999 , bestowed the same honor on Rajoelina in 2000 . Following Rajoelina 's marriage in 2000 , his wife 's wealthy parents invested in Injet and allowed Rajoelina in 2001 to acquire <unk> , a competing Antananarivo @-@ based billboard advertising business that they owned . The couple worked together to manage the family businesses , with Rajoelina responsible for Injet and his wife handling the affairs of <unk> . A competition organized by French bank BNI Crédit Lyonnais awarded first prize for best young entrepreneur in Madagascar to Rajoelina in 2003 . 
 Rajoelina 's business affairs gradually drew him into the political arena . Shortly after Ravalomanana won the presidential elections in 2001 , Rajoelina befriended the new president 's daughter and continued to expand his relationship with the capital 's political elite over the course of the Ravalomanana presidency . He assumed an increasingly political role after the policies of Ravalomanana 's Tiako I Madagasikara ( TIM ) <unk> government increasingly obstructed the expansion of his business activities , such as requiring the removal of Antananarivo 's first LED advertising panels , which Rajoelina had installed at a major roundabout in the capital . In May 2007 he purchased the <unk> television and radio stations , which he renamed Viva TV and Viva FM . The official launch of these newly acquired media channels on 27 May was attended by many of the capital 's political and cultural elite , including Antananarivo mayor Hery Rafalimanana and Jacques Sylla , president of the TIM political party . Rajoelina used these media channels as outlets for voicing criticism of the Ravalomanana administration , quickly transforming his public image into that of an opposition leader . 
 = = Mayor of Antananarivo = = 
 In 2007 Rajoelina created and led the political association <unk> <unk> <unk> ( TGV ) , meaning " determined Malagasy youth " . Shortly afterward he announced his candidacy for the position of Mayor of Antananarivo . Rajoelina was elected on 12 December 2007 with 63 @.@ 3 % of the vote and a 75 % voter turnout , beating TIM party incumbent Hery Rafalimanana . Although Rafalimanana enjoyed strong popularity during his tenure as mayor , having been nationally and internationally credited with effectively managing the capital and achieving significant transformation of the urban landscape in the city , his campaign suffered from inadequate TIM promotional support and the increasingly unpopular image of the TIM party . 
 Rajoelina faced significant challenges in his tenure as mayor . Upon taking office , he was confronted with redressing the city 's treasury , which had accumulated 8 @.@ 2 billion Malagasy <unk> ( approximately 4 @.@ 6 million U.S. dollars ) in debts under previous mayors , including Ravalomanana himself . Beginning 4 January 2008 , Ravalomanana ordered water cutoffs at public pumps and brownouts of Antananarivo 's street lights run by the state utilities company Jirama , due to 3 @.@ 3 million ariary of unpaid debts to Jirama by the City of Antananarivo . Rajoelina responded by condemning the move as political and proceeded to undertake an audit that identified and addressed long @-@ standing procedural irregularities and issues of corruption within the city 's administration . Following a series of crimes against members of Rajoelina 's inner circle in 2008 that comprised the burgling of his cabinet director 's car , the kidnapping and ransoming of one of his special advisers , and the death of an assistant under mysterious circumstances , rumors spread that the Rajoelina administration was being deliberately intimidated by supporters of the president . 
 = = = Confrontation with Ravalomanana = = = 
 On 13 December 2008 , the Government closed Andry Rajoelina 's Viva TV , stating that a Viva interview with exiled former head of state Didier Ratsiraka was " likely to disturb peace and security " . This move catalyzed the political opposition and a public already dissatisfied with other recent actions undertaken by Ravalomanana , including the July 2008 deal with Daewoo Logistics to lease half the island 's arable land for South Korean cultivation of corn and palm oil , and the November 2008 purchase of a second presidential jet at a cost of 60 million U.S. dollars . Within a week Rajoelina met with twenty of Madagascar 's most prominent opposition leaders , referred to in the press as the " Club of 20 " , to develop a joint statement demanding that the Ravalomanana administration improve its adherence to democratic principles . The demand was broadcast at a public press conference where Rajoelina also promised to dedicate a politically open public space in the capital which he would call Place de la democratie ( " Democracy Place " ) . 
 Beginning in January 2009 , Andry Rajoelina led a series of political rallies in downtown Antananarivo where he gave voice to the frustration that Ravalomanana 's policies had triggered , particularly among the economically marginalized and members of the political opposition . On 17 January he gathered 30 @,@ 000 supporters at a public park and declared it renamed Place de la democratie . At a rally on 31 January 2009 Rajoelina announced that he was in charge of the entire Malagasy Republic , declaring : " Since the president and the government have not assumed their responsibilities , I therefore proclaim that I will run all national affairs as of today . " He added that a request for President Ravalomanana to formally resign would shortly be filed with the Parliament of Madagascar . This self @-@ declaration of power discredited Rajoelina in the eyes of many of the supporters who had rallied around his original pro @-@ democracy message , and the number of attendees at subsequent rallies declined , averaging around 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 participants . 
 On 3 February , Ravalomanana dismissed Rajoelina as mayor of Antananarivo and appointed a special delegation headed by Guy <unk> to manage the affairs of the capital . Rajoelina denounced the decision and warned that it would not be accepted by the populace . The following day Rajoelina instead designated Michele <unk> to succeed him as mayor . Rajoelina incited demonstrators on 7 February to occupy the presidential palace , prompting the presidential guard to open fire on the advancing crowd , killing 31 and wounding more than 200 . Popular disapproval of Ravalomanana intensified and polarized some in favor of his resignation , although perceptions of Rajoelina as an alternative remained mixed . Conflicts between pro @-@ Rajoelina demonstrators and security forces continued over the following weeks , resulting in several additional deaths . The security forces unsuccessfully attempted to arrest Rajoelina at his compound on 5 March ; they also raided the offices of his Viva media network . Initially they surrounded Viva , and after thirty minutes the staff attempted to remove Viva property , at which point the security forces stormed the building and confiscated the equipment . For the next several days Rajoelina took refuge in the home of the French ambassador , reporting to the press that he feared for his safety . 
 On 11 March , following a declaration of neutrality by army leadership , pro @-@ opposition soldiers from the <unk> ( Army Corps of Personnel and Administrative and Technical Services ) stormed the army headquarters and forced the army chief of staff to resign . Over the next several days the army deployed forces to enable the opposition to occupy key ministries , the chief of military police transferred his loyalty to Rajoelina , and the army sent tanks against the president 's <unk> Palace . Rajoelina rejected Ravalomanana 's offer on 15 March to hold a national referendum to determine whether the president should resign , and called on security forces to arrest the president . The following day , the army stormed the president 's Ambohitsorohitra Palace and captured the Central Bank . Hours later Ravalomanana transferred his power to group of senior army personnel , an act described by the opposition as a voluntary resignation , although Ravalomanana later declared he had been forced at gunpoint to relinquish power . The military council would have been charged with organizing elections within 24 months and re @-@ writing the constitution for the " Fourth Republic " . However , Vice Admiral <unk> <unk> announced on 18 March that it would transfer power directly to Rajoelina , making him president of the opposition @-@ dominated High Transitional Authority ( HAT ) that he had appointed weeks earlier . With the military 's backing , the authority was charged with taking up the task previously accorded to Ravalomanana 's proposed military directorate . Madagascar 's constitutional court deemed the transfer of power , from Ravalomanana to the military board and then to Rajoelina , to be legal ; the court 's statement did not include a justification for its decision . 
 Upon the army 's transfer of power to Rajoelina , Malagasy navy troops called for his resignation by 25 March , threatening to use force otherwise to protect the constitution of Madagascar and denouncing Rajoelina for the " civil war occurring in Madagascar " . The navy troops claimed there was " irrefutable " evidence that Rajoelina had paid the army corps hundreds of millions of ariary and that they should face trial in accordance with military law , but called for other nations not to get involved in what they considered a purely domestic affair . Rajoelina was sworn in as President on 21 March at Mahamasina stadium before a crowd of 40 @,@ 000 supporters . He was 35 years of age when sworn in , making him the youngest president in the country 's history and the youngest head of government in the world at that time . 
 The Southern African Development Community , a bloc of 15 nations including Madagascar , announced on 19 March that it would not recognize Rajoelina 's presidency since the takeover was unconstitutional . His ascension to the presidency was also condemned by the European Union and the United States , and the African Union suspended Madagascar and threatened sanctions if the constitutional government had not been restored in six months . No foreign diplomats attended Rajoelina 's investiture ; the HAT foreign minister said none had been invited . 
 = = President of the High Transitional Authority = = 
 Rajoelina took power in an atmosphere of national tension and international pressure to re @-@ establish constitutional authority . The new head of state announced on 17 March that a new constitution would be presented for voter approval and general elections would be held within 24 months . Immediately after taking office , Rajoelina began naming opposition leaders to positions within the HAT . He dissolved the Senate and Parliament and transferred their powers to his cabinet , the officials of the HAT , and the newly established Council for social and economic strengthening , through which his policies were issued as decrees . Legislative authority rested in practice with Rajoelina and his cabinet , composed of his closest advisers . A military committee established in April increased HAT control over security and defense policy . The following month , after the suspension of the country 's 22 regional governors , Rajoelina strengthened his influence over local government by naming replacements despite the fact that regional governorships were normally elected positions . The National Inquiry Commission ( <unk> ) was established shortly thereafter ; although its official purpose was to strengthen HAT effectiveness in addressing judicial and legal matters , the new entity carried out investigations and arrests of TIM supporters and other opponents of the TGV party . In addition , the new administration launched a strong crackdown on demonstrations by the new opposition , composed largely of Ravalomanana supporters ; at two demonstrations in April 2009 security forces opened fire on unarmed civilians protesting the HAT 's closure of three media networks formerly controlled by Ravalomanana , killing four and wounding sixty . Political analysts have criticized Rajoelina for using his position primarily to consolidate power and protect his political position and business interests and those of his supporters , observing that his initially broad range of supporters within the opposition movement has significantly diminished over time . 
 While in power , Rajoelina periodically engaged in ongoing negotiations to establish conditions under which free and fair elections could be held to restore government constitutionality and legitimacy in the eyes of the international community . On 4 August 2009 Rajoelina met with former Madagascar presidents Ravalomanana , Ratsiraka and Zafy along with former Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano acting as mediator at the four @-@ day mediation crisis talks held in Maputo , Mozambique . The Maputo Accords signed by the four leaders in August and further accords signed in Addis @-@ <unk> in November provided guidelines for a period of consensual political transition . In the months that followed , however , Rajoelina obstructed the implementation of the accords , making unilateral political decisions and filling all important government posts with TGV party representatives . 
 After being pushed back repeatedly , a constitutional referendum was held on 17 November 2010 that resulted in adoption of the state 's fourth constitution with 73 % in favor and a voter turnout of 52 @.@ 6 % . The independent Malagasy political watchdog group KMF @-@ <unk> , as well as the political opposition and the international community , cited numerous irregularities in the process , which was carried out unilaterally by the HAT . The constitution in effect at the time Rajoelina took office required that presidential candidates attain a minimum of 40 years of age . One substantive change made by the new constitution was to lower the minimum age for presidential candidates from 40 to 35 , making Rajoelina eligible to stand in presidential elections . In addition , the new constitution mandated the leader of the High Transitional Authority – the position held by Rajoelina – be kept as interim president until an election could take place . The new constitution also contained a clause that required presidential candidates to have lived in Madagascar for at least six months prior to the elections , effectively barring Ravalomanana and other opposition leaders living in exile from running in the next election . After being repeatedly postponed , the general election was held on 25 October 2013 . 
 = = = Policies and governance = = = 
 The HAT under Rajoelina 's leadership affected highly visible , concrete activities that appealed to popular concerns . Rajoelina occasionally organized events to distribute basic items to groups of poor recipients , including medicines , clothing , house maintenance materials and school supplies . Rajoelina 's administration also spent billions of ariary to subsidize basic needs like electricity , petrol , and food staples . Public works construction projects featured prominently among Rajoelina 's activities . In 2010 , two years after Rajoelina launched the project as mayor of Antananarivo , the HAT completed the reconstruction of the Hotel de Ville ( town hall ) of Antananarivo which had been destroyed by arson during the rotaka political protests of 1972 . Also in 2010 , Rajoelina oversaw the construction of a hospital built to international standards in Toamasina . Through its trano mora ( " cheap house " ) initiative , the HAT built several subsidized housing developments intended for young middle class couples . Numerous other construction projects were planned or completed , including the restoration of historic staircases in Antananarivo built in the 19th century during the reign of Queen Ranavalona I , renovation of Toamasina 's two main markets and its principal boulevard , repaving of the heavily traveled road between Toamasina and Foulpointe , and the construction of a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity municipal stadium and new town hall in Toamasina . 
 On the national level , sanctions and suspension of donor aid amounting to 50 percent of the national budget and 70 percent of public investments obstructed the Rajoelina administration 's management of state affairs and its ability to systematically combat poverty on a wider scale . A United Nations envoy concluded in 2011 that Rajoelina 's controversial accession to the presidency had reduced food security , with Madagascar ranking among the worst in the world for child nutrition . The frequent non @-@ payment of civil servant and military salaries resulted in regular school and hospital closures , general strikes and widespread increases in corruption . Crime and insecurity grew dramatically , with a sharp upswing in violent crime and theft in Antananarivo and increasingly frequent and deadly incidences of armed cattle rustling in the central southern region of the island . Key development indicators steeply declined between 2009 and 2013 , including maternal and child mortality , education enrollment and completion , per capita income and employment rates . In 2010 the United Nations ranked Madagascar among the ten poorest countries in the world , noting that economic gains made under Ravalomanana had been lost following Rajoelina 's unconstitutional rise to power . In 2011 , Forbes magazine ranked Madagascar as the worst economy in the world , faulting its political instability and poor governance . 
 Environmental conditions on the island also worsened under Rajoelina . The illegal exportation of endangered rosewood from protected national forests abruptly increased under the HAT , with several business leaders and politicians linked to the HAT having been implicated in trafficking the valuable wood to China ; NGOs and the US government accused the Rajoelina administration of selling the wood to supplement the national budget and finance its public works projects . A large , unexplained stash of rosewood logs was discovered at the presidential palace after the end of Rajoelina 's term in office . Due to accelerating deforestation and a spike in bush meat consumption linked with deepening poverty , the island 's lemurs moved closer toward extinction under Rajoelina 's tenure . A July 2012 assessment found that 90 percent of lemur species were found to be threatened with extinction , an increase from 38 percent in 2008 . Lack of funds for pesticides and systematic spraying resulted in the March 2013 outbreak of a locust infestation that was anticipated to persist for five to ten years and require $ 41 million U.S. dollars to bring under control , deepening the risk of nationwide famine and destruction of habitat for endangered species . 
 After coming to power , Rajoelina 's HAT pursued action against Ravalomanana and his business interests . On 2 June 2009 , Ravalomanana was fined 70 million US dollars ( 42 million British pounds ) and sentenced to four years in prison for alleged abuse of office which , according to HAT Justice Minister Christine Razanamahasoa , included the December 2008 purchase of a second presidential jet ( " Air Force II " ) worth $ 60 million . Rajoelina sold the controversial jet in 2012 and pursued legal action against Ravalomanana 's company Tiko to reclaim 35 million US dollars in back taxes . Additionally , on 28 August 2010 , the HAT sentenced Ravalomanana in absentia to hard labor for life and issued an arrest warrant for his role in the protests and ensuing deaths . Rajoelina likewise sought to distinguish himself from his predecessor in policy choices . One of Rajoelina 's first measures as president was to cancel Ravalomanana 's unpopular deal with Daewoo Logistics . He also rejected Ravalomanana 's medium term development strategy , termed the Madagascar Action Plan , and abandoned education reforms initiated by his predecessor that adopted Malagasy and English as languages of instruction , instead returning to the traditional use of French . 
 = = = Diplomatic relations = = = 
 The international community maintained that Rajoelina 's legitimacy was conditional to free and fair elections . A number of key international organizations in which Madagascar had been a member , including the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) and the African Union , withheld recognition of Rajoelina 's legitimacy throughout his tenure . The United States , Madagascar 's largest bilateral donor and provider of humanitarian aid , also refused to acknowledge the Rajoelina administration . The United Nations responded to the power transfer by freezing 600 million euros in planned aid . The United States suspended Madagascar from the list of beneficiaries of the African Growth and Opportunity Act ( <unk> ) , which had ensured preferential tariffs for the import of Malagasy textiles . This sanction resulted in the loss of over 50 @,@ 000 jobs and dealt a severe blow to the textile sector , which had accounted for half of Madagascar 's exports . Rajoelina initially sought to persuade former donors to recommence their support ; when these efforts failed to yield results , the he explored the possibility of foregoing the support of traditional partners through new or strengthened relations with such alternatives as Libya , China and Saudi Arabia but was again unable to secure the desired partnerships . 
 Rajoelina 's relations with France were characterized by an initial period of gradually increasing diplomatic engagement that weakened after 2012 . On 13 May 2011 , Andry Rajoelina met with Alain <unk> , the French Minister of Foreign Affairs , and was received by the French President Nicolas Sarkozy on 7 December 2011 . According to the French presidency , " The interview was devoted to the situation in Madagascar and the completion of the political transition initiated in 2009 through the implementation of the roadmap for the return of constitutional order , validated by the international community " . Following Rajoelina 's announcement to run in the 2013 election , however , France responded by suspending the visas issued to Rajoelina and his family , and refusing to issue new visas requested by his ministers . 
 The Rajoelina administration was gradually afforded increasing entry to the United Nations . From 9 to 13 May 2011 , Rajoelina was invited to participate in the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries , held in Istanbul , Turkey . Rajoelina also spoke during the 66th Session of the United Nations General Assembly which took place on 23 September 2011 in New York City . 
 = = 2013 presidential candidacy = = 
 On 15 January 2013 , Rajoelina officially renounced his candidature in the next presidential election , then planned for May 2013 . This decision followed a similar declaration on the part of former president Ravalomanana . Exclusion of both political figures from the next general election was a key precondition to international recognition of the elections , as defined by the Southern African Development Community in its roadmap toward ending the political crisis . Rajoelina expressed support for Edgar <unk> , interim mayor of Antananarivo and the official candidate of the TGV party among several other party candidates , and declared his intention to run in the 2018 presidential election . 
 However , on 3 May 2013 , Rajoelina made last @-@ minute arrangements to stand in the 2013 presidential elections , declaring the roadmap agreement had been breached when former president Ravalomanana 's wife , Lalao , decided to stand . The candidacy of former president Didier Ratsiraka was also permitted ; the candidature of all three prominent politicians was rejected by the international community . At the time that Rajoelina submitted his candidacy , he would have run against forty other candidates in total , of whom seven were affiliated with his own political movement . 
 The African Union urged Rajoelina , Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka to withdraw their controversial candidacies , and the European Union responded by suspended funding to the election . The French government sanctioned all three candidates by revoking their French visas , effectively barring them from French territory , and considered freezing their financial and real estate assets . Following the suspension of election funding , the HAT again pushed back the election date , citing inadequate financial resources . A special electoral court ruled in August 2013 that the <unk> of Rajoelina , Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka were invalid and that Rajoelina and his two chief rivals would not be permitted to run in the 2013 election . Rajoelina then announced his endorsement of presidential candidate Hery Rajaonarimampianina , who successfully progressed from the first round voting held 25 October 2013 alongside the candidate backed by Ravalomanana , Jean Louis Robinson . The run @-@ off between the two candidates was held on 20 December 2013 . Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the election , and Rajoelina officially stepped down on 25 January 2014 . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 Following Rajaonarimampianina 's election , the international community offered " conditional recognition " of the new government . This tentative validation of the results was motivated by the concern that the new president was a puppet for Rajoelina , as well as the allegations by Robinson of massive electoral fraud after losing the runoff despite a wide lead over his opponent in the first round . Rajaonarimampianina set up the <unk> committee to organize the selection of his cabinet , a process that extended over several months . During this time , Rajoelina sought to be nominated for the position of Prime Minister of Madagascar and claimed the <unk> had promised he would be nominated . In April 2014 , Rajaonarimampianina instead announced the selection of Roger Kolo , following a consultation round which showed he had support from a majority in the parliament . On 18 April , a cabinet was announced that comprised 31 members with varied political affiliations . Rajoelina qualified Rajaonarimampianina 's decision to exclude him and form alliances with the political opposition , including Ravalomanana 's supporters , as " hypocrisy and betrayal " , and has declared a refusal to seek reconciliation with Rajaonarimampianina . 
 Following the end of Rajoelina 's term , the French government lifted its sanctions against him and 108 other HAT members . He and his family have since maintained a discreet profile , traveling to France , Dubai , South Africa and other foreign destinations . He has also made occasional visits to Madagascar . Rajoelina has declared an interest in presenting himself as a presidential candidate in the 2018 presidential election . 
 = Supergirl ( Hannah Montana song ) = 
 " Supergirl " is a pop song by American recording artist and actress Miley Cyrus , performing as Hannah Montana – the alter ego of Miley Stewart – a character she played on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana . The song was written by Kara DioGuardi , in collaboration with Daniel James , and produced by Dreamlab . " Supergirl " was released on August 28 , 2009 , by Walt Disney Records as the lead and only single from the series ' third soundtrack , Hannah Montana 3 . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . The song is characterized by dance @-@ pop elements in its musical composition and contains lyrics regarding the lows of pop stardom . 
 The song received average to mixed reception from contemporary critics and garnered average commercial outcomes for Cyrus in several countries , compared to those of her previous efforts as Montana . In the United States , it peaked at number five on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles ( Hot 100 – 105 ) . It marked Cyrus ' first entry as Montana in Austria ; it peaked at number fifty @-@ eight on the Austrian Singles Chart . A music video for " Supergirl " was released , taken from footage of a concert performance . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Supergirl " was co @-@ written by Kara DioGuardi , who composed a total of four songs on Hannah Montana 3 , and Dan James . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . " Supergirl " leaked into the Internet in November 2008 , along with six other songs from Hannah Montana 3 . The song first premiered on Radio Disney on July 2 , 2009 , in order to promote the soundtrack and was afterward released as the lead and only single from Hannah Montana 3 on August 28 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Supergirl " is pop song with a length of two minutes and fifty @-@ five seconds . According to Allmusic , the song contains dance @-@ pop and teen pop elements in its music , while Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly cited rock music as its main influence . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register described the track as a bouncy dance @-@ pop number also . The song is set in common time and has a moderate rock tempo . It is written in the key of C major and it follows the chord progression <unk> – Fmaj7 – C – G. Warren Truitt of About.com interpreted the lyrics of " Supergirl " to be about the lows of pop stardom . Larsen believed the line " You just wanna be like me " was a representation of Cyrus , " a super duper girl " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Supergirl " received average to mixed reception from contemporary critics . Heather Phares of Allmusic said , " That feeling of familiarity extends to the songs that haven 't appeared anywhere else . Whether it 's the happy side of Hannah ( ' It 's All Right Here , ' ' Supergirl ' ) [ ... ] they sound very much like what came before them . " Warren Truitt of About.com agreed but stated , " [ The song ] may be a little cookie @-@ cutter , but at least the songwriters realize who their audience is and they deliver the goods " . Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly compared the song 's style to that of Kelly Clarkson . While reviewing a concert before the release of the soundtrack , Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register predicted it would be released as a single and become popular with children , yet " saturate [ parents ' ] ears for a month or two " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending July 25 , 2009 , in the United States , " Supergirl " debuted at number five on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart ( Hot 100 – 105 ) upon Hannah Montana 3 's release . The song dropped from the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart in the following week . On the week ending September 11 , 2009 , " Supergirl " debuted and peaked at number fifty @-@ eight on the Austrian Singles Chart , marking Cyrus ' first appearance in the country as Montana ; it also dropped from the Austrian Singles Chart after one week . Along with its B @-@ side , " Every Part of Me " , the song peaked at number forty @-@ two on the German Singles Chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On October 10 , 2008 , Cyrus , dressed as Montana , premiered " Supergirl " , along with eight other songs , at the concert taping for the third season of Hannah Montana , which was set on October 10 in Irvine , California at the Verizon Wireless Amphitheatre . The performance began with Montana , dressed in a white and pink tie @-@ dye tee shirt , white pants , pink leather jacket , and large sunglasses . The performance begins with Cyrus sitting in a bench , facing a mirror , as backup dancers apply makeup on her and attend her . She stands up and roams around the stage to sing afterward . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register called it one of " hits of the night " . The performance was later premiered as the song 's music video on July 2 , 2009 , on Disney Channel to promote Hannah Montana 3 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 U.S. / EU Vinyl CD Single / Digital Download 
 " Supergirl " ( Album Version ) – 2 : 55 
 " Supergirl " ( Instrumental ) – 2 : 55 
 " Every Part of Me " – 3 : 30 
 EU 2 @-@ Track CD Single 
 " Supergirl " ( Album Version ) – 2 : 55 
 " Every Part of Me " – 3 : 30 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Leccinum manzanitae = 
 Leccinum manzanitae is an edible species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 1971 , it is commonly known as the manzanita bolete for its usual mycorrhizal association with manzanita trees . Its fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have sticky reddish to brown caps up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , and its stipes are up to 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) long and 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick . They have a whitish background color punctuated with small black scales known as scabers . Found only in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada , it is the most common Leccinum species in California . The mushroom is edible , although opinions vary as to its quality . L. manzanitae can be usually distinguished from other similar bolete mushrooms by its large size , reddish cap , dark scabers on a whitish stipe , and association with manzanita and madrone . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Leccinum manzanitae was first described by the American mycologist Harry Delbert Thiers in 1971 , from collections made in San Mateo County , California , the previous year . In that state , it is known as the manzanita bolete because of its close association with manzanita trees . It is classified in subsection <unk> of the section Leccinum in the genus Leccinum . Closely related species in this section include L. <unk> , L. monticola , L. <unk> , and L. <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Leccinum manzanitae are sometimes massive , occasionally reaching weights of several pounds . The cap is 7 – 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , spherical to convex when young , and broadly convex to flattened or cushion @-@ shaped ( pulvinate ) . The surface of the cap is often shallowly to deeply pitted or reticulate , sticky , and covered with pressed @-@ down hairs that are more conspicuous toward the edge of the cap . Its color is dark red during all stages of development . The cap 's flesh is 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick , white when first exposed , but slowly and irregularly changing to dark brownish @-@ gray with no reddish intermediate state . The change in color upon bruising or injury is often more pronounced in young specimens . 
 The tubes comprising the hymenophore are 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) long , with an adnate attachment to the stipe ; their color is pale olive when young and darkens when bruised . Pores are up to 1 mm in diameter , angular , and the same color as the tubes . The stipe is 10 – 16 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) long , and 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick at the apex , and either club @-@ shaped or swollen in the middle . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , with a dry surface , and covered with small , stiff , granular projections called scabers . The scabers are usually whitish when young , but eventually turn dark brownish @-@ grey with age . The stipe flesh stains a bluish color when bruised , although this reaction is variable and sometimes slow to occur . It has no distinctive taste or odor . 
 Leccinum manzanitae mushroom produce a cinnamon @-@ brown spore print . Spores are 13 – 17 by 4 – 5 @.@ 5 µm , somewhat elliptical to cylindrical , and tapered on each end ( fusoid ) ; their walls are smooth and moderately thick . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are 27 – 32 by 6 – 9 µm , club @-@ shaped to pear @-@ shaped ( pyriform ) and four @-@ spored . The cystidia are 23 – 32 by 4 – 6 µm , fusoid to club @-@ shaped with narrow , elongated apices . Caulocystidia ( found on the stipe surface ) are thin @-@ walled , club @-@ shaped to somewhat fusoid , and sometimes end in a sharp point ; they measure 35 – 45 by 9 – 14 µm . Clamp connections are absent in the hyphae of Leccinum manzanitae . The hyphae of the cap cuticle are arranged in the form of a trichoderm ( wherein the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , perpendicular to the cap surface ) . 
 Several chemical tests can be used to help confirm the identify of the mushroom : a drop of dilute ( 3 – 10 % ) potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) solution will turn the tubes pale red whereas nitric acid ( HNO3 ) on the tubes produces orange @-@ yellow ; a solution of Iron ( II ) sulfate ( FeSO4 ) applied to the flesh results in a pale grey color . 
 Thiers also described the variety L. manzanitae var. <unk> from Mendocino County . Similar to the main form in appearance and habitat , it has smaller , narrowly elongated spores , typically 3 – 4 µm wide and 1 – 2 µm longer . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Leccinum manzanitae is edible , and its taste is sometimes rated highly , although others have described the flavor as bland . Drying the mushroom may improve the flavor . One field guide advises caution when selecting this species for the table , as there have been poisonings reported with similar @-@ looking mushrooms found in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific Northwest region of the United States . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 In the field , Leccinum manzanitae fruit bodies can be usually distinguished from those of other similar bolete species by its large size , reddish cap , dark scabers on a whitish stipe , and association with manzanita and madrone . L. <unk> also has a dark red sticky cap , but its flesh does not darken upon exposure , and its cap is smooth when young . L. <unk> also grows with manzanita and madrone , but its cap is more orange . L. <unk> , known only from California , is another species that associates with manzanitae and madrone . It has an orangish cap and whitish scabers on the stipe that do not darken significantly as the mushroom matures . L. insigne , found in coniferous forests with aspens , has a coloration similar to L. manzanitae . The brown @-@ capped L. scabrum is associated with ornamental birch , usually in cultivated landscapes . L. <unk> , also found exclusively in California , is paler , and does not undergo color changes when the cut flesh is exposed to air ; it is found near madrone in coastal regions . The species L. <unk> , found in northern regions of the West Coast , has a dry cap with a fibrillose to scaly edge , dark olive pores , and densely arranged scabers on the stipe . It associates with <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Leccinum manzanitae is a mycorrhizal species . Its fruit bodies grow singly to scattered in soil under madrone and manzanita . Known to occur only in North America , it is commonly found from central California to southern Oregon , but has also been reported further north in Washington and British Columbia ( Canada ) . Thiers considered it the most abundant Leccinum in California . 
 = Ramariopsis kunzei = 
 Ramariopsis kunzei is an edible species of coral fungi in the Clavariaceae family , and the type species of the genus Ramariopsis . It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral . The fruit bodies are up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) tall by 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide , with numerous branches originating from a short rudimentary stem . The branches are one to two millimeters thick , smooth , and white , sometimes with yellowish tips in age . Ramariopsis kunzei has a widespread distribution , and is found in North America , Europe , Asia , and Australia . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The species was first described as Clavaria kunzei by pioneer mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in 1821 . E.J.H. Corner transferred the species to Ramariopsis in 1950 , and made it the type species . In general , coral fungi often have extensive taxonomic histories , as mycologists have not agreed on the best way to classify them . In addition to Clavaria and Ramariopsis , the R. kunzei has been placed in the genera Ramaria by Lucien Quélet in 1888 , and Clavulinopsis by Walter Jülich in 1985 . According to the taxonomic database MycoBank , the species has acquired a sizable list of synonyms , listed in the <unk> . It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral . 
 A phylogenetic analysis of clavarioid fungi concluded that R. kunzei is in a phylogenetic lineage together with several Clavulinopsis species ( including C. sulcata , C. <unk> and C. fusiformis ) , and that this clade ( the <unk> clade ) is nested within a group of species representing the Clavariaceae family . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies of Ramariopsis kunzei are white to whitish @-@ yellow in color , and are highly branched structures resembling coral ; the dimensions are typically up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) tall and 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide . Older specimens may have a pinkish tinge . The tips of the branches are blunt , not crested as in some other species of coral fungi , like Clavulina cristata ; branches are between 1 and 5 millimeters thick . The branch tips of mature specimens may be yellow . A stem , if present , may be up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long and scurfy — covered with small flakes or scales . The texture of the flesh may range from pliable to brittle . This fungus does not undergo any color changes upon bruising or injury , however , a 10 % solution of FeSO4 ( a chemical test known as " iron salts " ) applied to the flesh will turn it green . 
 In deposit , the spores are white . Viewed with a light microscope , the spores are translucent and have an ellipsoid to roughly spherical shape with spines on the surface , and dimensions of 3 – 5 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 µm . Spores are non @-@ amyloid , meaning that they do not absorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are usually 25 – 45 µm long by 6 – 7 µm wide , and 4 @-@ spored . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of this species . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The species is edible , but " <unk> and flavorless . " Other authors concur that the odor and taste are not distinctive . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The " crested coral " ( Clavulina cristata , edible ) is similar in appearance to R. kunzei , but its branches have fringed , feathery tips . The " jellied false coral " ( <unk> pallidum , edible ) has whitish , tough , cartilaginous branches with blunt tips . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The species is thought to be saprobic and can be found growing on the ground , in duff , or less frequently on well @-@ decayed wood . Fruit bodies may grow singly , in groups , or clustered together . David Arora has noted a preference for growing under conifers , as well as a prevalence in redwood forests of North America . In contrast , an earlier author claimed this species grows " rarely in coniferous woods . " 
 In Europe , Ramariopsis kunzei has been collected in Scotland ( specifically , on the islands of Arran , Gigha and Kintyre peninsula ) , the Netherlands , Norway , former Czechoslovakia , Germany , Poland , and Russia ( <unk> Mountains ) . It has also been found in China , India , Iran , the Solomon Islands , and Australia . In North America , the distribution extends north to Canada , and includes the United States ( including Hawaii and Puerto Rico ) . 
 = By the Grace of God ( song ) = 
 " By the Grace of God " is a song by American singer Katy Perry from her fourth studio album , Prism ( 2013 ) , included as its closing track . The song was written and produced by Perry and Canadian record producer Greg Wells . It was conceived following Perry 's divorce from English actor and comedian Russell Brand . This initially made Perry consider making a " darker " album , but instead was channeled into the song . Throughout its autobiographical lyrics , Perry is depicted finding her strength and standing up for herself . 
 The track was first unveiled at Perry 's headlining set at the 2013 iTunes Festival . Upon the release of Prism , " By the Grace of God " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who appreciated its vulnerability and picked it as one of the musical highlights from the album , but criticized its placement on the record . Following the album 's release , it has entered various musical charts due to strong digital downloads . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After English actor and comedian Russell Brand divorced Perry in late December 2011 , she was so distraught over the event that she considered committing suicide . Greg Wells , who assisted Perry with the composition of " By the Grace of God " , commented on the situation : " I think she felt so kicked in the head and so publicly embarrassed at being divorced by a text message " . After overcoming her suicidal thoughts and initial shock , she felt prompted to create a " darker " project as compared to her previous albums . Instead , she channelled the entire divorce event into " By the Grace of God " , in which its lyrics depict Perry battling against her suicidal thoughts while lying on her bathroom floor . During an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Perry spoke on how she felt during the breakup : " Imagine what you go through . Imagine what happens when you go through a break up . We all go through break ups and we all get very depressed and desperate . " 
 " By the Grace of God " was unveiled to industry insiders during a listening party for Prism held in Manhattan , while its inclusion on the album track list was confirmed on October 1 , 2013 . Perry confirmed that the song was the only one included in Prism about her divorce from Brand . However , the song " Ghost " , also present on Prism , includes references to the divorce , particularly the lyric " You sent a text , it was like the wind changed your mind " , although Perry stated that the track was not about the split . She further stated : " That 's the funny thing - it 's not about that chapter in my life , people think that certain songs are about certain people and there is only one song about that time in my life and that song is ' By the Grace of God ' " . 
 Unlike many of the album 's songs which were written by a multitude of collaborators , " By the Grace of God " was composed solely by Perry and Greg Wells . Wells also co @-@ wrote " Choose Your Battles " , the third bonus track from the album 's deluxe edition . For this track , he contributed with playing drums , piano , and the synthesizer . The song was engineered by Ian McGregor at Rocket Carousel Studio in Los Angeles , and mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios , Virginia Beach . 
 = = Composition = = 
 At a length of four minutes and twenty @-@ seven seconds , " By the Grace of God " is a pop piano @-@ driven power ballad . With a stripped @-@ down production , its instrumental is essentially composed of the sounds of various musical instruments , such as drums , piano and synthesizers along with military drums . Throughout the song , drums , piano , and synthesizers are used in its instrumental . According to the sheet music published by Alfred Publishing Co . , Inc. on Musicnotes.com , it is composed in the key of G minor and set in a 44 time signature at a tempo of 82 beats per minute . The melody spans the tonal range of B ♭ 3 to D5 , while the music follows the chord progression of Gm — E ♭ sus2 — B ♭ — Gm — E ♭ sus2 — <unk> . 
 Lyrically , Perry is depicted as having suicidal thoughts and lying on the floor of a bathroom . The song opens with only piano and Perry 's vocals , while she sings " Was twenty @-@ seven , surviving my return from Saturn " , and as the song carries on , she finds her strength , singing " By the grace of God / I picked myself back up / I put one foot in front of the other and I / Looked in the mirror and decided to stay / Wasn 't gonna let love take me out that way " . Perry commented on the lyrics : " [ They ] are very exact and autobiographical . That 's how I write . But the one thing about those lyrics is you can hear me finding my strength throughout the song . It starts off really low and then I kind of stand up for myself and say , ' No ! ' . " The song also sees Perry rejecting the idea that the relationship ended because of her . 
 Kitty Empire from The Guardian observed that the song served as a " vulnerable yin " to Perry 's hit single " Roar " ' s " righteous yang " . Josh Duboff from Vanity Fair highlighted the titles of " By the Grace of God " and deluxe edition song " Spiritual " , concluding that the religious undertones were " more prominent " in Prism . Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph deemed the song " tender " , and Jason Lipshutz from Billboard said it " is the most revealing song Perry will likely ever pen " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " By the Grace of God " received critical acclaim . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard thought the song was " obviously not the radio fare fans are used to from the pop star ( Perry ) " , but that it was " crucial for anyone trying to understand Perry 's Prism mind set " . Philip Matusavage from musicOMH considered that " the fact that [ " By the Grace of God " ] is the album highlight and is the only song written by less than three people " is an indicator of what Perry should do next . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune appreciated " Ghost " and " By the Grace of God " for allowing Perry 's vulnerability " to seep through " . In his review of Prism , Sam Lansky from Idolator showed himself divided relatively to the song : he classified it as the " most sonically conventional thing [ in the album ] " although he immediately stated it was " also the most emotionally gripping " in it . 
 Randall Roberts from Los Angeles Times affirmed that the song was " cosmic " and that it had a " humming , dark tension in which Perry and melody float like red balloons " . Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph declared that , in the song , Perry " sounds like a woman , and an artist , who 's finally found herself " . Allison Stewart from The Washington Post said that " By the Grace of God " ranked " among Perry 's strongest ( tracks ) " , and that it was " her most strangely sensible and affecting song ever , one that distances her from her suddenly @-@ more @-@ callow @-@ seeming peers and also from Brand " . John Walker from MTV highlighted the fact that the song is " light on figures of speech and all @-@ too accessible platitudes " , as compared to the metaphors present on the lyrics of " Wide Awake " . 
 In contrast , Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described it as " a sappy Paula Cole @-@ style statement of self @-@ actualization " . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone criticized its lyrics and negatively likened them to those of Alanis Morissette . Kitty Empire from The Guardian found the song to be " ridden with cliché " . Mesfin Fekadu from ABC News thought both tracks were " good " , but stated that they " could be great if Perry didn 't hold back and explored more lyrically and sonically " . Chris Bosman from Consequence of Sound criticized its placement on the album track listing and thought that they " would stand out more if they ( By The Grace of God , and closing track Double Rainbow ) hadn 't been forced to rub elbows , thus stealing momentum and impact from each other " . Carl Williott from Idolator praised the track as a " nice counterpart to Roar " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Following the album 's release , " By the Grace of God " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 179 on the week of November 2 , 2013 , and peaked on the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 10 , which represents the 25 songs which failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also appeared on the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 71 , where it stayed for only one week . It also entered the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 77 with sales of 2 @,@ 104 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " By the Grace of God " was debuted during Perry 's headlining set at the Roundhouse in London , England for her iTunes Festival , held on September 30 , 2013 . Once she finished singing , Perry thanked her fans for " letting [ her ] stay " . On October 22 , 2013 , Perry held a release party for Prism where she performed " By the Grace of God " along with the other songs from Prism . Tiffany Lee from Yahoo ! Music wrote that Perry 's renditions of " Unconditionally " and " By the Grace of God " " shone like lights through a prism in their acoustic setting " . The song was included as part of the setlist on The Prismatic World Tour . 
 Perry performed the song at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards which were held on February 8 , 2015 . The performance was in support of domestic violence and sexual assault victims . Before she appeared on stage , a prerecorded video message from U.S. President Barack Obama was screened , which featured him encouraging musicians to support the " # <unk> " sexual assault campaign . Then , domestic violence victim Brooke Axtell delivered a brief speech about her story . During the performance , Perry was clothed in a white dress , while shadows danced behind her . MTV 's John Walker labelled it as her most " powerful performance yet " , while <unk> Thompson of USA Today wrote that it was " powerful and subdued " compared to the " flamboyant and playful " set Perry was known for . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Rocket Carousel Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 Personnel 
 Lead vocals - Katy Perry 
 Songwriting – Katy Perry , Greg Wells 
 Production – Katy Perry , Greg Wells 
 Vocal production – Katy Perry 
 Mixing – Serban Ghenea 
 Mixing engineer – John Hanes 
 Drums , piano , synths , and programming – Greg Wells 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Prism , Capitol Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Young at Heart ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Young at Heart " is the sixteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 11 , 1994 . It was written by Scott Kaufer and series creator Chris Carter , and directed by Michael Lange . The episode featured guest appearances by Dick Anthony Williams , William B. Davis and Alan Boyce , and saw Jerry Hardin reprise his role as Deep Throat . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Young at Heart " earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 2 , being watched by 6 @.@ 8 million households in its initial broadcast ; and received mostly negative reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When Mulder and Scully aid a former colleague of Mulder 's in an investigation into a series of robberies , it becomes apparent that the culprit is an old nemesis of Mulder 's — who had seemingly died in prison several years previously . 
 " Young at Heart " originated as a script from freelance writer Scott Kaufer , who was a friend of series creator Chris Carter and former employee of California magazine and Warner Bros comedy development department . Chris Carter rewrote the script , which included the addition of Barnett 's salamander hand . Director Michael Lange felt the episode offered him excellent scope to try new techniques , noting that the series producers " encourage cinematic stuff " . William B. Davis makes his second appearance of the series in this episode , although his role is simply credited as " CIA Agent " , rather than the more well @-@ known " Smoking Man " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1989 , Joe Crandall , an inmate at a federal penitentiary in Pennsylvania , hears screaming from the infirmary . Inside , he discovers the prison 's doctor , Joe Ridley , amputating the hand of fellow inmate John Barnett . Ridley tells Crandall that Barnett is dead , threatening him with a scalpel . However , as Crandall leaves the room , he sees Barnett blinking at him . 
 Four years later , Fox Mulder is notified by his former FBI supervisor , Reggie Purdue , about a note from a jewelry store robbery mocking Mulder by name . Mulder recognizes the message as being from Barnett , a sociopathic multiple murderer whom he helped capture on his first case with the Bureau . Even though Barnett supposedly died in prison , the note bears his handwriting . Purdue shows Dana Scully a video of Barnett 's capture , which shows that Mulder didn 't fire on Barnett due to him having a hostage , per FBI regulations . Mulder 's hesitancy allowed Barnett to kill both the hostage and a fellow agent . 
 Scully looks into Barnett 's cause of death and discovers that despite it being listed as heart attack , he had no history of heart problems ; he had been sent to the infirmary over problems with his hand . Meanwhile , Barnett leaves Mulder another note in his car , along with photos of him and Scully . 
 Mulder and Scully visit the prison and meet Crandall , who recounts his experiences with Barnett and Ridley . Barnett makes taunting phone calls to Mulder , and strangles Purdue with his salamander @-@ like hand . Scully looks into Ridley 's past and finds that his medical license was revoked in 1979 due to malpractice ; he had performed illegal medical trials on children with progeria , a disease that causes premature aging . Mulder theorizes that Ridley 's experiments helped him find a way to reverse the aging process . 
 Scully summons Mulder when Ridley suddenly appears at her apartment . He tells the agents that he succeeded in making Barnett age in reverse after replacing his hand using salamander cells . However , Barnett stole Ridley 's government @-@ sponsored research . Deep Throat meets with Mulder and confirms Ridley 's story , saying that the government is negotiating with Barnett to purchase Ridley 's work . 
 Scully hears someone dialing into her answering machine and spots Barnett 's fingerprint on it . After Barnett calls again , Mulder decides to set up a sting operation at the cello recital for a friend of Scully 's , which Barnett learned about from her answering @-@ machine . 
 That night , FBI agents wait at the concert hall for Barnett 's arrival . Barnett , who goes completely unseen due to his youthful appearance , poses as a piano tuner . He shoots Scully in the chest during the recital and then flees , taking the cellist hostage . Mulder doesn 't hesitate this time around and fires at Barnett , fatally wounding him . Scully is revealed to have survived the attack , having worn a bullet @-@ proof vest . Despite the efforts of doctors and a mysterious CIA agent to resuscitate Barnett , he dies , and takes the secrets of Ridley 's research to the grave . The episode ends with the camera zooming in on locker number 935 in a train station , implying the secrets along with Barnett 's precaution , a bomb , are contained within and one day will be discovered . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode originated as a script from freelance writer Scott Kaufer , who was an acquaintance of Chris Carter and former employee of California magazine and Warner Bros comedy development department . Chris Carter rewrote the script , which included the addition of Barnett 's salamander hand . Fox 's standards and practices department fought with the producers over the scene where Barnett strangles Reggie Purdue , and as a result the producers were forced to reduce the length of the scene . The footage of the young girl with progeria was filmed after the production crew contacted the <unk> Society and were put in touch with the family of Courtney <unk> , who was a young girl with the disease . She and her family were fans of the series , and were flown from their San Diego home to Vancouver to shoot the scene . 
 Director Michael Lange felt the episode offered him excellent scope to try new techniques , noting that the series producers " encourage cinematic stuff " . He felt a highlight of this approach was in shooting the episode 's climactic stand @-@ off , explaining that " instead of shooting at a normal eye level as the Salamander Man takes the gun , I tilt up , and now I 'm shooting up his nose almost , and it was kind of like very disorienting . The show 's got a certain ennui that appeals to me , the film noir @-@ y movies of the ' 40s look , an undercurrent of tension and anxiety ' cause of all the weird things going on " . 
 William B. Davis makes his second appearance of the series in this episode , although his role is simply credited as " CIA Agent " , rather than " Smoking Man " , as per his credit in the pilot episode . The character of Reggie Purdue would later be referenced in the fourth season episode " Paper Hearts " , and the fifth season episode " Unusual Suspects " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Young at Heart " premiered on the Fox network on February 11 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 12 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 2 with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 6 @.@ 8 million households watched this episode during its original airing . 
 Director Michael Lange said that he " liked the script very much , and I think I stayed fairly close to the original draft . I liked it because it had a good spookiness to it . To me , the intriguing part was the doctor 's research into being able to reverse the aging process , which I wish we could have explored more . " Executive Producer Robert Goodwin considered the episode one of the most emotional episodes of the first season , due to the time spent working with Courtney <unk> , the little girl with progeria . In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a C , being called " far @-@ fetched " and criticised for its unoriginal themes . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , described it as " sloppy , poorly edited " and " thoroughly unexciting " , pointing out the " forced " nature of the supporting characters ' past involvement with Fox Mulder . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , expressed mixed feelings over the episode , comparing it to Quincy , M.E. and stating that it " just wasn 't weird enough " for an episode of The X @-@ Files . " Young at Heart " has been cited , along with the fourth season episode " Paper Hearts " , as representing " the supreme irony and the hidden agenda of the series " — in both cases , Mulder , directly through his work on the X @-@ Files , puts information permanently beyond reach by killing those who hold it , showing that " despite the fact that Mulder drives the car , he frequently ends up — and goes — nowhere " . 
 = SMS Stralsund = 
 SMS Stralsund was a Magdeburg @-@ class light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine . Her class included three other ships : Magdeburg , Breslau , and Strassburg . She was built at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen from 1910 to December 1912 , when she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Stralsund was assigned to the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career . She saw significant action in the early years of World War I , including several operations off the British coast and the Battles of Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank , in August 1914 and November 1915 , respectively . She was not damaged in either action . The ship was in dockyard hands during the Battle of Jutland , and so she missed the engagement . After the end of the war , she served briefly in the Reichsmarine before being surrendered to the Allies . She was ceded to the French Navy , where she served as Mulhouse until 1925 . She was formally stricken in 1933 and broken up for scrap two years later . 
 = = Design = = 
 Stralsund was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Cormoran " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1910 and launched on 4 November 1911 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 10 December 1912 . The ship was 138 @.@ 7 meters ( 455 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 4 m ( 14 ft ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 570 t ( 4 @,@ 500 long tons ; 5 @,@ 040 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of AEG @-@ Vulcan steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 4 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 25 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) , but reached 33 @,@ 482 shp ( 24 @,@ 968 kW ) in service . These were powered by sixteen coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers , although they were later altered to use fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Stralsund carried 1 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 106 tonnes ( 104 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 820 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 780 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Stralsund had a crew of 18 officers and 336 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 800 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Stralsund spent the majority of her career in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . On 16 August , some two weeks after the outbreak of World War I , Stralsund and Strassburg conducted a sweep into the Hoofden to search for British reconnaissance forces . The two cruisers encountered a group of sixteen British destroyers and a light cruiser at a distance of about 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) . Significantly outnumbered , the two German cruisers broke contact and returned to port . The ship 's first major action was the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 . British battlecruisers and light cruisers raided the German reconnaissance screen in the Heligoland Bight . At 12 : 30 , Stralsund , Danzig , and Ariadne arrived to reinforce Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass , and quickly turned the tide against the British light cruisers . Shortly thereafter , the British battlecruisers intervened and sank Ariadne and Maass 's flagship Cöln . Stralsund and the rest of the surviving light cruisers retreated into the haze and were reinforced by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . Stralsund and Danzig returned and rescued most of the crew of Ariadne . 
 She also participated in the raid on Yarmouth on 2 – 3 November 1914 , as reconnaissance screen for the I Scouting Group . While the battlecruisers bombarded the town of Yarmouth , Stralsund laid a minefield , which sank a steamer and the submarine HMS D5 which had sortied to intercept the German raiders . After completing the bombardment , the German squadron returned to port without encountering British forces . Stralsund was also present during the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , again screening for the I Scouting Group . In the withdrawal after bombarding the towns , the Germans were nearly intercepted by British forces ; the cruiser HMS Southampton spotted Stralsund and several torpedo boats . Confusion aboard the British flagship allowed the German squadron to escape , however . On 25 December , the British launched the Cuxhaven Raid , an air attack on the German naval base in Cuxhaven and the Nordholz Airbase . Stralsund engaged one of the attacking seaplanes , but was unable to shoot it down . 
 The ship was again part of the reconnaissance screen for the I Scouting Group at the Battle of Dogger Bank on 24 January 1915 . Stralsund and Graudenz were assigned to the front of the screen and Rostock and Kolberg steamed on either side of the formation ; each cruiser was supported by a half @-@ flotilla of torpedo boats . At 08 : 15 , lookouts on Stralsund and Kolberg spotted heavy smoke from large British warships approaching the formation . As the main German fleet was in port and therefore unable to support the battlecruisers , Hipper decided to retreat at high speed . The British battlecruisers were able to catch up to the Germans , however , and in the ensuing battle , the large armored cruiser Blücher was sunk . 
 Stralsund was not available for the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 as she was being rearmed with 15 cm SK L / 45 guns . The refit was completed at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel . The twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were replaced with seven 15 cm weapons and two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 guns . On 2 February 1918 , Stralsund struck a mine laid by British ships in the North Sea . The dreadnought Kaiser and several other ships steamed out to escort Stralsund back to port . The ship was unavailable for the major fleet operation on 23 – 24 April 1918 to intercept a British convoy to Norway . 
 After the war , Stralsund served briefly with the reorganized Reichsmarine in 1919 . The Treaty of Versailles specified that the ship was to be disarmed and handed over to the Allies within two months of the signing of the treaty . She was ceded to France as a war prize under the transaction name " Z " . The ship was formally handed over in Cherbourg on 3 August 1920 . The ship was renamed Mulhouse and served briefly with the French Navy until a refit in 1925 in Brest . By this time , she was thoroughly worn out and was therefore placed in reserve shortly after completing the refit . On 15 February 1933 , Mulhouse was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap in Brest in 1935 . The ship 's bell was later returned to Germany and is now on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 = Aaron Sorkin = 
 Aaron Benjamin Sorkin ( born June 9 , 1961 ) is an American screenwriter , producer , and playwright . His works include the Broadway plays A Few Good Men and The Farnsworth Invention ; the television series Sports Night , The West Wing , Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , and The Newsroom ; and the films A Few Good Men , The American President , Charlie Wilson 's War , The Social Network , Moneyball , and Steve Jobs . 
 Sorkin 's trademark rapid @-@ fire dialogue and extended monologues are complemented , in television , by frequent collaborator Thomas Schlamme 's characteristic directing technique called the " walk and talk " . These sequences consist of single tracking shots of long duration involving multiple characters engaging in conversation as they move through the set ; characters enter and exit the conversation as the shot continues without any cuts . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Sorkin was born in Manhattan , New York City , to a Jewish family , and was raised in the NY suburb of Scarsdale . His mother was a schoolteacher and his father a copyright lawyer who had fought in WWII and put himself through college on the G.I. Bill ; both his older sister and brother went on to become lawyers . His paternal grandfather was one of the founders of the International Ladies ' Garment Workers ' Union ( <unk> ) . Sorkin took an early interest in acting . Before he reached his teenage years , his parents were taking him to the theatre to see shows such as Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? and That Championship Season . 
 Sorkin attended Scarsdale High School where he became involved in the drama and theatre club . In eighth grade he played General Bullmoose in the musical Li 'l Abner . In Scarsdale High 's senior class production of Once Upon a Mattress , Sorkin played Sir Harry . He served as vice president in his junior and senior year at Scarsdale High School and graduated in 1979 . 
 In 1979 , Sorkin attended Syracuse University . In his freshman year he failed a class that was a core requirement . It was a devastating setback because he wanted to be an actor , and the drama department did not allow students to take the stage until they completed all the core freshman classes . Determined to do better , he returned in his sophomore year , and graduated in 1983 . Recalling the influence on him at college of drama teacher Arthur Storch , Sorkin recalled , after Storch 's death in March 2013 , that " Arthur 's reputation as a director , and as a disciple of Lee Strasberg , was a big reason why a lot of us went to [ Syracuse ] . " You have the capacity to be so much better than you are " , he started saying to me in September of my senior year . He was still saying it in May . On the last day of classes , he said it again , and I said , " How ? " , and he answered , " Dare to fail " . I 've been coming through on his admonition ever since " . 
 = = = Early career as an actor and playwright = = = 
 After graduating from Syracuse University with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Musical Theatre in 1983 , Sorkin moved to New York City where he spent much of the 1980s as a struggling , sporadically employed actor who also worked odd jobs , such as delivering singing telegrams , driving a limousine , touring Alabama with the children 's theatre company Traveling Playhouse , handing out fliers promoting a hunting @-@ and @-@ fishing show , and bartending at Broadway 's Palace Theatre . One weekend , while <unk> at a friend 's place he found an IBM Selectric typewriter , started typing , and " felt a phenomenal confidence and a kind of joy that [ he ] had never experienced before in [ his ] life . " 
 He continued writing and eventually put together his first play , Removing All Doubt , which he sent to his old Syracuse theatre teacher , Arthur Storch , who was impressed . In 1984 , Removing All Doubt was staged for drama students at his alma mater , Syracuse University . After that , he wrote Hidden in This Picture which debuted off @-@ off @-@ Broadway at Steve Olsen 's West Bank Cafe Downstairs Theatre Bar in New York City in 1988 . The contents of his first two plays got him a theatrical agent . Producer John A. <unk> saw the production of Hidden in This Picture and commissioned Sorkin to turn the one @-@ act into a full @-@ length play called Making Movies . 
 = = = A Few Good Men = = = 
 Sorkin got the inspiration to write his next play , a courtroom drama called A Few Good Men , from a phone conversation with his sister Deborah ( who had graduated from Boston University Law School and signed up for a three @-@ year stint with the U.S. Navy Judge Advocate General 's Corps ) . Deborah told Sorkin that she was going to Guantanamo Bay to defend a group of Marines who came close to killing a fellow Marine in a hazing ordered by a superior officer . Sorkin took that information and wrote much of his story on cocktail napkins while bartending at the Palace Theatre . He and his roommates had purchased a Macintosh <unk> so when he returned home he would empty his pockets of the cocktail napkins and type them into the computer , forming a basis from which he wrote many drafts for A Few Good Men . 
 In 1988 Sorkin sold the film rights for A Few Good Men to producer David Brown before it premiered , in a deal that was reportedly " well into six figures " . Brown had read an article in The New York Times about Sorkin 's one @-@ act play Hidden in This Picture and found out Sorkin also had a play called A Few Good Men that was having Off Broadway readings . Brown produced A Few Good Men on Broadway at the Music Box Theatre . It starred Tom Hulce and was directed by Don Scardino . After opening in late 1989 , it ran for 497 performances . 
 Sorkin continued writing Making Movies and in 1990 it debuted Off @-@ Broadway at the Promenade Theatre , produced by John A. <unk> , and again directed by Don Scardino . Meanwhile , David Brown was producing a few projects at TriStar Pictures and tried to interest them in making A Few Good Men into a film but his proposal was declined due to the lack of star actor involvement . Brown later got a call from Alan Horn at Castle Rock Entertainment who was anxious to make the film . Rob Reiner , a Castle Rock producing partner , opted to direct it . 
 = = Screenwriting career ( 1991 – 98 ) = = 
 = = = Working under contract for Castle Rock Entertainment = = = 
 In the early 1990s , Sorkin worked under contract for Castle Rock Entertainment , Inc . He wrote the scripts for A Few Good Men , Malice and The American President : The three films grossed about US $ 400 million worldwide . While writing for Castle Rock he became friends with colleagues such as William Goldman and Rob Reiner and met his future wife Julia Bingham , who was one of Castle Rock 's business affairs lawyers . 
 Sorkin wrote several drafts of the script for A Few Good Men in his Manhattan apartment , learning the craft from a book about screenplay format . He then spent several months at the Los Angeles offices of Castle Rock , working on the script with director Rob Reiner . William Goldman ( who regularly worked under contract at Castle Rock ) became his mentor and helped him to adapt his stageplay into a screenplay . The movie was directed by Reiner , starred Tom Cruise , Jack Nicholson , Demi Moore , and Kevin Bacon , and was produced by Brown . A Few Good Men was released in 1992 and was a box office success . 
 Goldman also approached Sorkin with a story premise , which Sorkin developed into the script for Malice . Goldman oversaw the project as creative consultant while Sorkin wrote the first two drafts . However , he had to leave the project to finish up the script for A Few Good Men , so screenwriter Scott Frank stepped in and wrote two drafts of the Malice screenplay . When production on A Few Good Men wrapped up , Sorkin took over and resumed working on the Malice right through the final shooting script . Harold Becker directed the film , a medical thriller released in 1993 , which starred Nicole Kidman and Alec Baldwin . Malice had mixed reviews . Vincent Canby in The New York Times described the film as " deviously entertaining from its start through its finish " . Roger Ebert gave it 2 out of 4 stars , and Peter Travers in a 2000 Rolling Stone review summarized it as having " suspense but no staying power " . 
 Sorkin 's last produced screenplay for Castle Rock was The American President and once again he worked with William Goldman , who served as a creative consultant . It took Sorkin a few years to write the screenplay for The American President , which started off as a massive 385 @-@ page screenplay ; it was eventually whittled down to a standard shooting script of around 120 pages . Rob Reiner directed . The film was critically acclaimed . Kenneth Turan in the Los Angeles Times described the film as " genial and entertaining if not notably inspired " , and believed its most interesting aspects were the " pipe dreams about the American political system and where it could theoretically be headed " . 
 = = = Script doctor for hire = = = 
 Sorkin did uncredited script doctor work on several films in the 1990s . He wrote some quips for Sean Connery and Nicolas Cage in The Rock . He worked on Excess Baggage , a comedy about a girl who stages her own kidnapping to get her father 's attention , and rewrote some of Will Smith 's scenes in Enemy of the State . 
 Sorkin collaborated with Warren Beatty on a couple of scripts , one of which was Bulworth . Beatty , known for occasionally personally financing his film projects through pre @-@ production , also hired Sorkin to rewrite a script titled Ocean of Storms which never went into production . At one point Sorkin sued Beatty for proper compensation for his work on the Ocean of Storms script ; once the matter was settled , he resumed working on the script . 
 = = Writing for television ( 1998 – 2007 ) = = 
 = = = Sports Night ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Sorkin came up with the idea to write about the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes happenings on a sports show while he was living in a room in the Four Seasons Hotel in Los Angeles writing the screenplay for The American President . He would work late , with the TV tuned into ESPN , watching continuous replays of SportsCenter . The show inspired him to try to write a feature film about a sports show but he was unable to structure the story for film , so instead he turned his idea into a TV comedy series . Sports Night was produced by Disney and debuted on the Disney @-@ owned ABC network in the fall of 1998 . 
 Sorkin fought with the ABC network during the first season over the use of a laugh track and a live studio audience . The laugh track was widely decried by critics as jarring , with Joyce Millman of Salon.com describing it as " the most unconvincing laugh track you 've ever heard " . Sorkin commented that : " Once you do shoot in front of a live audience , you have no choice but to use the laugh track . Oftentimes [ enhancing the laughs ] is the right thing to do . Sometimes you do need a cymbal crash . Other times , it alienates me . " The laugh track was gradually dialed down and was gone by the end of the first season . Sorkin was triumphant in the second season when ABC agreed to his demands , <unk> the crew of the difficulties of staging a scene for a live audience and leaving the cast with more time to rehearse . 
 Although Sports Night was critically acclaimed , ABC canceled the show after two seasons due to its low ratings . Sorkin entertained offers to continue the show on other television channels but declined all the offers as they were mainly contingent on his involvement which would have been a difficult prospect given that he was simultaneously writing The West Wing at that point . 
 = = = The West Wing ( 1999 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Sorkin conceived the political TV drama The West Wing in 1997 when he went unprepared to a lunch with producer John Wells and in a panic pitched to Wells a show centered on the senior staff of the White House , using leftover ideas from his script for The American President . He told Wells about his visits to the White House while doing research for The American President , and they found themselves discussing public service and the passion of the people who serve . Wells took the concept and pitched it to the NBC network , but was told to wait because the facts behind the Lewinsky scandal were breaking and there was concern that an audience would not be able to take a show about the White House seriously . When a year later some other networks started showing interest in The West Wing , NBC decided to greenlight the series despite their previous reluctance . The pilot debuted in the fall of 1999 and was produced by Warner Bros. TV . 
 The West Wing was honored with nine Emmy Awards for its debut season , making the show a record holder for most Emmys won by a series in a single season . Following the awards ceremony , a fiasco ensued , centered on the Emmy for writing The West Wing episode " In Excelsis Deo " which was awarded to Sorkin and Rick Cleveland , when it was reported in a The New York Times article that Cleveland had been ushered off the stage by Sorkin without being given a chance to say a few words . The story behind The West Wing episode is based on Cleveland 's father , a Korean war veteran who spent the last years of his life on the street , as Cleveland explains in his <unk> essay titled " I Was the Dumb Looking Guy with the Wire @-@ <unk> Glasses " . A back and forth took place between Sorkin and Cleveland in a public web forum at Mighty Big TV where Sorkin explained that he gives his writers " Story By " credit on a rotating basis " by way of a gratuity " and that he had thrown out Cleveland 's script and started from scratch . In the end , Sorkin apologized to Cleveland . Cleveland and Sorkin also won the Writers Guild of America Award for best episodic drama at the February 2001 ceremony for " In Excelsis Deo " . 
 In 2001 , after wrapping up the second season of The West Wing , Sorkin had a drug relapse , only two months after receiving a Phoenix Rising Award for drug recovery ; this became public knowledge when he was arrested at Burbank Airport for possession of hallucinogenic mushrooms , marijuana , and crack cocaine . He was ordered by a judge to attend a drug diversion program . His drug addiction was highly publicized , most notably when Saturday Night Live did a parody called " The West Wing " , though he did recover . 
 In 2002 , Sorkin criticized NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw 's TV special about a day in the life of a president , " The Bush White House : Inside the Real West Wing " , comparing it to the act of sending a valentine to President George W. Bush instead of real news reporting . Sorkin 's TV series The West Wing aired on the same network , and so at the request of NBC 's Entertainment President Jeff Zucker he apologized , but would later say " there should be a difference between what NBC News does and what The West Wing TV series does . " 
 Sorkin wrote 87 screenplays in all , which amounts to nearly every episode during the show 's first four Emmy @-@ winning seasons . Sorkin describes his role in the creative process as " not so much [ that of ] a showrunner or a producer . I 'm really a writer . " He admits that this approach can have its drawbacks , saying " Out of 88 [ West Wing ] episodes that I did we were on time and on budget never , not once . " In 2003 , at the end of the fourth season , Sorkin and fellow executive producer Thomas Schlamme left the show due to internal conflicts at Warner Bros. TV not involving the NBC network , thrusting producer John Wells into an expanded role as showrunner . Sorkin never watched any episodes beyond his writing tenure apart from 60 seconds of the fifth season 's first episode , describing the experience as " like watching somebody make out with my girlfriend . " Sorkin would later return in the final episode in a cameo appearance as a member of President Bartlet 's staff . 
 = = = Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 In 2003 Sorkin divulged to the American television interviewer Charlie Rose on The Charlie Rose Show that he was developing a TV series based on a late @-@ night sketch comedy show like Saturday Night Live . In early October 2005 a pilot script dubbed Studio 7 on the Sunset Strip for a new TV series , written by him and with Tommy Schlamme attached as producer , started circulating around Hollywood and generating interest on the web . A week later , NBC bought from Warner Bros. TV the right to show the TV series on their network for a near @-@ record license fee in a bidding war with CBS . The show 's name was later changed to Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . Sorkin described the show as having " autobiographical elements " to it and " characters that are based on actual people " but said that it departs from those beginnings to look at the backstage maneuverings at a late night sketch comedy show . 
 In September 2006 , the pilot for Studio 60 aired on NBC , directed by Schlamme . The pilot was critically acclaimed and viewed by over 12 million people , but Studio 60 experienced a significant drop in audience by mid @-@ season . The seething anticipation that preceded the début was followed up by a large amount of thoughtful and scrupulous criticism in the press , as well as largely negative analysis in the blogosphere . In January 2007 , Sorkin spoke out against the press for focusing too heavily on the ratings slide and for using blogs and unemployed comedy writers as sources . After two months on hiatus , Studio 60 resumed to air the last episodes of season one , which would be its only season . 
 = = 2004 – present = = 
 = = = Return to the theatre = = = 
 In 2003 , Sorkin was writing a screenplay on spec about the story of inventor and television pioneer Philo Farnsworth , a topic he had first become familiar with back in the early 1990s when producer Fred Zollo approached him with the idea of adapting a memoir by Elma Farnsworth into a biopic . The next year he completed the screenplay under the title " The Farnsworth Invention " , and it was picked up by New Line Cinema with Thomas Schlamme signed on to direct . The story is about the patent battle between inventor Philo Farnsworth and RCA tycoon David Sarnoff for the technology that allowed the first television transmissions in the US . 
 At the same time , Sorkin was contacted by Jocelyn Clarke , the commissions manager of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin , requesting he write a play for them , a commission which he accepted . In time Sorkin decided to tackle his commission by rewriting " The Farnsworth Invention " as a play . He delivered a first draft of the play to the Abbey Theatre in early 2005 , and a production was purportedly planned for 2007 with La Jolla Playhouse in California deciding to stage a workshop production of the play in collaboration with the Abbey Theatre . But in 2006 the Abbey Theatre 's new management pulled out of all involvement with The Farnsworth Invention . Despite the setback , La Jolla Playhouse pushed on , with Steven Spielberg lending his talents as producer . The production opened under La Jolla 's signature Page To Stage program which allowed Sorkin and director Des McAnuff to develop the play from show to show according to audience reactions and feedback ; the play ran at La Jolla Playhouse from February 20 , 2007 through March 25 , 2007 . A production followed on Broadway , beginning in previews at the Music Box Theatre and scheduled to open on November 14 , 2007 ; however , the play was delayed by the 2007 Broadway stagehand strike . The Farnsworth Invention eventually opened at the Music Box Theatre on December 3 , 2007 following the end of the strike ; it closed on March 2 , 2008 . 
 In 2005 , Sorkin revised his play A Few Good Men for a revival at the London West End theatre , the Haymarket . The play opened at the Theatre Royal Haymarket in the fall of the same year and was directed by David <unk> , with Rob Lowe of The West Wing in the lead role . 
 = = = Return to film = = = 
 Sorkin 's return to film occurred when he was commissioned by Universal Pictures to adapt 60 Minutes producer George Crile 's nonfiction book Charlie Wilson 's War for Tom Hanks ' production company Playtone . Charlie Wilson 's War is about the colorful Texas congressman Charlie Wilson who funded the CIA 's secret war against the former Soviet Union in Afghanistan . Sorkin completed the screenplay and the film was released in 2007 starring Tom Hanks , Julia Roberts , and Philip Seymour Hoffman , directed by Mike Nichols . 
 In August 2008 , Sorkin announced that he had agreed to write a script for Sony and producer Scott Rudin about how Facebook was founded . The film , The Social Network , based on Ben <unk> 's novel The Accidental Billionaires , was released on October 1 , 2010 . Sorkin won the Academy , BAFTA and Golden Globe Awards for The Social Network . One year later , Sorkin received nominations for the same awards for co @-@ writing the screenplay to the film Moneyball . 
 In May 2012 , Sony announced that Sorkin would write a movie based on Walter Isaacson 's biography of Steve Jobs . Sorkin was a guest at the D10 conference in May 2012 and explained his thoughts at the time on the adaptation of Isaacson 's biography : 
 To be honest , one of the hesitations I had in taking on the movie is that it was a little like writing about the Beatles — that there are so many people out there who know so much about him and who revere him that I just saw a minefield of disappointment . Frankly , that I was going to do something and that people who ... hopefully , when I 'm done with my research , I 'll be in the same ball park of knowledge about Steve Jobs that so many people in this room are . 
 Steve Jobs , written by Sorkin , directed by Danny Boyle , and starring Michael Fassbender as Jobs , was released in October 2015 . On January 10 , 2016 , Sorkin won the Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay for his work on this film . 
 = = = Return to television = = = 
 It was announced in 2011 Sorkin would be returning to television with two HBO projects . He has teamed with The Office star John Krasinski to develop a miniseries about the Chateau Marmont Hotel based on Life at the Marmont , a book by the hotel 's co @-@ owner Raymond R. <unk> and Fred Basten . He also developed The Newsroom , a series about a fictional cable news network . The series lasted three seasons , premiering on June 24 , 2012 , and concluding on December 14 , 2014 . 
 = = = Future projects = = = 
 In March 2007 , it was reported that Sorkin had signed on to write a musical adaptation of the hit 2002 record Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots by psychedelic @-@ rock band The Flaming Lips , collaborating with director Des McAnuff who had been developing the project . 
 On July 12 , 2007 , Variety reported that Sorkin had signed a deal with DreamWorks to write three scripts . The first script is titled The Trial of the Chicago 7 , which Sorkin was already developing with Steven Spielberg and producers Walter Parkes and Laurie MacDonald . In March 2010 , Sorkin 's agent , Ari Emanuel , was reported as saying that the project was proving " tough to get together " . However , in late July 2013 , it was announced that Academy Award nominated director Paul Greengrass was in final talks to direct Sorkin 's script and that Steven Spielberg had previously been attached . 
 In August 2008 , Des McAnuff announced that Sorkin had been commissioned by the Stratford Shakespeare Festival to write an adaptation of Chekhov 's The Cherry Orchard . 
 In 2010 , Sorkin reportedly obtained the film rights to Andrew Young 's book , The Politician ( about Sen. John Edwards ) , and announced that he would make his debut as a film director while also adapting the book for the screen . 
 In November 2010 , it was reported that Sorkin would be writing a musical based on the life of Houdini , with music by Danny Elfman . In January 2012 , Stephen Schwartz was reported to be writing the music and lyrics , with Sorkin making his debut as a librettist . The musical was expected to come out in 2013 @-@ 14 , with Sorkin saying " The chance to collaborate with Stephen Schwartz , ( the director ) Jack O 'Brien , and Hugh Jackman on a new Broadway musical is a huge gift . " In January 2013 , he dropped out of the project , citing film and TV commitments . 
 In September 2015 , it was reported that Sorkin is writing a biopic that will focus on the twenty year marriage of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz and their work together on I Love Lucy and The Lucy – Desi Comedy Hour . Academy Award winner Cate Blanchett is set to star as Ball , while the role of Arnaz is yet to be determined . 
 In January 2016 , it was announced that Sorkin would make his directorial debut with the film Molly 's Game for Sony Pictures Entertainment , based on Molly Bloom 's memoir and which he would adapt by himself . 
 In February 2016 , it was revealed that Sorkin will be adapting To Kill a Mockingbird for the stage , where he will be working alongside Bartlett Sher . 
 In March 2016 , it was announced that Sorkin would be adapting A Few Good Men for a live production on NBC , slated to air in 2017 . 
 = = Writing process and style = = 
 Sorkin has written for the theatre , film and television , and in each medium his level of collaboration with other creators has varied . He began in theatre which involved a largely solitary writing process , then moved into film where he collaborated with director Rob Reiner and screenwriter William Goldman , and eventually worked in television where he collaborated very closely with director Thomas Schlamme for nearly a decade on the shows Sports Night , The West Wing , and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip ; he now moves between all three media . He has a habit of chain smoking while he spends countless hours cooped up in his office plotting out his next scripts . He describes his writing process as physical because he will often stand up and speak the dialogue he is developing . 
 A New York Times article by Peter De Jonge explained that " The West Wing is never plotted out for more than a few weeks ahead and has no major story lines " , which De Jonge believed was because " with characters who have no flaws , it is impossible to give them significant arcs " . Sorkin has stated : " I seldom plan ahead , not because I don 't think it 's good to plan ahead , there just isn 't time . " Sorkin has also said , " As a writer , I don 't like to answer questions until the very moment that I have to . " The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer 's TV critic John Levesque has commented that Sorkin 's writing process " can make for ill @-@ advised plot developments " . Further complicating the matter , in television , Sorkin will have a hand in writing every episode , rarely letting other writers earn full credit on a script . Peter De Jonge has reported that ex @-@ writers of The West Wing have claimed that " even by the spotlight @-@ hogging standards of Hollywood , Sorkin has been exceptionally ungenerous in his sharing of writing credit " . In a comment to GQ magazine in 2008 , Sorkin said , " I 'm helped by a staff of people who have great ideas , but the scripts aren 't written by committee . " 
 Sorkin 's nearly decade @-@ long collaboration in television with director Thomas Schlamme began in early 1998 when they found they shared common creative ground on the soon to be produced Sports Night . Their successful partnership in television is one in which Sorkin focuses on writing the scripts while Schlamme executive produces and occasionally directs ; they have worked together on Sports Night , The West Wing , and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . Schlamme will create the look of the shows , work with the other directors , discuss the scripts with Sorkin as soon as they are turned in , make design and casting decisions , and attend the budget meetings ; Sorkin tends to stick strictly to writing . In response to what he perceived as unfair criticism of The Newsroom , Jacob Drum of Digital Americana wrote , " The essential truth that the critics miss is that The Newsroom is Sorkin being Sorkin as he always has been and always will be : one part pioneer ; one part self @-@ conscious romantic ; two parts actual Lewis & Clark @-@ style pioneer , trapping his way across an old , old idea of an America that can always stand to raise its game — but most importantly , spinning a good yarn while he does so . " 
 Sorkin is known for writing memorable lines and fast @-@ paced dialogue , such as " You can 't handle the truth ! " from A Few Good Men and the partly Latin tirade against God in The West Wing episode " Two Cathedrals " . For television , one hallmark of Sorkin 's writer 's voice is the repartee that his characters engage in as they small talk and banter about whimsical events taking place within an episode , and interject obscure popular culture references into conversation . 
 Although his scripts are lauded for being literate , Sorkin has been criticized for often turning in scripts that are overwrought . His mentor William Goldman has commented that normally in visual media speeches are avoided , but that Sorkin has a talent for dialogue and gets away with breaking this rule . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sorkin married Julia Bingham in 1996 and divorced in 2005 , with his workaholic habits and drug abuse reported to be a partial cause . Sorkin and Bingham have one daughter , Roxy . Sorkin was a dependent cocaine user for many years and , after a highly publicized arrest in 2001 , he received treatment in a drug diversion program . 
 For several years , he dated Kristin Chenoweth , who played Annabeth Schott on The West Wing ( though after Sorkin had left the show ) . He has also reportedly dated columnist Maureen Dowd and actress Kristin Davis . 
 A consistent supporter of the Democratic Party , Sorkin has made substantial political campaign contributions to candidates between 1999 and 2011 , according to <unk> During the 2004 US presidential election campaign , the liberal advocacy group <unk> 's political action committee enlisted Sorkin and Rob Reiner to create one of their anti @-@ Bush campaign advertisements . In August 2008 , Sorkin was involved in a Generation Obama event at the Fine Arts Theater in Beverly Hills , California , participating in a panel discussion subsequent to a screening of Frank Capra 's Mr Smith Goes to Washington . Despite this Sorkin does not consider himself a political activist noting " I 've met political activists , and they 're for real . I 've never marched <unk> or done anything that takes more effort than writing a check in terms of activism " . 
 In 1987 , Sorkin started using marijuana and cocaine . He has said that in cocaine he found a drug that gave him relief from certain nervous tensions he deals with on a regular basis . In 1995 , he checked into rehab at the Hazelden Institute in Minnesota , on the advice of his then girlfriend and soon to be wife Julia Bingham , to try to beat his addiction to cocaine . In 2001 , Sorkin along with colleagues John Spencer and Martin Sheen received the Phoenix Rising Award for their personal victories over substance abuse . However , two months later on April 15 , 2001 , Sorkin was arrested when guards at a security checkpoint at the Burbank Airport found hallucinogenic mushrooms , marijuana , and crack cocaine in his carry @-@ on bag when a metal crack pipe set off the gate 's metal detector . He was ordered to a drug diversion program . 
 Sorkin continued working on The West Wing amidst his drug abuse . In his commencement speech for Syracuse University on May 13 , 2012 , Sorkin declared that he had not used cocaine for eleven years . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 = = = Cameo acting appearances = = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = = Academy Awards = = = 
 = = = British Academy Film Awards = = = 
 = = = Critics ' Choice Movie Awards = = = 
 = = = Golden Globe Awards = = = 
 = = = Primetime Emmy Awards = = = 
 = = = = As writer = = = = 
 = = = = As producer = = = = 
 = = = Satellite Awards = = = 
 = = = Writers Guild of America Awards = = = 
 = = = = Film = = = = 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 = = Further information = = 
 Aaron Sorkin ( July 2002 ) . The West Wing Script Book . Newmarket Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 549 @-@ 2 . 
 Aaron Sorkin ( February 2004 ) . The West Wing Seasons 3 & 4 : The Shooting Scripts : Eight <unk> . Newmarket Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 612 @-@ 3 . 
 " Interview with Aaron Sorkin " ( PDF ) . On Writing Magazine , Issue 18 . The Writers Guild of America , East , Inc . February 2003 @.@ p . 6 . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on January 28 , 2007 . Retrieved January 10 , 2007 . 
 Aaron Sorkin . " Early draft of the Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip pilot script " . Archived from the original on October 24 , 2009 . Retrieved February 1 , 2007 . 
 Aaron Sorkin and Rob Reiner ( 2001 ) . From Stage to Screen with Aaron Sorkin and Rob Reiner , A Few Good Men ( Special Edition DVD ) ( Documentary ) . 
 Aaron Barnhart ( January 21 , 2007 ) . " Aaron Sorkin , in his own words " . TV Barn ( Podcast ) . 
 = Delaware Route 72 = 
 Delaware Route 72 ( DE 72 ) is a state highway located in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 9 near Delaware City north to DE 7 in Pike Creek . The route runs through suburban areas of northern New Castle County , passing through the eastern part of Newark . DE 72 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) , DE 1 , and DE 7 near Delaware City , DE 71 near Kirkwood , US 40 east of Glasgow , and DE 2 , DE 4 , and DE 273 in Newark . Parts of DE 72 were built as a state highway during the 1930s . By the 1940s , the route was designated between DE 2 in Newark and DE 7 in Pike Creek along Paper Mill Road . The route was extended south to DE 9 in the 1960s . In 1980 , the alignment was shifted to the east through Newark to bypass a railroad crossing on Chapel Street . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 72 begins at an intersection with DE 9 adjacent to the Delaware City Refinery near Delaware City , heading west on two @-@ lane undivided Wrangle Hill Road . The road continues between the oil refinery to the north and farmland to the south before coming to an intersection with US 13 and the southern terminus of DE 7 in Wrangle Hill , where it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway . At this point , US 13 turns west for a short concurrency with DE 72 to a diamond interchange with the DE 1 freeway , where US 13 splits north onto DE 1 . 
 Past this interchange , DE 72 narrows back into a two @-@ lane undivided road and passes through a mix of farmland and residences , coming to an intersection with DE 71 . Following this , the road curves to the northwest through a mix of homes and commercial establishments , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The route curves north and comes to an intersection with US 40 in a commercial area to the east of Glasgow . 
 Past the US 40 intersection , DE 72 continues to the north on Sunset Lake Road , heading into wooded areas with some fields and residential development and closely running to the west of a Norfolk Southern line . The route crosses to the east side of the railroad tracks and widens into a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane as it comes to an intersection with Old Baltimore Pike . At this intersection , the route name changes to South Chapel Street and it passes through fields with some development , crossing under Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 , Delaware Turnpike ) without an interchange . DE 72 enters the eastern part of Newark and passes industrial parks before heading past businesses and residential neighborhoods as it comes to an intersection with DE 4 . 
 Following this intersection , the road narrows to two lanes as it heads through agricultural areas to the east of the University of Delaware campus . The route continues northeast onto Library Avenue and runs through woods as it comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line . The road bends north into commercial areas , passing to the east of Newark High School and widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it comes to an intersection with Delaware Avenue , which carries the eastbound direction of DE 273 . Here , eastbound DE 273 turns north to join DE 72 and the road reaches an intersection where westbound DE 273 runs west on Main Street and DE 273 continues east as Ogletown Road . Past this intersection , DE 72 becomes concurrent with DE 2 and the name changes to Capitol Trail as it turns northeast and passes under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision railroad line . The road leaves Newark and heads northeast through residential areas , briefly becoming undivided as it crosses White Clay Creek . 
 DE 72 splits from DE 2 by heading northwest on two @-@ lane undivided Possum Park Road through a mix of fields , woods , and housing developments . In Milford Crossroads , the route turns northeast onto Paper Mill Road and curves north to pass between White Clay Creek State Park to the west and the Middle Run Valley Natural Area to the east . The road continues northeast into the suburban Pike Creek area . DE 72 turns east and reaches its northern terminus at another intersection with DE 7 . 
 DE 72 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 34 @,@ 091 vehicles at the north end of Newark to a low of 3 @,@ 489 vehicles at the US 13 intersection . The portions of DE 72 concurrent with US 13 and DE 2 are part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 72 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . By 1931 , the road was proposed as a state highway between present @-@ day DE 9 and US 13 while what would become DE 72 north of Milford Crossroads was completed as a state highway . The road from present @-@ day DE 9 to US 13 became a state highway ba year later . On July 1 , 1935 , the remaining sections of the present @-@ day route were transferred from the county to the state . The portion of the road between US 13 and US 40 was improved by the state in 1937 , providing a better route to Baltimore and Washington , D.C. for residents in the Delaware City , Port Penn , and Odessa areas . 
 DE 72 was designated by 1942 to run from DE 2 in Newark north to DE 7 , following Chapel Street and Paper Mill Road . In 1939 , suggestions were made to replace the bridge over the White Clay Creek along Paper Mill Road in Newark . Plans were completed for this bridge by 1942 but construction was postponed due to World War II . The concrete bridge carrying Paper Mill Road over the White Clay Creek was completed in 1947 , with final work on the project finished in August 1949 . By 1954 , Sunset Lake Road was improved from a dirt road to a low @-@ type bituminous road . The roadway between US 40 and Newark was paved by 1966 . 
 DE 72 was extended to its present southern terminus at DE 9 the next year , following Chapel Street , Sunset Lake Road , and Wrangle Hill Road . In 1980 , the Chapel Street crossing of the Northeast Corridor rail line in Newark was removed , and DE 72 was realigned farther to the east to follow Library Avenue across the railroad tracks before continuing north on DE 2 and Possum Park Road to Paper Mill Road in Milford Crossroads . DE 2 was realigned to follow DE 72 around the eastern part of Newark on Library Avenue by 1990 . In 2013 , the DE 2 concurrency between DE 4 and DE 273 was removed due to the truncation of DE 2 to the DE 273 intersection . On April 29 , 2016 , Governor Jack Markell , DelDOT secretary Jennifer Cohan , and local officials attended a groundbreaking ceremony for a $ 7 million project that will rebuild the interchange with DE 1 into a diverging diamond interchange , the first such interchange in Delaware . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Arthur Compton = 
 Arthur Holly Compton ( September 10 , 1892 – March 15 , 1962 ) was an American physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927 for his discovery of the Compton effect , which demonstrated the particle nature of electromagnetic radiation . It was a sensational discovery at the time : the wave nature of light had been well @-@ demonstrated , but the idea that light had both wave and particle properties was not easily accepted . He is also known for his leadership of the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory , and served as Chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis from 1945 to 1953 . 
 In 1919 , Compton was awarded one of the first two National Research Council Fellowships that allowed students to study abroad . He chose to go to Cambridge University 's Cavendish Laboratory in England , where he studied the scattering and absorption of gamma rays . Further research along these lines led to the discovery of the Compton effect . He used X @-@ rays to investigate ferromagnetism , concluding that it was a result of the alignment of electron spins , and studied cosmic rays , discovering that they were made up principally of positively charged particles . 
 During World War II , Compton was a key figure in the Manhattan Project that developed the first nuclear weapons . His reports were important in launching the project . In 1942 , he became head of the Metallurgical Laboratory , with responsibility for producing nuclear reactors to convert uranium into plutonium , finding ways to separate the plutonium from the uranium and to design an atomic bomb . Compton oversaw Enrico Fermi 's creation of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , the first nuclear reactor , which went critical on December 2 , 1942 . The Metallurgical Laboratory was also responsible for the design and operation of the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Plutonium began being produced in the Hanford Site reactors in 1945 . 
 After the war , Compton became Chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis . During his tenure , the university formally desegregated its undergraduate divisions , named its first female full professor , and enrolled a record number of students after wartime veterans returned to the United States . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur Compton was born on September 10 , 1892 in Wooster , Ohio , the son of Elias and <unk> Catherine ( née <unk> ) Compton , who was named American Mother of the Year in 1939 . They were an academic family . Elias was dean of the University of Wooster ( later The College of Wooster ) , which Arthur also attended . Arthur 's eldest brother , Karl , who also attended Wooster , earned a PhD in physics from Princeton University in 1912 , and was president of MIT from 1930 to 1948 . His second brother Wilson likewise attended Wooster , earned his PhD in economics from Princeton in 1916 and was president of the State College of Washington , later Washington State University from 1944 to 1951 . All three brothers were members of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity . 
 Compton was initially interested in astronomy , and took a photograph of Halley 's Comet in 1910 . Around 1913 , he described an experiment where an examination of the motion of water in a circular tube demonstrated the rotation of the earth . That year , he graduated from Wooster with a Bachelor of Science degree and entered Princeton , where he received his Master of Arts degree in 1914 . Compton then studied for his PhD in physics under the supervision of Hereward L. Cooke , writing his dissertation on " The intensity of X @-@ ray reflection , and the distribution of the electrons in atoms " . 
 When Arthur Compton earned his PhD in 1916 , he , Karl and Wilson became the first group of three brothers to earn PhDs from Princeton . Later , they would become the first such trio to simultaneously head American colleges . Their sister Mary married a missionary , C. Herbert Rice , who became the principal of Forman Christian College in Lahore . In June 1916 , Compton married Betty Charity McCloskey , a Wooster classmate and fellow graduate . They had two sons , Arthur Alan and John Joseph Compton . 
 Compton spent a year as a physics instructor at the University of Minnesota in 1916 – 17 , then two years as a research engineer with the Westinghouse Lamp Company in Pittsburgh , where he worked on the development of the sodium @-@ vapor lamp . During World War I he developed aircraft instrumentation for the Signal Corps . 
 In 1919 , Compton was awarded one of the first two National Research Council Fellowships that allowed students to study abroad . He chose to go to Cambridge University 's Cavendish Laboratory in England . Working with George Paget Thomson , the son of J. J. Thomson , Compton studied the scattering and absorption of gamma rays . He observed that the scattered rays were more easily absorbed than the original source . Compton was greatly impressed by the Cavendish scientists , especially Ernest Rutherford , Charles Galton Darwin and Arthur Eddington , and he ultimately named his second son after J. J. Thomson . 
 For a time Compton was a deacon at a Baptist church . " Science can have no quarrel " , he said , " with a religion which postulates a God to whom men are as His children . " 
 = = Physics professor = = 
 = = = Compton effect = = = 
 Returning to the United States , Compton was appointed Wayman Crow Professor of Physics , and Head of the Department of Physics at Washington University in St. Louis in 1920 . In 1922 , he found that X @-@ ray quanta scattered by free electrons had longer wavelengths and , in accordance with Planck 's relation , less energy than the incoming X @-@ rays , the surplus energy having been transferred to the electrons . This discovery , known as the " Compton effect " or " Compton scattering " , demonstrated the particle concept of electromagnetic radiation . 
 In 1923 , Compton published a paper in the Physical Review that explained the X @-@ ray shift by attributing particle @-@ like momentum to photons , something Einstein had invoked for his 1905 Nobel Prize – winning explanation of the photo @-@ electric effect . First postulated by Max Planck in 1900 , these were conceptualized as elements of light " quantized " by containing a specific amount of energy depending only on the frequency of the light . In his paper , Compton derived the mathematical relationship between the shift in wavelength and the scattering angle of the X @-@ rays by assuming that each scattered X @-@ ray photon interacted with only one electron . His paper concludes by reporting on experiments that verified his derived relation : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the initial wavelength , 
 <formula> is the wavelength after scattering , 
 <formula> is the Planck constant , 
 <formula> is the electron rest mass , 
 <formula> is the speed of light , and 
 <formula> is the scattering angle . 
 The quantity h ⁄ <unk> is known as the Compton wavelength of the electron ; it is equal to 2 @.@ 43 × 10 − 12 m . The wavelength shift λ ′ − λ lies between zero ( for θ 
 = 0 ° ) and twice the Compton wavelength of the electron ( for θ = 
 180 ° ) . He found that some X @-@ rays experienced no wavelength shift despite being scattered through large angles ; in each of these cases the photon failed to eject an electron . Thus the magnitude of the shift is related not to the Compton wavelength of the electron , but to the Compton wavelength of the entire atom , which can be upwards of 10 @,@ 000 times smaller . 
 " When I presented my results at a meeting of the American Physical Society in 1923 , " Compton later recalled , " it initiated the most hotly contested scientific controversy that I have ever known . " The wave nature of light had been well demonstrated , and the idea that it could have a dual nature was not easily accepted . It was particularly telling that diffraction in a crystal lattice could only be explained with reference to its wave nature . It earned Compton the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927 . Compton and Alfred W. Simon developed the method for observing at the same instant individual scattered X @-@ ray photons and the recoil electrons . In Germany , Walther Bothe and Hans Geiger independently developed a similar method . 
 = = = X @-@ rays = = = 
 In 1923 , Compton moved to the University of Chicago as Professor of Physics , a position he would occupy for the next 22 years . In 1925 , he demonstrated that the scattering of 130 @,@ 000 @-@ volt X @-@ rays from the first sixteen elements in the periodic table ( hydrogen through sulfur ) were polarized , a result predicted by J. J. Thomson . William Duane from Harvard University spearheaded an effort to prove that Compton 's interpretation of the Compton effect was wrong . Duane carried out a series of experiments to disprove Compton , but instead found evidence that Compton was correct . In 1924 , Duane conceded that this was the case . 
 Compton investigated the effect of X @-@ rays on the sodium and chlorine nuclei in salt . He used X @-@ rays to investigate ferromagnetism , concluding that it was a result of the alignment of electron spins . In 1926 , he became a consultant for the Lamp Department at General Electric . In 1934 , he returned to England as Eastman visiting professor at Oxford University . While there General Electric asked him to report on activities at General Electric Company plc 's research laboratory at Wembley . Compton was intrigued by the possibilities of the research there into fluorescent lamps . His report prompted a research program in America that developed it . 
 Compton 's first book , X @-@ Rays and Electrons , was published in 1926 . In it he showed how to calculate the densities of diffracting materials from their X @-@ ray diffraction patterns . He revised his book with the help of Samuel K. Allison to produce X @-@ Rays in Theory and Experiment ( 1935 ) . This work remained a standard reference for the next three decades . 
