 = Anglo @-@ Zanzibar War = 
 The Anglo @-@ Zanzibar War was a military conflict fought between the United Kingdom and the Zanzibar Sultanate on 27 August 1896 . The conflict lasted around 38 minutes , marking it as the shortest war in history . The immediate cause of the war was the death of the pro @-@ British Sultan Hamad bin <unk> on 25 August 1896 and the subsequent succession of Sultan Khalid bin Barghash . The British authorities preferred Hamud bin Muhammed , who was more favourable to British interests , as sultan . In accordance with a treaty signed in 1886 , a condition for accession to the sultanate was that the candidate obtain the permission of the British consul , and Khalid had not fulfilled this requirement . The British considered this a casus belli and sent an ultimatum to Khalid demanding that he order his forces to stand down and leave the palace . In response , Khalid called up his palace guard and barricaded himself inside the palace . 
 The ultimatum expired at 09 : 00 East Africa Time ( EAT ) on 27 August , by which time the British had gathered three cruisers , two gunboats , 150 marines and sailors , and 900 Zanzibaris in the harbour area . The Royal Navy contingent were under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Harry Rawson while their Zanzibaris were commanded by Brigadier @-@ General Lloyd Mathews of the Zanzibar army ( who was also the First Minister of Zanzibar ) . Around 2 @,@ 800 Zanzibaris defended the palace ; most were recruited from the civilian population , but they also included the sultan 's palace guard and several hundred of his servants and slaves . The defenders had several artillery pieces and machine guns , which were set in front of the palace sighted at the British ships . A bombardment opened at 09 : 02 set the palace on fire and disabled the defending artillery . A small naval action took place with the British sinking the Zanzibari royal yacht HHS Glasgow and two smaller vessels , and some shots were fired ineffectually at the pro @-@ British Zanzibari troops as they approached the palace . The flag at the palace was shot down and fire ceased at 09 : 40 . 
 The sultan 's forces sustained roughly 500 casualties , while only one British sailor was injured . Sultan Khalid received asylum in the German consulate before escaping to German East Africa ( in the mainland part of present Tanzania ) . The British quickly placed Sultan Hamud in power at the head of a puppet government . The war marked the end of the Zanzibar Sultanate as a sovereign state and the start of a period of heavy British influence . 
 = = Background = = 
 Zanzibar was an island country in the Indian Ocean , off the coast of Tanganyika ; today it forms part of Tanzania . The main island , Unguja ( or Zanzibar Island ) , had been under the nominal control of the Sultans of Oman since 1698 when they expelled the Portuguese settlers who had claimed it in 1499 . Sultan Majid bin Said declared the island independent of Oman in 1858 , which was recognised by Great Britain , and split the sultanate from that of Oman . The subsequent sultans established their capital and seat of government at Zanzibar Town where a palace complex was built on the sea front . By 1896 , this consisted of the palace itself ; the Beit al @-@ <unk> , an attached harem ; and the Beit al @-@ <unk> or " House of Wonders " — a ceremonial palace said to be the first building in East Africa to be provided with electricity . The complex was mostly constructed of local timber and was not designed as a defensive structure . All three main buildings were adjacent to one another in a line , and linked by wooden covered bridges above street height . 
 Britain had recognised Zanzibar 's sovereignty and its sultanate in 1886 , after a long period of friendly interaction , and generally maintained good relations with the country and its sultans . However , Germany was also interested in East Africa and the two powers vied for control of trade rights and territory in the area throughout the late 19th century . Sultan Khalifah had granted rights to the land of Kenya to Britain and that of Tanganyika to Germany , a process resulting in the prohibition of slavery in those lands . Many of the Arab ruling classes were upset by this interruption of a valuable trade , which resulted in some unrest . In addition , the German authorities in Tanganyika refused to fly the flag of the Zanzibar Sultanate , which led to armed clashes between German troops and the local population . One such conflict in Tanga claimed the lives of 20 Arabs . 
 Sultan Khalifah sent Zanzibari troops led by Brigadier @-@ General Lloyd Mathews , a former Lieutenant of the Royal Navy , to restore order in Tanganyika . The operation was largely successful , but anti @-@ German feeling among the Zanzibari people remained strong . Further conflicts erupted at Bagamoyo where 150 natives were killed by German military forces and at <unk> where German officials and their servants were murdered . Khalifah then granted extensive trade rights to the Imperial British East Africa Company ( <unk> ) who , with German assistance , ran a naval blockade to halt the continuing domestic slave trade . Upon Khalifah 's death in 1890 Ali bin Said ascended to the sultanate . Sultan Ali banned the domestic slave trade ( but not slave ownership ) , declared Zanzibar a British protectorate and appointed Lloyd Mathews as First Minister to lead his cabinet . The British were also guaranteed a veto over the future appointment of sultans . 
 The year of Ali 's ascension also saw the signing of the Heligoland @-@ Zanzibar Treaty between Britain and Germany . This treaty officially demarcated the spheres of interest in East Africa and ceded Germany 's rights in Zanzibar to the United Kingdom . This granted the British government more influence in Zanzibar , which they intended to use to eradicate slavery there , an objective they had held as early as 1804 . 
 Sultan Ali 's successor was Hamad bin <unk> , who became sultan in 1893 . Hamad maintained a close relationship with the British but there was dissent among his subjects over the increasing British control over the country , the British @-@ led army and the abolition of the valuable slave trade . In order to control this dissent , the British authorities authorised the sultan to raise a Zanzibari palace bodyguard of 1 @,@ 000 men , but these troops were soon involved in clashes with the British @-@ led police . Complaints about the bodyguards ' activities were also received from the European residents in Zanzibar Town . 
 = = 25 August = = 
 Sultan Hamad died suddenly at 11 : 40 EAT ( 08 : 40 UTC ) on 25 August 1896 . His 29 @-@ year @-@ old nephew Khalid bin <unk> , who was suspected by some of his assassination , moved into the palace complex at Zanzibar Town without British approval , in contravention of the treaty agreed with Ali . The British government preferred an alternative candidate , Hamud bin Muhammed , who was more favourably disposed towards them . Khalid was warned by the consul and diplomatic agent to Zanzibar , Basil Cave , and General Mathews to think carefully about his actions . This course of action had proved successful three years earlier when Khalid had tried to claim the sultanate after the death of Ali and the British consul @-@ general , Rennell Rodd , had persuaded him of the dangers of such an action . 
 Khalid ignored Cave 's warning and his forces began mustering in the Palace Square under the command of Captain Saleh of the palace bodyguard . By the end of the day , they numbered 2 @,@ 800 men armed with rifles and muskets . The majority were civilians but the force included 700 Zanzibari Askari soldiers who had sided with Khalid . The sultan 's artillery , which consisted of several Maxim machine guns , a Gatling gun , a 17th @-@ century bronze cannon and two 12 @-@ pounder field guns , was aimed at the British ships in the harbour . The 12 @-@ pounders had been presented to the sultan by Wilhelm II , the German emperor . The sultan 's troops also took possession of the Zanzibari Navy , which consisted of one wooden sloop , the HHS Glasgow , built as a royal yacht for the sultan in 1878 based on the British frigate Glasgow . 
 Mathews and Cave also began to muster their forces , already commanding 900 Zanzibari askaris under Lieutenant Arthur Edward Harington Raikes of the Wiltshire Regiment who was seconded to the Zanzibar Army and held the rank of Brigadier @-@ General . 150 sailors and marines were landed from the Pearl @-@ class protected cruiser Philomel and the gunboat Thrush , which were anchored in the harbour . The naval contingent , under the command of Captain O 'Callaghan , came ashore within fifteen minutes of being requested to deal with any rioting caused by the general population . A smaller contingent of sailors under Lieutenant Watson of Thrush were put ashore to guard the British consulate , where British citizens were requested to gather for protection . HMS Sparrow , another gunboat , entered the harbour and was anchored opposite the palace next to Thrush . 
 Some concerns were raised among the British diplomats as to the reliability of Raikes ' askaris , but they proved to be steady and professional troops hardened by military drill and several expeditions to East Africa . They would later become the only land troops to be fired upon by the defenders . Raikes ' troops were armed with two Maxim guns and a nine pounder cannon , and were stationed at the nearby customs house . The sultan attempted to have the US consul , Richard Dorsey Mohun , recognise his accession but the messenger was told that " as his accession had not been verified by Her Majesty 's government , it is impossible to reply . " 
 Cave continued to send messages to Khalid requesting that he stand down his troops , leave the palace and return home but these were ignored and Khalid replied that he would proclaim himself sultan at 15 : 00 . Cave stated that this would constitute an act of rebellion and that Khalid 's <unk> would not be recognised by the British government . At 14 : 30 , Sultan Hamad was buried and exactly 30 minutes later a royal salute from the palace guns proclaimed Khalid 's succession . Cave could not open hostilities without government approval and telegraphed the following message to the Foreign Office of Lord Salisbury 's administration in London : " Are we authorised in the event of all attempts at a peaceful solution proving useless , to fire on the Palace from the men @-@ of @-@ war ? " Meanwhile , Cave informed all other foreign consuls that all flags were to remain at half mast in honour of the late Hamad . The only one that did not was a large red flag flying from Khalid 's palace . Cave also informed the consuls not to recognise Khalid as sultan , to which they agreed . 
 = = 26 August = = 
 At 10 : 00 on 26 August , the Archer @-@ class protected cruiser Racoon arrived at Zanzibar Town and was anchored in line with Thrush and Sparrow . At 14 : 00 , the Edgar @-@ class protected cruiser St George , flagship of the Cape and East Africa Station , steamed into the harbour . On board were Rear @-@ Admiral Harry Rawson and further British marines and sailors . At around the same time Lord Salisbury 's reply arrived authorising Cave and Rawson to use the resources at their disposal to remove Khalid from power . The telegraph read : " You are authorised to adopt whatever measures you may consider necessary , and will be supported in your action by Her Majesty 's Government . Do not , however , attempt to take any action which you are not certain of being able to accomplish successfully . " 
 Cave attempted further negotiations with Khalid but these failed and Rawson sent an ultimatum , requiring him to haul down his flag and leave the palace by 09 : 00 on 27 August or he would open fire . During the afternoon , all merchant vessels were cleared from the harbour and the British women and children removed to St. George and a British @-@ India Steam Navigation Company vessel for their safety . That night , Consul Mohun noted that : " The silence which hung over Zanzibar was appalling . Usually drums were beating or babies cried but that night there was absolutely not a sound . " 
 = = 27 August = = 
 At 08 : 00 on the morning of 27 August , after a messenger sent by Khalid requested parley from Cave , the consul replied that he would only have salvation if he agreed to the terms of the ultimatum . At 08 : 30 a further messenger from Khalid declared that " We have no intention of hauling down our flag and we do not believe you would open fire on us " ; Cave replied that " We do not want to open fire , but unless you do as you are told we shall certainly do so . " At 08 : 55 , having received no further word from the palace , aboard St George Rawson hoisted the signal " prepare for action " . 
 At exactly 09 : 00 , General Lloyd Mathews ordered the British ships to commence the bombardment . At 09 : 02 Her Majesty 's Ships Racoon , Thrush and Sparrow opened fire at the palace simultaneously , Thrush 's first shot immediately dismounted an Arab 12 @-@ pounder cannon . Three thousand defenders , servants and slaves were present in the largely wooden palace and even with barricades of crates , bales and rubber , there were many casualties from the high explosive shells . Despite initial reports that he had been captured and was to be exiled to India , Sultan Khalid escaped from the palace . A Reuters news correspondent reported that the sultan had " fled at the first shot with all the leading Arabs , who left their slaves and followers to carry on the fighting " , but other sources state that he remained in the palace for longer . The shelling ceased at around 09 : 40 , by which time the palace and attached harem had caught fire , the Sultan 's artillery had been silenced and his flag cut down . 
 During the bombardment a small naval engagement occurred when , at 09 : 05 , the obsolete Glasgow fired upon the St George using her armament of 7 nine @-@ pounder guns and a Gatling gun , which had been a present from Queen Victoria to the sultan . The return fire caused Glasgow to sink , though the shallow harbour meant that her masts remained out of the water . Glasgow 's crew hoisted a British flag as a token of their surrender and they were all rescued by British sailors in launches . Thrush also sank two steam launches whose Zanzibari crews shot at her with rifles . Some land fighting occurred when Khalid 's men fired on Raikes ' askaris , with little effect , as they approached the palace . The fighting ceased with the end of the shelling . The British controlled the town and the palace and by the afternoon Hamud bin Muhammed , an Arab favourable to the British , had been installed as sultan with much reduced powers . The British ships and crews had fired around 500 shells , 4 @,@ 100 machine gun rounds and 1 @,@ 000 rifle rounds during the engagement . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Around 500 Zanzibari men and women were killed or wounded during the bombardment , most of the dead a result of the fire that engulfed the palace . It is unknown how many of these casualties were combatants , but Khalid 's gun crews were said to have been " decimated " . British casualties amounted to one Petty Officer severely wounded aboard Thrush who later recovered . Although the majority of the Zanzibari townspeople sided with the British , the town 's Indian quarter suffered from opportunistic looting and around twenty inhabitants lost their lives in the chaos . To restore order 150 British Sikh troops were transferred from Mombasa to patrol the streets . Sailors from St George and Philomel were landed to form a fire brigade to contain the fire , which had spread from the palace to the nearby customs sheds . There was some concern about the fire at the customs sheds as they contained a sizeable store of explosives , but no explosion occurred . 
 Sultan Khalid , Captain Saleh and around forty followers sought refuge in the German consulate following their flight from the palace , where they were guarded by ten armed German sailors and marines while Mathews stationed men outside to arrest them if they tried to leave . Despite extradition requests the German consul refused to surrender Khalid to the British as his country 's extradition treaty with Britain specifically excluded political prisoners . Instead , the German consul promised to remove Khalid to German East Africa without him " setting foot on the soil of Zanzibar " . At 10 : 00 on 2 October , SMS Seeadler of the German Navy arrived in port ; at high tide , one of Seeadler 's boats made it up to the consulate 's garden gate and Khalid stepped directly from consular grounds to a German war vessel and hence was free from arrest . He was transferred from the boat onto the Seeadler and was then taken to Dar es Salaam in German East Africa . Khalid was captured by British forces in 1916 , during the East African Campaign of World War I , and exiled to Seychelles and Saint Helena before being allowed to return to East Africa , where he died at Mombasa in 1927 . The British punished Khalid 's supporters by forcing them to pay reparations to cover the cost of shells fired against them and for damages caused by the looting , which amounted to 300 @,@ 000 rupees . 
 Sultan Hamud was loyal to the British and acted as a figurehead for an essentially British @-@ run government , the sultanate only being retained to avoid the costs involved with running Zanzibar directly as a crown colony . Several months after the war , Hamud , with British prompting , abolished slavery in all its forms . The emancipation of slaves required them to present themselves to a government office and proved a slow process — within ten years only 17 @,@ 293 slaves had been freed , from an estimated population of 60 @,@ 000 in 1891 . 
 The badly damaged palace complex was completely changed by the war . The harem , lighthouse and palace were demolished as the bombardment had left them unsafe . The palace site became an area of gardens while a new palace was erected on the site of the harem . The House of Wonders was almost undamaged and would later become the main secretariat for the British governing authorities . During renovation work on the House of Wonders in 1897 a clocktower was added to its frontage to replace the lighthouse lost to the shelling . The wreck of the Glasgow remained in the harbour in front of the palace where the shallow waters ensured that her masts would remain visible for several years to come ; it was eventually broken up for scrap in 1912 . 
 The British protagonists were highly regarded by the governments in London and Zanzibar for their actions leading up to and during the war , and many were rewarded with appointments and honours . General Raikes , leader of the askaris , was appointed a First Class ( Second Grade ) member of the Order of the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar on 24 September 1896 , a First Class member of the Zanzibari Order of Hamondieh on 25 August 1897 and later promoted to Commander of the Zanzibar armies . General Mathews , the Zanzibari army commander , was appointed a member of the Grand Order of Hamondieh on 25 August 1897 and became First Minister and Treasurer to the Zanzibari government . Basil Cave , the consul , was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 1 January 1897 and promoted to Consul @-@ General on 9 July 1903 . Harry Rawson was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath for his work in Zanzibar and would later be Governor of New South Wales in Australia and receive promotion to Admiral . Rawson was also appointed a first class member of the Order of the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar on 8 February 1897 and the Order of Hamondieh on 18 June 1898 . 
 Perhaps due to the effectiveness shown by the Royal Navy during the bombardment , there were no further rebellions against British influence during the remaining 67 years of the protectorate . 
 = = Duration = = 
 The war , lasting less than three quarters of an hour , is considered the shortest in recorded history . Several durations are given by sources , including 38 , 40 and 45 minutes , but the 38 @-@ minute duration is the most often quoted . The variation is due to confusion over what actually constitutes the start and end of a war . Some sources take the start of the war as the order to open fire at 09 : 00 and some with the start of actual firing at 09 : 02 . The end of the war is usually put at 09 : 40 when the last shots were fired and the palace flag struck , but some sources place it at 09 : 45 . The logbooks of the British ships also suffer from this with St George indicating that cease @-@ fire was called and Khalid entered the German consulate at 09 : 35 , Thrush at 09 : 40 , Racoon at 09 : 41 , and Philomel and Sparrow at 09 : 45 . 
 = The Collection ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " The Collection " is the third episode of NBC 's second season of 30 Rock , and the twenty @-@ fourth episode overall . It was written by producer Matt Hubbard and directed by producer Don Scardino , and first aired on October 18 , 2007 in the United States . In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) hires a private detective , Len ( Steve Buscemi ) , to investigate his past ; Angie Jordan ( Sherri Shepherd ) asks Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to help her watch Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) ; and Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) attempts to help Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) gain weight by insulting her . 
 The episode features a reference to Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , which was compared to 30 Rock because of their similar premise . This is a recurring element in the series , as well as references to other aspects of popular culture . " The Collection " received generally positive reviews , however several critics expressed their concern over the misuse of guest stars , especially in the case of Buscemi . Despite their reactions , Buscemi was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for his acting . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After their separation , Tracy and his wife Angie get back together on the condition that Tracy must never leave her sight . Liz is surprised to find Tracy on time in his dressing room , although Angie confesses that she cannot take care of Tracy alone , and asks for Liz 's help . Angie leaves to take care of personal issues , trusting Liz to watch over him . Busy with her own work , Liz forgets about her promise and Tracy leaves for a strip club . When Angie returns , Liz lies about his whereabouts and tries to cover her mistake , however Angie realizes that Tracy has been to a strip club , and blames the situation on Liz . Angie demands that all decisions regarding sketch ideas be run through her first , and rejects all of Liz 's ideas . To solve the problem , Liz offers Angie " consultant " credit , but she declines the offer . Liz decides to fight Angie , but Tracy scolds the women for their immature behavior and he reconciles with Angie . 
 Jack hires Len to investigate his past when he learns that he is a possible candidate for the position of president at <unk> .. Knowing that the company is looking for anything that could possibly embarrass them , Jack hires Len to find anything incriminating before the company does . When Len discovers that Jack has a collection of cookie jars , he advises him to get rid of them . Jack cannot bear to destroy his cookie jars , and when he realizes Kenneth has a similar enjoyment , he gives him the collection . 
 Jenna has become more famous after gaining weight , and sorts through large amounts of fan mail . Jack congratulates her on her weight , and Jenna enjoys her new friendship with him . While talking to Liz , Jenna begins to worry about losing weight , and fears her popularity will decline . Upset that Jenna is losing weight , Jack sends Kenneth to follow her around and make sure she keeps her weight on . Liz tells Kenneth to insult Jenna if he wants her to eat more , and writes down a list of things to say to Jenna to hurt her . Jenna takes the insults as compliments , and tries to seduce Kenneth . 
 = = Production = = 
 30 Rock and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , both of which debuted on 2006 – 07 NBC lineup , revolved around the off @-@ camera happenings on a sketch comedy series . Evidence of the overlapping subject matter between the shows , as well as the conflict between them , arose when Aaron Sorkin , the creator of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , asked Lorne Michaels to allow him to observe Saturday Night Live for a week , a request Michaels denied . Despite this , Sorkin sent Fey flowers after NBC announced it would pick up both series , and wished her luck with 30 Rock . Fey wound up " winning " over Sorkin when Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip was cancelled after one season and 30 Rock was renewed for a second . Although 30 Rock 's first season ratings proved lackluster and were lower than those of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , the latter was more expensive to produce . The first season episode " Jack the Writer " contained a self @-@ referencing walk and talk sequence , which was commonly used on Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip and Sorkin 's previous series . In this episode , the walk and talk sequence is referenced when Liz asks Kenneth , " can you walk and talk ? " , to which Kenneth replies , " usually , but now you 've got me thinking about it " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Collection " brought in an average of 6 @.@ 2 million American viewers . This episode achieved a 2 @.@ 6 / 7 in the key 18 – 49 demographic ; the 2 @.@ 6 refers to 2 @.@ 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. , and the 7 refers to 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast , in the U.S. This was a decrease from the previous episode , which was watched by an average of 6 @.@ 6 million American viewers . The episode retained 96 % of the audience from its lead @-@ in , My Name is Earl , in adults 18 @-@ 49 , and increased by 14 % in adults 18 @-@ 34 and by 22 % among men 18 @-@ 34 . 
 Bob Sassone of TV Squad said that the lack of the writing staff in the second season was " disappointing " . He " love [ d ] how this show is about NBC and really set at NBC " , but was worried about the misuse of guest stars . Robert Canning of IGN said that for the first time , Jenna 's storyline was the " most entertaining of the night " . He felt that first half of the episode was " tightly written and very funny " , but the second half " waned a bit , with less than stellar conclusions to the stories and far less funny bits " . Canning said that Jack 's storyline was the " most disappointing " , and hoped that future guest stars were used properly , rather than for the sake of having a name guest star . George Freitag of BuddyTV said that although Tracy was " not as strong as the previous two episodes " , he was " still terrific and the nod to his old SNL skit was a nice touch " . He felt that the lack of focus on the personal life of Liz seemed to give the series " a lack of focus " . Freitag hoped that her private issues would be further explored , as " her approachable yet successful persona was one of the main draws to the series in the first place " . Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide felt that the episode " fell a bit flat " , and that the season lacked the other <unk> , Lonny , Frank , <unk> [ sic ] and " director guy " . He did not enjoy Jack 's storyline , but said that Jenna 's storyline " ultimately won a thumbs @-@ up from me for her getting turned on by Kenneth 's rudeness " . 
 Steve Buscemi was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for this episode . 
 = The Arrival ( Fringe ) = 
 " The Arrival " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode was written by the series co @-@ creator and executive producer J. J. Abrams and executive producer and show runner Jeff Pinkner . Paul A. Edwards directed it . 
 The episode concerns a mysterious cylindrical object called " The Beacon " which appears at a construction site in New York City . The story also involves the relationship between Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) and the mysterious Observer ( Michael Cerveris in his first feature appearance ) . 
 " The Arrival " first aired in the United States on September 30 , 2008 on the Fox Network to more than 10 million viewers . It received positive to mixed reviews , with many praising the new revelations about the Observers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a diner in Brooklyn , New York , a bald man with no eyebrows sits down at a table and orders a raw roast beef sandwich with eleven jalapeño peppers and a glass of room temperature water . When the sandwich arrives , he drowns it in Tabasco sauce and black pepper and <unk> it down in large , quick bites , to the bemusement of the diner staff . During this time he is also watching the construction site across the street through high @-@ tech binoculars and taking notes from right to left in unrecognizable characters . The ground shakes and a gas main explodes at the site , toppling a crane . The bald man — the Observer — calmly pays for his sandwich and wanders to the gaping hole where the construction site was . On a wireless phone , he says " It has arrived . " 
 In their shared hotel room Walter keeps Peter awake by reciting the chemical formula for root beer . The next morning Peter expresses his unhappiness with the arrangement to Olivia ( Anna Torv ) and tells her he wants to leave . She can 't let him do that , telling him that Walter refuses to work without him . The Fringe Team investigates the object that arrived in Brooklyn , a cylinder that is determined to vibrate at a particular frequency . In the course of the investigation , Walter assaults and forcibly sedates Junior Agent Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) in order to hide the cylinder . He later meets with the bald man at a diner . 
 Meanwhile , a violent criminal named John Mosley ( Michael Kelly ) is also searching for the Beacon . After killing one of Olivia 's mentors , Mosley kidnaps and tortures Peter to find out the location . After he recovers the beacon from the grave of Robert Bishop , John Mosley is taken down by Olivia . The beacon escapes into the earth , and The Observer reports that its departure was " on schedule . " Peter confronts The Observer about the beacon , only to have a gibberish conversation that implies that the Observer knows what Peter is going to say before he says it , or , as Peter puts it , " he knew me [ ... ] he was inside my head . " The Observer then knocks Peter out with an advanced sort of stun gun . 
 After being hospitalized for his injuries , Peter admits to Olivia that his experience with The Observer has caused him to start to believe in The Pattern . Peter decides that he wants to stay with the Fringe team until he gets some explanations . Walter apologizes to Astrid , who doesn 't yet forgive him . Walter admits to Peter that , during an accident many years ago , a mysterious third party saved both their lives . The man was bald and had no eyebrows , who " knew my [ Walter 's ] thoughts before I did . " Walter admits that his behaviour regarding the capsule , and his desire to protect it , was motivated by his debt to this bald man , and that the capsule somehow contained instructions from this man . At the end of the episode , Olivia returns home , and sees recently deceased lover John Scott ( Mark Valley ) in her kitchen . He greets her with " Hello , Liv . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Arrival " was written by co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams and executive producer Jeff Pinkner . Paul A. Edwards directed the episode , his second of the season . Early in the series , actress Jasika Nicole feared her character was going to become liked by the audience only to suddenly die . She explained that " When I was reading the script in the episode where Dr. Bishop stabs her in the neck with the sedative … and all [ the script ] says is , ' Dr. Bishop grabs Astrid from behind and jams the needle into her neck . ' Then it fades to black . My mouth hung open for awhile and I was like , ' Oh my God , I only made it through six episodes . " 
 While Michael Cerveris has appeared as the Observer in the three previous episodes — and has appeared in every episode to date — his previous appearances had been brief background cameos . When initially cast for Fringe , Cerveris assumed he was a mere guest star , and that his character was " one of several nuggets dropped in " by J.J. Abrams in a manner similar to his other science fiction series , Lost . Cerveris soon discovered that his character was " this sort of Where 's Waldo thing ( as ) the linchpin in an overarching story of the series " . He continued : 
 I wasn 't told , because I don 't think they knew at the time , whether I was a good guy , a bad guy , human , alien , other @-@ dimensional . I just kind of felt my way through it with the first directors and input , obviously , from the writers in the scripts that we had . Even things like wardrobe , they weren 't given extremely big instructions , so we kind of worked things out together and just found something we all thought was interesting and iconic and went with that . 
 Executive producer Jeff Pinkner commented , " Our goal was to take a character who is by definition unknowable and make him someone you can connect to emotionally . He 's more specifically connected with the overall character mythology of the show than we ever expected . " The decision to remove his eyebrows was made an hour before he first appeared , which caused stress in the make @-@ up department because Cerveris would not shave his eyebrows ; he commented about the affair , " I 've got a little too much else going on , and who knows if they would ever grow back . I have little enough hair as it is . " " The Arrival " was the first episode in which the Observer had dialogue , and the first in which he was treated as a focal character . In addition to Cerveris , actor Michael Kelly made a guest appearance in the episode . 
 In the episode , a character introduced as " the Rogue " has a specialized weapon that fires massive amounts of energy . To simulate the energy gun the Rogue fires at Olivia in the forest , the crew placed pyrotechnic charges near the trees to make it appear large blasts were close to hitting her . In a DVD special feature , one of the crew commented it was " challenging " to choreograph the fight scene between The Observer and Peter , because the former does not fight back as he is only there to observe . 
 The DVD special features include a deleted scene , where Peter emphatically denies the existence of parallel universes after Walter implies their existence in a quote from Shakespeare 's Hamlet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 More than 10 @.@ 04 million viewers watched " The Arrival " as it was broadcast in the United States , for a 4 @.@ 3 / 11 share among viewers 18 – 49 . At the point the episode aired , Fringe was the most watched new show on television in the important 18 @-@ 49 demographic . Several days after its airing , Fox announced on October 1 , 2008 that Fringe had been picked up for a full season order . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode 's reception ranged from positive to mixed . Critic Maureen Ryan was very positive about the episode in her blog at The Chicago Tribune , writing , " I liked this week 's episode , and for once , it wasn 't a case of really wanting to like it and trying to find reasons to see past various flaws . I just enjoyed the hour and felt it had just the right mixture of creepiness and character development ( plus , the Observer was awesome . If only they 'd called him the Watcher , but let 's not quibble ) . " Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger found " The Arrival " a noticeable improvement over previous episodes . " ... After being more than prepared to give " Fringe " That 's It For Me ! status going into the episode , I enjoyed the strangeness of it — The Observer 's hairlessness and diet , Capt. Patterson from " Generation Kill " toting around a futuristic @-@ looking ray gun and a retro @-@ looking mind @-@ reading machine , Walter casually injecting <unk> with a sedative — that I think I 'll be sticking around for a bit ... If I can brace myself for the probability that this will all lead to nonsense , I can groove on all the atmospherics along the way . And , if nothing else , Abrams is great at atmosphere . " 
 Also seeing improvement was Jane Boursaw of AOL 's TV Squad , commenting " Tonight 's episode definitely got me intrigued about fringe science , and this is the first time I can really say I 'm looking forward to the next episode . It 's a combination of things , and of course , Walter 's scattered ramblings about whatever strikes him at any particular moment . " Less impressed was Noel Murray of The Onion 's A. V. Club , who gave the episode a grade of C + . Murray wrote , " ' The Arrival ' was the weirdest episode of Fringe yet – a deep @-@ down sci @-@ fi <unk> that minimized the show 's procedural side and instead raised far more questions than it answered . In fact , I can 't think of any questions that " The Arrival " satisfactorily answered – not even ' What happened in the Fringe episode entitled ' The Arrival ' ? ' ... The shock and awe factor of " The Arrival " was strong , but as a piece of storytelling , the episode felt slight and soggy , and hardly the satisfying standalone experience that the creators promised each Fringe chapter would be . " 
 IGN contributor Travis Fickett rated the episode 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , explaining that he liked the " attention to bits of logic that work as the glue , holding the show together " such as Peter 's security clearance , but was skeptical of the episode 's fringe science . Fickett also noticed many similarities to The X @-@ Files , writing " not enough is being done to move the show into its own direction " ; he concluded " The production values are exceptional , the acting is top notch , and it certainly seems to be going somewhere . Where , is another matter all together , but there does seem to be momentum . " Website blogger io9 highlighted " The Arrival " as one of the " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to understand the show . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " The Arrival " the twelfth best episode of the series , explaining the episode " formally , memorably introduced the Observer known as September ( Michael Cerveris ) , a Tabasco @-@ loving , Fedora @-@ wearing , bald @-@ headed time traveling surveyor from the future . His altercation with Peter in the graveyard — mirroring his movements ; parroting his speech in real time — was one of the show 's earliest water @-@ cooler @-@ weird moments . " 
 = Dejan ( magnate ) = 
 Dejan ( Serbian Cyrillic : Дејан ; fl . 1346 – ca . 1366 ) was a Serbian magnate who served Emperor Stefan Dušan ( r . 1331 – 55 ) as sevastokrator , and Emperor Uroš V ( r . 1355 – 71 ) as despot . He was married to Emperor Dušan 's sister Teodora , and possessed a large province in the Kumanovo region , east of Skopska Crna Gora . It initially included the old župe ( counties ) of Žegligovo and Preševo ( modern Kumanovo region with <unk> , <unk> and the larger part of Pčinja ) . Uroš V later gave Dejan the Upper Struma river with Velbužd ( Kyustendil ) . Dejan built the <unk> Monastery , among others , and reconstructed several church buildings throughout his province . 
 Dejan was one of the prominent figures of Dušan 's reign and during the fall of the Serbian Empire after Dušan 's death . Dejan is the progenitor of the Dejanović noble family , with his two sons , despot Jovan and gospodin Konstantin , also becoming powerful during the fall of the Serbian Empire and the ensuing Ottoman period . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Dejan had married Teodora , the sister of King Stefan Dušan , and received the title of sevastokrator in 1346 , upon Stefan Dušan 's crowning as Emperor . Dejan 's origin is deemed unknown . Earlier scholars believed that Dejan was a relative of Jovan Oliver , another magnate in Macedonia , but this is no longer accepted . K. J. Jireček suggested that he was vojvoda Dejan <unk> ( Дејан <unk> ) , only found mentioned in a 1333 charter , in which Stefan Dušan officially sold Ston and Prevlaka to the Republic of Venice . 
 = = = Stefan Dušan 's reign = = = 
 On Easter , 16 April 1346 , Stefan Dušan convoked a massive assembly at Skopje , attended by the Serbian Archbishop Joanikije II , the Archbishop of Ochrid Nikolaj I , the Bulgarian Patriarch Simeon and various religious leaders of Mount Athos . The autocephalous Serbian Archbishopric was raised to the status of a Patriarchate . The new Patriarch , Joanikije II , now solemnly crowned Dušan as " Emperor and autocrat of Serbs and Romans ( Greeks ) " . Dušan had his son Uroš V crowned King , giving him nominal rule over the Serbian lands , and although Dušan ruled the whole state , he had special responsibility for the " Roman " , i.e. Greek lands , in the south . There was a further increase in the <unk> of the Serbian court , especially in court ceremonies and titles . From his new position , Dušan could grant titles only possible for an emperor to grant , such as despot , sevastokrator , and ćesar . Among the Serbian magnates were : 
 despot Simeon Uroš , Dušan 's half @-@ brother , governor of Epirus and Acarnania 
 despot Jovan Asen , Dušan 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , governor in southern Albania 
 despot Jovan Oliver , Dušan 's close associate , vojvoda and governor in <unk> Pole and left Vardar 
 sevastokrator Dejan , Dušan 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , governor of Pčinja 
 sevastokrator Branko , Dušan 's relative , governor of Ohrid 
 ćesar Preljub , Dušan 's son @-@ in @-@ law , vojvoda and governor of Thessaly 
 ćesar <unk> , Dušan 's relative , vojvoda and governor of Drama 
 ćesar Grgur , Dušan 's relative ( son of Branko ) , vojvoda and governor of Polog 
 The raising of the Serbian Patriarchate resulted in bishops becoming metropolitans . The Serbian ruler had wide autocratic powers , but was surrounded and advised by a permanent council of magnates ( <unk> or <unk> ) and prelates . The court , chancellery and administration were rough copies of those of Constantinople . 
 In 1354 , when Dejan had finished building the Arhiljevica Church of the Holy Mother of God , his endowment , he asked that some of the villages under his administration be granted to the church ( as <unk> ) . According to Stefan Dušan 's charter to Arhiljevica dated 10 August 1354 , sevastokrator Dejan , whom he called his brother ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Дејан " ) , possessed a large province east of Skopska Crna Gora . It included the old župe ( counties ) of Žegligovo and Preševo ( modern Kumanovo region with <unk> , <unk> and the larger part of Pčinja ) . The granted villages included : village <unk> with hamlets , village Arhiljevica at the church with hamlets , village Izvor , village <unk> ( <unk> ) , selište ( arable land ) Mokra Poljana ( <unk> Polje ) , village <unk> , selište <unk> <unk> , selište <unk> ( <unk> ) , selište <unk> , selište <unk> , selište <unk> ( <unk> ) , selište Vrače ( <unk> ) , selište <unk> , selište <unk> and village <unk> ( <unk> ) . A total of 9 villages , 9 selište and a few hamlets . Based on the charter , Arhiljevica was situated where the granted villages of <unk> , Izvor and <unk> lay , on the slopes of <unk> ( <unk> Crna Gora ) . The fact that Dejan built Arhiljevica rather than renovated it is evidence of his economic strength . Apart from Dejan 's granted villages , Dušan also granted , on his behalf as a gift , the church and village of <unk> Polje ( lost ) , village <unk> <unk> ( <unk> and Dolna <unk> ) and village <unk> ( lost ) , situated in the Velbužd region . 
 Dejan was one of the prominent figures of Dušan 's reign and during the subsequent fall of the Serbian Empire , after Dušan 's death . Under Emperor Dušan , despot Jovan Oliver , with his brother Bogdan and sevastokrator Dejan , ruled over all of eastern Macedonia . Dejan is not mentioned much in Dušan 's military endeavors , although his reputation and that of his successors suggest that he was involved in most of Dušan 's successes . His prominence beyond Serbia is also evident from the fact that Pope Innocent VI addressed Dejan in 1355 , asking him to support the creation of the union between the Catholic Church and the Serbian Orthodox Church ( such letters were sent to the highest nobility and the church ) . 
 = = = Uroš V 's reign = = = 
 Dejan received the title of despot sometime after August 1355 , either from Emperor Dušan , who died on 20 December 1355 , or from his heir Uroš V , most likely the latter . During the rule of Uroš V , Dejan was entrusted with the administration of the territory between South Morava , Pčinja , Skopska Crna Gora ( his hereditary lands ) and in the east , Upper Struma river with Velbužd ( Kyustendil ) , a province notably larger than he had possessed during Dušan 's life . This province was located in the very heart of the Balkans , and the important Via de Zenta , a trade route connecting the Adriatic with the interior of the Balkans , crossed it . As the only despot , Dejan held the highest title in the Empire ( this had earlier been the veliki vojvoda , Jovan Oliver ) . Dejan 's daughter Teodora married Žarko , the lord of Lower Zeta , in 1356 . 
 Serbian historian M. Blagojević supported the view in historiography that Dejan also served as <unk> ( fl . 1362 – 1365 ) , mentioned as the envoy of Emperor Uroš alongside ćesar Grgur in the peace talks with the Republic of Ragusa , which had been at war with Vojislav Vojinović in southern Dalmatia . The peace was concluded on 22 August 1362 , in Onogošt ( Nikšić ) , and the Emperor 's charter confirmed the " old laws " and other laws regarding the Ragusans . Dejan and Grgur each received 100 ducats . 
 Until Vojislav 's death in December 1363 , the Serbian nobles in the Greek lands showed themselves more ambitious , as they held more titles and greater independence ( deriving from their more extensive possessions , and therefore , wealth ) in relation to the nobility of the old Serbian lands . While Vojislav lived , his influence secured the preeminence of the old Serbian nobility . After Vojislav 's death , Vukašin Mrnjavčević , who had previously served Emperor Dušan as a župan ( count , holder of a <unk> , a " county " or " district " ) of Prilep , quickly gained a decisive influence on Emperor Uroš V. The nobility in the old Serbian lands was not at first alarmed at this , but Vukašin 's ambition and his subsequent power moves woke up the simmering antagonism between the two groups . It was not only Vukašin 's endless ambition that led to his success , as he had plenty of support from other nobles who benefited from him . 
 It is not known for certain when Dejan died , as no Serbian or foreign sources have been found with information that could give historians clues to which year he died . S. Mandić said it may have been as early as 1358 , and that Vukašin , who until then was veliki vojvoda , took Dejan 's place as despot , and in turn Jovan Uglješa became veliki vojvoda . V. Ćorović believed it to have been sometime after the death of Vojislav ( 1363 ) . M. <unk> concluded that it was between 1366 and 1371 , as he believed Jovan Oliver to have held his lands at least to 1366 , and based on that the Pčinja <unk> ( memorial book ) said that Dejan had died after Jovan Oliver ( this is refuted by S. Mandić ) . S. Mandić also believed that it was unlikely that Dejan took monastic vows before his death , as his children were still young . His wife Teodora took monastic vows as <unk> and lived in Strumica and Velbužd , and she would until her death sign as <unk> ( Empress ) , as did : Ana @-@ Marija , the wife of Jovan Oliver ; Marija , wife of despot Toma <unk> ; and <unk> , the wife of Uglješa . 
 Dejan built and reconstructed several churches and monasteries throughout his province , including the <unk> Monastery and the lost Arhiljevica Church . His two sons Jovan and Konstantin later became rulers of his domain . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the death of Dejan , his province , except for the župe of Žegligovo and Upper Struma , was appropriated to nobleman Vlatko <unk> , whose hereditary land was <unk> directly to the south . Vukašin Mrnjavčević , of whom there are no notable mentions until 1365 , became more powerful ( ultimately the most powerful nobleman in Macedonia ) after the deaths of Vojislav Vojinović , Dejan and despot Jovan Oliver ( whose status in Macedonia was very high ) , as Vukašin 's rise would have been unlikely during the lifetime of these men . Vukašin 's younger brother Jovan Uglješa is also thought to have participated in the dismemberment of Dejan 's province , as he used this chance to take the provinces which bordered on the oblast ( province ) of Ser ( Serres ) . No one looked to the young sons of Dejan who would later become very important . Dejan 's death benefited Vukašin and Jovan Uglješa , not so much in territorial expansion ( which is not so sure ) , but because Dejan 's disappearance ended any stronger candidate to counter the Mrnjavčević family . 
 Like his father before , Dejan 's eldest son Jovan received the title of despot from Emperor Uroš . He and his brother later received most of Jovan Oliver 's lands . It is not known why Jovan Oliver 's sons did not inherit his lands . Serbian historian V. Ćorović attributed this to turmoil and disorder , though it is not known what extent it developed to and what the consequences were . Earlier scholars believed that the Dejanović were relatives of Jovan Oliver , although this is no longer accepted . The Dejanović brothers ruled a spacious province in eastern Macedonia , in the southern lands of the Empire , and remained loyal to Uroš V until his death . Emperor Uroš V died childless on December 2 / 4 , 1371 , after many of the Serbian nobility had been killed in the Battle of Maritsa against the Ottomans earlier that year . This marked an end to the once powerful Serbian Empire . Vukašin 's son Marko , who had earlier been crowned Young King , was to inherit his father 's royal title , and thus became one in the line of successors to the Serbian throne . Meanwhile , the nobles pursued their own interests , sometimes quarreling with each other . Serbia , without an Emperor , became " a conglomerate of aristocratic territories " , and the Empire was thus divided between the provincial lords : Marko Mrnjavčević , the Dejanović brothers , Đurađ I Balšić , Vuk Branković , Nikola Altomanović , and Lazar Hrebeljanović . In the new redistribution of feudal power , after 1371 , the brothers despot Jovan and gospodin ( lord ) Konstantin greatly expanded their province , not only recreating their father 's province , but also at least doubling the territory , on all sides , but chiefly to the south . The brothers ruled on the left riverside of the Vardar , from Kumanovo to Strumica . In 1373 , two years after Maritsa , the first mentions are made on the events in the province of the Dejanović brothers , as well as their mutual relation . As Marko had done , also the Dejanović brothers recognized Ottoman sovereignty . Although vassals , they had their own government . Their state symbol was the white double @-@ headed eagle and they minted coins according to the Nemanjić style . 
 = = Family = = 
 Dejan and Teodora had three children : 
 Jovan ( ca . 1343 – ca . 1378 ) , despot under Emperor Uroš ; vassal of the Ottoman Empire since 1373 until his death in 1378 . 
 Konstantin ( fl . 1365 – 95 ) , gospodin under Emperor Uroš ; succeeded his brother as vassal of the Ottoman Empire from 1378 until his death in 1395 . 
 Teodora ( fl . 1356 – 71 ) , married firstly gospodin Žarko ( in 1356 ) , then Đurađ I Balšić ( after 1371 ) . She had a son with Žarko , <unk> ( born 1363 ) . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Seax of Beagnoth = 
 The Seax of Beagnoth ( also known as the Thames scramasax ) is a 10th @-@ century Anglo @-@ Saxon seax ( single @-@ edged knife ) . It was found in the River Thames in 1857 , and is now at the British Museum in London . It is a prestige weapon , decorated with elaborate patterns of inlaid copper , bronze and silver wire . On one side of the blade is the only known complete inscription of the twenty @-@ eight letter Anglo @-@ Saxon runic alphabet , as well as the name " Beagnoth " in runic letters . It is thought that the runic alphabet had a magical function , and that the name Beagnoth is that of either the owner of the weapon or the smith who forged it . Although many Anglo @-@ Saxon and Viking swords and knives have inscriptions in the Latin alphabet on their blades , or have runic inscriptions on the hilt or scabbard , the Seax of Beagnoth is one of only a handful of finds with a runic inscription on its blade . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Henry J. Briggs , a labourer , found the seax in the River Thames near Battersea in early 1857 . Briggs sold it to the British Museum , and on 21 May 1857 it was exhibited at the Society of Antiquaries of London by Augustus Wollaston Franks ( an antiquary who worked at the Antiquities Department of the British Museum ) , when it was described as " resembling the <unk> of the Franks , of which examples are very rare in England ; and bears a row of runic characters inlaid in gold " . Since then the weapon has usually been called the Thames scramasax ; but the term scramasax ( from Old Frankish * <unk> ) is only attested once , in the History of the Franks by Gregory of Tours , and the meaning of the <unk> element is uncertain , so recent scholarship prefers the term long seax or long sax for this type of weapon . 
 = = Description = = 
 The seax is an iron knife with a single cutting edge and a long tapering point . It is 72 @.@ 1 cm in length , of which the tang is 17 @.@ 0 cm and the blade is 55 @.@ 1 cm . The tang would have been attached to a handle , which has not survived . 
 The blade is a prestige weapon , decorated on both faces with geometric patterns created by hammering strips of twisted copper , brass and silver wire into grooves cut into the blade , as well as with inlaid triangles and lozenges of copper , brass and silver . The technique of inlaying wire to create decorative patterns and inscriptions was widely used on Germanic and Anglo @-@ Saxon seaxes and spear heads from the 9th and 10th centuries , and is also found on Viking swords from about the same period . 
 On both sides of the seax is a deep median groove running the length of the blade , above which is a long rectangular panel bordered at the top and bottom with inlaid copper strips . The panel on one side of the seax is filled with a lozenge pattern in silver and copper , which may have been meant to simulate pattern welding . The panel on the other side bears two runic inscriptions inlaid with brass and silver wire . The inscription on the left comprises the twenty @-@ eight letters of the Anglo @-@ Saxon runic alphabet or futhorc . The inscription on the right , separated from the other by a herringbone design in silver and brass , is the male personal name <unk> or Beagnoth <unk> , which is assumed to be that of the maker or original owner of the blade . 
 = = Epigraphy = = 
 The inscription of the futhorc is as follows : 
 There are a number of interesting features about this inscription . Firstly , the order of the runes does not exactly match the traditional sequence of the earlier twenty @-@ four letter runic alphabet or that of the twenty @-@ eight letter Anglo @-@ Saxon futhorc preserved in the Vienna Codex . The first nineteen runes are in the correct order , but the next four ( 20 – 23 : <unk> ) are in a confused sequence which does not match that found in any other source . The last two runes ( 27 – 28 : <unk> ) are swapped with regard to their order in the Vienna Codex , but as these are later additions to the original twenty @-@ four letter runic alphabet their order may have been less stable , especially as the last letter <unk> is very rare in Anglo @-@ Saxon inscriptions ( elsewhere it occurs in the name <unk> <unk> on a stone found in Dover ) . 
 Secondly , the 16th rune ( ᛋ ) is very small , and appears to have been squeezed in as an afterthought . 
 Thirdly , the letterforms of a number of the runes are unusual : 
 No.12 <unk> ger is written in an unusual form , with a single horizontal bar instead of the circle , lozenge or cross most commonly found in other epigraphic and manuscript examples . 
 No.16 ᛋ is written in an unusual form , but one that is attested in a few other inscriptions ( for example on the shrine of Saint Cuthbert ) . Some scholars believe this runic <unk> is borrowed from the insular letter s <unk> used in Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> as it has a very similar shape ( both have a vertical stem with a horizontal or diagonal branch to the right ) . On the other hand , Elliot sees it as an evolution of the normal runic letter by straightening the left branching stroke and mirroring the letter . 
 No.21 <unk> is written in a unique form with the two diagonal crossbars forming a triangle rather than crossing in the middle . This is probably an aberrant form . 
 <unk> ᛟ is written in an unusual form with a single vertical stem instead of two diagonal legs as is normally the case . This form occurs occasionally in runic inscriptions , and more often in manuscript texts . Ralph Elliott , former professor of English at the University of Adelaide , suggests that it represents a simplified form of the standard rune . 
 No.27 <unk> is written in an unusual form with a cross in the centre rather than a vertical stroke . 
 These peculiarities may indicate that the artisan who designed the inscription was unfamiliar with runic writing , although perhaps some of the unusual letterforms may have been errors occasioned by the difficulty of inlaying wire to form runes . 
 The inscription of the name Beagnoth is as follows : 
 There are no unusual features in the inscription of the name , but at the top right of the name are two strange designs that almost look like letters , which no @-@ one has been able to explain . 
 = = Date and provenance = = 
 Finds of seaxes in Europe range from the 7th to the 11th century , and the earliest examples in England are from 7th @-@ century graves . Isolated finds of seaxes in England are believed to date from the 9th and 10th centuries . The Seax of Beagnoth has been dated to the 10th century . 
 Several seaxes of a similar kind are known from southern England ( three from London , one from Suffolk , one from the River Thames at Keen Edge Ferry in Berkshire ) , and one from <unk> in County Durham in the north of England . The Berkshire seax is so similar in construction and design to the Seax of Beagnoth that both may have come from the same workshop . 
 Elliott suggests a southern , presumably Kentish , origin for the seax because its inscription only comprises the original twenty @-@ eight letters of the Anglo @-@ Saxon futhorc , and does not include any of the additional letters in use in Northumbrian runic inscriptions at that time . 
 The name Beagnoth inscribed on the seax also supports a Kentish provenance , as the only two examples of this name in manuscript sources are Kentish . One Beagnoth was a witness to a charter ( <unk> ) by King Eardwulf of Kent , granting pasture rights to the church of St Andrew at Rochester , Kent , which is dated to 748 – 760 , and another Beagnoth ( also spelled <unk> ) was a monk from Kent who was present at the Synod of Clovesho in 803 and witnessed a charter by King Æthelwulf of Wessex dated to 844 . The name " Beagnoth " derives from the Old English words <unk> or <unk> meaning " ring , bracelet , torque or crown " and <unk> meaning " boldness " , and can be translated as " <unk> " . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Seax of Beagnoth is significant both as a rare example of a runic @-@ inscribed Anglo @-@ Saxon weapon , and specifically for its runic inscription , which is a unique epigraphical example of the complete twenty @-@ eight letter Anglo @-@ Saxon futhorc . 
 = = = Runic inscribed blades = = = 
 There was a widespread tradition throughout Northern Europe of inscribing runes on weapons , particularly swords . Thus , in Stanza 6 of the <unk> poem Sigrdrífumál the valkyrie Sigrdrífa teaches the hero Sigurd how to engrave runes on his sword to provide magical protection : 
 This poem was not committed to writing until the late 13th century ( in the Codex Regius ) , although it may preserve elements from a much earlier date . However , a similar admonishment to carve runes on swords is found in lines 1694 – 1698 of the Old English poem Beowulf , which is roughly contemporary with the Seax of Beagnoth : 
 This poem mentions the practice of carving the sword @-@ owner 's name in runes on the hilt . This practice is confirmed by a 6th @-@ century sword pommel from Kent , as well as a 6th @-@ century silver scabbard mouth @-@ piece from Chessell Down , Isle of Wight , which both preserve fragmentary runic inscriptions . The latter is the only known example of an Anglo @-@ Saxon runic inscription on a weapon from outside Kent . Several other Anglo @-@ Saxon weapons have isolated runic letters on them . For example , a <unk> rune <unk> , symbolizing the Anglo @-@ Saxon war god Tiw ( Tyr in the earlier quotation from the Sigrdrífumál ) , is found on two sword @-@ <unk> and a spear blade , all from Kent . Thus , although some Anglo @-@ Saxon runic inscriptions on weapons are known , none are as extensive or as prominent as the runic inscription on the Seax of Beagnoth . Furthermore , the Seax of Beagnoth is the only known Anglo @-@ Saxon weapon with a runic inscription on its blade , and indeed , other than the <unk> sword , which has a cryptic runic inscription on its blade comprising four runes in a cross formation , there are no other certain examples from anywhere in Europe of a sword or knife blade with a runic inscription . In contrast , inscriptions in the Latin alphabet occur frequently on Viking swords . For example , some one hundred swords with the maker 's name " <unk> " inlaid into the blade are known from a period of about 300 years . 
 On the basis of the Beowulf quotation it may be that " Beagnoth " was the Seax 's original owner 's name . However , that is not certain , as Viking and Anglo @-@ Saxon weapons often have the name of the weapon 's maker engraved on them instead of , or as well as , the owner 's ( as on the Sittingbourne seax shown below ) . Raymond Page , former <unk> and Bosworth Professor of Anglo @-@ Saxon at the University of Cambridge , considers four possibilities : 
 1 . That the name is that of the smith who forged the seax , as swords from the Dark Ages often had their maker 's name engraved on them . 
 2 . That the name is that of the rune @-@ master who wrote the futhorc . Page supposes that adding the rune @-@ master 's name would have added extra magical power to the weapon . 
 3 . That the name is that of the original owner of the seax , for as he notes , " [ t ] he scramasax is an impressive piece of equipment , one that an owner would be proud to see his name on " . 
 4 . That the name is that of someone who gave the seax as a present to someone else , for it is " distinguished enough to make a fine gift bearing the giver 's name " . 
 Page concludes that we cannot know which possibility is correct . 
 = = = The inscribed futhorc = = = 
 The runic inscription on the seax not only identifies the maker or owner of the seax , but also provides a rare example of the twenty @-@ eight letter Anglo @-@ Saxon runic alphabet . Examples of the earlier , twenty @-@ four letter Elder Futhark and sixteen letter Younger Futhark alphabets are relatively common in continental and Scandinavian runic inscriptions , but inscriptions of the historically later Anglo @-@ Saxon futhorc are rare in England , with most examples of the Anglo @-@ Saxon futhorc being known from manuscript sources . This seax represents the only surviving epigraphic inscription of the basic twenty @-@ eight letter Anglo @-@ Saxon runic alphabet , although an incomplete inscription of the first sixteen letters of the futhorc occurs on the disc @-@ shaped head of a Middle Saxon pin from Brandon , Suffolk , and the first seven or eight letters of the futhorc are inscribed on the head of a pin from Malton , North Yorkshire . 
 It is unclear what purpose the inscription of the futhorc served , but Page suggests it cannot be simply decorative , but must have had a magical significance . He notes that the carving of runic letters on swords as a form of magical protection was an ancient practice , but by the 9th century rune lore was probably on the decline in the Kingdom of Kent , and the owner of the seax may have commissioned an archaic runic inscription for prestige purposes . The fact that there are errors in the order and design of the runic letters suggests that the smith who made the seax was not used to adding such runic inscriptions to the weapons he made , and they may have been copied inaccurately from a manuscript text . 
 = 1990 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1990 Atlantic hurricane season was the most active Atlantic hurricane season since 1969 . It officially began on June 1 , 1990 , and lasted until November 30 , 1990 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . One tropical depression did form before the season officially started , however . 
 Though very active , the season featured relatively weak systems , most of which stayed at sea . The 1990 season was unusual in that no tropical cyclone of at least tropical storm strength made landfall in the United States , although Tropical Storm Marco weakened to a depression just before landfall . 1962 was the last season prior to this one when no storm of at least tropical storm strength made landfall in the US . There have been a total of 6 such seasons in which no storms have made landfall in the United States at at least tropical storm strength ; these were the 1853 , 1862 , 1864 , 1922 , 1962 , and 1990 seasons . 
 Two of the season 's hurricanes were notable . Hurricane Diana killed an estimated 139 in the Mexican states of Veracruz and Hidalgo ; property damage estimates are unavailable , but damage was widespread . Hurricane Klaus brought flooding to Martinique , and caused torrential rainfall across the southeastern United States after combining with Tropical Storm Marco and a frontal boundary . As a result of effects from Diana and Klaus , both names were retired following the season . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts such as Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) . A normal season as defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) , has eleven named storms , of which six reach hurricane strength , and two major hurricanes . In April 1990 , it was forecast that six storms would reach hurricane status , and there would be " three additional storms " from the previous year , which would indicate 14 named storms . The forecast did not specify how many hurricanes would reach major hurricane status . In early June 1990 , CSU released their predictions of tropical cyclonic activity within the Atlantic basin during the 1990 season . The forecast from CSU called for 11 named storms , seven of which to intensify into a hurricane , and three would strengthen further into a major hurricane . 
 = = = Season activity = = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , but activity in 1990 began five days earlier with the formation of Tropical Depression One on May 25 . It was an above average season in which 16 tropical depressions formed . Fourteen depressions attained tropical storm status , and eight of these attained hurricane status . There was only one tropical cyclone to reach major hurricane status ( Category 3 + on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ) , which was slightly below the 1950 – 2005 average of two per season . One hurricane and five tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 168 deaths and $ 152 million ( 1990 US $ ; $ 275 million 2016 USD ) in damage . The last storm of the season , Hurricane Nana , dissipated on October 21 , over a month before the official end of the season on November 30 . 
 The activity in the first two months of the season were limited in tropical cyclogenesis , with the second tropical depression of the season not developing until July 22 . Following that , the season was very active , and there was a quick succession of tropical cyclone development from late @-@ July to mid @-@ August . The Atlantic briefly remained dormant , and activity resumed on August 24 with the development of Tropical Depression Eight ( Hurricane Gustav ) . Although August was a very active month , there were only two named storms in September , both of which became hurricanes . Activity in October was high then average , with five tropical cyclones to either form or exist in the month . Following an active October , no tropical cyclogenesis occurred in the final month of the season , which is November . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 97 , which is categorized as being " near normal " since it is slightly below the mean value of 103 x <unk> . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = Storms = = 
 Timeline of tropical activity in the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 Tropical Depression One formed on May 25 from a weak low pressure area to the west of Jamaica , which had been producing scattered showers over the island during the preceding days . The depression moved across Cuba shortly after forming , although the convection was located to the east of its poorly defined center . As it headed toward Florida , it was absorbed by an approaching cold front . 
 The depression did not cause significant damage . In Florida , the depression was forecast to ease drought conditions that persisted for about two years . While crossing Cuba , the depression dropped heavy rainfall , and predictions stated that precipitation amounts could reach as high as 10 in ( 254 mm ) , but the greatest amount measured was at 6 in ( 152 @.@ 4 mm ) east of Havana . Heavy rainfall also occurred across much of south Florida , peaking at 6 @.@ 20 in ( 157 @.@ 5 mm ) at the Royal Palm Ranger Station in Everglades National Park . While the depression was affecting south Florida , the National Weather Service issued " urban flood statements " warning of flooded streets in mainly low @-@ lying areas , especially in Dade and Broward counties . Standing water on many Florida expressways caused automobile accidents , especially in Dade County , where 28 accidents were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Arthur = = = 
 The second tropical depression of the season developed on July 22 from a tropical wave nearly midway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . The depression slowly intensified , and was eventually upgraded to Tropical Storm Arthur , two days later . On July 25 , Tropical Storm Arthur crossed the Windward Islands chain , and it was noted that the storm made landfall on Tobago . Emerging into the Caribbean Sea , Arthur reached nearly attained hurricane status on July 25 . Thereafter , wind shear began increasing over Arthur , and a weakening trend began after peak intensity . As Arthur headed further into the Caribbean Sea , it significantly weakened and was downgraded to a tropical depression on July 27 . Later that day , Air Force reconnaissance and satellite imagery did not show a low @-@ level circulation , indicating that Arthur had degenerated into open tropical wave 130 mi ( 209 @.@ 2 km ) southeast of Kingston , Jamaica . 
 Shortly after Arthur became a tropical storm on July 24 , a tropical storm warning was issued for Trinidad , Tobago , and Grenada ; six hours later , it was extended to the Grenadines . About 24 hours later , all of the tropical storm warnings were discontinued . As Arthur headed further into the Caribbean Sea , a tropical storm watches and warnings were issued for Hispaniola and Puerto Rico on July 26 . All of the tropical storm watches and warnings were discontinued after Arthur weakened to a tropical depression . After Arthur made landfall on Tobago , several landslides occurred , and a major bridge had collapsed ; electrical and water services were significantly disrupted . Damage was also reported on Grenada , where two bridges were damaged , electricity and telephone service was disrupted , and crops were affected as well . In addition , Arthur caused damage to four hotels and hundreds of houses . Wind gusts on the island of Grenada reportedly reached 55 mph ( 85 km / h ) . As Arthur passed south of Puerto Rico , there were reports of strong winds and heavy rainfall . Heavy rainfall was also reported on the south coast of Haiti as Arthur approached the country . 
 = = = Hurricane Bertha = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the coast of Africa , and after interacting with a cold front and an area of low pressure , developed into a subtropical depression on July 24 , offshore of North Carolina near Cape Hatteras . The subtropical depression slowly acquired tropical characteristics , and was reclassified as Tropical Depression Three on July 27 . On the following day , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Bertha . It drifted northeast and became a hurricane 500 mi ( 804 @.@ 7 km ) west @-@ southwest of Bermuda on July 29 . As Bertha continued parallel to the East Coast of the United States , it had experienced strong wind shear and was downgraded back to a tropical storm later on July 29 . However , by July 30 , Air Force reconnaissance flights reported at hurricane @-@ force winds , and Bertha had re @-@ intensified into a hurricane at that time . After becoming a hurricane again , Bertha continued northeastward , but transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over Nova Scotia on August 2 . 
 Nine deaths were attributed to Bertha , including six crew members of the Greek freighter Corazon who perished off the Canadian coast after their ship broke up . Another fatality was caused when one person fell off the ship Patricia Star and into the Atlantic ; the other two deaths were from two people drowning in north Florida . Damage to crops and a suspension bridge were reported from Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island ; this damage totaled to $ 4 @.@ 427 million ( 1990 CAD ; $ 3 @.@ 912 million 1990 USD , $ 7 @.@ 09 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cesar = = = 
 While Bertha was approaching Atlantic Canada , a tropical wave emerged into an Atlantic from the west coast of Africa , and quickly developed into Tropical Depression Four 336 mi ( 540 @.@ 7 km ) south of Cape Verde . The depression headed northwestward due to the weakness of a subtropical ridge and slowly intensified . While the depression was well west of Cape Verde , it intensified into Tropical Storm Cesar on August 2 . Cesar continued on the generally northwestward path and no significant change in intensity occurred , as it peaked at 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) shortly after becoming a tropical storm . Later in its duration , wind shear significantly increased , causing the low @-@ level circulation to be removed from the deep convection on August 6 , and Cesar weakened back to a tropical depression as a result . As it was weakening to a tropical depression , Cesar became nearly stationary , and turned abruptly eastward . On the following day , Cesar dissipated almost 1 @,@ 151 mi ( 1 @,@ 852 @.@ 3 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Diana = = = 
 A tropical wave uneventfully crossed the Atlantic Ocean and entered the Caribbean Sea either late July or early August 1990 . As the system entered the southwest Caribbean , it began to further develop , and became Tropical Depression Five on August 4 . The depression headed northwestward , and intensified enough to be upgraded to Tropical Storm Diana on August 5 . After becoming a tropical storm , Diana continued to quickly intensify , and maximum sustained winds were 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) before landfall occurred in Felipe Carrillo Puerto , Quintana Roo , on the Yucatán Peninsula . Diana weakened somewhat over the Yucatán Peninsula , but was still a tropical storm when it entered the Gulf of Mexico . While over the Gulf of Mexico , Diana again rapidly intensified , and became a hurricane on August 7 . Later that day , Diana further strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane , and peaked with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Only two hours , Diana made landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , Mexico at the same intensity . After moving ashore , Diana rapidly weakened , and had deteriorated to a tropical storm only four hours after landfall . By August 8 , Diana weakened back to a tropical depression near Mexico City . Diana briefly entered the Eastern Pacific Basin on August , but was not re @-@ classified , and it rapidly dissipated at the south end of the Gulf of California . 
 In preparations for Diana , there were several tropical storm watches and warning issued along the Yucatán Peninsula and several areas along the Gulf Coast of Mexico ; hurricane watches and warnings were also put into effect . While crossing the Yucatán Peninsula , Diana produced near @-@ tropical storm force winds , and heavy rainfall , but not damage or fatalities . However , the mainland of Mexico fared much worse , where torrential rainfall caused mudslides in the states of Hidalgo and Veracruz . As a result of heavy rainfall , many houses were destroyed , and approximately 3 @,@ 500 became homeless . Diana also produced high winds across Mexico , which toppled tree and fell electricity poles , leaving many without telephone service and block several roads . In addition , the remnants of Diana brought rainfall to the southwestern United States . Contemporary reports indicated that 139 people had been killed , with an additional 25 @,@ 000 people being injured . Damage as a result of Diana was estimated at $ 90 @.@ 7 million ( 1990 USD , $ 164 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Edouard = = = 
 A frontal wave formed near the Azores in early August . When thunderstorm activity grew near its center , it was deemed a subtropical depression on August 2 just east of the Azores . Associated with an upper @-@ level cold low , it intensified into a subtropical storm on August 3 , although water temperatures were cooler than what is usually required for tropical cyclogenesis . It tracking westward and passed near Graciosa before weakening back to a depression on August 4 . The depression executed a small cyclonic loop , developing deep and organized convection near the circulation . Late on August 6 , it transitioned into Tropical Depression Six . The depression moved northeastward toward the Azores , intensifying into Tropical Storm Edouard on August 8 . Shortly thereafter it reached peak winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , and subsequently it moved past the northern Azores . On August 10 , Edouard weakened again to depression status , and became extratropical on the following day . The remnants of Edouard dissipated on August 13 , a few hundred miles west of Portugal . 
 Much of the western Azores reported winds of at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The island of Horta reported winds gusts from 35 to 65 mph ( 55 to 100 km / h ) . Lajes Air Force Base on Terceira Island reported a maximum wind gust of 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) . Also a tower on the island of Terceira reported sustained winds at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , while a gusts as high as 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) were recorded . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fran = = = 
 On August 11 , a tropical wave developed into the seventh tropical depression of the season , while situated several hundred miles southwest of Cape Verde . The depression moved rapidly westwards , and intensified to just under tropical storm status on August 12 . However , later that day , the depression began to lose its low @-@ level circulation , while deep convection was diminishing . As a result , the depression became " too weak to classify " for Dvorak technique , and the system had degenerated back into a tropical wave early on August 13 . After weakening back to a tropical wave , the system quickly re @-@ organized , and re @-@ developed into a tropical depression twelve hours later . Later that day , the depression further intensified , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fran . No significant change in intensity occurred after Fran became a tropical storm and maximum sustained winds never exceeded 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . By the next day , Fran made landfall on Trinidad at the same intensity . While on Trinidad , Fran significantly interacted with the South American mainland , and quickly dissipated on August 15 . 
 After Fran became a tropical storm on August 13 , a tropical storm warning was issued for Trinidad , Tobago , and Grenada . Simultaneously , a tropical storm watch came into effect for Barbados and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . As Fran was passing through the Windward Islands , the tropical storm watch was discontinued . Only two hours before Fran dissipated , the tropical storm warning was discontinued for Trinidad , Tobago , and Grenada . As a result of Fran , only heavy rains were reported on the Windward Islands . Light rainfall was reported on Trinidad , peaking at 2 @.@ 6 in ( 66 mm ) . In addition , wind gusts were reported up to 29 mph ( 46 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Gustav = = = 
 A tropical depression developed from a tropical wave approximately 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 609 @.@ 3 km ) east of Barbados on August 24 . After forming , the depression moved westward and on the next day intensified into a tropical storm on the following day . After becoming a tropical storm , Gustav continued to intensify as it headed west @-@ northwestward . Intensification into a hurricane occurred on August 26 , as the storm began slowly curving northward under the influence of a trough . After reaching Category 2 intensity , Gustav was affected by wind shear , and weakened , but eventually re @-@ intensified . The hurricane ultimately peaked as a Category 3 hurricane on August 31 , and was also the most intense tropical cyclone of the season , in addition to being the only major hurricane in the Atlantic that year . Around the time of attaining peak intensity , Gustav began a <unk> interaction with nearby Tropical Storm Hortense . After attaining peak intensity on August 31 , Gustav weakened back , at nearly the same rate as it had intensified , and deteriorated to a tropical storm on September 2 . By September 3 , Gustav transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , 230 mi ( 370 km ) south of Iceland . 
 Gustav initially appeared as a significant threat to the Lesser Antilles , which was devastated by Hurricane Hugo about a year prior . As a result , several hurricane watches and warnings were issued on August 27 , but all were discontinued later that day as Gustav turned northward . The only effects reported on the Lesser Antilles were large swells , light winds , and light rains . Following the passage of Gustav , no damage or fatalities were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Hortense = = = 
 The ninth tropical depression of the season developed from a tropical wave 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 126 @.@ 5 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cape Verde on August 25 . The depression headed west @-@ northwestward , while slowly intensifying and establishing better @-@ defined upper @-@ level outflow . By August 26 , the depression intensified enough to be upgraded to Tropical Storm Hortense . After becoming a tropical storm , Hortense was steered nearly due north , under the influence on an upper @-@ level low . Hortense later headed generally northwestward , after the upper @-@ level low degenerated into a trough and moved eastward . Although intensification was somewhat slow , Hortense managed to peak as a 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) tropical storm on August 28 . On August 29 , nearby Hurricane Gustav was rapidly intensifying , and began to significantly affect Hortense with increasing vertical wind shear . Hortense weakened , with the storm degenerating into a tropical depression on August 30 . Further weakening occurred , and Hortense dissipated on August 31 circa 805 mi ( 1 @,@ 296 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Isidore = = = 
 A vigorous tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 3 . It quickly developed an area of deep convection with a well @-@ defined circulation , which prompted it being classified a tropical depression on September 4 . At the time it was situated hundreds of miles south of Cape Verde at a very low latitude of 7 @.@ 2 ° N. Initial intensification was slow as the system moved northwestward , a movement caused by a large mid @-@ level trough over the central Atlantic . On September 5 the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Isidore . Subsequently it intensified at a faster rate , becoming a hurricane on September 6 . The following day , satellite estimates from the Dvorak technique suggested a peak intensity of 100 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 978 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 88 inHg ) . 
 After peaking , Isidore entered a region of stronger upper @-@ level winds and quickly weakened . By September 8 it had deteriorated into a tropical storm , although re @-@ intensification occurred after the shear decreased . An eye feature redeveloped in the center of the convection , and Isidore re @-@ intensified into a hurricane on September 9 . It ultimately reached a secondary peak intensity of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Isidore 's motion slowed , briefly becoming stationary , although it remained a hurricane for several days . Cooler waters imparted weakening to a tropical storm on September 16 , and the next day it became extratropical to the east of Newfoundland . There were a few ships that came in contact with Hurricane Isidore , one of which reported hurricane @-@ force wind gusts . The storm never approached land during its duration , and no damage or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eleven = = = 
 On September 18 , Tropical Depression Eleven formed midway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles from a tropical wave . Ship and reconnaissance aircraft observations reported that the depression almost reached tropical storm strength . It was sheared by strong upper @-@ level winds until it dissipated on September 27 . The system never affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Josephine = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on September 16 with copious convection . It tracked westward , developing into Tropical Depression Twelve on September 21 while located a few hundred miles west of Cape Verde . Without intensifying further , the depression turned northward , due to a weakness caused by the deepening of a 200 mbar cut @-@ off low near the Iberian Peninsula . Under the influence of a building high pressure area , the depression turned to a northwest and later westward drift . It into Tropical Storm Josephine on September 24 , although increased wind shear from a trough weakened the storm back to a tropical depression on September 26 . It remained weak for several days , gradually turning to the north due to a weak trough over the northwestern Atlantic . On October 1 , another high pressure area halted its northward movement , causing Josephine to turn to the east . That day , it re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm as it began to execute a small cyclonic loop . An approaching trough caused Josephine to accelerate north @-@ northeastward , and with favorable conditions it intensified into a hurricane on October 5 , after existing nearly two weeks . 
 Hurricane Josephine intensified slightly more on October 5 , attained its peak intensity later that day , with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) . A large mid @-@ latitude storm began developing on October 5 , and Hurricane Josephine accelerated around the east periphery on the system . Josephine weakened back to a tropical storm early on October 6 , while moving to the north of the mid @-@ latitude system . After tracking near the mid @-@ latitude cyclone , Tropical Storm Josephine transitioned into an extratropical storm on October 6 before being absorbed by it . The mid @-@ latitude cyclone later developed into Hurricane Lili . 
 = = = Hurricane Klaus = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Thirteen on October 3 , 115 mi ( 185 km / h ) east of Dominica . The depression rapidly intensified into a tropical storm , and was classified as Tropical Storm Klaus only six hours later . Because Klaus was in an area of weak steering current , it was drifting west @-@ northwestward . On October 5 , Klaus briefly intensified into a hurricane , and passed only 12 mi ( 19 km ) east of Barbuda later that day . By the following day , Klaus had weakened back into a tropical storm . After weakening to a tropical storm , Klaus began to accelerate , while turning westward . Klaus became significantly affected by wind shear , as it weakened to a tropical depression to the north of Puerto Rico on October 8 . Later that day , deep convection began to re @-@ developed near the low @-@ level circulation of Klaus , and it had re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm . As Klaus tracked northwestward near the Bahamas on October 9 , it was absorbed by an area of low pressure , which would eventually develop into Tropical Storm Marco . 
 Since Klaus passed very close to the Leeward Islands , tropical storm watches and warnings were issued , as well as hurricane watches and warning , starting on October 4 . In addition , tropical storm watches and warnings were also issued for the British and United States Virgin Islands , and the Bahamas . After several watches and warnings were issued , all were discontinued by October 9 , around the time when Klaus was absorbed by the area of low pressure . In Martinique , flooding caused seven fatalities , and displaced 1 @,@ 500 other people . Heavy rainfall also occurred on other Leeward Islands , with estimates as high as 15 in ( 381 mm ) of precipitation . However , no effects were reported in the Bahamas . The remnants brought large waves and heavy rainfall to southeastern United States , which caused four deaths when a dam burst in South Carolina . In total , Klaus caused 11 fatalities , but only $ 1 million ( 1990 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 81 million 2016 USD ) in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Lili = = = 
 A cold @-@ core low which affected the latter stages of Josephine developed at the surface and became a subtropical storm on October 6 , about 875 mi ( 1 @,@ 408 @.@ 1 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The subtropical storm moved southwest and slowly curved westward , nearly intensifying into a hurricane . On October 11 , the subtropical storm finally acquired tropical characteristics . Simultaneously , the now @-@ tropical cyclone intensified into a hurricane , and was re @-@ classified as Hurricane Lili . After becoming a hurricane , Lili headed rapidly west @-@ southwestward , and did not intensify past maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . After passing 140 mi ( 230 km ) south of Bermuda later that day , Lili began to curve slowly northward , thereby avoiding landfall in the United States . While about 200 mi ( 321 @.@ 9 km ) east @-@ southeast of Cape Hatteras , Lili weakened back to tropical storm intensity . Weakening to a tropical storm , Lili curved northeastward and accelerated toward Atlantic Canada . However , Lili transitioned into an extratropical storm on October 14 , just offshore of Nova Scotia . The post @-@ tropical cyclone made landfall on Newfoundland soon afterwards . 
 Lili posed a threat to Bermuda , and a hurricane warning as the storm approached , but only gusty winds and light rainfall was reported . As Lili continued westward , it had also posed a significant threat to the East Coast of the United States , since some of the computer models did not predict a northward curve . As a result , several hurricane watches and warnings were issued from Little River Inlet , South Carolina , to Cape Henlopen , Delaware . However , Lili later curved northward , and only caused minor coastal erosion in North Carolina and rainfall in Pennsylvania . Lili began impacting Atlantic Canada as it was transitioning an extratropical cyclone , and the storm reportedly caused strong winds in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . No damage total or fatalities were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Marco = = = 
 As Klaus was dissipating , a new cold low developed over Cuba and developed down to the surface as a tropical depression on October 9 . The depression emerged the Straits of Florida , and quickly intensified into a tropical storm on October 10 . After becoming a tropical storm , Marco steadily intensified and eventually peaked with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Marco headed towards Florida , and remained just offshore of the western coast and nearly made landfall near St. Petersburg , Florida on October 12 . However , Marco continued to interact with land , and weakened to a tropical depression before actually making landfall near Cedar Key , Florida with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . It rapidly weakened over land , and dissipated in Georgia later that day . Although it had dissipated , Marco added to the heavy rainfall already brought to the southeastern states by the remnants Hurricane Klaus . 
 Although only a depression at final landfall , this was officially counted as a tropical storm hit on the United States as much of the circulation was on land before landfall in the area of St. Petersburg , Florida . In preparations for Marco , a tropical storm warning was issued for nearly the entire Gulf and Atlantic coast of Florida . In Florida , Marco caused flooding damage to houses and roads , in addition to producing tropical storm force winds across the state . However , Marco is more notable for the impact from the remnants , especially in Georgia and South Carolina , where rainfall from the storm peaked at 19 @.@ 89 in ( 505 mm ) near Louisville , Georgia . In combination with the remnants of Hurricane Klaus , Marco caused heavy rainfall in South Carolina , causing a dam to burst , leading to three fatalities . Several more fatalities were caused by the remnants of Marco and Klaus , and the system caused 12 deaths . It also caused $ 57 million ( 1990 USD , $ 109 million 2016 USD ) in damage , most of it from damage or destruction of residences in Georgia . 
 = = = Hurricane Nana = = = 
 On October 7 , a vigorous tropical wave emerged off the coast of Africa near Cape Verde , and despite semi @-@ favorable conditions , the wave did not develop initially , due to embedded westerlies , which caused the wave to remain disorganized , despite having deep convection . Six days later , the wave had reached the Lesser Antilles , and split , the northern portion of the wave then developed into Tropical Depression Sixteen on October 16 . The depression rapidly intensified to a tropical storm , and then a hurricane the next day , receiving the name Nana . Development increased slightly and the system reached its peak intensity of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) that same day . Nana dissipated while heading southward on October 21 . 
 Nana initially posed a threat to Bermuda , and as a result , a hurricane watch was issued late on October 18 . However , after Nana weakened to a tropical storm on October 20 , the hurricane watch was downgraded to a tropical storm watch . Furthermore , Nana began to curve southeastward away from Bermuda , and later on October 20 , the tropical storm watch was discontinued . The only known effect from Nana on Bermuda was 0 @.@ 33 in ( 8 @.@ 4 mm ) of rain . Nana was a very small hurricane , the circulation probably being only 30 – 40 mi ( 50 – 60 km ) wide . Nana was the first storm to receive the ' N ' name since naming began in the Atlantic basin in 1950 , and the first of thirteen storms to do so . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1990 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1996 season . This is the same list used for the 1984 season . Storms were named Marco and Nana for the first time in 1990 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired two names in the spring of 1991 : Diana and Klaus . They were replaced in the 1996 season by Dolly and Kyle . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in 1990 and the affected regions , if any . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still storm @-@ related . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low . 
 = Charles Fryatt = 
 Charles Algernon Fryatt ( 2 December 1872 – 27 July 1916 ) was a British mariner who was executed by the Germans for attempting to ram a U @-@ boat in 1915 . When his ship , the SS Brussels , was captured off the Netherlands in 1916 , he was court @-@ martialled and sentenced to death although he was a civilian non @-@ combatant . International outrage followed his execution near Bruges , Belgium . In 1919 , his body was reburied with full honours in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fryatt was born on 2 December 1872 in Southampton , the son of Charles and Mary Fryatt . He attended Freemantle School in the late 1870s . In 1881 , Fryatt 's family lived at 22 Trinity Terrace , in St Mary 's , Southampton , but later moved to Harwich , Essex where he attended the Corporation School . He and his wife , Ethel , had seven children ; six girls and one boy . The children were Olive , Victoria , Doris , Vera , Mabel , Charles and Dorothy . The younger Charles later followed his father into the merchant navy , training at HMS Worcester . 
 On leaving school , Fryatt entered the Mercantile Marine , serving on SS County Antrim , SS <unk> , SS Marmion and SS Harrogate . In 1892 , Fryatt joined the Great Eastern Railway as a seaman on SS Ipswich . Fryatt 's father had been the First Officer on SS Cambridge . Fryatt rose through the ranks , serving on various ships . His first command was SS Colchester . In 1913 , he was appointed master of SS Newmarket . 
 = = U @-@ boat attack = = 
 On 3 March 1915 , Fryatt 's command , SS Wrexham , a Great Central Railway ship , was attacked by a German U @-@ Boat . The ship was chased for 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ) . With deckhands assisting the stokers , the vessel made 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) when it would normally have been pushed to make 14 knots ( 26 km / h ) . Wrexham arrived at Rotterdam with burnt funnels . The Great Eastern Railway presented Fryatt with a gold watch for this feat . The watch was inscribed Presented to Captain C. A. Fryatt by the chairman and Directors of the <unk> Railway Company as a mark of their appreciation of his courage and skilful seamanship on March 2nd , 1915 . Later that month he was in charge of Colchester when it was unsuccessfully attacked by a U @-@ boat . 
 On 28 March 1915 , as captain of the SS Brussels , he was ordered to stop by U @-@ 33 when his ship was near the Maas <unk> . Seeing the U @-@ boat had surfaced to torpedo his ship , Fryatt ordered full steam ahead and proceeded to try to ram U @-@ 33 , which was forced to crash dive . This action was in compliance with orders issued by Winston Churchill to captains of merchant ships . These orders included treating the crews of U @-@ boats as felons and not as prisoners of war , in consideration of the German Empire 's policy of unrestricted submarine warfare . White flags were to be ignored . Churchill 's order also stated that survivors from U @-@ boats might be shot if this was more convenient than taking them prisoner . If a captain were to surrender his ship he would be prosecuted by the British . The Germans became aware of these orders when they found a copy of them upon capturing the SS Ben Cruachan in October 1915 . For this second action , Fryatt was awarded a gold watch by the Admiralty . The watch was inscribed Presented by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to Chas . Algernon Fryatt Master of the S.S. ' Brussels ' in recognition of the example set by that vessel when attacked by a German submarine on March 28th , 1915 . Fryatt was presented with a certificate on vellum by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty . He was also praised in the House of Commons . 
 = = Capture = = 
 On 25 June 1916 , Brussels left Hoek van Holland bound for Harwich . Lights were shown from the beach and a flare was fired . A passenger is reported to have remained on deck and signalled to shore . Five German destroyers surrounded Brussels . The passengers were told to prepare to take to the lifeboats and orders were given for official papers to be destroyed , which was done successfully . Brussels was taken by the Germans , and the radio was destroyed . She was escorted into Zeebrugge and then to Bruges . 
 = = Court Martial = = 
 Fryatt and his crew were sent to the civilian internment camp at Ruhleben , near Berlin . On 16 July 1916 , it was reported in the Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf that Fryatt had been charged with sinking a German submarine . The Germans knew that U @-@ 33 had not been sunk . At the time of the trial she was on active service as part of the Constantinople Flotilla . The basis for the charge was the inscriptions on his watches . Fryatt was tried at a Court Martial on 27 July 1916 . The Court Martial was held at Bruges Town Hall . He was found guilty of being a franc @-@ <unk> and sentenced to death . The sentence was confirmed by the Kaiser . At 19 : 00 , Fryatt was executed by firing squad and was buried in a small cemetery just outside Bruges that the Germans used for burying Belgian " traitors " . The grave was later visited by diplomat Sir Walter Townley ( British Ambassador to the Netherlands from 1917 to 1919 . ) and his wife . 
 An execution notice was published in Dutch , French and German announcing the death of Fryatt . It was signed by Admiral Ludwig von Schröder . A translation of the execution notice reads as follows : 
 <unk> . The English captain of a merchant ship , Charles Fryatt , of Southampton , though he did not belong to the armed forces of the enemy , attempted on March 28th , 1915 , to destroy a German submarine by running it down . For this he has been condemned to death by judgment this day of the Field Court Martial of the Naval Corps , and has been executed . A ruthless deed has thus been avenged , belatedly but just . Signed <unk> <unk> , Admiral Commandant of the Naval Corps , Bruges , July 27th , 1916 . 
 = = = German post @-@ war confirmation of Court Martial = = = 
 On 2 April 1919 , a German International Law Commission named the " Schücking Commission " , after its chairman Walther Schücking , reconfirmed Fryatt 's sentence : 
 " The execution by shooting of Captain Charles Fryatt , which was given by the Court Martial Bruges , due to the sentence of the court martial proceedings on 27 July 1916 , contains no violation of international law , The Commission apologizes most vividly for the hurry in which the judgement was enforced . " 
 The Commission 's ruling was not unanimous . Two members of the legal review panel , Eduard Bernstein and Oskar Cohn , dissented because in their opinion Fryatt 's sentence had been a severe infringement of international law . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 On 31 July 1916 , British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith issued a statement in the House of Commons . 
 I deeply regret to say that it appears to be true that Captain Fryatt has been murdered by the Germans . His Majesty 's Government have heard with the utmost indignation of this atrocious crime against the laws of nations and the usages of war . Coming as it does contemporaneously with the lawless cruelty towards the population of Lille and other occupied districts of France , it shews that the German High Command , under the stress of military defeat , have renewed their policy of terrorism . It is impossible of course to conjecture to what atrocities they may proceed . 
 His Majesty 's Government desire to repeat emphatically their resolve that such crimes shall not , if they can help it , go unpunished . When the time arrives they are determined to bring to justice the criminals whoever they maybe and whatever position they may occupy . In such cases as these the authors of the system under which such crimes are committed may well be the most guilty of all . The question of what immediate action can be taken is engaging the earnest attention of the Government and I hope very soon to announce to the House of Commons what we can do . 
 Lord Claud Hamilton , MP , Chairman of the Great Eastern Railway , denounced the execution as " sheer , brutal murder " . The Mayor of Harwich opened a fund to erect a permanent memorial to Fryatt . A similar fund was opened in the Netherlands . 
 In the United States , The New York Times denounced the execution as " a deliberate murder " . The New York Herald called it " The crowning German atrocity " . In the Netherlands , the Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant described the execution as " arbitrary and unjust " , while the Handelsblad Holland called it " A cowardly murder inspired by hatred and revenge " . In Switzerland , the Journal de Genève said " It is monstrous to maintain that armed forces have a right to murder civilians but that civilians are guilty of a crime in defending themselves " . The Dutch branch of the League of Neutral States presented the Great Eastern Railway a memorial tablet which was erected at Liverpool Street station . The memorial was unveiled on 27 July 1917 , exactly a year after Fryatt 's execution . The scrap value of Brussels was donated towards the cost . 
 The Great Eastern Railway awarded Fryatt 's widow a pension of £ 250 per annum . The Government granted her an extra £ 100 per annum pension on top of her entitlement . Fryatt 's insurers , the Provident Clerk 's Association , paid the £ 300 that Mrs Fryatt was entitled to immediately , dispensing with the usual formalities . The Royal Merchant Seaman 's Orphanage offered to educate two of Fryatt 's seven children . The King expressed his indignation and abhorrence at the execution of Fryatt in a letter to Mrs Fryatt . In the letter , he also wrote " The action of Captain Fryatt in defending his ship against the attack of an enemy submarine was a noble instance of the resource and self @-@ reliance so characteristic of his profession . " 
 The incident inspired an Australian film , The Murder of Captain Fryatt ( 1917 ) . 
 = = Funeral and reburial = = 
 In 1919 , Fryatt 's body was exhumed and returned to the United Kingdom for burial . His coffin was landed at Dover , and transported in South Eastern and Chatham Railway <unk> <unk> to London . On 8 July 1919 , his funeral was held at St Paul 's Cathedral . Hundreds of merchant seamen and widows of merchant seamen and fishermen attended . Representing the Government were many members of the Admiralty , the Board of Trade , the Cabinet and the War Office . 
 The band of the Great Eastern Railway , augmented by drummers from the Royal Marines , played the Dead March . Eternal Father , Strong to Save and Abide with Me were sung , and a blessing given by the Bishop of London . The route of the coffin to Liverpool Street station was lined with people . Fryatt was buried at All Saints ' Church , Upper Dovercourt . His coffin was carried from the station to the church on a gun carriage . His widow was presented with the insignia of the Belgian Order of Leopold that had been posthumously awarded to Fryatt . Fryatt was also posthumously awarded the Belgian Maritime War Cross . 
 = = Namesakes = = 
 In Zeebrugge there 's a street named after Captain Fryatt , It 's the place where he was forced to border by the Germans 
 A wing at Dovercourt Cottage Hospital – which is now known as the Captain Fryatt Memorial Hospital . – was named in Fryatt 's honour . A public house in nearby Parkeston is also named in Captain Fryatt 's honour . 
 In Canada , the 11 @,@ 027 feet ( 3 @,@ 361 m ) high Mount Fryatt ( 52 ° 33 ′ 00 ″ N 117 ° 54 ′ 35 ″ W ) was named in 1921 in honour of Captain Fryatt . The 10 @,@ 317 feet ( 3 @,@ 145 m ) high Brussels Peak ( 51 ° 31 ′ 00 ″ N 117 ° 49 ′ 20 ″ W ) was named in honour of his ship . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 In 2016 , an exhibition was held at the Masonic Hall , Harwich to <unk> the 100th anniversary of his execution . The exhibition runs from 23 to 31 July . 
 = SS Merion = 
 SS Merion was an ocean liner built in 1902 for the American Line , a subsidiary line of the International Mercantile Marine ( IMM ) . She also sailed for the Red Star Line and the Dominion Line — both subsidiary lines of IMM — during her passenger career . After the outbreak of World War I she was bought by the British Admiralty and converted to serve as a decoy resembling the Royal Navy battlecruiser HMS Tiger . In May 1915 , while posing as Tiger in the Aegean Sea , Merion was sunk by the German submarine SM UB @-@ 8 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Merion was built by John Brown & Company of Clydebank , Scotland for the American Line , a subsidiary of the International Navigation Company , and launched on 26 November 1901 . The ship was 161 @.@ 7 metres ( 530 ft 6 in ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 18 @.@ 0 metres ( 59 ft 1 in ) abeam . She had a gross register tonnage ( GRT ) of 11 @,@ 621 . The ship had twin screw propellers powered by twin triple @-@ expansion steam engines , and , at top speed , could move 14 knots ( 26 km / h ) . As built , Merion had accommodations for 150 second- and 1 @,@ 700 third @-@ class passengers . She was a sister ship to Haverford . 
 Upon completion , the ship was chartered to the Dominion Line , a subsidiary line of International Mercantile Marine ( IMM ) with which International Navigation had merged in 1902 . The liner sailed for Dominion on her maiden voyage on 8 March 1902 from Liverpool to Boston . After completing eleven voyages on that route , Merion was returned to the American Line in March 1903 . The following month she began sailing on the Liverpool – Philadelphia route on which she sailed most of the rest of her passenger career . She was briefly chartered to the Red Star Line in 1907 for one Antwerp – New York voyage . 
 The liner had several mishaps during her passenger career . On 2 March 1903 , an article in The Washington Post reported that Merion had run aground shortly after leaving Queenstown while en route to Liverpool from Boston . The ship was freed from her perch near Chicago Knoll by the rising tide , but when she got underway again became stuck fast in almost the same spot . At press time , two British Admiralty tugs had been dispatched to free the ship . Almost exactly a year later , Merion collided with the steamer Clan Grant off <unk> Rock on 30 March 1904 and was damaged . On 24 December 1912 , Merion collided with a tanker off the Delaware coast and sustained damage which included two flooded compartments . The ship was beached below Cross Ledge , but was refloated and made way under her own power back to Philadelphia , after discharging her cargo and passengers . 
 After the outbreak of World War I in Europe , Merion was equipped with four 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) guns for defensive purposes . Merion was the subject of a protest by the German Consul at Philadelphia , when she docked at that port equipped with those guns , counter to rules regarding armed ships in neutral ports . The still @-@ neutral United States required that the guns be removed before they would allow Merion to sail ; her guns were stowed belowdecks when she departed Philadelphia on 5 September 1914 . Merion 's final voyage on the Liverpool – Philadelphia route began on 31 October , after which she was sold to the British Admiralty . 
 Merion was employed as part of a program that disguised ocean liners to resemble Royal Navy capital ships . Merion was patterned after the British battlecruiser HMS Tiger and deployed in the Mediterranean . For this duty , the liner was equipped with canvas @-@ and @-@ wood replicas of Tiger 's guns , and her crew had to stow them whenever approached by neutral ships . The ship was also overloaded with ballast to make the ship ride lower in the water to match the profile of the real Tiger . 
 On 29 May 1915 , the German submarine UB @-@ 8 , apparently tempted by the prospect of sinking a British battlecruiser , allowed five loaded transports to sail past before launching a torpedo attack on Merion . One torpedo from UB @-@ 8 struck the liner and exploded , sending some of the " cement and stones " used as ballast into the air . Some of Merion 's crew that were knocked overboard by the explosion were able to float ashore on nearby <unk> Island on remnants of the liner 's false guns . Despite being severely overloaded , Merion did not immediately sink , remaining afloat more than 24 hours before finally succumbing to the attack on 31 May . Four crew were killed during the . Merion 's sinking . 
 = Paul Kruger = 
 Stephanus Johannes Paulus " Paul " Kruger ( / <unk> / ; Dutch : [ <unk> ] ; 10 October 1825 – 14 July 1904 ) was one of the dominant political and military figures in 19th @-@ century South Africa , and President of the South African Republic ( or Transvaal ) from 1883 to 1900 . Nicknamed Oom Paul ( " Uncle Paul " ) , he came to international prominence as the face of the Boer cause — that of the Transvaal and its neighbour the Orange Free State — against Britain during the Second Boer War of 1899 – 1902 . He has been called a personification of Afrikanerdom , and remains a controversial and divisive figure ; admirers venerate him as a tragic folk hero , while critics view him as the obstinate guardian of an unjust cause . 
 Born in the eastern Cape Colony , Kruger took part in the Great Trek as a child during the late 1830s . He had almost no education apart from the Bible and , through his interpretations of scripture , believed the Earth was flat . A protégé of the Voortrekker leader Andries Pretorius , he witnessed the signing of the Sand River Convention with Britain in 1852 and over the next decade played a prominent role in the forging of the South African Republic , leading its commandos and resolving disputes between the rival Boer leaders and factions . In 1863 he was elected Commandant @-@ General , a post he held for a decade before he resigned soon after the election of President Thomas François Burgers . 
 Kruger was appointed Vice @-@ President in 1877 , shortly before the South African Republic was annexed by Britain as the Transvaal . Over the next three years he headed two deputations to London to try to have this overturned and became the leading figure in the movement to restore the South African Republic 's independence , culminating in the Boers ' victory in the First Boer War of 1880 – 81 . Kruger served until 1883 as a member of an executive triumvirate , then was elected President . In 1884 he headed a third deputation that brokered the London Convention , under which Britain recognised the South African Republic as a fully independent state . 
 Following the influx of thousands of predominantly British settlers with the Witwatersrand Gold Rush of 1886 , " uitlanders " ( out @-@ landers ) provided almost all of the South African Republic 's tax revenues but lacked civic representation ; Boer burghers retained control of the government . The uitlander problem and the associated tensions with Britain dominated Kruger 's attention for the rest of his presidency , to which he was re @-@ elected in 1888 , 1893 and 1898 , and led to the Jameson Raid of 1895 – 96 and ultimately the Second Boer War . Kruger left for Europe as the war turned against the Boers in 1900 and spent the rest of his life in exile , refusing to return home following the British victory . After he died in Switzerland at the age of 78 in 1904 , his body was returned to South Africa for a state funeral , and buried in the Heroes ' Acre in Pretoria . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and childhood = = = 
 Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger was born on 10 October 1825 at Bulhoek , Cape Colony , the third child and second son of Casper Jan Hendrik Kruger , a farmer , and his wife Elsie ( Elisa ; née Steyn ) . The family was of Dutch @-@ speaking Afrikaner or Boer background , of German , French Huguenot and Dutch stock . His paternal ancestors had been in South Africa since 1713 , when Jacob Krüger , from Berlin , arrived in Cape Town as a 17 @-@ year @-@ old soldier in the Dutch East India Company 's service . Jacob 's children dropped the umlaut from the family name , a common practice among South Africans of German origin , and over the following generations Kruger 's paternal forebears moved into the interior . His mother 's family , the <unk> , had lived in South Africa since 1668 and were relatively affluent and cultured by Cape standards . Kruger 's great @-@ great @-@ uncle Hermanus Steyn had been President of the self @-@ declared Republic of Swellendam that revolted against Company rule in 1795 . 
 Bulhoek , Kruger 's birthplace , was the Steyn family farm and had been Elsie 's home since early childhood ; her father <unk> Gerbrand Steyn had settled there in 1809 . The Krugers and <unk> were acquainted and Casper occasionally visited Bulhoek as a young man . He and Elsie married in Cradock in 1820 , when he was 18 and she was 14 . A girl , Sophia , and a boy , <unk> Gerbrand , were born before Paul 's arrival in 1825 . The child 's first two names , Stephanus Johannes , were chosen after his paternal grandfather , but rarely used — the provenance of the third name Paulus " was to remain rather a mystery " , Johannes Meintjes wrote in his 1974 biography of Kruger , " and yet the boy was always called Paul . " 
 Paul Kruger was baptised at Cradock on 19 March 1826 , and soon thereafter his parents acquired a farm of their own to the north @-@ west at <unk> , near Colesberg , in the remote north @-@ east of the Cape Colony . His mother died when he was eight ; Casper soon remarried and had more children with his second wife , <unk> ( née du Plessis ) . Beyond reading and writing , which he learned from relatives , Kruger 's only education was three months under a travelling tutor , <unk> Roos , and Calvinist religious instruction from his father . In adulthood Kruger would claim to have never read any book apart from the Bible . 
 = = = Great Trek = = = 
 In 1835 Casper Kruger , his father and his brothers Gert and Theuns moved their families east and set up farms near the Caledon River , on the Cape Colony 's far north @-@ eastern frontier . The Cape had been under British sovereignty since 1814 , when the Netherlands ceded it to Britain with the Convention of London . Boer discontent with aspects of British rule , such as the institution of English as the sole official language and the abolition of slavery in 1834 , led to the Great Trek — a mass migration by Dutch @-@ speaking " Voortrekkers " north @-@ east from the Cape to the land over the Orange and Vaal Rivers . While many Boers had been voicing displeasure with the British Cape administration for some time , the Krugers were comparatively content — they had always co @-@ operated with the British and the abolition of slavery was irrelevant to them as they did not own slaves . They had given little thought to the idea of leaving the Cape . 
 A group of emigrants under Hendrik Potgieter passed through the Krugers ' Caledon encampments in early 1836 . Potgieter envisioned a Boer republic with himself in a prominent role ; he sufficiently impressed the Krugers that they joined his party of Voortrekkers . Kruger 's father continued to give the children religious education in the Boer fashion during the trek , having them recite or write down biblical passages from memory each day after lunch and dinner . At stops along the journey classrooms were improvised from reeds and grass and the more educated emigrants took turns in teaching . 
 The Voortrekkers faced competition for the area they were entering from Mzilikazi and his Ndebele ( or Matabele ) people , a recent offshoot from the Zulu Kingdom to the south @-@ east . On 16 October 1836 the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Kruger took part in the Battle of <unk> , where Potgieter 's laager , a circle of wagons chained together , was unsuccessfully attacked by Mzilikazi and around 4 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 000 Matabele warriors . Kruger and the other small children assisted in tasks such as bullet @-@ casting while the women and larger boys helped the fighting men , of whom there were about 40 . Kruger could recall the battle in great detail and give a vivid account well into old age . 
 During 1837 and 1838 Kruger 's family was part of the Voortrekker group under Potgieter that trekked further east into Natal . Here they met the American missionary Daniel Lindley , who gave young Paul much spiritual <unk> . The Zulu King Dingane concluded a land treaty with Potgieter , but then promptly reconsidered and massacred first Piet <unk> 's party of settlers , then others at <unk> . Kruger would recount his family 's group coming under attack from Zulus soon after the <unk> massacre , describing " children pinioned to their mothers ' breasts by spears , or with their brains dashed out on waggon wheels " — but " God heard our prayer " , he recalled , and " we followed them and shot them down as they fled , until more of them were dead than those of us they had killed in their attack ... I could shoot moderately well for we lived , so to speak , among the game . " 
 These developments impelled the Krugers ' return to the highveld , where they took part in Potgieter 's campaign that compelled Mzilikazi to move his people north , across the Limpopo River , to what became Matabeleland . Kruger and his father thereupon settled at the foot of the Magaliesberg mountains in the Transvaal . Meanwhile , in Natal , Andries Pretorius defeated more than 10 @,@ 000 of Dingane 's Zulus at the Battle of Blood River on 16 December 1838 , a date subsequently marked by the Boers as <unk> ( " Dingane 's Day " ) or the Day of the Vow . 
 = = = Burgher = = = 
 Boer tradition of the time dictated that men were entitled to choose two 6 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 24 km2 ) farms — one for crops and one for grazing — upon becoming enfranchised burghers at the age of 16 . Kruger set up his home at <unk> , near Rustenburg in the Magaliesberg area . This concluded , he wasted little time in pursuing the hand of Maria du Plessis , the daughter of a fellow Voortrekker south of the Vaal ; she was only 14 years old when they married in Potchefstroom in 1842 . The same year Kruger was elected a deputy field cornet — " a singular honour at seventeen " , Meintjes comments . This role combined the civilian duties of a local magistrate with a military rank equivalent to that of a junior commissioned officer . 
 Kruger was already an accomplished frontiersman , horseman and guerrilla fighter . In addition to his native Dutch he could speak basic English and several African languages , some fluently . He had shot a lion for the first time while still a boy — in old age he recalled being 14 , but Meintjes suggests he may have been as young as 11 . During his many hunting excursions he was nearly killed on several occasions . In 1845 , while he was hunting rhinoceros along the <unk> River , his four @-@ pounder elephant gun exploded in his hands and blew off most of his left thumb . Kruger wrapped the wound in a handkerchief and retreated to camp , where he treated it with turpentine . He refused calls to have the hand amputated by a doctor , and instead cut off the remains of the injured thumb himself with a pocketknife . When gangrenous marks appeared up to his shoulder , he placed the hand in the stomach of a freshly @-@ killed goat , a traditional Boer remedy . He considered this a success — " when it came to the turn of the second goat , my hand was already easier and the danger much less . " The wound took over half a year to heal , but he did not wait that long to start hunting again . 
 Britain annexed the Voortrekkers ' short @-@ lived Natalia Republic in 1843 as the Colony of Natal . Pretorius briefly led Boer resistance to this , but before long most of the Boers in Natal had trekked back north @-@ west to the area around the Orange and Vaal Rivers . In 1845 Kruger was a member of Potgieter 's expedition to Delagoa Bay in Mozambique to negotiate a frontier with Portugal ; the <unk> Mountains were settled upon as the border between Boer and Portuguese lands . After Maria and their first child died of fever in January 1846 , Kruger married her cousin Gezina du Plessis , from the Colesberg area , in 1847 . Their first child , Casper Jan Hendrik , was born on 22 December that year . 
 Concerned by the exodus of so many whites from the Cape and Natal , and taking the view that they remained British subjects , the British Governor Sir Harry Smith in 1848 annexed the area between the Orange and Vaal rivers as the " Orange River Sovereignty " . A Boer commando led by Pretorius against this was defeated by Smith at the Battle of <unk> . Pretorius also lived in the Magaliesberg mountains and often hosted the young Kruger , who greatly admired the elder man 's resolve , sophistication and piety . A warm relationship developed . " Kruger 's political awareness can be dated from 1850 " , Meintjes writes , " and it was in no small measure given to him by Pretorius . " Like Pretorius , Kruger wanted to centralise the emigrants under a single authority and win British recognition for this as an independent state . This last point was not due to hostility to Britain — neither Pretorius nor Kruger was particularly anti @-@ British — but because they perceived the emigrants ' unity as under threat if the Cape administration continued to regard them as British subjects . 
 The British resident in the Orange River area , Henry Douglas Warden , advised Smith in 1851 that he thought a compromise should be attempted with Pretorius . Smith sent representatives to meet him at the Sand River . Kruger , aged 26 , accompanied Pretorius and on 17 January 1852 was present at the conclusion of the Sand River Convention , under which Britain recognised " the Emigrant Farmers " in the Transvaal — the Zuid @-@ Afrikaansche Republiek ( " South African Republic " ) , they called themselves — as independent . In exchange for the Boers ' pledge not to introduce slavery in the Transvaal , the British agreed not to ally with any " coloured nations " there . Kruger 's uncle Gert was also present ; his father Casper would have been as well had he not been ill . 
 = = = Field cornet = = = 
 The Boers and the local Tswana and Basotho chiefdoms were in near @-@ constant conflict , mainly over land . Kruger was elected field cornet of his district in 1852 , and in August that year he took part in the Battle of <unk> , a raid against the Tswana chief <unk> I. The Boer commando was headed by Pretorius , but in practice he did not take much part as he was suffering from dropsy . Kruger narrowly escaped death twice — first a piece of shrapnel hit him in the head but only knocked him out , then later a Tswana bullet swiped across his chest , tearing his jacket without wounding him . The commando wrecked David Livingstone 's mission station at <unk> , destroying his medicines and books . Livingstone was away at the time . Kruger 's version of the story was that the Boers found an armoury and a workshop for repairing firearms in Livingstone 's house and , interpreting this as a breach of Britain 's promise at the Sand River not to arm tribal chiefs , confiscated them . Whatever the truth , Livingstone wrote about the Boers in strongly condemnatory terms thereafter , depicting them as mindless barbarians . 
 One charge levelled by Livingstone and many others against the Boers was that when attacking tribal settlements they abducted women and children and took them home as slaves . The Boer argument was that these were not slaves but <unk> — indentured " apprentices " who , having lost their families , were given bed , board and training in a Boer household until reaching adulthood . Modern scholarship widely dismisses this as a ruse to create inexpensive labour while avoiding overt slavery . Gezina Kruger had an <unk> maid for whom she eventually arranged marriage , paying her a dowry . 
 Having been promoted to the rank of lieutenant ( between field cornet and commandant ) , Kruger formed part of a commando sent against the chief <unk> in December 1852 to recover some stolen cattle . Pretorius was still sick , and only nominally in command . Seven months later , on 23 July 1853 , Pretorius died , aged 54 . Just before the end he sent for Kruger , but the young man arrived too late . Meintjes comments that Pretorius " was perhaps the first person to recognise that behind [ Kruger 's ] rough exterior was a most singular person with an intellect all the more remarkable for being almost entirely self @-@ developed . " 
 = = Commandant = = 
 Pretorius did not name a successor as Commandant @-@ General ; his eldest son Marthinus Wessel Pretorius was appointed in his stead . The younger Pretorius elevated Kruger to the rank of commandant . Pretorius the son claimed power over not just the Transvaal but also the Orange River area — he said the British had promised it to his father — but virtually nobody , not even supporters like Kruger , accepted this . Following Sir George Cathcart 's replacement of Smith as Governor in Cape Town , the British policy towards the Orange River Sovereignty changed to the extent that the British were willing to pull out and grant independence to a second Boer republic there . This was in spite of the fact that in addition to the Boer settlers there were many English @-@ speaking colonists who wanted rule from the Cape to continue . On 23 February 1854 Sir George Russell Clerk signed the Orange River Convention , ending the sovereignty and recognising what the Boers dubbed the Oranje @-@ Vrijstaat ( " Orange Free State " ) . 
 Bloemfontein , the former British garrison town , became the Free State 's capital ; the Transvaal seat of government became Pretoria , named after the elder Pretorius . The South African Republic was in practice split between the south @-@ west and central Transvaal , where most of Pretorius 's supporters were , and regionalist factions in the Zoutpansberg , Lydenburg and Utrecht districts that viewed any central authority with suspicion . Kruger 's first campaign as a commandant was in the latter part of 1854 , against the chiefs <unk> and <unk> near the <unk> . The chiefs retreated into what became called the Caves of <unk> ( " <unk> " ) with many of their people and cattle , and a siege ensued in which thousands of the defenders died , mainly from starvation . When Commandant @-@ General Piet Potgieter of Zoutpansberg was shot dead , Kruger advanced under heavy fire to retrieve the body and was almost killed himself . 
 = = = Mediator = = = 
 Marthinus Pretorius hoped to achieve either federation or amalgamation with the Orange Free State , but before he could contemplate this he would have to unite the Transvaal . In 1855 he appointed an eight @-@ man constitutional commission , including Kruger , which presented a draft constitution in September that year . Lydenburg and Zoutpansberg rejected the proposals , calling for a less centralised government . Pretorius tried again during 1856 , holding meetings with eight @-@ man commissions in Rustenburg , Potchefstroom and Pretoria , but Stephanus Schoeman , Zoutpansberg 's new Commandant @-@ General , repudiated these efforts . 
 The constitution settled upon formalised a national volksraad ( parliament ) and created an executive council , headed by a President . Pretorius was sworn in as the first President of the South African Republic on 6 January 1857 . Kruger successfully proposed Schoeman for the post of national Commandant @-@ General , hoping to thereby end the factional disputes and foster unity , but Schoeman categorically refused to serve under this constitution or Pretorius . With the Transvaal on the verge of civil war , tensions also rose with the Orange Free State after Pretorius 's ambitions of absorbing it became widely known . Kruger had strong personal reservations about Pretorius , not considering him his father 's equal , but nevertheless remained steadfastly loyal to him . 
 After the Free State government dismissed an ultimatum from Pretorius to cease what he regarded as the marginalisation of his supporters south of the Vaal , Pretorius called up the burghers and rode to the border , prompting President Jacobus Nicolaas Boshoff of the Free State to do the same . Kruger was dismayed to learn of this and on reaching the Transvaal commando he spoke out against the idea of fighting their fellow Boers . However , when he learned that Boshoff had called on Schoeman to lead a commando against Pretorius from Zoutpansberg and Lydenburg , he realised that simply disbanding was no longer enough and that they would have to make terms . 
 With Pretorius 's approval , Kruger met Boshoff under a white flag . Kruger made clear that he personally disapproved of Pretorius 's actions and the situation as a whole , but defended his President when the Free Staters began to speak harshly of him . A commission of 12 men from each republic , including Kruger , reached a compromise whereby Pretorius would drop his claim on the Free State , and a treaty was concluded on 2 June 1857 . Over the next year Kruger helped to negotiate a peace agreement between the Free State and <unk> I of the Basotho , and persuaded Schoeman to take part in successful talks regarding constitutional revisions , after which Zoutpansberg accepted the central government with Schoeman as Commandant @-@ General . On 28 June 1858 Schoeman appointed Kruger Assistant Commandant @-@ General of the South African Republic . " All in all " , Kruger 's biographer T R H Davenport comments , " he had shown a loyalty to authority in political disputes , devotion to duty as an officer , and a real capacity for power play . " 
 = = = Forming the " Dopper Church " = = = 
 Kruger considered Providence his guide in life and referred to scripture constantly ; he knew large sections of the Bible by heart . He understood the biblical texts literally and inferred from them that the Earth was flat , a belief he retained firmly to his dying day . At mealtimes he said grace twice , at length and in formal Dutch rather than the South African dialect that was to become Afrikaans . In late 1858 , when he returned to <unk> , he was mentally and physically drained following the exertions of the past few years and in the midst of a spiritual crisis . Hoping to establish a personal relationship with God , he ventured into the Magaliesberg and spent several days without food or water . A search party found him " nearly dead from hunger and thirst " , Davenport records . The experience reinvigorated him and greatly intensified his faith , which for the rest of his life was unshakeable and , according to Meintjes , perceived by some of his contemporaries as like that of a child . 
 Kruger belonged to the " Doppers " — a group of about 6 @,@ 000 that followed an extremely strict interpretation of traditional Calvinist doctrine . They based their theology almost entirely on the Old Testament and , among other things , wished to eschew hymns and organs and read only from the Psalms . When the 1859 synod of the <unk> Hervormde Kerk van Afrika ( NHK ) , the main church in the Transvaal , decided to enforce the singing of modern hymns , Kruger led a group of Doppers that denounced the NHK as " deluded " and " false " and left its Rustenburg congregation . They formed the <unk> <unk> van Zuid @-@ Afrika ( GK ) , thereafter known informally as the " Dopper Church " , and recruited the Reverend Dirk <unk> , a like @-@ minded traditionalist recently arrived from the Netherlands , to be their minister . This act also had secular ramifications as according to the 1858 constitution only NHK members could take part in public affairs . 
 = = = Civil war ; Commandant @-@ General = = = 
 In late 1859 Pretorius was invited to stand for President in the Orange Free State , where many burghers now favoured union , partly as a means to overcome the Basotho . The Transvaal constitution he had just enacted made it illegal to simultaneously hold office abroad , but nevertheless he readily did so and won . The Transvaal volksraad attempted to side @-@ step the constitutional problems surrounding this by granting Pretorius half a year 's leave , hoping a solution might come about during this time , and the President duly left for Bloemfontein , appointing Johannes Hermanus Grobler to be Acting President in his absence . Pretorius was sworn in as President of the Free State on 8 February 1860 ; he sent a deputation to Pretoria to negotiate union the next day . 
 Kruger and others in the Transvaal government disliked Pretorius 's unconstitutional dual presidency , and worried that Britain might declare the Sand River and Orange River Conventions void if the republics joined . Pretorius was told by the Transvaal volksraad on 10 September 1860 to choose between his two posts — to the surprise of both supporters and detractors he resigned as President of the Transvaal and continued in the Free State . After Schoeman unsuccessfully attempted to forcibly supplant Grobler as Acting President , Kruger persuaded him to submit to a volksraad hearing , where Schoeman was censured and relieved of his post . Willem Cornelis Janse van Rensburg was appointed Acting President while a new election was organised for October 1862 . Having returned home , Kruger was surprised to receive a message urgently requesting his presence in the capital , the volksraad having recommended him as a suitable candidate ; he replied that he was pleased to be summoned but his membership in the Dopper Church meant he could not enter politics . Van Rensburg promptly had legislation passed to give equal political rights to members of all Reformed denominations . 
 Schoeman mustered a commando at Potchefstroom , but was routed by Kruger on the night of 9 October 1862 . After Schoeman returned with a larger force Kruger and Pretorius held negotiations where it was agreed to hold a special court on the disturbances in January 1863 , and soon thereafter fresh elections for President and Commandant @-@ General . Schoeman was found guilty of rebellion against the state and banished . In May the election results were announced — Van Rensburg became President , with Kruger as Commandant @-@ General . Both expressed disappointment at the low turnout and resolved to hold another set of elections . Van Rensburg 's opponent this time was Pretorius , who had resigned his office in the Orange Free State and returned to the Transvaal . Turnout was higher and on 12 October the volksraad announced another Van Rensburg victory . Kruger was returned as Commandant @-@ General with a large majority . The civil war ended with Kruger 's victory over Jan Viljoen 's commando , raised in support of Pretorius and Schoeman , at the Crocodile River on 5 January 1864 . Elections were held yet again , and this time Pretorius defeated Van Rensburg . Kruger was re @-@ elected as Commandant @-@ General with over two @-@ thirds of the vote . 
 The civil war had led to an economic collapse in the Transvaal , weakening the government 's ability to back up its professed authority and sovereignty over the local chiefdoms , though Lydenburg and Utrecht did now accept the central administration . By 1865 tensions had risen with the Zulus to the east and war had broken out again between the Orange Free State and the Basotho . Pretorius and Kruger led a commando of about 1 @,@ 000 men south to help the Free State . The Basotho were defeated and <unk> ceded some of his territory , but President Johannes Brand of the Free State decided not to give any of the conquered land to the Transvaal burghers . The Transvaal men were scandalised and returned home en masse , despite Kruger 's attempts to maintain discipline . The following February , after a meeting of the executive council in Potchefstroom , Kruger capsized his cart during the journey home and broke his left leg . On one leg he righted the cart and continued the rest of the way . This injury incapacitated him for the next nine months , and his left leg was thereafter slightly shorter than his right . 
 In 1867 , Pretoria sent Kruger to restore law and order in Zoutpansberg . He had around 500 men but very low reserves of ammunition , and discipline in the ranks was poor . On reaching Schoemansdal , which was under threat by the chief <unk> , Kruger and his officers resolved that holding the town was impossible and ordered a general evacuation , following which <unk> razed the town . The loss of Schoemansdal , once a prosperous settlement by Boer standards , was considered a great humiliation by many burghers . The Transvaal government formally exonerated Kruger over the matter , ruling that he had been forced to evacuate Schoemansdal by factors beyond his control , but some still argued that he had given the town up too readily . Peace returned to Zoutpansberg in 1869 , following the intervention of the republic 's Swazi allies . 
 Pretorius stepped down as President in November 1871 . In the 1872 election Kruger 's preferred candidate , William Robinson , was decisively defeated by the Reverend Thomas François Burgers , a church minister from the Cape who was noted for his eloquent preaching but controversial for some because of his liberal interpretation of the scriptures . He did not believe in the Devil , for example . Kruger publicly accepted Burgers 's election , announcing at his inauguration that " as a good republican " he submitted to the vote of the majority , but he had grave personal reservations regarding the new President . He particularly disliked Burgers 's new education law , which restricted children 's religious instruction to outside school hours — in Kruger 's view an affront to God . This , coupled with the sickness of Gezina and their children with malaria , caused Kruger to lose interest in his office . In May 1873 he requested an honourable discharge from his post , which Burgers promptly granted . The office of Commandant @-@ General was abolished the following week . Kruger moved his main residence to Boekenhoutfontein , near Rustenburg , and for a time absented himself from public affairs . 
 = = Diamonds and deputations = = 
 = = = Under Burgers = = = 
 Burgers busied himself attempting to modernise the South African Republic along European lines , hoping to set in motion a process that would lead to a united , independent South Africa . Finding Boer officialdom inadequate , he imported ministers and civil servants en masse from the Netherlands . His ascent to the presidency came shortly after the realisation that the Boer republics might stand on land of immense mineral wealth . Diamonds had been discovered in <unk> territory just north of the Orange River on the western edge of the Free State , arousing the interest of Britain and other countries ; mostly British settlers , referred to by the Boers as uitlanders ( " out @-@ landers " ) , were flooding into the region . Britain began to pursue federation of the Boer republics with the Cape and Natal and in 1873 , over Boer objections , annexed the area surrounding the huge diamond mine at Kimberley , dubbing it Griqualand West . 
 Some Doppers preferred to embark on another trek , north @-@ west across the Kalahari Desert towards Angola , rather than live under Burgers . This became the <unk> Trek of 1874 . The emigrants asked Kruger to lead the way , but he refused to take part . In September 1874 , following a long delay calling the volksraad due to sickness , Burgers proposed a railway to Delagoa Bay and said he would go to Europe to raise the necessary funds . By the time he left in February 1875 opposition pressure had brought about an amendment to bring religious instruction back into school hours , and Kruger had been restored to the executive council . 
 In 1876 hostilities broke out with the Bapedi people under Sekhukhune . Burgers had told the Acting President Piet Joubert not to fight a war in his absence , so the Transvaal government did little to combat the Bapedi raids . On his return Burgers resolved to send a commando against Sekhukhune ; he called on Kruger to lead the column , but much to his surprise the erstwhile Commandant @-@ General refused . Burgers unsuccessfully asked Joubert to head the commando , then approached Kruger twice more , but to no avail . Kruger was convinced that God would cause any military expedition organised by Burgers to fail — particularly if the President rode with the commando , which he was determined to do . " I cannot lead the commando if you come " , Kruger said , " for , with your merry evenings in laager and your Sunday dances , the enemy will even shoot me behind the wall ; for God 's blessing will not rest on your expedition . " Burgers , who had no military experience , led the commando himself after several other prospective generals rebuffed him . After being routed by Sekhukhune , he hired a group of " volunteers " under the German Conrad von <unk> to defend the country , paying for this by levying a special tax . The war ended , but Burgers became extremely unpopular among his electorate . 
 With Burgers due to stand for re @-@ election the following year , Kruger became a popular alternative candidate , but he resolved to stand by the President after Burgers privately assured him that he would do his utmost to defend the South African Republic 's independence . The towns of the Transvaal were becoming increasingly British in character as immigration and trade gathered apace , and the idea of annexation was gaining support both locally and in the British government . In late 1876 Lord Carnarvon , Colonial Secretary under Benjamin Disraeli , gave Sir Theophilus Shepstone of Natal a special commission to confer with the South African Republic 's government and , if he saw fit , annex the country . 
 = = = British annexation ; first and second deputations = = = 
 Shepstone arrived in Pretoria in January 1877 . He outlined criticisms expressed by Carnarvon regarding the Transvaal government and expressed support for federation . After a joint commission of inquiry on the British grievances — Kruger and the State Attorney E J P Jorissen refuted most of Carnarvon 's allegations , one of which was that Pretoria tolerated slavery — Shepstone stayed in the capital , openly telling Burgers he had come to the Transvaal to annex it . Hoping to stop the annexation by reforming the government , <unk> introduced scores of bills and revisions to a bewildered volksraad , which opposed them all but then passed them , heightening the general mood of discord and confusion . One of these reforms appointed Kruger to the new post of Vice @-@ President . 
 The impression of Kruger garnered by the British envoys in Pretoria during early 1877 was one of an unspeakably vulgar , bigoted <unk> peasant . Regarding his austere , weather @-@ beaten face , greying hair and simple Dopper dress of a short @-@ cut black jacket , baggy trousers and a black top hat , they considered him extremely ugly . Furthermore , they found his personal habits , such as copious spitting , revolting . Shepstone 's legal adviser William Morcom was one of the first British officials to write about Kruger : calling him " <unk> horrible " , he recounted a public luncheon at which Kruger dined with a dirty pipe protruding from his pocket and such greasy hair that he spent part of the meal combing it . According to Martin Meredith , Kruger 's <unk> was mentioned in British reports " so often that it became shorthand for his whole personality , and indeed , his objectives " . They did not consider him a major threat to British ambitions . 
 Shepstone had the Transvaal 's annexation as a British territory formally announced in Pretoria on 12 April 1877 . Burgers resigned and returned to the Cape to live in retirement — his last act as President was to announce the government 's decision to send a deputation , headed by Kruger and Jorissen , to London to make an official protest . He exhorted the burghers not to attempt any kind of resistance to the British until these diplomats returned . Jorissen , one of the Dutch officials recently imported by Burgers , was included at Kruger 's request because of his wide knowledge of European languages ( Kruger was not confident in his English ) ; a second Dutchman , Willem Eduard Bok , accompanied them as secretary . They left in May 1877 , travelling first to Bloemfontein to confer with the Free State government , then on to Kimberley and Worcester , where the 51 @-@ year @-@ old Kruger boarded a train for the first time in his life . In Cape Town , where his German ancestor had landed 164 years before , he had his first sight of the sea . 
 During the voyage to England Kruger encountered a 19 @-@ year @-@ old law student from the Orange Free State named Martinus Theunis Steyn . Jorissen and Bok marvelled at Kruger , in their eyes more suited to the 17th century than his own time . One night , when Kruger heard the two Dutchmen discussing celestial bodies and the structure of the universe , he interjected that if their conversation was accurate and the Earth was not flat , he might as well throw his Bible overboard . At the Colonial Office in Whitehall , Carnarvon and Kruger 's own colleagues were astonished when , speaking through interpreters , he rose to what Meintjes calls " remarkable heights of oratory " , averring that the annexation breached the Sand River Convention and went against the popular will in the Transvaal . His arguments were undermined by reports to the contrary from Shepstone and other British officials , and by a widely publicised letter from a Potchefstroom vicar claiming that Kruger only represented the will of " a handful of <unk> " . Carnarvon dismissed Kruger 's idea of a general plebiscite and concluded that British rule would remain . 
 Kruger did not meet Queen Victoria , though such an audience is described in numerous anecdotes , depicted in films and sometimes reported as fact . Between August and October he visited the Netherlands and Germany , where he aroused little general public interest , but made a potent impact in the Reformed congregations he visited . After a brief sojourn back in England he returned to South Africa and arrived at Boekenhoutfontein shortly before Christmas 1877 . He found a national awakening occurring . " Paradoxically " , John <unk> writes , " British occupation seemed to be fomenting a sense of national consciousness in the Transvaal which years of fractious independence had failed to elicit . " When Kruger visited Pretoria in January 1878 he was greeted by a procession that took him to a mass gathering in Church Square . Attempting to stir up the crowd , Kruger said that since Carnarvon had told him the annexation would not be revoked he could not see what more they could do . The gambit worked ; burghers began shouting that they would sooner die fighting for their country than submit to the British . 
 According to Meintjes , Kruger was still not particularly anti @-@ British ; he thought the British had made a mistake and would rectify the situation if this could be proven to them . After conducting a poll through the former republican infrastructure — 587 signed in favour of the annexation , 6 @,@ 591 against — he organised a second deputation to London , made up of himself and Joubert with Bok again serving as secretary . The envoys met the British High Commissioner in Cape Town , Sir Bartle Frere , and arrived in London on 29 June 1878 to find a censorious letter from Shepstone waiting for them , along with a communication that since Kruger was agitating against the government he had been dismissed from the executive council . 
 Carnarvon had been succeeded as Colonial Secretary by Sir Michael Hicks Beach , who received the deputation coldly . After Bok gave a lengthy opening declaration , Hicks Beach muttered : " Have you ever heard of an instance where the British Lion has ever given up anything on which he had set his paw ? " Kruger retorted : " Yes . The Orange Free State . " The deputation remained in London for some weeks thereafter , communicating by correspondence with Hicks Beach , who eventually reaffirmed Carnarvon 's decision that the annexation would not be revoked . The deputation attempted to rally support for their cause , as the first mission had done , but with the Eastern Question dominating the political scene few were interested . One English sympathiser gave Kruger a gold ring , bearing the inscription : " Take courage , your cause is just and must triumph in the end . " Kruger was touched and wore it for the rest of his life . 
 Like its predecessor , the second deputation went on from England to continental Europe , visiting the Netherlands , France and Germany . In Paris , where the 1878 Exposition Universelle was in progress , Kruger saw a hot air balloon for the first time and readily took part in an ascent to view the city from above . " High up in mid @-@ air " , he recalled , " I <unk> asked the aeronaut , as we had gone so far , to take me all the way home . " The pilot asked who Kruger was and , on their descent , gave him a medal " to remind me of my journey through the air " . Meanwhile , the deputation composed a long reply to Hicks Beach , which was published as an open letter in the British press soon before they sailed for home on 24 October 1878 . Unless the annexation were revoked , the letter stated , the Transvaal Boers would not co @-@ operate regarding federation . 
 = = = Drive for independence = = = 
 Kruger and Joubert returned home to find the British and the Zulus were close to war . Shepstone had supported the Zulus in a border dispute with the South African Republic , but then , after annexing the Transvaal , changed his mind and endorsed the Boer claim . Meeting Sir Bartle Frere and Lord Chelmsford at Pietermaritzburg on 28 November 1878 , Kruger happily gave tactical guidance for the British campaign — he advised the use of Boer tactics , making <unk> at every stop and constantly scouting ahead — but refused Frere 's request that he accompany one of the British columns , saying he would only help if assurances were made regarding the Transvaal . Chelmsford thought the campaign would be a " promenade " and did not take Kruger 's advice . Soon after he entered Zululand in January 1879 , starting the Anglo @-@ Zulu War , his <unk> central column was surprised by Cetshwayo 's Zulus at Isandlwana and almost totally destroyed . 
 The war in Zululand effectively ended on 4 July 1879 with Chelmsford 's decisive victory at the Zulu capital Ulundi . Around the same time the British appointed a new Governor and High Commissioner for the Transvaal and Natal , Sir Garnet Wolseley , who introduced a new Transvaal constitution giving the Boers a limited degree of self @-@ government . Wolseley blunted the Zulu military threat by splitting the kingdom into 13 chiefdoms , and crushed Sekhukhune and the Bapedi during late 1879 . However , he had little success in winning the Boers over to the idea of federation — indeed his defeat of the Zulus and the Bapedi had the opposite effect , as with these two long @-@ standing threats to security removed the Transvaalers could focus all their efforts against the British . Most Boers refused to co @-@ operate with Wolseley 's new order ; Kruger declined a seat in the new executive council . 
 At <unk> on 15 December 1879 , 6 @,@ 000 burghers , many of them bearing the republic 's vierkleur ( " four @-@ colour " ) flag , voted to pursue a restored , independent republic . Pretorius and Bok were imprisoned on charges of high treason when they took this news to Wolseley and Sir Owen Lanyon ( who had replaced Shepstone ) , prompting many burghers to consider rising up there and then — Kruger persuaded them not to , saying this was premature . Pretorius and Bok were swiftly released after Jorissen telegraphed the British Liberal politician William Ewart Gladstone , who had met Kruger 's first deputation in London and had since condemned the annexation as unjust during his Midlothian campaign . 
 In early 1880 Hicks Beach forwarded a scheme for South African federation to the Cape Parliament . Kruger travelled to the Cape to agitate against the proposals alongside Joubert and Jorissen ; by the time they arrived the Liberals had won an election victory in Britain and Gladstone was Prime Minister . In Cape Town , Paarl and elsewhere Kruger lobbied vigorously against the annexation and won much sympathy . Davenport suggests that this contributed to the federation plan 's withdrawal , which in turn weakened the British resolve to keep the Transvaal . Kruger and Joubert wrote to Gladstone asking him to restore the South African Republic 's independence , but to their astonishment the Prime Minister replied in June 1880 that he feared withdrawing from the Transvaal might lead to chaos across South Africa . Kruger concluded that they had done all they could to try to regain independence peacefully , and over the following months the Transvaal burghers prepared for rebellion . Meanwhile , Wolseley was replaced as Governor and High Commissioner by Sir George Pomeroy Colley . 
 In the last months of 1880 , Lanyon began to pursue tax payments from burghers who were in arrears . Piet Cronjé , a farmer in the Potchefstroom district , gave his local <unk> a written statement that the burghers would pay taxes to their " legal government " — that of the South African Republic — but not to the British " usurper " administration . Kruger and Cronjé knew each other ; the writer Johan Frederik van <unk> , who was acquainted with them both , suggested that Kruger may have had a hand in this and what followed . In November , when the British authorities in Potchefstroom were about to auction off a burgher 's wagon that had been seized amid a tax dispute , Cronjé and a group of armed Boers intervened , overcame the presiding officers and reclaimed the wagon . On hearing of this from Cronjé , Kruger told Joubert : " I can no longer restrain the people , and the English government is entirely responsible for the present state of things . " 
 Starting on 8 December 1880 at <unk> , a farm to the south @-@ west of Pretoria , 10 @,@ 000 Boers congregated — the largest recorded meeting of white people in South Africa up to that time . " I stand here before you " , Kruger declared , " called by the people . In the voice of the people I have heard the voice of God , the King of Nations , and I obey ! " He announced the fulfilment of the decision taken at <unk> the previous year to restore the South African Republic government and volksraad , which as the Vice @-@ President of the last independent administration he considered his responsibility . To help him in this he turned to Jorissen and Bok , who respectively became State Attorney and State Secretary , and Pretorius and Joubert , who the reconstituted volksraad elected to an executive triumvirate along with Kruger . The assembly approved a proclamation announcing the restoration of the South African Republic . 
 = = Triumvirate = = 
 = = = Transvaal rebellion : the First Boer War = = = 
 At Kruger 's suggestion Joubert was elected Commandant @-@ General of the restored republic , though he had little military experience and protested he was not suited to the position . The provisional government set up a temporary capital at Heidelberg , a strategically placed town on the main road from Natal , and sent a copy of the proclamation to Lanyon along with a written demand that he surrender the government offices in Pretoria . Lanyon refused and mobilised the British garrison . 
 Kruger took part in the First Boer War in a civilian capacity only , playing a diplomatic and political role with the aid of Jorissen and Bok . The first major clash , a successful Boer ambush , took place on 20 December 1880 at <unk> . By the turn of the year the Transvaalers had all six British garrison outposts , including that in Pretoria , under siege . Colley assembled a field force in Natal , summoned reinforcements from India , and advanced towards the Transvaal . Joubert moved about 2 @,@ 000 Boers south to the Drakensberg and repulsed Colley at Laing 's Nek on 28 January 1881 . After Colley retreated to <unk> , near <unk> , he was attacked by Joubert 's second @-@ in @-@ command Nicolaas Smit on 8 February and again defeated . 
 Understanding that they could not hold out against the might of the British Empire indefinitely , Kruger hoped for a solution at the earliest opportunity . The triumvirate wrote to Colley on 12 February that they were prepared to submit to a royal commission . Colley liaised by telegraph with Gladstone 's Colonial Secretary Lord Kimberley , then wrote to Kruger on 21 February that if the Boers stopped fighting he would cease hostilities and send commissioners for talks . Kruger received this letter on 28 February and readily accepted , but by now it was too late . Colley had been killed at the Battle of <unk> Hill the day before , another decisive victory for the Boers under Smit . This progressive humiliation of the Imperial forces in South Africa by a ragtag collection of farmers , to paraphrase Meintjes and the historian Ian Castle , stunned the Western world . 
 Colley 's death horrified Kruger , who feared it might jeopardise the peace process . His reply to Colley 's letter was delivered to his successor Sir Evelyn Wood on 7 March 1881 , a day after Wood and Joubert had agreed to an eight @-@ day truce . Kruger was outraged to learn of this armistice , which in his view only gave the British opportunity to strengthen their forces — he expected a British attempt to avenge <unk> , which indeed Wood and others wanted — but Gladstone wanted peace , and Wood was instructed to proceed with talks . Negotiations began on 16 March . The British offered amnesty for the Boer leaders , retrocession of the Transvaal under British suzerainty , a British resident in Pretoria and British control over foreign affairs . Kruger pressed on how the British intended to withdraw and what exactly " suzerainty " meant . Brand arrived to mediate on 20 March and the following day agreement was reached ; the British committed to formally restore the republic within six months . The final treaty was concluded on 23 March 1881 . 
 = = = Pretoria Convention = = = 
 Kruger presented the treaty to the volksraad on the triumvirate 's behalf at Heidelberg on 15 April 1881 . " With a feeling of gratitude to the God of our fathers " , he said , " who has been near us in battle and danger , it is to me an unspeakable privilege to lay before you the treaty ... I consider it my duty plainly to declare before you and the whole world , that our respect for Her Majesty the Queen of England , for the government of Her Majesty , and for the English Nation , has never been greater than at this time , when we are enabled to show you a proof of England 's noble and magnanimous love for right and justice . " This statement was to be ignored by many writers , but Manfred Nathan , one of Kruger 's biographers , stresses it as one of his " most notable utterances " . Kruger reaffirmed his faith in the royal commission of Wood , Sir Hercules Robinson and the Cape 's Chief Justice Sir Henry de Villiers , who convened for the first time in Natal on 30 April , Brand with them as an adviser . The commissioners held numerous sessions in Pretoria over the following months with little input from Kruger , who was bedridden with pneumonia . 
 Kruger was largely happy with the terms under which the republic would regain its sovereignty , but two points offended him . The first of these was that the British would recognise them as the " Transvaal Republic " and not the South African Republic ; the second was that it was still not clear to him what British " suzerainty " was . The commission , in which De Villiers emerged as the dominant figure , defined it primarily as British purview over the Transvaal 's external affairs . The final Pretoria Convention was signed on 3 August 1881 by Joubert , Pretorius and the members of the royal commission . Kruger was absent due to his illness , but he did attend the official retrocession five days later in Church Square . Kruger felt well enough to give only a short speech , after which Pretorius addressed the crowd and the vierkleur was raised . 
 By now aged nearly 56 , Kruger resolved that he could no longer travel constantly between Boekenhoutfontein and the capital , and in August 1881 he and Gezina moved to Church Street , Pretoria , from where he could easily walk to the government offices on Church Square . Also around this time he shaved off his moustache and most of his facial hair , leaving the chinstrap beard he kept thereafter . His and Gezina 's permanent home on Church Street , what is now called Kruger House , would be completed in 1884 . 
 A direct consequence of the end of British rule was an economic slump ; the Transvaal government almost immediately found itself again on the verge of bankruptcy . The triumvirate spent two months discussing the terms of the Pretoria Convention with the new volksraad — approve it or go back to Laing 's Nek , said Kruger — before it was finally ratified on 25 October 1881 . During this time Kruger introduced tax reforms , announced the triumvirate 's decision to grant industrial monopolies to raise money and appointed the Reverend S J du Toit to be Superintendent of Education . To counteract the influx of uitlanders , the residency qualification to vote was raised from a year to five years . In July 1882 the volksraad decided to elect a new President the following year ; Joubert and Kruger emerged as candidates . Kruger campaigned on the idea of an administration in which " God 's Word would be my rule of conduct " — as premier he would prioritise agriculture , industry and education , revive Burgers 's Delagoa Bay railway scheme , introduce an immigration policy that would " prevent the Boer nationality from being stifled " , and pursue a cordial stance towards Britain and " obedient native races in their appointed districts " . He defeated Joubert by 3 @,@ 431 votes to 1 @,@ 171 , and was inaugurated as President on 9 May 1883 . 
 = = President = = 
 = = = Third deputation ; London Convention = = = 
 Kruger became President soon after the discovery of gold near what was to become Barberton , which prompted a fresh influx of uitlander diggers . " This gold is still going to soak our country in blood " , said Joubert — a prediction he would repeat many times over the coming years . Joubert remained Commandant @-@ General under Kruger and also became Vice @-@ President . A convoluted situation developed on the Transvaal 's western frontier , where burghers had crossed the border defined in the Pretoria Convention and formed two new Boer republics , <unk> and Goshen , on former Tswana territory in 1882 . These states were tiny but they occupied land of potentially huge importance — the main road from the Cape to Matabeleland and the African interior . 
 Kruger and the volksraad resolved to send yet another deputation to London to renegotiate the Pretoria Convention and settle the western border issue . The third deputation , comprising Kruger , Smit and Du Toit with Jan <unk> as secretary , left the Transvaal in August 1883 and sailed from Cape Town two months later . Kruger spent part of the voyage to Britain studying the English language with a Bible printed in Dutch and English side by side . Talks with the new Colonial Secretary Lord Derby and Robinson progressed smoothly — apart from an incident when Kruger , thinking himself insulted , nearly punched Robinson — and on 27 February 1884 the London Convention , superseding that of Pretoria , was concluded . Britain ended its suzerainty , reduced the Transvaal 's national debt and once again recognised the country as the South African Republic . The western border question remained unresolved , but Kruger still considered the convention a triumph . 
 The deputation went on from London to mainland Europe , where according to Meintjes their reception " was beyond all expectations ... one banquet followed the other , the stand of a handful of Boers against the British Empire having caused a sensation " . During a grand tour Kruger met William III of the Netherlands and his son the Prince of Orange , Leopold II of Belgium , President Jules Grévy of France , Alfonso XII of Spain , Luís I of Portugal , and in Germany Kaiser Wilhelm I and his Chancellor Otto von Bismarck . His public appearances were attended by tens of thousands . The deputation discussed the bilateral aspects of the proposed Delagoa Bay railway with the Portuguese , and in the Netherlands laid the groundwork for the Netherlands @-@ South African Railway Company , which would build and operate it . Kruger now held that Burgers had been " far ahead of his time " — while reviving his predecessor 's railway scheme , he also brought back the policy of importing officials from the Netherlands , in his view a means to strengthen the Boer identity and keep the Transvaal " Dutch " . Willem Johannes Leyds , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old Dutchman , returned to South Africa with the deputation as the republic 's new State Attorney . 
 By late 1884 the Scramble for Africa was well underway . Competition on the western frontier rose after Germany annexed South @-@ West Africa ; at the behest of the mining magnate and Cape MP Cecil Rhodes , Britain proclaimed a protectorate over Bechuanaland , including the <unk> – Goshen corridor . While Joubert was in negotiations with Rhodes , Du Toit had Kruger proclaim Transvaal protection over the corridor on 18 September 1884 . Joubert was outraged , as was Kruger when on 3 October Du Toit unilaterally hoisted the vierkleur in Goshen . Realising the implications of this — it clearly violated the London Convention — Kruger had the flag stricken immediately and retracted his proclamation of 18 September . Meeting Rhodes personally in late January 1885 , Kruger insisted the " flag incident " had taken place without his consent and conceded the corridor to the British . 
 = = = Gold rush ; burghers and uitlanders = = = 
 In July 1886 an Australian prospector reported to the Transvaal government his discovery of an unprecedented gold reef between Pretoria and Heidelberg . The South African Republic 's formal proclamation of this two months later prompted the Witwatersrand Gold Rush and the founding of Johannesburg , which within a few years was the largest city in southern Africa , populated almost entirely by uitlanders . The economic landscape of the region was transformed overnight — the South African Republic went from the verge of bankruptcy in 1886 to a fiscal output equal to the Cape Colony 's the following year . The British became anxious to link Johannesburg to the Cape and Natal by rail , but Kruger thought this might have undesirable geopolitical and economic implications if done prematurely and gave the Delagoa Bay line first priority . 
 The President was by this time widely nicknamed Oom Paul ( " Uncle Paul " ) , both among the Boers and the uitlanders , who variously used it out of affection or contempt . He was perceived by some as a despot after he compromised the independence of the republic 's judiciary to help his friend Alois Hugo <unk> , who had been found guilty of embezzlement — Kruger rejected the court 's judgement and granted <unk> a full pardon , an act Nathan calls " completely indefensible " . Kruger defeated Joubert again in the 1888 election , by 4 @,@ 483 votes to 834 , and was sworn in for a second time in May . Nicolaas Smit was elected Vice @-@ President , and Leyds was promoted to State Secretary . 
 Much of Kruger 's efforts over the next year were dedicated to attempts to acquire a sea outlet for the South African Republic . In July Pieter Grobler , who had just negotiated a treaty with King Lobengula of Matabeleland , was killed by Ngwato warriors on his way home ; Kruger alleged that this was the work of " Cecil Rhodes and his clique " . Kruger despised Rhodes , considering him corrupt and immoral — in his memoirs he called him " capital incarnate " and " the curse of South Africa " . According to the editor of Kruger 's memoirs , Rhodes attempted to win him as an ally by suggesting " we simply take " Delagoa Bay from Portugal ; Kruger was appalled . Failing to make headway in talks with the Portuguese , Kruger switched his attention to Kosi Bay , next to Swaziland , in late 1888 . 
 In early 1889 Kruger and the new Orange Free State President Francis William Reitz enacted a common @-@ defence pact and a customs treaty waiving most import duties . The same year the volksraad passed constitutional revisions to remove the <unk> Hervormde Kerk 's official status , open the legislature to members of other denominations and make all churches " sovereign in their own spheres " . Kruger proposed to end the lack of higher education in the Boer republics by forming a university in Pretoria ; enthusiastic support emerged for this but the Free University of Amsterdam expressed strong opposition , not wishing to lose the Afrikaner element of its student body . No university was built . 
 Kruger was obsessed with the South African Republic 's independence , the retention of which he perceived as under threat if the Transvaal became too British in character . The uitlanders created an acute predicament in his mind . Taxation on their mining provided almost all of the republic 's revenues , but they had very limited civic representation and almost no say in the running of the country . Though the English language was dominant in the mining areas , only Dutch remained official . Kruger expressed great satisfaction at the new arrivals ' industry and respect for the state 's laws , but surmised that giving them full burgher rights might cause the Boers to be swamped by sheer weight in numbers , with the probable result of absorption into the British sphere . <unk> over how he " could meet the wishes of the new population for representation , without injuring the republic or prejudicing the interests of the older burghers " , he thought he had solved the problem in 1889 when he tabled a " second volksraad " in which the uitlanders would have certain matters devolved to them . Most deemed this inadequate , and even Kruger 's own supporters were unenthusiastic . 
 Rhodes and other British figures often contended that there were more uitlanders in the Transvaal than Boers . Kruger 's administration recorded twice as many Transvaalers as uitlanders , but acknowledged that there were more uitlanders than enfranchised burghers . According to the British Liberal politician James Bryce , most uitlanders saw the country as " virtually English " and perceived " something unreasonable or even grotesque in the control of a small body of persons whom they deemed in every way their inferiors . " On 4 March 1890 , when Kruger visited Johannesburg , men sang British patriotic songs , tore down and trampled on the vierkleur at the city <unk> 's office , and rioted outside the house where the President was staying . One of the agitators accused him of treating the uitlanders with contempt ; Kruger retorted : " I have no contempt for the new population , only for people like yourself . " The riot was broken up by police and the Chamber of Mines issued an apology , which Kruger accepted , saying only a few of the uitlanders had taken part . Few Boers were as conciliatory as Kruger ; Meintjes marks this as " the point where the rift between the Transvaalers and the uitlanders began . " 
 = = = Early 1890s = = = 
 In mid @-@ March 1890 Kruger met the new British High Commissioner and Governor Sir Henry Brougham Loch , Loch 's legal adviser William Philip Schreiner , and Rhodes , who had by now attained a dominant position in the Transvaal 's mining industry and a royal charter for his British South Africa Company to occupy and administer Matabeleland and Mashonaland . A group of Transvaalers planned to emigrate to Mashonaland — the so @-@ called Bowler Trek — and Rhodes was keen to stop this lest it interfere with his own plans . He and Loch offered to support Kruger in his plan to acquire a port at Kosi Bay and link it to the Transvaal through Swaziland if in return the Transvaal would enter a South African customs union and pledge not to expand northwards . Kruger made no commitments , thinking this union might easily turn into the federation Britain had pursued years before , but on his return to Pretoria forbade any Boer trek to Mashonaland . 
 Rhodes became Prime Minister of the Cape Colony in July 1890 . A month later the British and Transvaalers agreed to joint control over Swaziland ( without consulting the <unk> ) — the South African Republic could build a railway through it to Kosi Bay on the condition that the Transvaal thereafter supported the interests of Rhodes 's Chartered Company in Matabeleland and its environs . Kruger honoured the latter commitment in 1891 when he outlawed the <unk> Trek , another would @-@ be emigration to Mashonaland , over the protests of Joubert and many others . This , along with his handling of the economy and the civil service — now widely perceived as overloaded with Dutch imports — caused opposition to grow . The industrial monopolies Kruger 's administration granted became widely derided as corrupt and inefficient , especially the dynamite concession given to Edouard Lippert and a French consortium , which Kruger was forced to revoke in 1892 amid much scandal over misrepresentation and price gouging . 
 Kruger 's second volksraad sat for the first time in 1891 . Any resolution it passed had to be ratified by the first volksraad ; its role was in effect largely advisory . <unk> could vote in elections for the second volksraad after two years ' residency on the condition they were naturalised as burghers — a process requiring the renunciation of any foreign allegiance . The residency qualification for naturalised burghers to join the first volksraad electorate was raised from five to 14 years , with the added criterion that they had to be at least 40 years old . During the close @-@ run campaign for the 1893 election , in which Kruger was again challenged by Joubert with the Chief Justice John Gilbert Kotzé as a third candidate , the President indicated that he was prepared to lower the 14 @-@ year residency requirement so long as it would not risk the subversion of the state 's independence . The electoral result was announced as 7 @,@ 854 votes for Kruger , 7 @,@ 009 for Joubert , and 81 for Kotzé . Joubert 's supporters alleged procedural irregularities and demanded a recount ; the ballots were counted twice more and although the results varied slightly each time , every count gave Kruger a majority . Joubert conceded and Kruger was inaugurated for the third time on 12 May 1893 . 
 Kruger was by this time widely perceived as a personification of Afrikanerdom both at home and abroad . When he stopped going to the government offices at the <unk> by foot and began to be conveyed there by a presidential carriage , his coming and going became a public spectacle not unlike the Changing of the Guard in Britain . " Once seen , he is not easily forgotten " , wrote Lady Phillips . " His greasy frock coat and antiquated tall hat have been portrayed times without number ... and I think his character is clearly to be read in his face — strength of character and cunning . " 
 = = = Rising tensions : raiders and reformers = = = 
 By 1894 the Kosi Bay scheme had been abandoned and the Delagoa Bay line was almost complete , while the railways from Natal and the Cape had reached Johannesburg . Chief <unk> 's insurgency in the north compelled Joubert to call up a commando and the State Artillery in May 1894 . Those drafted included British subjects , the large majority of whom indignantly refused to report , feeling that as foreigners they should be exempted . Kotzé 's ruling that British nationality did not preclude one from conscription as a Transvaal resident prompted an outpouring of displeasure from the uitlanders that manifested itself when Loch visited Pretoria the following month . Protesters waited for Kruger and Loch to enter the presidential coach at the railway station , then unharnessed the horses , attached a Union Jack and raucously dragged the carriage to Loch 's hotel . Embarrassed , Loch complied with Kruger 's request that he should not go on to Johannesburg . Kruger announced that " the government will , in the meantime , provisionally , no more commandeer British subjects for personal military service " . In his memoirs , he alleged that Loch secretly conferred with the uitlanders ' National Union at this time about how long the miners could hold Johannesburg by arms without British help . 
 The following year the National Union sent Kruger a petition bearing 38 @,@ 500 signatures requesting electoral reform . Kruger dismissed all such entreaties with the assertion that enfranchising " these new @-@ comers , these disobedient persons " might imperil the republic 's independence . " Protest ! " he shouted at one uitlander deputation ; " What is the use of protesting ? I have the guns , you haven 't . " The Johannesburg press became intensely hostile to the President personally , using the term " <unk> " to encapsulate all the republic 's perceived injustices . In August 1895 , after gauging burghers ' views from across the country , the first volksraad rejected the opposition 's bill to give all uitlanders the vote by 14 ballots to 10 . Kruger said this did not extend to those who had " proved their trustworthiness " , and conferred burgher rights on all uitlanders who had served in Transvaal commandos . 
 The Delagoa Bay railway line was completed in December 1894 — the realisation of a great personal ambition for Kruger , who tightened the final bolt of " our national railway " personally . The formal opening in July 1895 was a gala affair with leading figures from all the neighbouring territories present , including Loch 's successor Sir Hercules Robinson . " This railway changed the whole internal situation in the Transvaal " , Kruger wrote in his autobiography . " Until that time , the Cape railway had enjoyed a monopoly , so to speak , of the Johannesburg traffic . " Difference of opinion between Kruger and Rhodes over the distribution of the profits from customs duties led to the Drifts Crisis of September – October 1895 : the Cape Colony avoided the Transvaal railway fees by using wagons instead . Kruger 's closure of the drifts ( fords ) in the Vaal River where the wagons crossed prompted Rhodes to call for support from Britain on the grounds that the London Convention was being breached . The Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain told Kruger if he did not reopen the drifts Britain would do so by force ; Kruger backed down . 
 Understanding that renewed hostilities with Britain were now a real possibility , Kruger began to pursue armament . Relations with Germany had been warming for some time ; when Leyds went there for medical treatment in late 1895 , he took with him an order from the Transvaal government for rifles and munitions . Conferring with the Colonial Office , Rhodes pondered the co @-@ ordination of an uitlander revolt in Johannesburg with British military intervention , and had a force of about 500 marshalled on the Bechuanaland – Transvaal frontier under Leander Starr Jameson , the Chartered Company 's administrator in Matabeleland . On 29 December 1895 , ostensibly following an urgent plea from the Johannesburg Reform Committee ( as the National Union now called itself ) , these troops crossed the border and rode for the Witwatersrand — the Jameson Raid had begun . 
 Jameson 's force failed to cut all of the telegraph wires , allowing a rural Transvaal official to raise the alarm early , though there are suggestions Kruger had been tipped off some days before . Joubert called up the burghers and rode west to meet Jameson . Robinson publicly repudiated Jameson 's actions and ordered him back , but Jameson ignored him and pushed on towards Johannesburg ; Robinson wired Kruger offering to come immediately for talks . The Reform Committee 's efforts to rally the uitlanders for revolt floundered , partly because not all of the mine @-@ owners ( or " <unk> " ) were supportive , and by 31 December the conspirators had raised a makeshift vierkleur over their headquarters at the offices of Rhodes 's Gold Fields company , signalling their capitulation . Unaware of this , Jameson continued until he was forced to surrender to Piet Cronjé on 2 January 1896 . 
 A congratulatory telegram to Kruger from Kaiser Wilhelm II on 3 January prompted a storm of anti @-@ Boer and anti @-@ German feeling in Britain , with Jameson becoming lionised as a result . Kruger shouted down talk of the death penalty for the imprisoned Jameson or a campaign of retribution against Johannesburg , challenging his more bellicose commandants to depose him if they disagreed , and accepted Robinson 's proposed mediation with alacrity . After confiscating the weapons and munitions the Reform Committee had stockpiled , Kruger handed Jameson and his troops over to British custody and granted amnesty to all the Johannesburg conspirators except for 64 leading members , who were charged with high treason . The four main leaders — Lionel Phillips , John Hays Hammond , George Farrar and Frank Rhodes ( brother of Cecil ) — pleaded guilty in April 1896 and were sentenced to hang , but Kruger quickly had this commuted to fines of £ 25 @,@ 000 each . 
 = = = Resurgence = = = 
 The Jameson Raid ruined Rhodes 's political reputation in the Cape and lost him his longstanding support from the Afrikaner Bond ; he resigned as Prime Minister of the Cape Colony on 12 January . Kruger 's handling of the affair made his name a household word across the world and won him much support from Afrikaners in the Cape and the Orange Free State , who began to visit Pretoria in large numbers . The President granted personal audiences to travellers and writers such as Olive Schreiner and Frank Harris , and wore the knightly orders of the Netherlands , Portugal , Belgium and France on his sash of state . Jameson was jailed by the British but released after four months . Meanwhile , the republic made armament one of its main priorities , ordering huge quantities of rifles , munitions , field guns and howitzers , primarily from Germany and France . 
 In March 1896 Marthinus Theunis Steyn , the young lawyer Kruger had encountered on the ship to England two decades earlier , became President of the Orange Free State . They quickly won each other 's confidence ; each man 's memoirs would describe the other in glowing terms . Chamberlain began to take exception to the South African Republic 's diplomatic actions , such as joining the Geneva Convention , which he said breached Article IV of the London Convention ( which forbade extraterritorial dealings except vis @-@ a @-@ vis the Orange Free State ) . Chamberlain asserted that the Transvaal was still under British suzerainty , a claim Kruger called " nonsensical " . Kruger and Steyn concluded a treaty of trade and friendship in Bloemfontein in March 1897 , along with a fresh military alliance binding each republic to defend the other 's independence . Two months later Sir Alfred Milner became the new High Commissioner and Governor in Cape Town . 
 Kruger developed a habit of threatening to resign whenever the volksraad did not give him his way . In the 1897 session there was much surprise when the new member Louis Botha reacted to the usual proffered resignation by leaping up and moving to accept it . A constitutional crisis developed after the judiciary under Chief Justice Kotzé abandoned its prior stance of giving volksraad resolutions legal precedence over the constitution . " This decision would have upset the whole country " , Kruger recalled , " for a number of rules concerning the goldfields , the franchise and so on depended on resolutions of the volksraad . " Chief Justice De Villiers of the Cape mediated , sided with Kruger and upheld the volksraad decrees . 
 Kruger was never more popular domestically than during the 1897 – 98 election campaign , and indeed was widely perceived to be jollier than he had been in years . He won his most decisive election victory yet — 12 @,@ 853 votes to Joubert 's 2 @,@ 001 and Schalk Willem Burger 's 3 @,@ 753 — and was sworn in as President for the fourth time on 12 May 1898 . After a three @-@ hour inauguration address , his longest speech as President , his first act of his fourth term was to sack Kotzé , who was still claiming the right to test legislation in the courts . To Kruger 's critics this lent much credence to the notion that he was a tyrant . Milner called Kotzé 's dismissal " the end of real justice in the Transvaal " and a step that " threatened all British subjects and interests there " . 
 Kruger 's final administration was , Meintjes suggests , the strongest in the history of the republic . He had the former Free State President F W Reitz as State Secretary from June 1898 and Leyds , who set up an office in Brussels , as Envoy Extraordinary in Europe . The post of State Attorney was given to a young lawyer from the Cape called Jan Smuts , for whom Kruger presaged great things . The removal of Leyds to Europe marked the end of Kruger 's longstanding policy of giving important government posts to Dutchmen ; convinced of Cape Afrikaners ' sympathy following the Jameson Raid , he preferred them from this point on . 
 = = = Road to war = = = 
 Anglo @-@ German relations warmed during late 1898 , with Berlin disavowing any interest in the Transvaal ; this opened the way for Milner and Chamberlain to take a firmer line against Kruger . The so @-@ called " Edgar case " of early 1899 , in which a South African Republic Policeman was acquitted of manslaughter after shooting a British subject dead during an attempted arrest , prompted outcry from the British element in the Transvaal and is highlighted by Nathan as " the starting point of the final agitation which led to war . " 
 The South African League , a new uitlander movement , prepared two petitions , each with more than 20 @,@ 000 signatures , that appealed to Queen Victoria for intervention against the Transvaal government , which they called inefficient , corrupt and oppressive . Other uitlanders produced a counter @-@ petition in which about as many affirmed their satisfaction with Kruger 's government . Attempting to address the main point of contention raised by Milner and Chamberlain , Kruger spoke of reducing the residency qualification for foreigners to nine years or perhaps less . In May and June 1899 he and Milner met in Bloemfontein , with Steyn taking on the role of mediator . " You must make concessions on the franchise issue " , Steyn counselled . " Franchise after a residence of 14 years is in conflict with the first principles of a republican and democratic government . The Free State expects you to concede ... Should you not give in on this issue , you will lose all sympathy and all your friends . " Kruger answered that he had already indicated his willingness to lower the franchise and was " prepared to do anything " — " but they must not touch my independence " , he said . " They must be reasonable in their demands . " 
 Milner wanted full voting rights after five years ' residence , a revised naturalisation oath and increased legislative representation for the new burghers . Kruger offered naturalisation after two years ' residence and full franchise after five more ( seven years , effectively ) along with increased representation and a new oath similar to that of the Free State . The High Commissioner declared his original request an " irreducible minimum " and said he would discuss nothing else until the franchise question was resolved . On 5 June Milner proposed an advisory council of non @-@ burghers to represent the uitlanders , prompting Kruger to cry : " How can strangers rule my state ? How is it possible ! " When Milner said he did not foresee this council taking on any governing role , Kruger burst into tears , saying " It is our country you want " . Milner ended the conference that evening , saying the further meetings Steyn and Kruger wanted were unnecessary . 
 Back in Pretoria Kruger introduced a draft law to give the mining regions four more seats in each volksraad and fix a seven @-@ year residency period for voting rights . This would not be retroactive , but up to two years ' prior residence would be counted towards the seven , and uitlanders already in the country for nine years or more would get the vote immediately . Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr of the Afrikaner Bond persuaded Kruger to make this fully retrospective ( to immediately enfranchise all white men in the country seven years or more ) , but Milner and the South African League deemed this insufficient . After Kruger rejected the British proposal of a joint commission on the franchise law , Smuts and Reitz proposed a five @-@ year retroactive franchise and the extension of a quarter of the volksraad seats to the Witwatersrand region , on the condition that Britain drop any claim to suzerainty . Chamberlain issued an ultimatum in September 1899 in which he insisted on five years without conditions , else the British would " formulate their own proposals for a final settlement . " 
 Kruger resolved that war was inevitable , comparing the Boers ' position to that of a man attacked by a lion with only a pocketknife for defence . " Would you be such a coward as not to defend yourself with your pocketknife ? " he posited . Aware of the deployment of British troops from elsewhere in the Empire , Kruger and Smuts surmised that from a military standpoint the Boers ' only chance was a swift pre @-@ emptive strike . Steyn was anxious that they not be seen as the aggressors and insisted they delay until there was absolutely no hope of peace . He informed Kruger on 9 October that he also now thought war unavoidable ; that afternoon the Transvaal government handed the British envoy Conyngham Greene an ultimatum advising that if Britain did not withdraw all troops from the border within 48 hours , a state of war would exist . The British government considered the conditions impossible and informed Kruger of this on 11 October 1899 . The start of the Second Boer War was announced in Pretoria that day , at 17 : 00 local time . 
 = = = Second Boer War = = = 
 The outbreak of war raised Kruger 's international profile even further . In countries antagonistic to Britain he was idolised ; Kruger expressed high hopes of German , French or Russian military intervention , despite the repeated despatches from Leyds telling him this was a fantasy . Kruger took no part in the fighting , partly because of his age and poor health — he turned 75 the week war broke out — but perhaps primarily to prevent his being killed or captured . His personal contributions to the military campaign were mostly from his office in Pretoria , where he oversaw the war effort and advised his officers by telegram . The Boer commandos , including four of Kruger 's sons , six sons @-@ in @-@ law and 33 of his grandsons , advanced quickly into the Cape and Natal , won a series of victories and by the end of October were besieging Kimberley , Ladysmith and Mafeking . Soon thereafter , following a serious injury to Joubert , Kruger appointed Louis Botha to be Acting Commandant @-@ General . 
 The British relief of Kimberley and Ladysmith in February 1900 marked the turning of the war against the Boers . Morale plummeted among the commandos over the following months , with many burghers simply going home ; Kruger toured the front in response and asserted that any man who deserted in this time of need should be shot . He had hoped for large numbers of Cape Afrikaners to rally to the republican cause , but only small bands did so , along with a few thousand foreign volunteers ( principally Dutchmen , Germans and Scandinavians ) . When British troops entered Bloemfontein on 13 March 1900 Reitz and others urged Kruger to destroy the gold mines , but he refused on the grounds that this would obstruct rehabilitation after the war . Mafeking was relieved two months later and on 30 May Lord Roberts took Johannesburg . Kruger left Pretoria on 29 May , travelling by train to <unk> , and on 2 June the government abandoned the capital . Roberts entered three days later . 
 With the major towns and the railways under British control , the conventional phase of the war ended ; Kruger wired Steyn pondering surrender , but the Free State President insisted they fight " to the bitter end " . Kruger found new strength in Steyn and <unk> all Transvaal officers forbidding the laying down of arms . <unk> ( " bitter @-@ enders " ) under Botha , Christiaan de Wet and Koos de la Rey took to the veld and waged a guerrilla campaign . The British under Lord Kitchener applied scorched earth policy in response , burning the farms of Boers still in the field ; non @-@ combatants ( mostly women and children ) were put into what the British Army dubbed concentration camps . Kruger moved to <unk> <unk> , where his small house became the " <unk> " , in late June . After Roberts announced the annexation of the South African Republic to the British Empire on 1 September 1900 — the Free State had been annexed on 24 May — Kruger proclaimed on 3 September that this was " not recognised " and " declared null and void " . It was decided in the following days that to prevent his capture Kruger would leave for Lourenço Marques and there board ship for Europe . Officially he was to tour the continent , and perhaps America too , to raise support for the Boer cause . 
 = = Exile and death = = 
 Kruger left the Transvaal by rail on 11 September 1900 — he wept as the train crossed into Mozambique . He planned to board the first outgoing steamer , the Herzog of the German East Africa Line , but was prevented from doing so when , at the behest of the local British Consul , the Portuguese Governor insisted that Kruger stay in port under house arrest . About a month later Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands concluded a deal with Britain to extricate Kruger on a Dutch warship , HNLMS Gelderland , and convey him through non @-@ British waters to Marseille . Kruger was delighted to hear of this , but dismayed that Gezina , still in Pretoria , was not well enough to accompany him . Gelderland departed on 20 October 1900 . 
 Kruger was going deaf and losing some of his sharpness but his presence in Europe nevertheless had enormous propaganda value for the Boers . He received a rapturous welcome in Marseille on 22 November — 60 @,@ 000 people turned out to see him disembark . Accompanied by Leyds , he went on to an exuberant reception in Paris , then continued to Cologne on 1 December . Here the public greeted him with similar excitement , but Kaiser Wilhelm II refused to receive him in Berlin . Having apparently still harboured hopes of German assistance in the war , Kruger was deeply shocked . " The Kaiser has betrayed us " , he told Leyds . They went on to the Netherlands , which was strictly neutral and could not assist militarily , but would feel more like home . After another buoyant reception from the general public Kruger was cordially received by Wilhelmina and her family in The Hague , but it soon became clear to Leyds that it embarrassed the Dutch government to have them staying in the capital . The Kruger party moved to Hilversum in April 1901 . 
 Gezina , with whom Kruger had had 16 children — nine sons , seven daughters ( of whom some died young ) — had eight sickly grandchildren transferred to her from the concentration camp at Krugersdorp , where their mother had died , in July 1901 . Five of the eight children died within nine days , and two weeks later Gezina also died . Meintjes writes that a " strange silence " enveloped Kruger thereafter . By now partially blind and almost totally deaf , he dictated his memoirs to his secretary Hermanus Christiaan " <unk> " Bredell and Pieter Grobler during the latter part of 1901 , and the following year they were published . Kruger and his entourage relocated in December 1901 to Utrecht , where he took a comfortable villa called " Oranjelust " and was joined by his daughter <unk> <unk> and her family . 
 Rhodes died in March 1902 , bequeathing Groote Schuur to be the official residence for future premiers of a unified South Africa . Kruger quipped to Bredell : " Perhaps I 'll be the first . " The war formally ended on 31 May 1902 with the Treaty of Vereeniging ; the Boer republics became the Orange River and Transvaal Colonies . Kruger accepted it was all over only when Bredell had the flags of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State removed from outside Oranjelust two weeks later . In reply to condolences from Germany , Kruger would only say : " My grief is beyond expression . " 
 Kruger would not countenance the idea of returning home , partly because of personal reluctance to become a British subject again , and partly because he thought he could better serve his people by remaining in exile . Steyn similarly refused to accept the new order and joined Kruger in Europe , though he was later to return . Botha , De Wet and De la Rey visited Oranjelust in August 1902 and , according to hearsay , were berated by Kruger for " signing away independence " — rumours of such a scene were widespread enough that the generals issued a statement denying them . 
 After passing October 1902 to May 1903 at Menton on the French Riviera , Kruger moved back to Hilversum , then returned to Menton in October 1903 . In early 1904 he moved to Clarens , a small village in the canton of Vaud in western Switzerland where he spent the rest of his days looking over Lake Geneva and the Alps from his balcony . " He who wishes to create a future must not lose track of the past " , he wrote in his final letter , addressed to the people of the Transvaal . " Thus ; seek all that is to be found good and fair in the past , shape your ideal accordingly and try to realise that ideal for the future . It is true : much that has been built is now destroyed , damaged , levelled . But with unity of purpose and unity of strength that which has been pulled down can be built again . " After contracting pneumonia , Paul Kruger died in Clarens on 14 July 1904 at the age of 78 . His Bible lay open on a table beside him . 
 Kruger 's body was initially buried in The Hague , but was soon repatriated with British permission . After ceremonial lying in state , he was accorded a state funeral in Pretoria on 16 December 1904 , the vierkleur of the South African Republic draped over his coffin , and buried in what is now called the Heroes ' Acre in the Church Street Cemetery . 
 = = Appraisal and legacy = = 
 Academic opinion on Kruger is divided . To admirers he was an astute reader of people , events and law who faithfully defended a maligned nation and became a tragic folk hero ; to critics he was " an anachronistic throwback " , the stubborn , slippery guardian of an unjust cause and an oppressor of black Africans . " More nonsense has been written about him than anybody I know of " , writes Meintjes , in whose view the true figure has been obscured by conflicting attempts to sabotage or whitewash his image — " a veritable bog of hostility and sentiment , prejudice and deification " , depicting Kruger as anything " from saint to stuffy mendacious savage " . Rights and wrongs aside , Meintjes asserts , Kruger is the central figure of Boer history and one of the " most extraordinary " of South Africans . 
 Following the Union of South Africa under Botha in 1910 , Kruger remained " a vital force in South African politics and Afrikaner culture " . The government wildlife reserve he had proclaimed in 1898 was expanded and dubbed Kruger National Park in 1926 . In 1954 , over half a century after its construction by Anton van <unk> , a bronze statue of Kruger in his characteristic Dopper suit and top hat was erected in Church Square , Pretoria ; Kruger stands atop a plinth surrounded by four crouching Boers from different time periods . Thirteen years later the South African Mint put his likeness on the Krugerrand , a gold bullion coin still produced and exported in the 21st century . His home in Pretoria and farm at Boekenhoutfontein are provincial heritage sites , the former of which is preserved to appear as in his time . 
 Kruger gives his name to the town of Krugersdorp , and to many streets and squares in South Africa and other countries , especially the Netherlands . This has , on occasion , led to controversy ; in 2009 local authorities in St Gallen , Switzerland renamed <unk> " because of racist associations " . Clarens , Free State is named after Kruger 's last home in Switzerland . During the Second World War Kruger 's life story and image were appropriated by propagandists in Nazi Germany , who produced the biographical film Ohm Krüger ( " Uncle Krüger " , 1941 ) to attack the British , with Emil Jannings in the title role . The underdevelopment of South African administrative law until the late 20th century was , Davenport asserts , the direct result of Kruger 's censure and dismissal of Chief Justice Kotzé in 1898 over the question of legislative review . 
 " Paul Kruger 's name and fame he made himself " , Leyds said . " It is sometimes said that he was illiterate . This is of course nonsense ... He was certainly not learned , but he had a thorough knowledge of many things . " " In the lower spheres of diplomacy Mr Kruger was a master " , E B Iwan @-@ Müller asserted . " He was quick in detecting the false moves made by his opponents , and an adept in turning them to his own advantage ; but of the large combinations he was hopelessly incapable . To secure a brilliant and conspicuous success today he was ready to squander the prospects of the future , if , indeed , he had the power of forecasting them . He was what I believe soldiers would call a brilliant tactician , but a hopeless strategist . " Soon after Kruger 's death , Smuts told the British humanitarian campaigner Emily Hobhouse : " He typified the Boer character both in its brighter and darker aspects , and was no doubt the greatest man — both morally and intellectually — whom the Boer race has so far produced . In his iron will and tenacity , his ' never say die ' attitude towards fate , his mystic faith in another world , he represented what is best in all of us . " 
 = Shanhua Temple = 
 Shanhua Temple ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) is a Buddhist temple located in Datong , Shanxi Province , China . The temple was first founded during the early 8th century of the Tang Dynasty , but its earliest surviving building dates from the 11th century . The temple was heavily repaired over the years , and today three original halls and two recently rebuilt pavilions survive . The largest , and earliest hall , dating from the 11th @-@ century Liao Dynasty , is the Mahavira Hall and is one of the largest of its kind in China . Also historically significant are the Main Gate and Sansheng Hall , both dating from 12th century during the Jin dynasty . 
 = = History = = 
 The Shanhua Temple was first founded during the Kaiyuan period of the Tang Dynasty ( 713 @-@ 741 ) under the patronage of emperor Xuanzong , at which time it was known as the Kaiyuan Temple . After the fall of the Tang Dynasty during the Five Dynasties period ( 906 @-@ 960 ) , the temple underwent a name change and was known as Da Pu ’ <unk> . During this chaotic time , out of ten buildings at the temple , only three or four escaped destruction . After the takeover by the Liao Dynasty in 960 , the temple assumed its present configuration . 
 The temple was again heavily damaged when the Jin dynasty took over in 1120 , and in 1128 repair work was started that took fifteen years to complete . In 1421 , more repairs were undertaken , this time by a monk named <unk> . In 1445 , he received an imperial presentation of sutras . This is also the first time that the temple was referred to by its present name , Shanhua Temple . In the late 16th century , drum and bell towers were built on the same stone platform ( yuetai , 月台 ) supporting the Mahavira Hall . Further repairs were made to the temple over the next two hundred years but by the late 18th century the temple was once again in a state of disrepair , and the use of one of the halls as a camel stable had caused a wall to collapse . During World War II , the Puxian pavilion was destroyed , and was rebuilt in 1953 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Shanhua Temple today consists of three main halls ( The Mahavira Hall , the Sansheng Hall and the Main Gate ) arranged on a north @-@ south axis and two pavilions located to the east and west of the Sansheng Hall . There are also two smaller halls on each side of the Mahavira Hall . The main halls were all first built during the Liao Dynasty ( 907 @-@ 1125 ) , but only the Mahavira Hall is now considered a Liao Building . The Main Gate and Sansheng Hall were extensively renovated during the subsequent Jin dynasty , and are classified by scholars as being Jin buildings . 
 = = = Main Hall = = = 
 The Main or Mahavira Hall ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is the northernmost and largest hall , and dates from the 11th century . It measures seven by five bays ( 40 @.@ 5 by 25 m ) and has three doors at the front of the hall . The hall is built on an elevated three meter high platform that was once the site of both a drum and bell tower that are no longer extant . According to the standards in the 11th @-@ century Chinese architectural treatise Yingzao Fashi , the hall is held up by fifth rank bracket sets ( <unk> ) in a system of eight ranks . The interior contains four large Buddha statues representing the four cardinal directions , and a central statue representing Sakyamuni . The statues are similar , and represent the Buddha displaying different mudras ( symbolic hand gestures ) . Above the Sakyamuni statue , is a caisson ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , an octagonal wooden ceiling that is painted and decorated . 
 Along with other statues of disciples and attendants grouped with the large statues , there are also 24 deva statues located next to the east and west walls . There are 190 square meters of murals in the hall . They date from 1708 to 1716 , but have been damaged over the years . 
 = = = Sansheng Hall = = = 
 The Sansheng Hall ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; literally : " Hall of Three Sages " ) is the middle hall , and was built during the Jin dynasty . It houses statues of the three sages of the <unk> Sutra - a central one of Vairocana ( the universal aspect of Shakyamuni ) and two accompanying statues of Manjusri and Samantabhadra . The hall has very few central pillars for its support and depends on complex rafters and brackets of the 6th rank for its support . 
 = = = Puxian Pavilion = = = 
 The Puxian Pavilion ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) was initially built during the Liao Dynasty , and was examined by Liang Sicheng in the 1930s . He reported a heavily damaged structure with two stories . On the first story was a miniature building and niche with two images . On the top story was a statue of the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra . 
 The building was rebuilt in 1953 after having been destroyed during the war . The pavilion measures three bays by two , but is nearly a perfect square . It is built on a short stone platform called a yuetai ( 月台 ) which is accessed by a short set of stairs . While from the outside , the pavilion appears to only have two stories , there are actually three , with the second floor being hidden from outside view . Each of the exterior levels is surrounded by a perimeter of columns . 
 = = = Wenshu Pavilion = = = 
 This pavilion ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) was destroyed in the early 20th century after it caught fire after being converted into a tannery . It was rebuilt in 2008 by the local government . 
 = = = Main Gate = = = 
 The Main Gate ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Shān <unk> ) is a large hall that was built during the Jin dynasty in the 12th century , and is the entrance building of the temple . The hall contains statues of the four heavenly kings , with two on the east side , and two on the west side . It is five bays long , and two bays wide and has an area of 278 square meters . The brackets used to support the structure are of the 5th rank . 
 = Simpson family = 
 The Simpson family are cartoon characters featured in the animated television series The Simpsons . The Simpsons are a nuclear family consisting of married couple Homer and Marge and their three children Bart , Lisa and Maggie . They live at 742 Evergreen Terrace in the fictional town of Springfield , U.S.A. and they were created by cartoonist Matt Groening who conceived the characters after his own family members , substituting " Bart " for his own name . The family debuted April 19 , 1987 in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " and were later spun off into their own series which debuted on December 17 , 1989 . 
 Alongside the five main family members , there are a number of other major and minor characters in their family . The most commonly recurring characters are Homer 's father Abraham " Grampa " Simpson ; Marge 's sisters Patty and Selma Bouvier ; and the family 's two pets , Santa 's Little Helper and Snowball II . Other family members include Homer 's mother Mona Simpson , Homer 's half @-@ brother Herbert Powell , Marge 's mother Jacqueline Bouvier , and other minor relatives . 
 = = Main family = = 
 The Simpsons are a family who live in at 742 Evergreen Terrace in the town of Springfield in the United States . Homer , the father , works as a safety inspector at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , a position at odds with his careless , buffoonish personality . He is married to Marge Simpson , a stereotypical American housewife and mother . They have three children : Bart , a ten @-@ year @-@ old troublemaker ; Lisa , a precocious intelligent eight @-@ year @-@ old environmental activist ; and Maggie , a baby who rarely speaks , but communicates by sucking on a pacifier . The family owns a dog , Santa 's Little Helper , and a cat , Snowball II . Both pets have had starring roles in several seasons . Despite the passing of yearly milestones such as holidays or birthdays , the Simpsons do not physically age and still appear just as they did at the end of the 1980s . Although the family is dysfunctional , many episodes examine their relationships and bonds with each other and they are often shown to care about one another . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Groening conceived of the idea for the Simpsons in the lobby of James L. Brooks 's office . Brooks had asked Groening to pitch an idea for a series of animated shorts , which Groening initially intended to present as his Life in Hell series . However , when Groening realized that animating Life in Hell would require the rescinding of publication rights for his life 's work , he chose another approach and formulated his version of a dysfunctional family . He named the characters after his own family members — his father Homer , his mother Margaret , and his younger sisters Lisa and Maggie . He substituted " Bart " , an anagram of " brat " , for his own name , and modeled the character after his older brother , Mark . 
 The five family members were given simple designs so that their facial emotions could easily be changed with almost no effort and so that they would be recognizable in silhouette . Groening submitted only basic sketches to the animators and assumed that the figures would be cleaned @-@ up in production . However , the animators merely re @-@ traced his drawings , which led to the crude appearance of the characters in the initial short episodes . The Simpson family made their debut on April 19 , 1987 in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " . In 1989 , the shorts were adapted into The Simpsons , a half @-@ hour series airing on the Fox Broadcasting Company . The Simpson family remained the main characters on this new show . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Dan Castellaneta , Julie Kavner , Nancy Cartwright , and Yeardley Smith all began voicing their characters on The Tracey Ullman Show . Nancy Cartwright was the only one of the group who had been trained to be a voice actor while Castellaneta had done some voice over work in Chicago . Castellaneta and Kavner had been part of the regular cast of The Tracey Ullman Show and voices were needed for the shorts , so the producers decided to ask them to voice Homer and Marge rather than hire more actors . The producers decided to hold casting for the roles of Bart and Lisa . Yeardley Smith had initially been asked to audition for the role of Bart , but casting director Bonita Pietila believed her voice was too high . Smith later recalled , " I always sounded too much like a girl . I read two lines as Bart and they said , ' Thanks for coming ! ' " Smith was given the role of Lisa instead . On March 13 , 1987 , Nancy Cartwright went in to audition for the role of Lisa . After arriving at the audition , she found that Lisa was simply described as the " middle child " and at the time did not have much personality . Cartwright became more interested in the role of Bart who she found more fascinating because he was described as " devious , underachieving , school @-@ hating , irreverent , [ and ] clever . " Matt Groening let her try out for the part instead , and upon hearing her read , gave her the job on the spot . 
 = = = Homer Simpson = = = 
 Homer Jay Simpson , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , is the father of the Simpson family . He embodies several American working class stereotypes : he is crude , overweight , incompetent , clumsy , thoughtless and a borderline alcoholic . He has occasionally displayed flashes of great intellect and fitness whenever the situation calls for it , and an integrity reflecting his own values , including a fierce devotion to and protectiveness of his family . His voice started out as an impression of Walter Matthau but eventually evolved into a more robust voice during the second and third season of the half @-@ hour show , allowing Homer to cover a fuller range of emotions . Homer has since become one of the most influential fictional characters and has been described by the UK newspaper The Sunday Times as the greatest comedic creation of modern time . He has inspired an entire line of merchandise , and his catchphrase , the annoyed grunt " D 'oh ! " , has been included in the Oxford English Dictionary . 
 = = = Marge Simpson = = = 
 Marjorie " Marge " Simpson ( née Bouvier ) , voiced by Julie Kavner , is the well @-@ meaning and extremely patient wife of Homer and mother of Bart , Lisa and Maggie . She often acts as the voice of reason , but displays exaggerated behavior traits of stereotypical mothers and takes the blatant dysfunctionality of her family for granted , unlike the other family members , who are aware that they are eccentric . Her most notable physical feature is her blue hair , styled into an improbably high beehive . Julie Kavner received a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 for voicing Marge in the episode " I Married Marge " . For her performance in The Simpsons Movie , Kavner received a nomination for " Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature " at the 2007 Annie Awards , but lost to Ian Holm in Ratatouille . Kavner 's emotional performance in the movie got positive reviews and one critic said she " gave what must be the most heartfelt performance ever " . Part of Kavner 's contract says that she will never have to promote The Simpsons on video because she does not want to " destroy the illusion for children " . In 2008 , CityNews published an article entitled " Top 10 Greatest TV Moms of All Time " , and placed Marge in eighth spot . 
 = = = Bart Simpson = = = 
 Bartholomew JoJo " Bart " Simpson , voiced by Nancy Cartwright , is the eldest child and only son in the family — at age 10 . Bart 's most prominent character traits are his mischievousness , rebelliousness , disrespect for authority and sharp wit . During the first two seasons of The Simpsons , Bart was the show 's main character . The name " Bart " is an anagram of the word " brat " . Groening conceived Bart as an extreme version of the typical misbehaving child character , merging all of the extreme traits of characters such as Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn into one person . Groening 's older brother Mark provided most of the inspiration for Bart. Bart 's catchphrase " Eat My Shorts " was an ad @-@ lib by Cartwright in one of the original table readings , harking back to an incident when she was at college . In 1998 , Time magazine selected Bart as 46th of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century , and the only fictional character to make the list . He had previously appeared on the cover of the December 31 , 1990 edition . Bart is rebellious and frequently escapes without punishment , which lead some parents ' groups and conservative spokespeople to believe he provided a poor role model for children . This prompted George H. W. Bush to rally , " We 're going to keep trying to strengthen the American family . To make them more like the Waltons and less like the Simpsons . " Bart , and other Simpsons characters , have appeared in numerous television commercials for Nestlé 's Butterfinger candy bars from 1990 – 2001 , with the slogan " Nobody better lay a finger on my Butterfinger ! " 
 = = = Lisa Simpson = = = 
 Lisa Marie Simpson , voiced by Yeardley Smith , is the eldest daughter and middle child of the family . She is an extremely intelligent eight @-@ year @-@ old girl , one of the most intelligent characters on the show . Lisa 's political convictions are generally socially liberal . She is a vegetarian , and a supporter of the Free Tibet movement , and while still supportive of the Christian church in which she was raised , Lisa became a practicing Buddhist following her decision to follow the Noble Eightfold Path . In the Tracey Ullman Show shorts , Lisa was more of a " female Bart " and was equally mischievous . As the series progressed , Lisa began to develop into a more intelligent and more emotional character with " Krusty Gets Busted " being one of the first episodes where her true intelligence is fully shown . Many episodes focusing on Lisa have an emotional nature , the first one being " Moaning Lisa " . The idea for the episode was pitched by James L. Brooks , who had wanted to do an emotional episode where Lisa is sad because the show had done a lot of " jokey episodes " . In 2001 Lisa received a special " Board of Directors Ongoing Commitment Award " at the Environmental Media Awards . " Lisa the Vegetarian " , an episode from the seventh season , won both an Environmental Media Award for " Best Television Episodic Comedy " and a Genesis Award for " Best Television Comedy Series , Ongoing Commitment " . In Japan , the broadcasters of the series found they were able to turn the apparent viewer dislike of the series around by focusing marketing attention on Lisa . Lisa 's well @-@ intended but ill @-@ fated struggles to be a voice of reason and a force of good in her family and city struck a chord with the Japanese . 
 = = = Maggie Simpson = = = 
 Margaret " Maggie " Simpson , is the youngest of the five main family members and is almost always seen as a baby . She is 2 years old . She was quite prominent in the Tracey Ullman Show shorts , often being featured alongside Bart and Lisa but has since become the least seen and heard of the five main Simpsons . It has been revealed that Maggie has outstanding artistic and academic abilities , much like her sister Lisa . Maggie rarely speaks , but has been voiced by several different actors including Jodie Foster , Elizabeth Taylor , James Earl Jones , Harry Shearer ( who used his Kang voice ) , Yeardley Smith , and Nancy Cartwright . 
 = = Pets = = 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 = = = = Santa 's Little Helper = = = = 
 Santa 's Little Helper , voiced by Frank Welker and Dan Castellaneta , is the Simpsons ' pet greyhound . He first appeared in the series premiere as a race dog adopted by Homer and Bart and has been in the series ever since . 
 = = = = Laddie = = = = 
 Laddie was a collie owned by the Simpson family in the episode " The Canine Mutiny " . He joined the family after Bart managed to get a credit card issued to Santos L. Halper ( a non @-@ existent person whose name is a corruption of " Santa 's Little Helper " ) and purchased him from a catalogue . Described in the catalogue as the ultimate dog , Laddie was able to perform household chores and use the toilet . Laddie currently resides with the Springfield Police Department after he incidentally sniffed out marijuana at a blind man 's house and Bart gave up ownership . 
 = = = Cats = = = 
 = = = = Snowball = = = = 
 Snowball , also known as Snowball I , was the Simpsons ' first cat . She was first mentioned in the series premiere in a Christmas letter Marge is writing where she explains that Snowball had died that year and went to " kitty heaven " . Snowball was named due to her white fur . Snowball was , according to Lisa in a poem , run over by a Chrysler belonging to Mayor Quimby 's brother " Clovis " . She is seen in flashback in the ninth season episode " Lisa 's Sax " . 
 = = = = Snowball II = = = = 
 Snowball II was the Simpson family 's second cat . Though Snowball I had white fur , which inspired her name , Snowball II had black fur . She first appeared in the series premiere but has received little attention in the series . Snowball II and Santa 's Little Helper have always been shown as having a good relationship ; usually they are seen sleeping near each other . Snowball II 's largest role is in the fourteenth season episode " Old Yeller Belly " , in which she saves Homer from a burning treehouse . She also has minor roles in " Bart Gets an Elephant " , where she tries to get attention ; in " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " , in which she is scared by the many puppies ; and in " Make Room for Lisa " , in which Lisa has a hallucination where she becomes Snowball II . In the episode " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " , Snowball II is hit and killed by Dr. Hibbert 's Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> . After numerous fleeting replacements for Snowball II , the fifth ( and last surviving ) cat is named Snowball II by Lisa , in order both to avoid future confusions and to save more money on a first @-@ hand food bowl . 
 = = = = Snowball III = = = = 
 Snowball III was the third cat owned by the Simpsons . Snowball III was a ginger male Persian cat . In " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " , Lisa adopts him from an animal shelter shortly after the death of Snowball II . He drowns trying to catch a goldfish in an aquarium while Lisa is preparing his cat food in the kitchen for the first time . 
 = = = = Coltrane / Snowball IV = = = = 
 Coltrane was the Simpsons ' fourth cat , adopted from an animal shelter shortly after the death of Snowball III . Lisa is not certain she wants another cat , but her other one has haunted her <unk> , Coltrane 's name wins her over due to its resemblance to that of the jazz musician John Coltrane . Upon bringing Coltrane home , Lisa decides to play him some of John Coltrane 's music on her saxophone , but the noise frightens him and he commits suicide by jumping out the window . Coltrane was the Simpsons ' only cat since Snowball I to have been white , although he was the only one not to be named Snowball . However , Lisa evidently considers him as part of the Snowball lineage , as she names her next cat Snowball V , implying that Coltrane was Snowball IV . 
 = = = = Snowball V ( Snowball II ) = = = = 
 Snowball V , later renamed Snowball II , is the Simpsons ' fifth cat and is almost identical in appearance to Snowball II . In " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " , the Crazy Cat Lady gives Lisa one of her cats while she is mourning the death of her other three cats that are killed in the episode . Lisa then tells the cat to leave , because any cat that she owns is unlucky and is certain to be killed . As the cat starts to cross Evergreen Terrace , a car driven by Gil Gunderson drives past . As Gil swerves to avoid hitting the cat , his car hits a tree and bursts into flames , thereby giving him insurance compensation for his meals . Since the cat is intact and whole , Lisa takes it as a sign of good luck and adopts her . Lisa renames Snowball V " Snowball II " at the end of the episode , in her words " to save money on a new dish " , also promising to act as if the whole thing did not actually happen . Snowball V also is the focus of a subplot in the sixteenth season episode " The Seven @-@ Beer Snitch " , in which she becomes overweight after abandoning the Simpsons for brief periods to visit a different family but she then goes back to live with the Simpson family . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Harry Plopper ( a spoof of Harry Potter ) is Homer Simpson 's pet Pig 
 <unk> Boy and Bart JR were Bart 's pet Lizards 
 = = = = Stampy = = = = 
 Stampy was an African Elephant briefly owned by the Simpson family in the episode " Bart Gets an Elephant " . 
 = = = = Strangles = = = = 
 Strangles was a green python that Bart owned during the episode " Stop or My Dog Will Shoot " , during which time Santa 's Little Helper was a police dog . Strangles ' current owner is Groundskeeper Willie . Bart named the snake Strangles while it was strangling Homer on the dinner table . 
 = = = = Pokey = = = = 
 Pokey was a Guinea pig and Lisa 's first pet of her own . It appears in " The Simpsons : Tapped Out " and in the episode " The War of Art " where it destroyed the iconic artwork over the lounge . 
 = = = = Princess = = = = 
 In the episode " Lisa 's Pony " Homer bought Lisa a pony to show her that he loves her but he has to work two jobs to keep her . When Lisa discovers this she gives up the pony . 
 = = = = Pinchy = = = = 
 Pinchy was Homer 's pet lobster in " Lisa Gets an " A " " . Homer went to the supermarket to buy a lobster that he could cook for dinner . Homer found that the big lobsters were too expensive , so he bought a smaller lobster with the intention of fattening him up , but he grew attached to the lobster and decided to keep him as a pet instead , naming him Pinchy . At the end of the episode , Homer puts Pinchy in a hot bath , but accidentally boils and kills him . Since his body is cooked , a sobbing Homer eats Pinchy 's remains , saying that " That 's what he would want " . 
 = = Extended Simpson family = = 
 = = = Grampa Simpson = = = 
 Abraham Jay @-@ Jedediah " Abe " Simpson ( or just Grampa ) , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , is the patriarch of the Simpson family , the father of Homer . He is a World War II veteran who was later sent to the Springfield Retirement Castle by Homer . He is known for his borderline senility , his long rambling ( and probably apocryphal ) stories and his love of Matlock . He shares his name with one of Matt Groening 's relatives , in this case his grandfather . However , Groening says he refused to name him , leaving it to other writers to choose a name . By coincidence , the writers chose the name Abraham . 
 = = = Mona Simpson = = = 
 Mona Penelope Simpson ( née Olsen ) , voiced by Glenn Close , is Homer 's long @-@ lost mother and Abe 's estranged first wife . Her first major appearance was in " Mother Simpson " where she reveals that she was forced to abandon her family after being caught up in the hippie movement and participated in various acts of activism . The writers used this episode as an opportunity to solve several little puzzles , such as where Lisa 's intelligence came from . Prior to the seventh season , Mona Simpson had only made two brief flashback appearances , the first being season two 's " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " and the second being season six 's " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " and in both episodes she was voiced by Maggie Roswell . Mona dies in the episode " Mona Leaves @-@ a " , as Homer struggles to come to terms with her death . The character is named after writer Richard Appel 's wife , whose maiden name is Mona Simpson . Mona was designed in a way so that she has little bit of Homer in her face , such as the shape of her upper lip and her nose . There were several design changes because the directors were trying to make her an attractive older and younger woman , but still be Simpson @-@ esque . Glenn Close recorded original material for another episode , season fifteen 's " My Mother the Carjacker " . Mona also has a speaking appearance in season ten 's " D 'oh @-@ in in the Wind " , this time voiced by Tress MacNeille . 
 = = = Herbert Powell = = = 
 Herbert " Herb " Powell , voiced by Danny DeVito , is Homer 's paternal half brother . He resembles Homer , though he is much thinner , boasts a full head of hair and is more astute . He first appeared in the season two episode " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " when Homer discovered he had a half @-@ brother , the product of a short @-@ lived affair between his father Abe and a carnival dunk @-@ tank worker who was also a prostitute ( identified in The Simpsons Uncensored Family Album as " Gaby " ) . A year after putting the baby up for adoption , Abe married Mona , who insisted he promise never to tell Homer about Herb or how he was conceived . Herb was raised by his adoptive parents Edward and Mililani Powell ( first names given in The Simpsons Uncensored Family Album ) , put himself through college by working odd jobs , then founded Powell Motors , a car company based in Detroit . Herb is somehow an exception to " the Simpson Gene " , which causes all male members of the Simpson family to gradually lose their intelligence as they mature , as Herb is intelligent , successful and an astute businessman , becoming extremely wealthy due to his car dealership . Overjoyed to learn that he had a blood family , Herb bonded with the children and hired Homer , as a representative of average Americans , to design a car . The car was a flop , bankrupting the company , and Herb became a street vagrant . The episode was written by Jeff Martin but the idea of having Herb voiced by Danny DeVito had been pitched by Sam Simon . Some were upset with the sad ending of the episode , and as a result the producers decided to make a sequel . 
 Herb re @-@ appeared the next season in " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " . Now broke and homeless , he briefly settled in the Simpson household , despite his intense continuing antipathy toward Homer . Homer loaned Herb $ 2000 , which Herb used to build an invention that translated infantile speech into comprehensible English , based on observations he made of Maggie . He proceeded to mass @-@ produce his new product and regained his fortune . In gratitude , he bought gifts for each member of the family and paid Homer back with his forgiveness . Homer 's " seldom seen half @-@ brother " has had only one brief speaking part since this episode . DeVito reprised his role for the Season 24 episode " The Changing of the Guardian " , in which Powell 's answering machine message is heard : " Hi , you 've reached Herb Powell . I 'm poor again . " 
 = = = Amber Simpson = = = 
 Amber Simpson , voiced by Pamela Hayden , is the Vegas ex @-@ wife of both Homer and Abe Simpson from the season ten episode " Viva Ned Flanders " . Homer and Ned Flanders visit Las Vegas for the weekend , get drunk and unknowingly marry two women . Amber reappears in " Brawl in the Family " , where the Simpson family trick her into marrying Grampa , and in the process forsake all other spouses . Amber is horrified at the deception and runs away back to Vegas , much to Grampa 's disappointment at losing another wife . In " Jazzy and the Pussycats " , the Simpsons attend Homer 's ex @-@ wife and former stepmother 's funeral after Amber dies from a drug overdose . 
 = = = Rita LaFleur = = = 
 Rita LaFleur , voiced by Anika Noni Rose , is the third wife of Abraham Simpson and a jazz recording artist . She was a singer at Spiro 's Restaurant and met Abe when he was a waiter . They married and LaFleur left the restaurant , wishing to become a successful singer . She was invited to tour in Europe , but Homer suffered a head injury and Abraham realized that Homer was defenseless and would not survive in Europe , so he stayed behind with him while Rita went to Europe , and the two never saw each other again . In " Gone Abie Gone " , Rita reunited with Abraham and they played piano . It was unknown why they were not together . 
 = = = Other Simpson family members = = = 
 Chet , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , owns an unsuccessful shrimp company . 
 Cyrus , voiced by Hank Azaria , is Grampa 's older brother who is seen in " Simpsons Christmas Stories " . Cyrus crashed his Corsair at Tahiti in World War II 's Pacific Theater of Operations during a kamikaze raid . He never left and now has 15 wives . 
 Dr. Simpson , voiced by Tress MacNeille , is the chief of complicated surgeries at the invasive care unit ; she is first seen in " Lisa the Simpson " . She is the one who reassures Lisa that she will not suffer the defective Simpson Gene because of her sex and also reveals that only male members are affected by it . Dr. Simpson resembles Lisa , minus the spikes . 
 Grampa 's parents both appear briefly in " Much Apu About Nothing " when Grampa tells the story of how his family emigrated to America . Their names were given to be Orville J. Simpson and Yuma Hickman in The Simpsons Uncensored Family Album , but have never been mentioned in the series . In the Season 25 episode " The Winter of His Content " , Homer thinks that his grandfather is still alive , which means that Mona 's father would be the one alive since Abe 's father was seen in Heaven . 
 Stanley , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , is the Simpson children 's second cousin who shoots birds at the airport . 
 Uncle Tyrone , voiced by Hank Azaria , is a cynical elderly Simpson relative who lives in Dayton , Ohio . The family intends to visit him during his birthday in the episode " Catch ' Em If You Can " . 
 Abbie is hinted to be Abe 's illegitimate daughter and Homer 's half sister from a relationship he had with a British woman named Edwina during World War II . 
 A group of unnamed relatives show up in the episode " Lisa the Simpson " , when Homer tries to prove to Lisa that not all Simpsons are failures . In the end , only Dr. Simpson and three other female members proved successful . 
 Mabel Simpson , an ancestor of the Simpson family who was part of the underground railroad . She appeared in " The Color Yellow " . She was married to Hiram before divorcing him and fleeing to Canada to marry Virgil . 
 Virgil , an African American slave owned by Mr Burns ' father , Colonel Burns , and rescued by Eliza . He was betrayed by Hiram but escaped with Mabel , whom he later married , from whom the Simpson family are really descended . 
 Abraham Simpson , son of Mabel and Virgil , half @-@ brother of Eliza and great @-@ grandfather of Grampa Simpson . 
 Hiram Simpson , a distant relative of the Simpson family who was bribed with a new pair of shoes into revealing Virgil 's whereabouts . 
 Eliza Simpson , a distant relative of the Simpson family and daughter of Mabel and Hiram . She was part of the underground railroad with her mother and helped Virgil evade capture . 
 Great @-@ Aunt Hortense , who died before Bart the Fink and left Homer , Marge , Bart and Lisa $ 100 each . The rest of her estate was passed to Ann Landers . In a continuity error , Aunt Hortense appeared on Bart 's journey to Heaven in Bart Gets Hit by a Car . 
 Country folks , though they not blood relatives , the " country folks " are referred to as cousins in the episode " The Bonfire of the Manatees " , as their dog is the brother of Santa 's Little Helper . 
 = = Extended Bouvier family = = 
 = = = Patty and Selma Bouvier = = = 
 Patty and Selma Bouvier , both voiced by Julie Kavner , are Marge 's older twin sisters . They work at the Springfield Department of Motor Vehicles , and possess a strong dislike for their brother @-@ in @-@ law , Homer . Selma is the elder by two minutes , possesses a strong desire for family , and has been married and sought to have a child on numerous occasions . Her sister , Patty , is one of the show 's few openly gay recurring characters although for the most part she has avoided relationships . Kavner voices them as characters " who suck the life out of everything " . Kavner makes Patty 's voice more masculine and a lower register , while Selma 's voice is a little sweeter . The origins of their names are unknown , Matt Groening has a sister named Patty , but unlike the other Simpson relatives , this has not been explicitly revealed . 
 = = = Jacqueline Bouvier = = = 
 Jacqueline Ingrid Bouvier ( née Gurney ) , voiced by Julie Kavner , is the mother of Marge , Patty and Selma and the widow of Clancy Bouvier . She was first referenced in a flashback in the episode , " Moaning Lisa " and made her first appearance in the episode " Bart vs. Thanksgiving " . She had a sister named Gladys , who is now deceased . Like all Bouvier women , she is voiced by Julie Kavner , and has large , unique hair , resembling Marge 's , only a light gray color due to her old age . In her younger days she smoked heavily but now has quit , although she still speaks more <unk> than Patty and Selma . Mr. Burns and Abe Simpson once battled for her affections ; she became engaged to Burns , but eventually decided not to marry either man . Although it seems that she disapproves of Marge 's marriage to Homer , stating that he is never to address her as " Mom " , she has shown that she does tolerate Homer a lot more than her elder daughters , evident in " Moe Letter Blues " when she explained to Homer that Patty and Selma were really at fault for ruining her birthday party and not him . Her name is identical to Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis ' maiden name , a reference made to Marge when Lisa wanted to follow the maiden name after uncovering Homer 's betting scandal on " Homer and Lisa Exchange Cross Words " . 
 = = = Clancy Bouvier = = = 
 Clancy Bouvier , voiced by Harry Shearer , is the deceased father of Marge , Patty and Selma and the husband of Jacqueline Bouvier . His first appearance was in the episode " The Way We Was " . He was kind and complimentary to teenage Homer when he arrived to pick up Marge for the prom , but after finding out that Artie Ziff was really her date remarked that Homer " took years off my life " . In " Fear of Flying " it was revealed that he was one of the earliest male flight attendants ; Marge initially believed he was a heroic pilot and was traumatized when she discovered he was a flight attendant instead . According to Marge in " Bart the Lover " after Clancy got out of the Navy , he had trouble with his cursing that nearly cost him a job as a baby photographer , but Jacqueline was able to curtail that by having him donate money to the swear jar . In the episode " <unk> " , it is revealed that he died of lung cancer . While Clancy does not appear with the rest of the Bouvier family in " I Married Marge " , he is shown to be still alive when Bart and Lisa were toddlers in the episode " Walking Big & Tall " . 
 = = = Ling Bouvier = = = 
 Ling Bouvier , voiced by Nancy Cartwright , is Selma Bouvier 's adopted daughter . In " Goo Goo Gai Pan " , Selma discovers that she has reached menopause and adopts Ling in China , after lying that she is married to Homer , to fool the Chinese authorities into thinking that Ling would be part of a traditional family as opposed to being raised by a single mother . The authorities briefly reclaim Ling , but the adoption agent relates to her experiences of her childhood with her single mother and allows Selma to adopt Ling . Ling has since become a recurring character and has appeared in several episodes . 
 = = = Gladys Gurney = = = 
 Gladys Gurney , voiced by Julie Kavner , is Marge 's spinster aunt and the sister of Jacqueline . Her death was noted in the episode " Selma 's Choice " , in which she died of a bowel obstruction . Her final words to Patty and Selma during a video will is a plea that they not end their lives old and alone like herself , prompting Selma to become more intent on having a family . 
 = = = Cousin Dot = = = 
 Dot is the cousin of Marge , Patty and Selma . She gave Selma a video camera at her wedding to Sideshow Bob . This is the only time she is mentioned . 
 = = = Uncle Lou = = = 
 Lou is the uncle of Marge , Patty and Selma . In Children of a Lesser Clod , Marge is called to identify Lou 's body , which turns out to be a very much alive Hans Moleman . While Marge is identifying the body , Homer starts a daycare centre for local children . 
 = Menacer = 
 The Menacer is a light gun peripheral released by Sega in 1992 for its Sega Genesis and Sega CD video game consoles . It was created in response to Nintendo 's Super Scope and as Sega 's successor to the Master System Light Phaser . The gun is built from three detachable parts ( pistol , shoulder stock , sights ) , and communicates with the television via an infrared sensor . The Menacer was announced at the May 1992 Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago and was released later that year . The gun was bundled with a pack @-@ in six @-@ game cartridge of mostly shooting gallery games . Sega also released a Menacer bundle with the Terminator 2 : The Arcade Game . 
 Sega producer Mac Senour was responsible for the Menacer project and designed the six @-@ game pack . He originally proposed non @-@ shooting minigames based on existing Sega licenses like Joe Montana , David Robinson , and ToeJam & Earl , but most of the prototypes were abandoned due to high cost in favor of more shooting @-@ type games . Sega did not plan another first @-@ party release for the Menacer outside the included multicart . Compatible games were published through 1995 . 
 The Menacer is remembered as a critical and commercial flop . Critics found the six @-@ game pack subpar and repetitive , and criticized the peripheral 's lack of games . The ToeJam & Earl spinoff game was held in the highest regard , and reviewers recommended the Menacer @-@ compatible Terminator 2 game . A direct @-@ to @-@ TV light gun that includes the six @-@ game Menacer pack was released in 2005 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The gray , white , and red Menacer is a light gun peripheral for the Sega Genesis . The Menacer is built of three separable parts : a pistol , twin sights , and shoulder stock . ( In the peripheral 's branding , these parts were called the Master Module , <unk> Module , and <unk> Module , respectively . ) The pistol has a double grip and fires the infrared beam with a trigger on the back grip . There are three buttons on the pistol 's front grip : one pauses the game and the other two provide game @-@ specific functions . Unlike the Super Scope , the Menacer has two infrared transmitters . The optional skeletal shoulder stock and binocular twin sights were designed to improve the aim . Digital Spy reported that the twin sights never worked as intended , and Sega Force wrote that the gun must be recalibrated when adding or removing the sights . Calibration is performed by aiming at a bullseye target to adjust the gun 's sensitivity . The gun was designed to be reassembled to suit the player . 
 The light gun 's shots are controlled by its aim towards the television . It operates on batteries and works in conjunction with a sensor plugged into the second controller port and placed atop the television display . The sensor counts CRT television scan lines to detect the player 's shots . Sega Force noticed that the controller acts erratically when used under fluorescent lighting . Sega recommended eight feet of distance from the receiver , though the peripheral works between four and 12 feet from the television . Sega Force reported that the controller lasts about 18 hours on new batteries , though Will Smith of The Hawk Eye estimated fewer ( " a matter of hours " ) . The Toronto Star wrote that the Menacer lasts 20 hours as opposed to the Super Scope 's 50 to 140 hours . The Menacer has no power switch : it automatically activates when aimed at the television and turns off after 30 seconds without input . The Super Scope fully drains its batteries when left on . Menacer 's Accu @-@ Sight option puts crosshairs on the screen to eliminate the need to aim manually through the sights . The gun does not have a " turbo " mode for continuous fire , unlike the Super Scope . 
 = = History = = 
 The Menacer was produced in response to the Nintendo Super Scope released several months earlier , though Sega intended to support the peripheral as more than a clone . These two peripherals brought arcade light gun game ports to home consoles . The Menacer is the successor to the Master System 's Light Phaser . 
 Mac Senour , a producer at Sega , was responsible for the peripheral and its six @-@ game cartridge as the company 's " hardware boy " . He designed the six minigames based on Sega 's previous intellectual property and licenses — such as ToeJam & Earl — under the instruction to avoid shooting games . His prototypes included games based on Joe Montana ( Joe Montana Wide Receiver Training Camp ) and David Robinson , but when presented , the company asked for more shooting games and scrapped all license @-@ based games ( besides ToeJam & Earl , whose license was free ) due to their added cost . His " reverse <unk> game " prototype was the only other title carried to the final cartridge . Senour recalled that upon his cubicle presentation to Sega Japan 's president , the executive did not say anything besides " very good " before leaving . Sega did not plan any other first @-@ party releases for the Menacer — Senour recollected that " they laughed when I proposed more . " 
 Sega announced the Menacer alongside the Sega CD at the May 1992 Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago and the peripheral was released towards the end of that year . By December 1992 , the Menacer began shipping with Terminator 2 : The Arcade Game as a bundle . Goodby , Silverstein & Partners produced Menacer television advertisements directed by Danny Boyle . Playthings reported that Chicago toy retailers promoted Sega electronics including the Menacer over Nintendo 's during their 1992 Thanksgiving promotions . Sega 's sales exceeded Nintendo 's during the 1992 Christmas season , and gained cultural cachet for the Menacer among other peripherals . Electronic Gaming Monthly reported in March 1993 that the Menacer would not have a new game for six months . Compatible games were published through 1995 . 
 Mac Senour left Sega in 1993 for Atari , where he received an increase in pay and status . He later worked at Konami and Electronic Arts . In his first days at Atari , Senour was sent to Paris , where he remembered an excess of unsold <unk> in a Virgin Megastore display . His translators told the clerk that Senour was responsible for the Menacer , and when Senour offered to autograph their stock , the clerk replied in slow English that Senour could autograph the items he purchased . 
 In 2005 , Radica created a Menacer @-@ based direct @-@ to @-@ TV dedicated console with the original six @-@ game cartridge built into a light gun controller as part of their Play TV Legends line of Sega Genesis dedicated consoles . Retro Gamer wrote that Radica 's gun is based on the Sega Saturn light gun 's design and not the Menacer 's . 
 = = Games = = 
 Games include the pack @-@ in single @-@ player Menacer 6 @-@ game cartridge , which consists of mostly shooting gallery games : 
 Ready , Aim , Tomatoes ! is a spin @-@ off of the original ToeJam & Earl where the player ( as ToeJam ) fires tomatoes at ToeJam & Earl series enemies for points as the screen scrolls . The scroll speed increases with game duration . The enemies — dentists , devils , and cupids — return fire throughout the ten levels . The game also features power @-@ ups and lock @-@ on targeting , to aide in player accuracy . 
 In Rockman 's Zone , the screen scrolls through streets of houses as the player shoots criminals and refrains from shooting innocent bystanders , for which the player loses a life . In later levels , the criminals return fire faster . 
 Space Station Defender is similar to Tomatoes ! with added memory aspects . In each level , players shoot enemy @-@ filled pods as up to eight drop in a <unk> sequence . There are 999 levels , a Power Zone to charge shots , and power @-@ ups including extra shields . 
 Whack Ball is comparable to Breakout : the player controls a large ball with the Menacer to push a smaller on @-@ screen ball into color @-@ changing bricks that line the wall . One all of the bricks change color , the player moves to the next level . Some bricks are power @-@ ups that change the larger ball 's size or add extra small balls into play . Players who hit flashing bricks are punished . Inadvertently guiding the ball through a hole in the wall ends the game . 
 In Front Line , the player defends against tanks and airplanes with a machine gun and missiles with unlimited ammo . 
 In Pest Control , the player 's vision is limited to a small area of the screen around the Accu @-@ Sight crosshairs while looking for cockroaches that attempt to eat an on @-@ screen pizza . Two different power @-@ ups briefly illuminate the screen and clear all bugs onscreen . Later levels feature larger insects that contain bombs and small , fast bugs . 
 Digital Spy mentioned Body Count , Terminator 2 : The Arcade Game , and Mad Dog McCree as Menacer 's other notable games . Terminator 2 was the first external game to work with the Menacer , the only one confirmed as of December 1992 . Terminator 's programmers , Probe Software , later began work on another Menacer @-@ compatible game . Terminator 2 has a two @-@ player mode that uses one Menacer light gun and one controller . Sega Force reported that Menacer gameplay registered faster than the Genesis controller . Mad Dog McCree , a live action Wild West shoot ' em up for the Sega CD , used either a controller or a choice of several light guns : the Menacer , the Konami Justifier , or the game developer 's own compatible light gun . In the 1994 Body Count , the player defends Earth from an alien invasion . The Irish Times wrote that the game is " ideally suited for the ... Menacer " and is " to be avoided " otherwise . The Menacer is also compatible with Corpse Killer and American Laser Games ' other titles , such as Who Shot Johnny Rock ? The light gun does not work with Konami 's Lethal Enforcers games or Snatcher , which use the Konami Justifier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Matthew Reynolds of Digital Spy wrote that the Menacer was a poorly executed " flop " that is much less likely to be remembered than its Super Scope competitor , even though the latter did not fare much better . Reynolds added that the Menacer was hurt by the poor quality of the pack @-@ in six @-@ game cartridge and a lack of titles in support of the peripheral . Will Smith of The Hawk Eye concurred , calling the peripheral " a commercial and critical flop " . The Menacer 's original reviewers pinned the device 's success on the strength of its developer support , and multiple reviewers cited the Menacer 's lack of good games as the cause for its decline . 
 Writing for the Chicago Tribune on the 1992 Consumer Electronics Show , Dennis Lynch saw the Super Scope and Menacer as a continuation of a Nintendo – Sega arms race and wrote that the peripheral 's " Uzi attachment " was " just what every kid needs " . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution 's Andy <unk> said the Menacer was " definitely a winner " in comparison to the Super Scope . Toronto Star 's William Burrill wrote that the " Great <unk> War " would be decided by the strength of the light guns ' supporting games . Multiple reviewers ultimately recommended that players wait for more games to be released before purchasing the Menacer . William Burrill of the Toronto Star said not to bother unless the player " absolutely love [ s ] target shooter games " . Mean Machines called the Menacer " an expensive novelty " until it had more games . The Herald Sun wrote in August 1993 that the Menacer looked to be " an expensive , limited @-@ use fad " . 
 GamePro considered the gun " well @-@ designed " and " fairly good @-@ looking " , though they wrote that the gun 's options buttons were inconvenient and that the Menacer 's lengthy <unk> before play sessions without Accu @-@ Sight were tedious . Mean Machines wrote that the gun 's shades of gray clashed with the glossy black console . Several reviewers called the binocular scope addition unhelpful . Paul <unk> of Mega found the manual sights an eyestrain and the gun " deadly accurate " as long as players used the Accu @-@ Sight mode . Still , as of January 1993 , Mega felt that the Menacer 's future success was doubtless . Jaz of Mean Machines had low expectations for the Menacer , which he compared to the shortcomings of previous light guns : high price , short @-@ lived novelty , and dearth of games . Gus of Mean Machines wrote that " Sega hasn 't learned the lessons " from the Super Scope 's " fairly naff " release in the magazine 's January 1993 Menacer review , calling the light gun a " samey @-@ looking , samey @-@ playing piece of hardware , with some redundant add @-@ ons " with mediocre launch titles . He added that the Menacer was less tiring to use than the Super Scope , praised the Menacer 's infrared , and criticized the gun 's lack of available software . 
 Multiple reviewers found the pack @-@ in six @-@ game cartridge games subpar and repetitive . Mean Machines 's Gus wrote that the games were all too simple and easy . Of the pack , reviewers held Ready , Aim , Tomatoes ! in the highest regard . Ray Barnholt of 1UP.com wrote that the Menacer 's games were " duller " than its competitor Super Scope 's already dull games , but Tomatoes ! gave Sega 's cartridge " some pittance of value " . Mega rated the ToeJam & Earl spin @-@ off at 62 % , calling it " fun and strange " though " rather repetitive " . Sega Force thought the game 's graphics were the pack 's best , and its audio to be of high quality , though the magazine also considered the game repetitive . GamePro thought the game 's colors were oversaturated . 
 As for the other six @-@ pack titles , Mega called Rockman 's Zone " not a very inspiring game " for its slow pacing and " bland " graphics . Reviewers compared the game to Hogan 's Alley and Empire City : 1931 . Mega called Space Station Defender 's concept " incredibly daft " . GamePro criticized Space Station Defender 's " washed @-@ out and ugly " graphics and " obnoxious " audio . The magazine thought poorly of most of the cartridge 's audio . Mega found Whack Ball easy and did not expect players to maintain interest in it for longer than an hour . Sega Visions compared Whack Ball to Arkanoid . Mega wrote that Front Line was programmed poorly with " the appearance of having never met up with a <unk> " , calling it " truly awful " . Electronic Gaming Monthly and GamePro compared the game to Operation Wolf . Sega Force rated Front Line lowest within the six @-@ pack , with a score of 22 % . The magazine wrote that the bug game , Pest Control , would make players bored after ten minutes , and Mega said the game was not worth loading even once , giving it their lowest rating of the bunch : 12 % . Sega Force wrote in February that the games were only fun for an hour and that the peripheral 's success would depend on its future games , adding , " Without that [ developer ] support , it will die as surely as all other attempts at light guns have done . " The magazine ultimately recommended against purchase until more games were released . 
 Sega Force 's Paul Wooding considered Terminator 2 a " must " for Menacer owners , adding that it far surpassed the quality of the six @-@ pack games . The magazine added that the gun registered shots faster than the controller , was more accurate , and worked well from a distance . Neil West of Mega wrote the Menacer works well with Terminator 2 in his review of the game . The Hawk Eye 's Will Smith wrote in 2010 that the six @-@ game pack and Terminator 2 were the only Menacer games readily accessible . Ken Horowitz of Sega @-@ 16 wrote that none of the Menacer @-@ compatible titles were exceptional , though Terminator and Body Count were standouts . He added that the Menacer 's small library made collecting easier . Edward Fox of The Centre for Computing History has said that the museum 's Menacer is his favorite piece in the collection when used with the Aura <unk> haptic suit . 
 = Medieval : Total War = 
 Medieval : Total War is a turn @-@ based strategy and real @-@ time tactics computer game developed by The Creative Assembly and published by Activision . Set in the Middle Ages , it is the second game in the Total War series , following on from the 2000 title Shogun : Total War . Originally announced in August 2001 , the game was released in North America on 19 August 2002 and in Europe on 30 August for Microsoft Windows . 
 Following a similar form of play to Shogun : Total War , the player builds a dynastic empire in Europe , North Africa and the Middle East , spanning the period of 1087 to 1453 . Gameplay is both strategic and tactical , with strategy played out in turn @-@ based fashion on a province @-@ by @-@ province level , while military units of varying types and capabilities fight against each other in real time on a 3D battlefield . 
 Medieval : Total War received acclaim from reviewers ; several critics commending it as a milestone in gaming . The real @-@ time battles were praised for their realism and the new feature of siege battles but also received some criticism for unit management . The depth and complexity of the strategy portion was also received well by reviewers , together with well integrated historical accuracy . The game was a commercial success , topping the British video game chart upon release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Medieval : Total War is based upon the building of an empire across medieval Europe , North Africa and the Middle East . It focuses on the warfare , religion and politics of the time to ultimately lead the player in conquest of the known world . As with the preceding Total War game , Shogun : Total War , the game consists of two broad areas of gameplay : a turn @-@ based campaign map that allows the user to move armies across provinces , control agents , diplomacy , religion , and other tasks needed to run their faction , and a real @-@ time battlefield , where the player directs the land battles and sieges that occur . 
 The strategic portion of the game divides the campaign map among twenty factions from the period , with a total of twelve being playable . The initial extent of each major faction 's territory , and the factions available , depends on the starting period of the game , Early ( 1087 ) , High ( 1205 ) or Late ( 1321 ) , reflecting the historical state of these factions over time . The factions themselves represent many of the major nations at the time , including the Byzantine Empire , France , England , the Holy Roman Empire and the Turks . Several factions , such as the Golden Horde , emerge during the course of play at their historical time . These factions , together with several other factions appearing at the start of the campaign , are unavailable to the player in the main campaign . Each faction varies in territory , religion and units ; however , factions of the same culture share many of their core units . 
 In addition to the main campaign , Medieval : Total War also features a game mode where the player can undertake various historical campaigns and battles . Historical campaigns allow the player to control a series of famous battles from a war of the medieval period , such as the Hundred Years War and the Crusades , playing as historic commanders like Richard the Lionheart . Individual historic battles have the player controlling a historical figure in an isolated battle that occurred in the era , such as controlling William Wallace through the Battle of Stirling Bridge . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The main campaign of Medieval : Total War involves the player choosing one of the fourteen playable factions and eventually leading them in conquest on the strategy map . Each of the factions controls a number of historical provinces , which on the map contain a castle and , if located by the sea , a port as well . In the campaign , the player controls construction , unit recruitment and the movement of armies , fleets and agents in each of these provinces , using these means to acquire and defend the provinces . Diplomacy and economics are two other aspects the player can use to advance their aims , as well as having access to more clandestine means such as espionage and assassination . Religion is very important in the game , with the player able to convert provinces to their own religions to cement the people 's loyalty . Another campaign mode is available , called " Glorious Achievements " , in which each faction has several historically @-@ based goals to achieve , which score points ; the faction with the most achievement points wins the game . The campaign mode is turn @-@ based , with each turn representing one year , allowing the player to attend to all needs of the faction before allowing the artificial intelligence to carry out the other factions ' moves and decisions . 
 The campaign is carried out in a similar fashion to Shogun : Total War , but features many enhancements . The game is set mainly in Europe , but also features the Middle East and North Africa . Production can occur in every province , with the player building from one of the hundreds of connected buildings and units in the game 's technology tree . Income to develop provinces and armies comes from taxation of the provinces and trade with neighbouring provinces . There is no specific technology research , but several advances , such as gunpowder , do become available over time . Castles provide the basis for more developed construction in the game , with players having to upgrade to the next castle level to be able to build more advanced buildings ; upgrades such as a curtain wall and guard towers can be added to individual castles . Many buildings have economic functions , such as trading posts that generate money , while others are military buildings and allow the training of more advanced unit types . Whilst there are many common unit types , several unique units are available . These units are either restricted to a single faction or are dependent on the control of a particular province . Each unit possesses different strengths and weaknesses . 
 Each faction has a variety of different generals , some related to the royal family and in line to the throne , and the rest members of the nobility , who command units in the field and can assume offices of the state . Each of these characters has a base ranking for several attributes , such as command ability and piety , which affects how they carry out duties on the battlefield and governing the provinces . These attributes , and other factors such as health , are influenced by “ Vices and Virtues ” , defining the character 's personality and actions . These traits can be acquired seemingly randomly , or may be given to the character through actions in the game . Non @-@ military units , collectively referred to as " agents " , may be trained . The types of agent a faction is able to produce depends on its religion , but all factions have emissaries , spies and assassins available to them . Emissaries conduct diplomatic tasks such as start alliances between two factions , or bribe foreign armies ; spies allow detailed information to be collected from foreign provinces or characters , while assassins can attempt to kill both foreign and domestic units . Factions also have access to various religious agents to spread their religion , and Christian factions can marry their princesses to domestic generals or other factions for political reasons . Occasionally in the game , a character will be trained bearing the name of a famous historical figure , with better than normal starting abilities . A general such as Richard the Lionheart , El Cid or Saladin will be a capable military commander , while a bishop such as Thomas Becket will have higher piety than normal . 
 Rebellions can occur if the loyalty of a particular province falls too low , with a rebel army appearing in the province to attempt to assume control from the owners . Civil wars may also take place if several generals commanding large armies have sufficiently low loyalty . In the event of a civil war , the player is given the choice to back either the current rulers or the rebels . It had been planned to allow other factions who had established a prior claim to the throne by marriage to princesses to join in a civil war to claim the throne for themselves ; however , this was never implemented . Naval warfare is carried out upon the campaign map , where ships can be built and organised into fleets . These fleets can be used to control the game 's sea regions and form sea lanes , allowing trade and troop movement between provinces that have constructed a port . Fleets can engage in sea battles with foreign fleets , although unlike land battles these are resolved by the computer . Religion plays an important aspect in Medieval : Total War , with religious differences between the Catholic , Orthodox and Muslim factions affecting diplomacy and population loyalty . Catholic factions must also respond to the wishes of the Papal States ; factions gain favour by refraining from hostilities with other Catholic nations and responding to Crusades , else they run the risk of excommunication . The option to launch a holy war in the form of a Crusade or Jihad is open to both Catholic and Muslim factions . 
 = = = Warfare = = = 
 The battle system takes place on a 3D battlefield in real @-@ time , instead of the turn @-@ based system of the campaign . Battles are similar to those in Shogun : Total War , where two armies from opposing factions engage in combat until one side is defeated or withdraws . Warfare in Medieval : Total War occurs when the player or the artificial intelligence moves their armies into a province held by a hostile faction . The player is then presented with the option of fighting the battle on the battle map , or allowing the computer to automatically resolve it . Alongside the campaign battles , players have the option of both historical and custom battles , where the player controls what climate , units and terrain will be present on the battlefield . 
 During battles , players take control of a medieval army containing various units , such as knights and longbowmen , each of which has various advantages , disadvantages and overall effectiveness . Players must use medieval tactics in order to defeat their enemy , using historical formations to give units advantages in different situations . All units in the game gain experience points , known as " valour " , which improves unit effectiveness in combat as it increases . Every battle map contains various terrain based upon that of the province on the campaign map , with separate maps for each of the borders between provinces – four hundred unique maps are available for the game . The climate , surroundings and building style for every map varies depending on the part of the world it is located in ; for example , a map based in the Middle East will have a hot , sunny climate , sandy terrain and Islamic architecture . Sieges are an important aspect of the game introduced to the Total War series , occurring when the invading army elects to attack the defending army which has retreated inside the province 's castle . Upon starting the engagement , the attacker has to fight their way through the castle 's defences , winning the battle once the enemy units have been defeated . Each unit in the game has morale , which can increase if a battle is going well for their faction , or decrease in situations such as sustained heavy casualties . Morale can drop low enough to eventually force a unit to rout off the battlefield , with the player having the option to attempt to rally the men back into the battle through their general . Each side 's army can capture routing enemy units and ransom them back to the owning faction , with important generals having greater ransom values . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Medieval : Total War features a multiplayer game mode similar to that in Shogun : Total War , where players can engage in real @-@ time battles with up to seven other players . Players create and control armies from the factions available in the game , where players can use them to compete in online tournaments or casual battles . The campaign mode cannot be played multiplayer ; this feature was later added to the Total War series in Empire : Total War – but only at the beta stage , before being later removed . 
 = = Development = = 
 Medieval : Total War was originally announced by The Creative Assembly on 3 August 2001 , with the working title of Crusader : Total War . Development of the game started shortly after the release of Shogun : Total War . Early in development it was decided to change the name to Medieval : Total War ; this was to have a name that better reflected the scope of the game . In a press release , The Creative Assembly announced that the game would be published by Activision instead of Electronic Arts , the publisher of the previous games . The Creative Assembly also outlined the features of the game , including the game covering the medieval era from the 11th to 15th century , with players being able to participate in various historical scenarios of the time , such as the Hundred Years ' War . Media releases over the subsequent months gave screenshots of the game , with more information on Medieval : Total War 's features . The game uses an updated version of the game engine used in Shogun : Total War , allowing larger battles than previously possible with an increased troop limit of ten thousand . The improved game engine also allowed more battle maps than previously possible , now based upon where the conflicting armies are located on the strategy map . Other new battlefield enhancements included terrain detailed with villages and vegetation and improved castle siege mechanics , with players now having to focus on destroying the walls before assaulting and capturing the castle . The game features improved artificial intelligence from Shogun : Total War , with the individual unit AI and the tactical AI — which controls the overall army tactics — separated to more effectively control the opposing forces . 
 The Creative Assembly 's creative director , Michael de Plater , stated in an interview that " We were never 100 percent satisfied with the name ' Crusader ' ... it didn 't cover the full scope or the rich diversity of the game " . The focus on the medieval period was chosen because " it was perfectly suited to the direction in which we wanted to take the gameplay .... we wanted to have great castles and spectacular sieges . " Designer Mike Brunton wrote before the game 's release that sieges were one of the most important features to be added to the Total War series , explaining how it led to increasing the troop limit from twenty in Shogun : Total War to over a hundred in Medieval : Total War . For increased authenticity , research was carried out into the medieval period aspects such as assassinations and historical figures . Leaders from the period were included in the game ; to represent their personalities and actions the " vices and virtues " system was incorporated into the game , designed to make characters more realistic in their actions . 
 A demonstration of the game was released on 26 June 2002 , featuring tutorial missions and a full single @-@ player mission . The game was released on 19 August in North America and on 30 August in Europe . The Creative Assembly released a patch on 5 November 2002 , which was targeted to fix the several bugs that were still present in the game . A new historical battle based on the Battle of Stamford Bridge was later released by The Creative Assembly , made available through Wargamer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Medieval : Total War received " favorable " reviews according to the review aggregation website Metacritic . In the United Kingdom , the game went straight to the top of the video game chart after its release , staying at the top for two weeks . The United States charts saw Medieval : Total War reach fourth in its second week after release , behind Warcraft III , The Sims and its expansion The Sims : Vacation . 
 Reviewers praised the many different factors adding to complexity of the campaign , ActionTrip noting that " Medieval adds a new strategic balance to the game , which teaches that great empires come with an even greater responsibility " . Eurogamer praised the way the player had to manage production queues , guard the loyalty of important generals and make use of spies and assassins , calling the level of control " far ahead of anything seen in the previous game " ; many other reviews shared a similar view . The number of factions in the game , each with their own historically accurate units and territories , was commended , with IGN and Game Informer stating it " gives the game huge replay value " , with GameSpot adding " the strategic portion now has a lot more options " . Many reviewers gave praise to the fact the historical setting of the Middle Ages was said to be well integrated into the game ; PC Zone acknowledging the " brutality and instability " of the era is well included in the game , with GameSpot praising the religion in the game , " religion played an enormous role in shaping history , and so it is in the game " . GameSpy stated that the different historical starting positions made the games attention to detail " impressive and noteworthy " ; the historical battle system was also highly received from Computer Gaming World , stating that they successfully " provide an authentic glimpse of the past " . However , GameSpot commented on a problem with a lack of information , " you 'll have a tough time keeping track of all the goings @-@ on in your provinces " , suggesting this could be solved through a more informative interface . Overall , reviewers highly complimented the strategic gameplay , many saying it was similar to a Civilization @-@ style game . 
 The battle system in Medieval : Total War was considered by many reviewers to be the highlight of the game . In their review , Eurogamer felt " The sensation of scale and drama in these conflicts is incredible " , praising the visual effects and combat . The different battlefields and their environments were praised by IGN , with ActionTrip agreeing that " Medieval : Total War looks better than Shogun " , adding that the terrain and units are more detailed than those in Shogun : Total War . GameSpot praised the realistic battles , mentioning that the real @-@ world battlefield considerations like fatigue , ammunition , facing , and morale included in the game was a " welcome change " . GameSpy also stated the " chaotic " battles were appropriate to the era , but criticised the siege aspect , claiming it to be " too plain and underwhelming " , with a lack of detail compared to the other 3D elements . The soundtrack to the game was well received by IGN , " The soundtrack is full of rousing context @-@ sensitive orchestra moments which get you in the mood for bloody slaughter " commenting it is fitting for a game that " delivers body counts like no other " ActionTrip also admired how the game 's music changed pace as the battle commenced , praising The Creative Assembly for its " masterfully placed audio and visual effects " . The artificial intelligence for Medieval : Total War was thought to be much improved over its predecessor , CGW mentioning the AI was intelligent enough to prevent brute force alone from winning fights . Criticism was received on the larger battles giving low frame rates and performance , while ActionTrip also noted several unit management issues with path @-@ finding and unit facing , stating " it 's demoralising to see archers facing the wrong way " . 
 Medieval : Total War received very favourable reviews , despite a few criticisms , gaining high distinction from the industry . GameSpot summarised by saying that while the game " isn 't well suited for the casual gamer " , most strategy gamers will " find a lot to like in it , for a very long time . " Although GameSpy described Medieval : Total War as " hit [ ting ] a few bumps in the road " , they mentioned the game has enough to keep players interested for many months . Eurogamer was enthusiastic in pronouncing Medieval : Total War " a milestone in gaming " . IGN closed by stating that the game " delivers an encompassing experience " , while CGW finished by proclaiming " there simply isn 't enough room in this magazine to extol its virtues . " 
 Medieval : Total War was the recipient of a number of industry awards . PC Gamer UK named it the top game of 2002 , replacing the previous entry , Valve Software 's Half @-@ Life . In awarding the distinction , PC Gamer stated : " It was the only contender . " The game received an <unk> award in Technical Excellence for its audio by Jeff van Dyck , commended for having a " game soundtrack and score that is lush , well @-@ mixed , and adds dynamically to the gameplay . The extensive diverse musical tracks sound authentic and fully engage the user . " The game received a number of distinctions from game publications , such as the " Best Strategy Game of 2002 " award from GameSpy , mentioning " It 's not that Medieval is just two great games in one . It 's two games that feed off of one another for the ultimate rush . " The Creative Assembly itself was also awarded the European Computer Trade Show PC Game Developer of the Year award , for the production of Medieval : Total War . 
 = = Expansions and versions = = 
 The Creative Assembly announced the development of an expansion pack , Medieval : Total War – Viking Invasion , on 7 January 2003 . The Viking Invasion expansion pack adds a Viking campaign taking place from 793 to 1066 , set upon an expanded map of the British Isles and western Scandinavia . The campaign replaces the original factions with earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon and Celtic kingdoms such as Wessex , Mercia , Wales and Scotland , as well as the Vikings . The Viking faction is designed to raid the British Isles ; to achieve this the faction has access to faster ships and gains money for every building destroyed upon the battle map . The Anglo @-@ Saxon and Celtic factions have the goal of repelling the Vikings and ultimately controlling the British Isles . New historical units were included with the expansion pack , such as the <unk> . Medieval : Total War : Viking Invasion brought several enhancements that were also added to the original campaign : flaming ammunition giving the player an option to set alight enemy castles , and a pre @-@ battle deployment screen , allowing the player to organise their forces and view the terrain and opposing forces before the battle begins . In addition , three new factions were added to the main Medieval : Total War campaign , along with <unk> artillery and the game 's patch . The expansion pack was released on 7 May 2003 in the United States and on 9 May in the United Kingdom . 
 Activision , the game 's publisher , produced a combination of Medieval : Total War and Medieval : Total War : Viking Invasion , called the Medieval : Total War Battle Collection , released on 7 January 2004 . Medieval : Total War Battle Collection contained both games , patched to the latest version , and their manuals . On 30 June 2006 , Sega , the company that took over the publishing of the series , released a collector 's edition version of the Total War series , called Total War : Eras . The edition included patched versions of Shogun : Total War , Medieval : Total War and Rome : Total War , together with their expansion packs , a documentary detailing the creation of the game series , and Total War memorabilia . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Viking Invasion received " favorable " reviews , albeit slightly less than the original Medieval : Total War , according to Metacritic . Reviewers felt the new gameplay features for the Vikings were the most important enhancement of the expansion pack , with Eurogamer commending the Vikings ' raiding system as something that fixes what " the original Medieval lacked " . ActionTrip praised the new campaign as being a challenge for players : " even on the normal difficulty setting , Viking Invasion is a very challenging game " , a view shared by other critics . The pre @-@ battle screen was commended by GameSpot , calling it a " handy new feature . " GameSpot also praised the new additions to the original campaign , mentioning they have " made castle sieges more interesting " . The main criticism for Medieval : Total War – Viking Invasion was the graphics , with both ActionTrip and Eurogamer stating that they were " starting to feel a little bit creaky " . A lack of new multiplayer options was considered by GameSpot to be " unfortunate " , mentioning that " a multiplayer campaign option would have been a great new feature " . Overall , the expansion was received well by critics in the industry . IGN concluded by saying fans " won 't be disappointed with the Viking Invasion " , while <unk> finished stating ; " the graphics are beginning to look old " but the challenge made the expansion " worth it " . The review by GameSpot finished by saying " overall , the expansion is a great addition to Medieval " , and Eurogamer concluded with praising the addition it made to Medieval : Total War : " It 's a worthy expansion pack to a truly excellent game " . 
 = Leo Ornstein = 
 Leo Ornstein ( born Lev <unk> ; Russian : <unk> <unk> ; c . December 11 , 1895 – February 24 , 2002 ) was an American composer and pianist of the early twentieth century . His performances of works by avant @-@ garde composers and his own innovative and even shocking pieces made him a cause célèbre on both sides of the Atlantic . 
 Ornstein was the first important composer to make extensive use of the tone cluster . As a pianist , he was considered a world @-@ class talent . By the mid @-@ 1920s , he had walked away from his fame and soon disappeared from popular memory . Though he gave his last public concert before the age of forty , he continued writing music for another half @-@ century and beyond . Largely forgotten for decades , he was rediscovered in the mid @-@ 1970s . Ornstein completed his eighth and final piano sonata in September 1990 at the age of ninety @-@ four , making him the oldest published composer in history ( a mark since passed by Elliott Carter ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ornstein was born in Kremenchuk , a large town in the Ukrainian province of Poltava , then under Imperial Russian rule . He grew up in a musical environment — his father was a Jewish cantor , while a violinist uncle encouraged the young boy 's studies . Ornstein was recognized early on as a prodigy on the piano ; in 1902 , when the celebrated Polish pianist Josef Hofmann visited <unk> , he heard the six @-@ year @-@ old Ornstein perform . Hofmann gave him a letter of recommendation to the highly regarded St. Petersburg Conservatory . Soon after , Ornstein was accepted as a pupil at the Imperial School of Music in Kiev , then headed by Vladimir <unk> . A death in the family forced Ornstein 's return home . In 1903 , Osip <unk> heard him play and recommended him to the Moscow Conservatory . In 1904 , the eight @-@ year @-@ old Ornstein auditioned for and was accepted by the St. Petersburg school . There he studied composition with Alexander Glazunov and piano with Anna <unk> . By the age of eleven , Ornstein was earning his way by coaching opera singers . To escape the pogroms incited by the nationalist and antisemitic organisation Union of the Russian People , the family emigrated to the United States in February 1906 . They settled in New York 's Lower East Side , and Ornstein enrolled in the Institute of Musical Art — predecessor to the Juilliard School — where he studied piano with Bertha <unk> Tapper . In 1911 , he made a well @-@ received New York debut with pieces by Bach , Beethoven , Chopin , and Schumann . Recordings two years later of works by Chopin , Grieg , and <unk> demonstrate , according to music historian Michael Broyles , " a pianist of sensitivity , prodigious technical ability , and artistic maturity . " 
 = = Fame and " futurism " = = 
 Ornstein soon moved in a very different direction . He began imagining and then writing works with new sounds , dissonant and startling . Ornstein himself was unsettled by the earliest of these compositions : " I really doubted my sanity at first . I simply said , what is that ? It was so completely removed from any experience I ever had . " On March 27 , 1914 , in London , he gave his first public performance of works then called " futurist " , now known as modernist . In addition to a Busoni arrangement of three Bach choral preludes and several pieces by Schoenberg , Ornstein played a number of his own compositions . The concert caused a major stir . One newspaper described Ornstein 's work as " the sum of Schoenberg and <unk> [ sic ] squared . " Others were less analytical : " We have never suffered from such insufferable hideousness , expressed in terms of so @-@ called music . " 
 Ornstein 's follow @-@ up performance provoked a near @-@ riot : " At my second concert , devoted to my own compositions , I might have played anything . I couldn 't hear the piano myself . The crowd whistled and howled and even threw handy missiles on the stage . " The reaction , however , was by no means universally negative — the Musical Standard called him " one of the most remarkable composers of the day ... [ with ] that germ of realism and humanity which is indicative of genius . " By the next year , he was the talk of the American music scene for his performances of cutting @-@ edge works by Schoenberg , Scriabin , Bartók , Debussy , Kodály , Ravel , and Stravinsky ( many of them U.S. premieres ) , as well as his own , even more radical compositions . 
 Between 1915 and the early 1920s , when he virtually ceased performing in public , Ornstein was one of the best known ( by some lights , notorious ) figures in American classical music . In the description of Broyles and Denise Von <unk> , his " draw was immense . He constantly performed before packed halls , often more than two thousand , in many places the ' largest audience of the season . ' " His solo piano pieces such as Wild Men 's Dance ( aka Danse Sauvage ; c . 1913 – 14 ) and Impressions of the Thames ( c . 1913 – 14 ) pioneered the integrated use of the tone cluster in classical music composition , which Henry Cowell , three years Ornstein 's junior , would do even more to popularize . In the description of scholar Gordon Rumson , Wild Men 's Dance is a " work of vehement , unruly rhythm , compounded of dense chord clusters ... and brutal accents . Complex rhythms and gigantic crashing chords traverse the whole range of the piano . This remains a work for a great virtuoso able to imbue it with a burning , ferocious energy . " Aaron Copland recalled a performance of it as the most controversial moment of his later teen years . In 2002 , a New York Times reviewer declared that it " remains a shocker . " According to critic Kyle Gann , Impressions of the Thames , " if <unk> in its textures , used more prickly chords than Debussy ever dared , and also clusters in the treble range and a low pounding that foreshadowed Charlemagne Palestine , yet modulated ... with a compelling sense of unity . " 
 As an example of what Ornstein described as " abstract music " , his Sonata for Violin and Piano ( 1915 ; not 1913 as is often erroneously given ) went even further ; " to the brink " , as he put it : " I would say that [ the sonata ] had brought music just to the very edge .... I just simply drew back and said , ' beyond that lies complete chaos . ' " In 1916 , critic Herbert F. <unk> declared that " the world has indeed moved between the epoch of Beethoven and of Leo Ornstein . " That spring , Ornstein gave a series of recitals in the New York home of one of his advocates ; these concerts were crucial precedents for the composer societies around which the modern music scene would thrive in the 1920s . Ornstein also traveled to New Orleans in 1916 , where he discovered jazz . The following year , critic James Huneker wrote , 
 I never thought I should live to hear Arnold Schoenberg sound tame , yet tame he sounds — almost timid and halting — after Ornstein who is , most emphatically , the only true @-@ blue , genuine , Futurist composer alive . " 
 In addition to " futurist " , Ornstein was also sometimes labeled — along with Cowell and others in their circle — an " ultra @-@ modernist . " An article in the Baltimore Evening Sun referred to him as " the intransigent pianist , who has set the entire musical world by the ears and who is probably the most discussed figure on the concert stage . " In The Musical Quarterly he was described as " the most salient musical phenomenon of our time . " Swiss @-@ born composer Ernest Bloch declared him " the single composer in America who displays positive signs of genius . " 
 By 1918 , Ornstein was sufficiently renowned that a full @-@ length biography of him was published . The book , by Frederick H. Martens , suggests not only the level of Ornstein 's fame at age twenty @-@ four , but also his divisive effect on the cultural scene : 
 Leo Ornstein to many represents an evil musical genius wandering without the utmost pale of tonal orthodoxy , in a weird No @-@ Man 's Land haunted with tortuous sound , with wails of futuristic despair , with cubist shrieks and post @-@ impressionist cries and crashes . He is the great <unk> , the iconoclast . 
 Cowell , who had encountered Ornstein while studying in New York , would pursue a similarly radical style as part of a grand intellectual and cultural mission , which also involved ambitious writings on music theory and publishing and promotional efforts in support of the avant @-@ garde . Ornstein , the vanguard iconoclast of American classical music , followed a much more idiosyncratic muse : " I 'm guided entirely by just my musical instinct as to what I feel is consequential or inconsequential . " Evidence of that is the fact that , even at the height of his ultra @-@ modernist notoriety , he also wrote several lyrical , tonal works , such as the First Sonata for Cello and Piano : " [ It ] was written in less than a week under a compulsion that was not to be resisted " , Ornstein later said . " Why I should have heard this romantic piece at the same period that I was tumultuously involved in the primitivism of [ other works ] is beyond my understanding . " Commenting on the piece after Ornstein 's death approximately three @-@ quarters of a century later , critic Martin Anderson wrote that it " rivals Rachmaninov 's [ cello sonata ] in gorgeous tunes . " 
 Before the turn of the decade — probably in 1918 or 1919 — Ornstein produced one of his most distinctive works involving tone clusters , Suicide in an Airplane . Its score calls for a high @-@ speed bass ostinato pattern meant to simulate the sound of engines and capture the sensation of flight . The piece would serve as an inspiration for the Airplane Sonata ( 1923 ) of George Antheil , who reflected Ornstein 's influence in other works such as Sonata Sauvage ( 1923 ) . Writing in 2000 , pianist and historian Joseph Smith cited Suicide in an Airplane among those pieces of Ornstein 's that " represented ( and may still represent ) the ne plus ultra of pianistic violence . " 
 = = Transition in the 1920s = = 
 Ornstein , burned out , effectively gave up his celebrated performance career in the early 1920s . His " music was soon forgotten " , writes scholar Erik Levi , leaving him " an essentially peripheral figure in American musical life . " As described by Broyles , " Ornstein had mostly retired by the time the new music organizations of the 1920s appeared . Too early and too independent , Ornstein had little desire to participate in the modernist movement by the time it caught hold in the United States .... [ He ] seemed little bothered by the publicity or the lack of it . He listened only to his own voice . " 
 Ornstein 's primary compositional style was changing as well . As described by latter @-@ day critic Gordon Rumson , his 
 musical language organised itself into a shimmering , luminous gradation between simplicity and harshness . The melodies have a Hebraic tint , and Ornstein does not shy from placing dissonant and tonal music side by side . This shifting of style is just one of Ornstein 's creative tools . More importantly , there is a directness of emotion that makes the music genuinely appealing . It should also be noted that his music is ideally written for the piano and is clearly the work of a master pianist . 
 This transformation contributed to Ornstein 's fade into obscurity . Those whom he had inspired now rejected him , almost as vehemently as the critics he had shocked a decade earlier . " [ H ] e had been radical modernism 's poster boy throughout the 1910s , and when he abandoned that style for one more expressive the <unk> reacted as a lover scorned " , according to Broyles . " Not even Cowell , known for his accepting temperament , could forgive Ornstein . " 
 Having abandoned not only the concert stage , but also the income that went with it , Ornstein signed an exclusive contract with the <unk> label to make piano rolls . He made over two dozen rolls for <unk> , mostly of a <unk> repertoire ; the composers he performed most often were Chopin , Schumann , and Liszt . Two rolls contained his own compositions : Berceuse ( Cradle Song ) ( c . 1920 – 21 ) and Prélude tragique ( 1924 ) . Ornstein never recorded , in any format , even a single example of his futurist pieces which had brought him fame . 
 In the mid @-@ 1920s , Ornstein left New York to accept a teaching post at the Philadelphia Musical Academy , later part of the University of the Arts . During this period , he wrote some of his most important work , including the Piano Concerto , commissioned by the Philadelphia Orchestra in 1925 . Two years later , he produced his Piano Quintet . An epic tonal work marked by an adventurous use of dissonance and complex rhythmic arrangements , it is recognized as a masterpiece of the genre . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In the early 1930s , Ornstein gave his last public performance . A few years later , he and his wife — the former Pauline <unk> Mallet @-@ <unk> ( 1892 — 1985 ) , also a pianist — founded the Ornstein School of Music in Philadelphia . Among the students there , John Coltrane and Jimmy Smith would go on to major careers in jazz . The <unk> directed and taught at the school until it closed with their retirement in 1953 . They essentially disappeared from public view until the mid @-@ 1970s , when they were tracked down by music historian Vivian Perlis : the couple was spending the winter in a Texas trailer park ( they also had a home in New Hampshire ) . Ornstein had continued to compose music ; equipped with a powerful memory , he was not diligent about writing it all down and had not sought to publicize it for decades . Though his style had tempered greatly since the 1910s , it retained its unique character , and with his rediscovery came a new burst of productivity . In Gann 's description , piano works composed by Ornstein in his eighties , such as Solitude and Rendezvous at the Lake , featured melodies that " sprang through endless ornate curlicues that brought no other composer to mind . " 
 In 1988 , the ninety @-@ two @-@ year @-@ old Ornstein wrote his Seventh Piano Sonata . With this composition Ornstein became , by a couple of years , the oldest published composer ever to produce a substantial new work . In September 1990 , at the age of ninety @-@ four , Ornstein 's final work , the Eighth Piano Sonata , was completed and given its world premiere . The names of the sonata 's movements reflect not only the passage of a remarkable span of time , but an <unk> sense of humor and exploratory spirit : I. " Life 's Turmoil and a Few Bits of Satire " / II . " A Trip to the Attic — A Tear or Two for a Childhood Forever Gone " ( a . " The Bugler " / b . " A Lament for a Lost Toy " / c . " A Half @-@ <unk> Cradle — Berceuse " / d . " First Carousel Ride and Sounds of a Hurdy @-@ Gurdy " ) / III . " Disciplines and Improvisations " . Reviewing the work 's New York debut , critic Anthony Tommasini wrote , " Between the roaring craziness of the first and third movements , the middle movement is a suite of four short musical musings on childhood mementos discovered in an attic . Though completely incongruous , the shift in tone is audacious and the music disarming . The audience listened <unk> , then erupted in applause . " 
 In February 2002 , Ornstein died peacefully in his home in Green Bay , Wisconsin . He is survived by his daughter Edith Valentine of De Pere , Wisconsin , his son , Severo Ornstein of Woodside , California , five grandchildren , and four great @-@ grandchildren . At the age of 108 , he was among the longest @-@ lived of composers . 
 = = Popular Culture = = 
 Leo Ornstein is referenced in the 2012 dark @-@ fantasy hit game Dark Souls . One of the most challenging fights in the game is Dragonslayer Ornstein , whose armor and crest bear a lion motif , and drops the Leo ring upon defeat . 
 = = = Listening = = = 
 Leo Ornstein Centenary Program , December 1 , 1992 the composer , on the occasion of his 100th birthday , visits with Charles <unk> 
 Leo Ornstein : The Last of the Original 20th Century Mavericks Ornstein and his wife interviewed by Vivian Perlis 
 Ornstein Piano Music Marc @-@ André Hamelin 's performance of Suicide in an Airplane from the Hyperion Leo Ornstein : Piano Music 
 Sarah Cahill Plays Ornstein video of 2002 performance of A Morning in the Woods ( Sep 28 , 1971 ) for solo piano 
 = Battle of the Tenaru = 
 The Battle of the Tenaru , sometimes called the Battle of the Ilu River or the Battle of Alligator Creek , was a land battle between the Imperial Japanese Army and Allied ground forces that took place on August 21 , 1942 on the island of Guadalcanal during the Pacific campaign of World War II . The battle was the first major Japanese land offensive during the Guadalcanal campaign . 
 In the battle , U.S. Marines , under the overall command of U.S. Major General Alexander Vandegrift , repulsed an assault by the " First Element " of the " Ichiki " Regiment , under the command of Japanese Colonel Kiyonao Ichiki . The Marines were defending the Lunga perimeter , which guarded Henderson Field , which was captured by the Allies in landings on Guadalcanal on August 7 . Ichiki 's unit was sent to Guadalcanal in response to the Allied landings with the mission of recapturing the airfield and driving the Allied forces off the island . 
 <unk> the strength of Allied forces on Guadalcanal , which at that time numbered about 11 @,@ 000 personnel , Ichiki 's unit conducted a nighttime frontal assault on Marine positions at Alligator Creek on the east side of the Lunga perimeter . Ichiki 's assault was defeated with heavy losses for the Imperial attackers . The Marine units counterattacked Ichiki 's surviving troops after daybreak , killing many more of them . All but 128 of the original 917 of the Ichiki Regiment 's First Element were killed in the battle . 
 The battle was the first of three separate major land offensives by the Japanese in the Guadalcanal campaign . The Japanese realized after Tenaru that Allied forces on Guadalcanal were much greater in number than originally estimated and sent larger forces to the island for their subsequent attempts to retake Henderson Field . 
 = = Background = = 
 On August 7 , 1942 , U.S. forces landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of isolating the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal campaign . 
 Taking the Japanese by surprise , the Allied landing forces accomplished their initial objectives of securing Tulagi and nearby small islands , as well as an airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal , by nightfall on August 8 . That night , as the transports unloaded , the Allied warships screening the transports were surprised and defeated by an Imperial fleet of seven cruisers and one destroyer , commanded by Japanese Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa . Three U.S. and one Australian cruisers were sunk and one other U.S. cruiser and two destroyers were damaged in the Battle of Savo Island . Turner withdrew all remaining Allied naval forces by the evening of August 9 without unloading all of the heavy equipment , provisions , and troops from the transports , although most of the divisional artillery was landed , consisting of 32 75 mm and 105 mm howitzers . Only five days worth of rations were landed . 
 The Marines ashore on Guadalcanal initially concentrated on forming a defense perimeter around the airfield , moving the landed supplies within the perimeter , and finishing the airfield . Vandegrift placed his 11 @,@ 000 troops on Guadalcanal in a loose perimeter around the Lunga Point area . In four days of intense effort , the supplies were moved from the landing beach into dispersed dumps within the perimeter . Work began on the airfield immediately , mainly using captured Japanese equipment . On August 12 , the airfield was named Henderson Field after Major Lofton Henderson , a Marine aviator who had been killed at the Battle of Midway . Captured Japanese stock increased the total supply of food to 14 days worth . To conserve the limited food supplies , the Allied troops were limited to two meals per day . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army , a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake , with the task of retaking Guadalcanal from Allied forces . The 17th Army , currently heavily involved with the Japanese campaign in New Guinea , had only a few units available to send to the southern Solomons area . Of these units , the 35th Infantry Brigade under Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi was at Palau , the 4th ( Aoba ) Infantry Regiment was in the Philippines , and the 28th ( Ichiki ) Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Kiyonao Ichiki , was at sea en route to Japan from Guam . The different units began to move towards Guadalcanal immediately , but Ichiki 's regiment , being the closest , arrived first . 
 An aerial reconnaissance of the U.S. Marine positions on Guadalcanal on August 12 by one of the senior Japanese staff officers from Rabaul sighted few U.S. troops in the open and no large ships in the waters nearby , convincing Imperial Headquarters that the Allies had withdrawn the majority of their troops . In fact , none of the Allied troops had been withdrawn . Hyakutake issued orders for an advance unit of 900 troops from Ichiki 's regiment to be landed on Guadalcanal by fast warship to immediately attack the Allied position and reoccupy the airfield area at Lunga Point . The remaining personnel in Ichiki 's regiment would be delivered to Guadalcanal by slower transport later . At the major Japanese naval base at Truk , which was the staging point for delivery of Ichiki 's regiment to Guadalcanal , Colonel Ichiki was briefed that 2 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 U.S. troops were holding the Guadalcanal beachhead and that he should , " avoid frontal attacks . " 
 Ichiki and 916 of his regiment 's 2 @,@ 300 troops , designated the " First Element " and carrying seven days ' supply of food , were delivered to Taivu Point , about 35 kilometers ( 22 miles ) east of Lunga Point , by six destroyers at 01 : 00 on August 19 . Ichiki was ordered to scout the American positions and wait for the remainder of his force to arrive . Known as the Ichiki Butai ( Ichiki Detachment ) , they were an elite and battle @-@ seasoned force but as was about to be discovered , they were heavily stricken with " victory disease " - overconfidence due to previous success . Ichiki was so confident in the superiority of his men that he decided to destroy the American defenders before the remaining majority of his force arrived , even writing in his journal " 18 August , landing ; 20 August , march by night and battle ; 21 August , enjoyment of the fruit of victory " . He concocted a brazenly simple plan : march straight down the beach and through the American defenses . Leaving about 100 personnel behind as a rear guard , Ichiki marched west with the remaining 800 men of his unit and made camp before dawn about 14 kilometers ( 8 @.@ 7 miles ) east of the Lunga perimeter . The U.S. Marines at Lunga Point received intelligence that a Japanese landing had occurred and took steps to find out exactly what was happening . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Reports to Allied forces from patrols of Solomon Islanders , including retired Sergeant Major Jacob C. <unk> of the British Solomon Islands Protectorate Constabulary , under the direction of Martin Clemens , a coastwatcher and officer in the British Solomon Islands Protectorate Defence Force ( <unk> ) , along with Allied intelligence from other sources , indicated that Japanese troops were present east of Lunga Point . To investigate further , on August 19 , a Marine patrol of 60 men and four native scouts , commanded by U.S. Marine Captain Charles H. Brush , marched east from the Lunga Perimeter . 
 At the same time , Ichiki sent forward his own patrol of 38 men , led by his communications officer , to reconnoiter Allied troop dispositions and establish a forward communications base . Around 12 : 00 on August 19 at Koli Point , Brush 's patrol sighted and ambushed the Japanese patrol , killing all but five of its members , who escaped back to Taivu . The Marines suffered three dead and three wounded . 
 Papers discovered on the bodies of some of the Japanese officers in the patrol revealed that they belonged to a much larger unit and showed detailed intelligence of U.S. Marine positions around Lunga Point . The papers did not , however , detail exactly how large the Japanese force was or whether an attack was imminent . 
 Now anticipating an attack from the east , the U.S. Marine forces , under the direction of General Vandegrift , prepared their defenses on the east side of the Lunga perimeter . Several official U.S. military histories identify the location of the eastern defenses of the Lunga perimeter as emplaced on the Tenaru River . The Tenaru River , however , was actually located further to the east . The river forming the eastern boundary of the Lunga perimeter was actually the Ilu River , nicknamed Alligator Creek by the Marines , a double misnomer : there are no alligators in the Solomons , only crocodiles , and Alligator " Creek " was a tidal lagoon separated from the ocean by a sandbar about 7 to 15 meters ( 23 to 49 ft ) in width and about 30 meters ( 98 feet ) long . 
 Along the west side of Alligator Creek , Colonel Clifton B. Cates , commander of the 1st Marine Regiment , deployed his 1st and 2nd battalions . To help further defend the Alligator Creek sandbar , Cates deployed 100 men from the 1st Special Weapons Battalion with two 37mm anti @-@ tank guns equipped with canister shot . Marine divisional artillery , consisting of both 75mm and 105mm guns , pre @-@ targeted locations on the east side and sandbar areas of Alligator Creek , and forward artillery observers emplaced themselves in the forward Marine positions . The Marines worked all day on August 20 to prepare their defenses as much as possible before nightfall . 
 Learning of the annihilation of his patrol , Ichiki quickly sent forward a company to bury the bodies and followed with the rest of his troops , marching throughout the night of August 19 and finally halting at 04 : 30 on August 20 within a few miles of the U.S. Marine positions on the east side of Lunga Point . At this location , he prepared his troops to attack the Allied positions that night . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Just after midnight on August 21 , Ichiki 's main body of troops arrived at the east bank of Alligator Creek and were surprised to encounter the Marine positions , not having expected to find U.S. forces located that distance from the airfield . Nearby U.S. Marine listening posts heard " clanking " sounds , human voices , and other noises before withdrawing to the west bank of the creek . At 01 : 30 Ichiki 's force opened fire with machine guns and mortars on the Marine positions on the west bank of the creek , and a first wave of about 100 Imperial soldiers charged across the sandbar towards the Marines . 
 Marine machine gun fire and canister rounds from the 37 mm cannons killed most of the Japanese soldiers as they crossed the sandbar . A few of the Japanese soldiers reached the Marine positions , engaged in hand to hand combat with the defenders , and captured a few of the Marine front @-@ line emplacements . Also , Japanese machine gun and rifle fire from the east side of the creek killed several of the Marine machine @-@ gunners . A company of Marines , held in reserve just behind the front line , attacked and killed most , if not all , of the remaining Japanese soldiers that had breached the front line defenses , ending Ichiki 's first assault about an hour after it had begun . 
 At 02 : 30 a second wave of about 150 to 200 Japanese troops again attacked across the sandbar and was again almost completely wiped out . At least one of the surviving Imperial officers from this attack advised Ichiki to withdraw his remaining forces , but Ichiki declined to do so . 
 As Ichiki 's troops regrouped east of the creek , Japanese mortars bombarded the Marine lines . The Marines answered with 75 mm artillery barrages and mortar fire into the areas east of the creek . At about 05 : 00 , another wave of Japanese troops attacked , this time attempting to flank the Marine positions by wading through the ocean surf and attacking up the beach into the west bank area of the creek bed . The Marines responded with heavy machine gun and artillery fire along the beachfront area , again causing heavy casualties among Ichiki 's attacking troops and causing them to abandon their attack and withdraw back to the east bank of the creek . For the next couple of hours , the two sides exchanged rifle , machine gun , and artillery fire at close range across the sandbar and creek . 
 In spite of the heavy losses his force had suffered , Ichiki 's troops remained in place on the east bank of the creek , either unable or unwilling to withdraw . At daybreak on August 21 , the commanders of the U.S. Marine units facing Ichiki 's troops conferred on how best to proceed , and they decided to counterattack . The 1st Battalion , 1st Marine Regiment , under Lieutenant Colonel Lenard B. Cresswell , crossed Alligator Creek upstream from the battle area , enveloped Ichiki 's troops from the south and east , cutting off any avenue for retreat , and began to " compress " Ichiki 's troops into a small area in a coconut grove on the east bank of the creek . 
 Aircraft from Henderson Field strafed Japanese soldiers that attempted to escape down the beach and , later in the afternoon , five Marine M3 Stuart tanks attacked across the sandbar into the coconut grove . The tanks swept the coconut grove with machine gun and canister cannon fire , as well as rolling over the bodies , both alive and dead , of any Japanese soldiers unable or unwilling to get out of the way . When the tank attack was over , Vandegrift wrote that , " the rear of the tanks looked like meat grinders . " 
 By 17 : 00 on August 21 , Japanese resistance had ended . Colonel Ichiki was either killed during the final stages of the battle , or committed ritual suicide ( seppuku ) shortly thereafter , depending on the account . As curious Marines began to walk around looking at the battlefield , some wounded Japanese troops shot at them , killing or wounding several Marines . Thereafter , Marines shot and / or bayonetted any Japanese soldier laying on the ground that moved , although about 15 injured and unconscious Japanese soldiers were taken prisoner . About 30 of the Japanese troops escaped to rejoin their regiment 's rear echelon at Taivu Point . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 For the U.S. and its allies , the victory in the Tenaru battle was psychologically significant in that Allied soldiers , after a series of defeats to Japanese Army units throughout the Pacific and east Asia , now knew that they could defeat the Imperial Armies in a land battle . The battle also set another precedent that would continue throughout the war in the Pacific , which was the reluctance of defeated Japanese soldiers to surrender and their efforts to continue killing Allied soldiers , even as the Japanese soldiers lay dying on the battlefield . On this subject Vandegrift remarked , " I have never heard or read of this kind of fighting . These people refuse to surrender . The wounded wait until men come up to examine them ... and blow themselves and the other fellow to pieces with a hand grenade . " Robert Leckie , a Guadalcanal veteran , recalls the aftermath of the battle in his book Helmet For My Pillow , " Our regiment had killed something like nine hundred of them . Most lay in clusters or heaps before the gun pits commanding sandspit , as though they had not died singly but in groups . Moving among them were the souvenir hunters , picking their way delicately as though fearful of booby traps , while stripping the bodies of their possessions . " 
 The battle was also psychologically significant in that Imperial soldiers believed in their own invincibility and superior spirit . By August 25 , most of Ichiki 's survivors reached Taivu Point and radioed Rabaul to tell 17th Army headquarters that Ichiki 's detachment had been " almost annihilated at a point short of the airfield . " Reacting with disbelief to the news , Japanese Army headquarters officers proceeded with plans to deliver additional troops to Guadalcanal to reattempt to capture Henderson Field . The next major Imperial attack on the Lunga perimeter occurred at the Battle of Edson 's Ridge about three weeks later , this time employing a much larger force than had been employed in the Tenaru battle . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 The Battle of the Tenaru is a key part of the 1945 biographical film on Al Schmid , Pride of the Marines . The brunt of the Japanese assault was borne by Marines Cpl. Lee Diamond , PFC . John Rivers and Pvt. Albert Schmid . The three were credited with 200 Japanese killed in action ( KIA ) . Awarded the Navy Cross ( America 's second highest decoration ) for their actions , the trio paid dearly . Rivers lost his life , while Schmid and Diamond suffered horrendous wounds . Schmid lost sight in one eye and was left with very little in the other . Shot in his arm early in the fight , Diamond 's arms and hands were also ripped by the same grenade which blinded Schmid . In 2010 , the battle became the climax of Episode One of Steven Spielberg 's and Tom Hanks ' miniseries , The Pacific . 
 = Esparza 's = 
 Esparza 's Tex Mex Cafe , or simply Esparza 's , was a Tex @-@ Mex restaurant in Portland , Oregon , in the United States . Opened by Martha and Joe Esparza in 1990 , the restaurant operated for more than 24 years before closing in January 2014 . Its unusual menu included buffalo <unk> , ground ostrich and <unk> , several varieties of tongue , beef brisket , and more traditional options such as enchiladas , <unk> , tacos and tamales . Esparza 's was one of Portland 's most popular restaurants during the 1990s and was named " Restaurant of the Year " by The Oregonian in 1992 . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Esparza 's , located at the intersection of SE 28th Avenue and SE Ankeny Street in Portland 's Buckman neighborhood , served Tex @-@ Mex cuisine . Opening in 1990 , it became one of Portland 's most popular restaurants . The Portland Mercury described Esparza 's as a " quaint little cafe " with " interesting " menu options , including buffalo <unk> , ground ostrich and <unk> ( cactus deep @-@ fried in cornmeal batter ) . It served several varieties of tongue , including beef , buffalo , calf , lamb , pork and venison . The menu also included beef brisket ( " Smiley Burnette " ) and more traditional options such as enchiladas , <unk> , tacos and tamales , with most entrees ranging from $ 9 – 11 . The most expensive entree on the menu cost $ 12 @.@ 95 , making Esparza 's known for its reasonable pricing . 
 The restaurant 's owners , Martha and Joe Esparza , shared four of their recipes with The Oregonian between 1990 and 2002 . Joe 's recipe for " Texas @-@ Style Chili Colorado " was based on one his mother made during his childhood in Uvalde , Texas . His mother disliked short @-@ cut cooking and instead used ground chilies and other seasonings . Joe used a similar method , and his recipe was considered one of Esparza 's signature dishes . In 1994 , Martha shared her recipe for " Sudie Mae 's Sweet Potato Pecan Pie " , which came from her mother , who would make it on Sundays while growing up in Mineola , Texas . Joe 's " <unk> Ranchero " recipe , which he shared with The Oregonian in 1996 , became popular after guests " got over their squeamishness over eating cactus leaves " . The recipe for " Turkey <unk> a la Tex @-@ Mex " ( guiso is a type of stew ) , was shared in 2002 and has been recommended for utilizing leftover Thanksgiving turkey . Esparza 's " Dirty Bird " recipe was shared on the Food Network 's The Best Of : Spicy Foods . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 In January 2014 , the restaurant was closed temporarily for renovations , with no timeline offered for the project . The Oregonian also reported that the restaurant 's phone number was disconnected and its website inactive . Signage confirmed the closure , stating : " Esparza 's will be temporarily closed while renovating and regrouping . Thank you for your patience . We will re @-@ open soon . " However , several days later , the owners confirmed the restaurant 's permanent closure , posting a note that said : " We have closed our business after 24 years . We would like to thank you for supporting us . We have enjoyed the friendships made over the years . We are starting a new chapter in our lives – relaxing and enjoying life . Thank you for your support . " The Oregonian published an article containing memories of the restaurant submitted by readers . Esparza 's was replaced by The Blue Goose , a " Southwestern @-@ grill @-@ meets @-@ New @-@ Mexico " restaurant serving Mexican and Tex @-@ Mex cuisine , named after the neighborhood tavern of similar title that occupied the building . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The restaurant received a mostly positive reception , including " glowing " reviews in Bon Appétit and The New York Times . In 1992 , Esparza 's was named The Oregonian 's " Restaurant of the Year " . According to the paper , the restaurant played an important role in developing NE and SE 28th Avenue as a food destination . Portland Monthly called the food " so @-@ so " , but noted its menu , outdoor patio and jukebox , encouraging people to " bask in the indecipherable harmonies of norteño polka crackling from the vintage vinyl @-@ and @-@ neon Wurlitzer " . 
 Esparza 's was highlighted in numerous travel guides of Portland . Fodor 's published , " Be prepared for south @-@ of @-@ the @-@ border craziness at this beloved local eatery . Wild West kitsch festoons the walls , but it isn 't any wilder than some of the entrées that emerge from chef @-@ owner Joe Esparza 's kitchen . " In her book Insiders ' Guide to Portland , Oregon , Rachel Dresbeck called the menu " spicy , flavorful , and tantalizingly aromatic " , and described the atmosphere as " 1950s Texas soda shop — just the right accent to complement the hearty fare " . Yahoo ! Travel called the restaurant " fun , wild and woolly " , offering food " in the true tradition of the Lone Star State " . Yahoo ! recommended the chile <unk> , ostrich enchiladas , or <unk> for a unique dining experience . 
 The restaurant did not receive universal acclaim , however . In a negative review for The Portland Mercury in 2000 , Robin Rosenberg wrote : 
 ... one expects the food at Esparza 's to be something special ; You might think that the line trickling out the door on a Thursday night is an indication of exceptional Tex @-@ Mex , worth a considerable sum . Well , certainly , Esparza 's <unk> , an amalgam of Western nostalgia , Texan brawn , and Tijuana cheese is executed with flair . Unfortunately though , no thematic coup can compensate for the fact that Esparza 's food rarely exceeds mediocre , and never lives up to its price ... The bulk of the clientele resides in a comfortable economic bracket and come down to the gritty Eastside to <unk> top shelf margaritas and feast on manic kitsch . The hot corn chips and fresh salsa , which come fast and free , are the height of the meal . Smoked salmon enchiladas are just wrong ; No quantity of barbecue sauce ( in this case , cloying and acrid ) is going to improve a tough , dry brisket . The pork tacos are equally dry , but the ground buffalo enchiladas are very macho and spicy ( though they will linger painfully ) ... The beans and rice that accompany most entrees are utterly flavorless , a gratuitous use of space on the plate . Some people like beans and rice ; Esparza 's doesn 't seem to care . It 's a troublesome adage , ' you get what you pay for , ' when you 've gorged on flash and formula — and yet , you 're starved for a good meal . 
 Following the restaurant 's closure , The Oregonian 's Grant Butler called the run that it had " remarkable " . He recalled , " [ W ] hen Esparza 's opened in 1990 , it broke the mold of what Mexican fare in Portland could be . Instead of combination plates blanketed in shrouds of sour cream and melted cheddar , Esparza 's served dishes that few people in Portlanders [ sic ] had ever experienced at the time " . 
