 = = Comprehensive charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = The Last Outpost ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " The Last Outpost " is the fifth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired within the United States on October 19 , 1987 . The episode was written by Herbert Wright , based on a story by Richard <unk> , and directed by Richard Colla . The guest cast included Armin Shimerman , Jake Dengel and Tracey Walter . Although this was Shimerman 's first appearance as a Ferengi , he had previously filmed his first appearance in an uncredited role in " Haven " , but that was broadcast after " The Last Outpost " . He would later gain the role of the Ferengi Quark in the main cast of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the Enterprise pursue a Ferengi starship to the planet Gamma Tauri IV , where both ships are disabled by an unknown power drain . Away teams from each vessel beam down to the planet where they find an automated system left behind by the Tkon Empire . 
 This episode marked the first on @-@ screen appearance of the Ferengi , who had been mentioned earlier in the series . They were intended to replace the antagonist roles that Klingons and Romulans played in Star Trek : The Original Series in the new series , but this idea was dropped after their first couple of appearances . Their look was created by Andrew Probert with modifications by Michael Westmore . The tattoo design was created by Mike Okuda , while Probert was also responsible for the design of their starship . The Ferengi were criticised by reviewers following broadcast , and later reviewers had a mostly negative opinion of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise is in pursuit of a Ferengi vessel which has stolen an energy converter from an unmanned Federation outpost . While the Ferengi were known to the Federation , this is the first contact with the species , and the Enterprise crew finds the Ferengi appear to be at a similar technology level as themselves . As the chase passes the planet Delphi <unk> IV , both ships suffer from power drains causing them to come to a halt . The crews of both ships initially believe the power drain is caused by the other vessel , but Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) realizes that the Ferengi are as confused as they are , and orders the crew to investigate the planet . Operations Officer Lt. Cdr . Data ( Brent Spiner ) reports that the planet seems to have once been a remote outpost of the " Tkon Empire " that became extinct 600 @,@ 000 years ago . Picard contacts the Ferengi and gets them to agree to mutually explore the planet below to try to find the source of the energy drain . 
 On the planet , the away team is momentarily separated due to effects of the energy field on the transporters . They regroup but are attacked and bound by the Ferengi , believing the Enterprise crew was planning an ambush of their own . The away team break free , and begin to exchange weapon fire , but the energy expelled is absorbed by a nearby crystalline structure . Data investigates the tree and awakens an entity that displays itself as a humanoid and calls itself Portal 63 ( Darryl Henriques ) , " a guardian of the Tkon Empire . " Portal 63 asks the two groups if they seek to enter the Tkon Empire , and does not comprehend when it is told that the Tkon have long since disappeared . The Ferengi accuse the Enterprise away team of being a hostile force ; Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) admits that they are hostile to the Ferengi , inadvertently confirming humanity to be indeed hostile in the eyes of Portal 63 , who steps forward , appearing ready to attack Riker and claims his species is barbaric . Riker responds with a quote from Sun Tzu , " Fear is the true enemy , the only enemy , " while keeping from flinching as the attack comes . Portal 63 accepts this and stands down from the challenge , satisfied that the Federation is civilized , and allows the Enterprise to go free . It further offers Riker the opportunity to destroy the Ferengi vessel , but he declines on the grounds that the Ferengi would learn nothing from such an action . Both away teams return to their ships with power restored , and the Ferengi return the stolen energy converter . As a means of ironic thanks , Riker suggests sending the Ferengi a box of Chinese finger traps , a toy that fascinated Data when he became stuck in one earlier in the mission . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Creating the Ferengi = = = 
 The creator of Star Trek , Gene Roddenberry , decided early on that he did not want to repeat the adversaries from Star Trek : The Original Series in The Next Generation . To this extent , the " bible " produced before the start of the show stated categorically " No stories about warfare with Klingons or Romulans " . The Ferengi were designed by Roddenberry and Herbert Wright to fill this gap . They were mentioned in the episodes running up to " The Last Outpost " , which marked their first appearance on screen . After they re @-@ appeared later in the first series in " The Battle " , the producers thought that they didn 't make a suitable adversary and plans for their continued use in this role were dropped . Their role as major villains in The Next Generation was eventually taken by the Borg . By the time that they appeared in Deep Space Nine , they were used in a comedic fashion . The look of the Ferengi and their ship were created by Andrew Probert . The vessel was inspired by a Horseshoe crab and was built by Greg Jein . 
 Michael Westmore was responsible for taking Probert 's designs for the Ferengi and creating the make @-@ up for the actors to meet that design . In Probert 's original concept , the Ferengi had ears which were pointed like a bat . There were concerns from the producers that these would appear simply to be larger versions of the already known Vulcan ears , and so Westmore was told to round off the ears when it came to producing the make @-@ up . Other elements which were changed at the make @-@ up stage included modifications to the nose to increase the volume of wrinkles and dropping the idea of an extended chin as Westmore thought it would save time in applying the make @-@ up . A set of false upper teeth were also created , which were added to a single head piece and a nose piece which comprised the prosthetics for the Ferengi . Westmore was not pleased when a shot of an actor in costume was leaked without the teeth , he said " I was annoyed about that photo because the make @-@ up was incomplete . After all the work that went into it , we would have wanted our design in proper form . The photo was like a pirated version of our make @-@ up , because none of us would ever approved it under those circumstances . " Michael Okuda designed a rank designation tattoo which Westmore applied to the right part of each Ferengi forehead . The symbol means " Dog eat dog " and was painted green as that is the colour of American dollar bills . Each bar ( referred to by the production crew as a " rocker " ) to the side of the symbol designated a rank with more bars meaning a higher rank . 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 In Richard <unk> 's original draft , Portal was referred to as <unk> . Executive producer Maurice Hurley saw Portal as being a sort of guard @-@ dog , but thought that the Ferengi turned the concept into " silliness " . Director Richard Colla felt that the episode had problems which were only identified after shooting was completed . Riker 's notion of sending Chinese finger traps to the Ferengi vessel at the end of the episode was a reference to The Original Series episode " The Trouble with Tribbles " where Chief Engineer Scott beams over a shipload of tribbles to a Klingon ship . Wil Wheaton later recalled that the cast were unhappy with the episode as they didn 't like several aspects of it including the <unk> joke and the Ferengi in general . The episode also featured the first occasion that Geordi La Forge gave a report to the bridge from the engineering section . The producers liked this image so much that from season two onwards the character became the Chief Engineer . 
 The guest stars in this episode re @-@ appeared in different roles later in the series . Both Tracey Walter and Mike Gomez re @-@ appeared as other Ferengi in the sixth season episode " Rascals " . This was the second recorded performance of Armin Shimerman in a TNG episode , although the first to be broadcast . He has gone uncredited in a previously filmed role as the face of a Betazoid gift box in " Haven " . He made a further appearance as a different Ferengi in " Peak Performance " before gaining the main cast role of the Ferengi Quark in Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . In that role he would also shoot a scene for the movie Star Trek : Insurrection , but it was cut from the final version of the film . He said of his performance in " The Last Outpost " , " I was pretty much playing over @-@ the @-@ top villain – that turned out to be very comical . I thought I was being serious , but obviously , it was not serious . It 's because there was no subtlety to the performance , there was no attempt to try to give them some real <unk> ... It was bad acting . It was just bad acting . They liked it , god bless them , Star Trek liked it . " 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " The Last Outpost " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing October 17 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 8 @.@ 9 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the lowest ratings received by any episode during the first season . 
 There was initial criticism regarding the Ferengi from reviewers . Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in May 2011 , and praised Mike Gomez as the first Ferengi seen in Star Trek , but thought that they were " far too comical to be taken in any way seriously as the threat the script desperately wanted them to be " . He said that apart from the first appearance of the Ferengi and Armin Shimerman that the episode wasn 't " anything to write home about " . He gave it a score of three out of ten . Cast member Wil Wheaton watched the episode for AOL TV in October 2006 . He thought that the episode saw some character growth but felt that the Ferengi " were a total joke " until they were later partially redeemed by <unk> as Quark in Deep Space Nine . He thought that the episode didn 't show a great deal of improvement after " The Naked Now " and " Code of Honor " and may have resulted in the show losing viewers . He gave it a grade of C. 
 James Hunt wrote about the episode in October 2012 for the website Den of Geek . He thought it worked " surprisingly well " and that the ending was " Star Trek at its best - big idea philosophical nonsense " . He praised the plot twists and said that the Ferengi " while completely ridiculous , are genuinely hilarious " . Zack Handlen watched the episode for The A.V. Club in April 2010 . He described the Ferengi as " really , really terrible " , and said that Portal was a lazy device reminiscent of such god @-@ like beings in The Original Series . He gave the episode a grade of C- . 
 The first home media release of " The Last Outpost " was on VHS cassette was on April 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Martha Layne Collins = 
 Martha Layne Collins ( née Hall , born December 7 , 1936 ) is an American former businesswoman and politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky ; she was elected as the state 's 56th governor from 1983 to 1987 , the first woman to hold the office and the only one to date . Prior to that , she served as the 48th Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky , under John Y. Brown , Jr . Her election made her the highest @-@ ranking Democratic woman in the U.S. She was considered as a possible running mate for Democratic presidential nominee Walter Mondale in the 1984 presidential election , but Mondale chose Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro instead . 
 After graduating from the University of Kentucky , Collins worked as a school teacher while her husband finished a degree in dentistry . She became interested in politics , and worked on both Wendell Ford 's gubernatorial campaign in 1971 and Walter " Dee " Huddleston 's U.S. Senate campaign in 1972 . In 1975 , she was chosen secretary of the state 's Democratic Party and was elected clerk of the Kentucky Court of Appeals . During her tenure as clerk , a constitutional amendment restructured the state 's judicial system , and the Court of Appeals became the Kentucky Supreme Court . Collins continued as clerk of the renamed court and worked to educate citizens about the court 's new role . 
 Collins was elected lieutenant governor in 1979 , under Governor John Y. Brown , Jr . Brown was frequently out of the state , leaving Collins as acting governor for more than 500 days of her four @-@ year term . In 1983 , she defeated Republican Jim Bunning to become Kentucky 's first woman governor . Her administration had two primary focuses : education and economic development . After failing to secure increased funding for education in the 1984 legislative session , she conducted a statewide public awareness campaign in advance of a special legislative session the following year ; the modified program was passed in that session . She successfully used economic incentives to bring a Toyota manufacturing plant to Georgetown , Kentucky in 1986 . Legal challenges to the incentives – which would have cost the state the plant and its related economic benefits – were eventually dismissed by the Kentucky Supreme Court . The state experienced record economic growth under Collins ' leadership . 
 At the time , Kentucky governors were not eligible for reelection . Collins taught at several universities after her four @-@ year term as governor . From 1990 to 1996 , she was the president of Saint Catharine College near Springfield , Kentucky . The 1993 conviction of Collins ' husband , Dr. Bill Collins , in an influence @-@ peddling scandal damaged her hopes for a return to political life . Prior to her husband 's conviction it had been rumored that she would be a candidate for the U.S. Senate , or would take a position in the administration of President Bill Clinton . From 1998 to 2012 , Collins served as an executive scholar @-@ in @-@ residence at Georgetown College . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Martha Layne Hall was born December 7 , 1936 , in Bagdad , Kentucky , the only child of Everett and Mary ( Taylor ) Hall . When Martha was in the sixth grade , her family moved to Shelbyville , Kentucky , and opened the Hall @-@ Taylor Funeral Home . Martha was involved in numerous extracurricular activities both in school and at the local Baptist church . Her parents were active in local politics , working for the campaigns of several Democratic candidates , and Hall frequently joined them , stuffing envelopes and delivering pamphlets door @-@ to @-@ door . 
 Martha attended Shelbyville High School where she was a good student and a cheerleader . She frequently competed in beauty pageants and won the title of Shelby County Tobacco Festival Queen in 1954 . After high school , Hall enrolled at Lindenwood College , then an all @-@ woman college in Saint Charles , Missouri ( It is now a co @-@ ed university ) . After one year at Lindenwood , she transferred to the University of Kentucky in Lexington , Kentucky . She was active in many clubs , including the Chi Omega social sorority , the Baptist Student Union , and the home economics club , and was also the president of her dormitory and vice president of the house presidents council . 
 In 1957 , Hall met Billy Louis Collins while attending a Baptist camp in Shelby County . He was a student at Georgetown College in Georgetown , Kentucky , about 13 miles from Lexington ; he and Hall dated while finishing their degrees . Hall earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Home Economics in 1959 . Having won the title of Kentucky Derby Festival Queen earlier that year , she briefly considered a career in modeling . Instead , she and Collins married shortly after her graduation . While Billy Collins pursued a degree in dentistry at the University of Louisville , Martha taught at Seneca and Fairdale high schools , both located in Louisville . While living in Louisville , the couple had two children , Steve and Marla . 
 In 1966 , the Collinses moved to Versailles , Kentucky , where Martha taught at Woodford County Junior High School . The couple became active in several civic organizations , including the Jaycees and <unk> and the Young Democratic Couples Club . Through the club , they worked on behalf of Henry Ward 's unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign in 1967 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 By 1971 , Collins was the president of the <unk> ; through her work there , she came to the attention of Democratic state senator Walter " Dee " Huddleston . Huddleston asked Collins to co @-@ chair Wendell Ford 's gubernatorial campaign in the 6th District . J.R. Miller , then @-@ chairman of the state Democratic Party , commented that " She organized that district like you wouldn 't believe . " After Ford 's victory , he named Collins as a Democratic National Committeewoman from Kentucky . She quit her teaching job and went to work full @-@ time at the state Democratic Party headquarters , as secretary of the state Democratic party and as a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention . The following year , she worked for Huddleston 's campaign for the U.S. Senate . 
 In 1975 , Collins won the Democratic nomination for Clerk of the Kentucky Court of Appeals in a five @-@ way primary . In the general election , she defeated Republican Joseph E. Lambert by a vote of 382 @,@ 528 to 233 @,@ 442 . During her term , an amendment to the state constitution changed the name of the Court of Appeals to the Kentucky Supreme Court ; Collins was the last person to hold the office of Clerk of the Court of Appeals and the first to hold the office of Clerk of the Supreme Court . As Clerk , she compiled and distributed a brochure about the new role of the Supreme Court , and worked with the state department of education to create a teacher 's manual for use in the public schools , detailing the changes effected in the court system as a result of the constitutional amendment . The Woodford County chapter of Business and Professional Women chose Collins as its 1976 Woman of Achievement , and in 1977 , Governor Julian Carroll named her Kentucky Executive Director of the Friendship Force . 
 In a field that included six major candidates , Collins secured the Democratic nomination for lieutenant governor in the 1979 primary , garnering 23 percent of the vote . She handily defeated Republican Hal Rogers in the general election 543 @,@ 176 to 316 @,@ 798 . As lieutenant governor , she traveled the state , attending ceremonies in place of Democratic Governor John Y. Brown , Jr . , who disliked such formal events and often chose not to attend . By the end of her term , she declared that she had visited all 120 counties in Kentucky . Governor Brown was frequently out of the state , leaving Collins as acting governor for more than 500 days of her four @-@ year term . 
 As lieutenant governor , Collins presided <unk> the state Senate . Members of both major parties praised Collins for her impartiality and knowledge of parliamentary procedure in this role . She was twice called upon to break tie votes in the Senate , once on a bill allowing the state 's teachers to engage in collective bargaining and another on a bill to allow branch banking across county lines within the state ; in both instances she voted in the negative , killing the bill . During her tenure , she also chaired the National Conference of Lieutenant Governors , becoming the first woman to hold that position . In 1982 , she was named to the board of regents of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville . 
 = = Gubernatorial election of 1983 = = 
 Nearing the end of her term as lieutenant governor , Collins announced her intent to run for governor in 1983 . Her opponents for the Democratic nomination included Louisville mayor Harvey Sloane and Grady Stumbo , the former secretary of the state 's Department of Human Resources . Collins had the support of many leaders in the Democratic Party , but just before the primary , Governor Brown endorsed Stumbo , charging that both Sloane and Collins would use their gubernatorial appointment power to dispense party patronage . Although this was a common practice at the time , Brown notably shunned it during his term . With 223 @,@ 692 votes , Collins edged out Sloane ( 219 @,@ 160 votes ) and Stumbo ( 199 @,@ 795 votes ) to secure the nomination . Sloane asked for a <unk> of the ballots , but ultimately decided it would not change the outcome and conceded defeat . 
 In the general election , Collins faced Republican state senator Jim Bunning , who was later elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame for his achievements as a professional pitcher . The National Organization for Women , the National Women 's Campaign Fund , and the Women 's Political Caucus all refused to endorse Collins , citing her lukewarm support for the Equal Rights Amendment and her opposition to abortion except in cases of rape , incest , or when the mother 's life was in danger . But , Bunning was not personable on the campaign trail and had difficulty finding issues that would draw traditionally Democratic voters to him . His Catholicism was a political liability among the majority @-@ Protestant voters . Collins won the election by a vote of 561 @,@ 674 to 454 @,@ 650 , becoming the first , and to date only , woman to be elected governor of Kentucky . 
 Following her election , Collins donated the surplus $ 242 @,@ 000 from her campaign coffers to the state Democratic Party . When Collins ' husband was named state treasurer for the party – at an annual salary of $ 59 @,@ 900 – the state press charged that the move was a plot to funnel Collins ' campaign funds into her personal account . ( The previous Democratic state treasurer had received no salary during his tenure . ) Following the media criticism , Dr. Collins resigned his post as treasurer . All of the involved individuals insisted that Governor Collins had not been briefed on the details of her husband 's appointment . The media 's criticism of Collins continued as many of the appointments to her executive cabinet went to what they characterized as inexperienced personnel who had held key positions in her past campaigns . When newly appointed Insurance Commissioner Gilbert McCarty approved a 17 % rate increase requested by Blue Cross Blue Shield – a request that his predecessor had denied a few days earlier – Collins quickly countermanded the approval pending a public hearing on the matter . 
 = = Governor = = 
 In her first address to the legislature , Collins asked for an additional $ 324 million from the Kentucky General Assembly , most of it allocated for education . The additional revenue was to be derived from Collins ' proposed tax package , which included increasing the income tax on individuals making more than $ 15 @,@ 000 annually , extending the sales tax to cover services such as auto repair and dry cleaning , and increasing the corporate licensing tax . After opposition to her proposal developed among legislators during the 1984 biennial legislative session , Collins revised the tax package . She retained the corporate licensing tax increase , but replaced the sales tax and income tax modifications with a flat five percent personal income tax and phasing out the deductions for depreciation which corporations could claim on their state taxes . 
 With the state still recovering from an economic recession and an election year upcoming , legislators refused to raise taxes . Collins eventually withdrew her request and submitted a continuation budget instead . Some education proposals advocated by Collins were passed , including mandatory kindergarten , remedial programs for elementary school children , mandatory testing and internship for teachers , and the implementation of academic receivership for underperforming schools . Among the other accomplishments of the 1984 legislative session were passage of a tougher drunk driving law , and a measure allowing state banking companies to purchase other banks within the state . 
 = = = Consideration for vice @-@ president = = = 
 By virtue of her election as Kentucky 's governor , Collins became the highest @-@ ranking Democratic woman in the nation . The only two women in the U.S. Senate at the time were Republicans , and Collins was the only woman governor of any state . Shortly after her election , she appeared on Good Morning America , where she was asked about her interest in the vice @-@ presidency and gave a non @-@ committal answer . Four days after her inauguration as governor , she was chosen to deliver the Democratic response to President Ronald Reagan 's weekly radio address . At a news conference following her speech , Collins was asked again if she would be willing to be considered as the Democrats ' vice @-@ presidential candidate in the upcoming election ; she replied " No , not at this time . " 
 In mid @-@ 1984 , the Democratic National Committee chose Collins to preside over the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco . This engagement prevented Collins from chairing the state delegation to the convention , as was typical of governors . The party appointed Collins ' son , Steve as state chair . Prior to the convention , Walter Mondale , the presumptive presidential nominee , interviewed Collins as a possible vice @-@ presidential candidate before choosing Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate . A writer for The Miami Herald later opined , based on interviews with Mondale advisers , that Collins was never given serious consideration by Mondale . He reported that she was included in his list of potential running mates primarily to blunt potential charges of " tokenism " in considering other women and minorities . 
 = = = Education proposals = = = 
 In January 1985 , Collins renewed her push for additional education funding and changes by appointing herself secretary of the state Education and Humanities Cabinet . Following the announcement , Collins and several key legislators held a series of meetings in every county , advocating for her proposed changes and seeking information about what types of changes the state 's citizens desired . At the meetings , Collins was careful to separate the issues of her proposed education plan and potential tax increases . She believed that opposition to increased taxes had prevented her previous package from being enacted . 
 Collins announced a new education package in June 1985 that included a five percent across @-@ the @-@ board pay raise for teachers , a reduction in class sizes , funding for construction projects , aides for every kindergarten teacher in the state , and a " power equalization " program to make funding for poorer school districts more equal to that of their more affluent counterparts . After favorable reaction to the plan from legislators , she called a special legislative session to convene July 8 to consider the plan . After two weeks of deliberation , the General Assembly approved Collins ' education plan , tripling the corporate licensing tax to $ 2 @.@ 10 per $ 1 @,@ 000 in order to pay for the package . The Assembly rejected a proposed five @-@ cents @-@ per @-@ gallon increase in the state gasoline tax to finance other spending . 
 Collins followed up her success in the 1985 special session with a push for more higher education funding in the 1986 legislative session . Lawmakers obliged by approving an additional $ 100 million for higher education in the biennial budget . They also approved implementation of a pilot preschool program and the purchase of new reading textbooks , but failed to act on Collins ' request for an additional $ 3 @.@ 9 million to improve the state 's vocational education system . Legislators approved calling a referendum on a constitutional amendment – supported by Collins – to make the state superintendent of education an appointive , rather than elective , office . The amendment was defeated by the state 's voters in November 1986 , despite a Collins @-@ led campaign in favor of it . The increased corporate tax intended to cover the cost of the increased education budget was , however , inadequate . In 1987 , a plan to increase revenue through changes in the state income tax was abandoned when Wallace Wilkinson , the Democratic gubernatorial nominee who would go on to succeed Collins , announced his opposition to it . 
 = = = Toyota Assembly Plant = = = 
 In March 1985 , Collins embarked on the first of several trade missions to Japan . She returned there in October 1985 , and also visited China – a first for any Kentucky governor – to encourage opening Chinese markets for Kentucky goods and to establish a " sister state " relationship with China 's Jiangxi province . Collins ' efforts in Japan yielded her most significant accomplishment as governor – convincing Toyota to locate an $ 800 million manufacturing plant in Georgetown . According to published reports , the Kentucky location was chosen over proposed sites in Indiana , Missouri , Tennessee , and Kansas . 
 The agreement with Toyota was contingent upon legislative approval of $ 125 million in incentives promised to Toyota by Collins and state Commerce Secretary Carroll <unk> . They included $ 35 million to buy and improve a 1 @,@ 600 acres ( 650 ha ) tract to be given to Toyota for the plant , $ 33 million for initial training of employees , $ 10 million for a skills development center for employees , and $ 47 million in highway improvements near the site . The incentive package was approved in the 1986 legislative session . State Attorney General David L. Armstrong expressed concerns that the incentives might conflict with the state constitution by giving gifts from the state treasury to a private business , but concluded that the General Assembly had made " a good @-@ faith effort to be in compliance with the constitution " . 
 Given Armstrong 's concerns , the administration employed general counsel J. Patrick Abell to file a friendly test case to determine the constitutionality of the incentive package . While the suit was pending , the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader reported that the administration had failed to include the interest on the bonds used to finance the expenditures in its estimation of the cost ; this , plus the cost overruns reported by the Herald @-@ Leader , had already pushed the total cost of the package to about $ 354 million by late September 1986 . In October , Toyota agreed to cover the cost overruns associated with preparing the site for construction . 
 Opponents of the economic enticements for Toyota joined the state 's test suit . In October 1986 , Franklin County Circuit Court Judge Ray Corns issued an initial ruling that the package did not violate the state constitution , but both sides asked the Kentucky Supreme Court to make a final decision . On June 11 , 1987 , the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled 4 – 3 that the package served a public purpose and were therefore constitutional . 
 Shortly after the announcement that Toyota was moving to Georgetown , Martha Lane Collins , within her capacity as Governor condemned a portion of land belonging to real estate developer Gordon Taub . Taub owned 60 acres within the Toyota plant site and 4 @.@ 2 acres were condemned to build a four @-@ lane highway to the Toyota plant entrance . Taub challenged the condemnation stating that the Commonwealth did not have the right to condemn private property for the use of a for profit , public corporation . At trial , Martha Lane Collins became the first sitting governor of Kentucky to testify in <unk> was represented by former governor , Bert T. Combs , Taub was represented by former governor Louis B. Nunn ; this was also the first time in the history of Kentucky that two former governors represented opposing parties in a legal action . 
 Later , Toyota set up several assembly plants across the state ; near the end of Collins ' term , the state Commerce Cabinet reported that 25 automotive @-@ related manufacturing plants had been constructed in 17 counties since the Toyota announcement . 
 In 1987 , Collins promised $ 10 million in state aid to Ford to incentivize the company to expand its truck assembly plant in Louisville . The state experienced record job growth under Collins ' economic development plan , which included attempts to attract both domestic and international companies . The state 's unemployment rate fell from 9 @.@ 7 percent in October 1983 to 7 @.@ 2 percent in October 1987 ; according to the administration 's own figures , they created a net increase of 73 @,@ 000 jobs in the state during Collins ' tenure . 
 = = = Other matters during Collins ' term = = = 
 On October 7 , 1987 , Collins called a special legislative session to close a deficit between state contributions to the worker 's compensation Special Fund and disbursements . The Special Fund was designated for payments to workers with occupational diseases and workers whose work @-@ related injuries could not be traced to any single employer . A plan proposed by Democratic state senator Ed O 'Daniel was expected to provide the framework for legislation considered in the session . Under O 'Daniel 's plan , additional revenue for the Special Fund would be raised by increasing assessments on worker 's compensation premiums for 30 years . Assessments for coal companies were increased more than those on other businesses because the majority of the claims paid from the Special Fund were for black lung , a breathing disease common among coal miners ; consequently , it was opposed by legislators from heavily coal @-@ dependent counties . Nevertheless , after nine days of negotiations , a bill substantially similar to O 'Daniel 's original plan was approved by the legislature and signed by Collins . 
 Collins chaired the Tennessee – Tombigbee Waterway Authority and held that position when the waterway opened to the public in 1985 . On May 10 , 1985 , she was named to the University of Kentucky Alumni Association 's Hall of Distinguished Alumni . She also chaired the Southern Growth Policies Board , Southern States Energy Board , and was co @-@ chair of the Appalachian Regional Commission . 
 = = Activities after leaving office = = 
 Collins ' term expired on December 8 , 1987 , and under the restrictions then present in the Kentucky Constitution , she was ineligible for consecutive terms . In 1988 , she accepted a position as " executive in residence " at the University of Louisville , giving guest lectures to students in the university 's business classes . She also started an international trade consulting firm in Lexington . When Western Kentucky University president Kern Alexander resigned to accept a position at Virginia Tech in 1988 , Collins was among four finalists to succeed him . Some faculty members publicly expressed concerns about Collins ' lack of experience in academia , and she withdrew her name from consideration shortly before the new president was announced . 
 After fulfilling her one @-@ year commitment to the University of Louisville , Collins was named a fellow of the Harvard Institute of Politics ' John F. Kennedy School of Government , teaching non @-@ credit classes on leadership styles once a week . Concurrent with her position at Harvard , Collins was named to the board of regents for Midway College in 1989 ; the following year , she was removed from the board of regents of Southern Baptist Theological Seminary . Her removal was automatically triggered after she missed three consecutive board meetings between 1986 and 1989 . In 1990 , Collins accepted the presidency of Saint Catharine College in Springfield , Kentucky , becoming the first president of the small , Catholic college who was not a Dominican nun . College officials stated that Collins was recruited for the presidency to raise the college 's profile . 
 In 1993 , Collins ' husband , Bill , was charged in an influence @-@ peddling scandal . The prosecution claimed that while Collins was governor , Dr. Collins exploited a perception that he could influence the awarding of state contracts through his wife . It was alleged that he exploited this perception to pressure people who did business with the state to invest nearly $ 2 million with him . He was convicted on October 14 , 1993 , after a seven @-@ week trial ; he was given a sentence of five years and three months in federal prison , which was at the low end of the range prescribed by the federal sentencing guidelines . He was also fined $ 20 @,@ 000 for a conspiracy charge that involved kickbacks disguised as political contributions . Governor Collins was called to testify in the trial , but was not charged . The scandal tarnished her image , however , and may have cost her an appointment in the administration of President Bill Clinton . Collins was also rumored to be considering running for the U.S. Senate , a bid which never materialized following her husband 's conviction . The Collinses reunited following Dr. Collins ' release from prison on October 10 , 1997 . 
 In 1996 , Collins resigned as president of Saint Catharine College to direct the International Business and Management Center at the University of Kentucky . Later that year , she was a co @-@ chair of the Credentials Committee at the Democratic National Convention . When her contract with the University of Kentucky expired in 1998 , Collins took a part @-@ time position as " executive scholar in residence " at Georgetown College , which allowed her more time to pursue other interests . In 1999 , she was named Honorary Consul General of Japan in Kentucky , a position which involved promoting Japanese interests in Kentucky , encouraging Japanese investment in the state , and encouraging cultural understanding between Kentucky and Japan . In 2001 , Governor Paul E. Patton named her co @-@ chair of the Kentucky Task Force on the Economic Status of Women . In January 2005 , she became the chairwoman and chief executive officer of the Kentucky World Trade Center . She has held positions on the boards of directors for several corporations , including Eastman Kodak . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 Women Leading Kentucky , a non @-@ profit group designed to promote education , mentorship , and networking among Kentucky professional women , created the Martha Layne Collins Leadership Award in 1999 to recognize " a Kentucky woman of achievement who inspires and motivates other women through her personal , community and professional lives " ; Collins was the first recipient of the award . In 2003 , Kentucky 's Bluegrass Parkway was renamed the Martha Layne Collins Bluegrass Parkway in her honor ; Collins also received the World Trade Day Book of Honor Award for the state of Kentucky from the World Trade Centers Association that year . In 2009 , she was inducted into the Order of the Rising Sun , Gold and Silver Star by the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs for her contributions " to strengthening economic and cultural exchanges between Japan and the United States of America " . Martha Layne Collins High School in Shelby County was named in her honor and opened in 2010 . 
 = Siege of Mantua ( 1799 ) = 
 The Siege of Mantua ( 1799 ) was a four @-@ month effort by the Austrian army to regain a presence in northern Italy after being excluded from that region by Napoleon Bonaparte through the successful French Siege of Mantua in 1797 . In April 1799 , the Austrians placed a military blockade around Mantua as part of the War of the Second Coalition with the intent of withering the French by attrition . While the diminishing food supplies and losses weakened the French army , the Austrians received reinforcements and attacked on 4 July 1799 . By the end of the month , the French agreed to surrender . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By 1799 , the fortress of Mantua on the river Mincio in northern Italy was in poor shape . It was commanded by viscount lieutenant general François @-@ Philippe de Foissac @-@ Latour ( 1750 @-@ 1804 ) and garrisoned by a diverse force of 10 @,@ 000 , including French , Polish ( Polish Legionnaires under general Józef Wielhorski ) , Italian ( Republic of Alba and Cisalpine Republic ) , Swiss and German units . From the beginning of his assignment , Foissac @-@ Latour , an engineer , was convinced that the fortress would be indefensible in any serious siege . 
 = = Siege = = 
 In April , Austrian forces approached Mantua and started their siege . At first , the Austrians were content to simply blockade the fortress , but with the artillery duels and occasional skirmishes , attrition began taking its toll on the defenders . The defenders were also weakened by diminishing food supplies , and their morale was undermined by lack of payment . 
 On 18 June , the French suffered a defeat at the Battle of Trebbia , and consequently the Austrians were able to move more decisively against Mantua . On 4 July the siege entered a new stage , with Austrian reinforcements arriving , and the besieging force growing from 8 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 . The Austrians were commanded by Hungarian general Baron Pal von Kray , an artillery expert . Artillery bombardment was constant . On 24 @-@ 25 July the assault begun ; and the Austrians slowly advanced over the next few days . On 27 July Foissac @-@ Latour began negotiating surrender terms . 
 = = Capitulation = = 
 The Austrians agreed to release most of the French garrison , keeping the officers for three months , and with soldiers pledging not to take arms until the prisoners were exchanged by the fighting sides . In a secret protocol , however , the Austrians demanded full sovereignty over " deserters from the Austrian army " . After protests from the Polish officers — who were afraid that due to recent partitions of Poland in which Austria gained control over parts of Poland that the Austrians may want to take custody of the Polish legionnaires — the Austrian negotiator clarified officially that they meant any deserters from the current Austrian army or former Austrian soldiers serving in the Cisalpine Republic Army . 
 On 30 July the French and allied troops left the fortress . The garrison troops were split into French and non @-@ French units ( of whom Poles still constituted 1 @,@ 800 ) ; the Austrian soldiers observing the marching non @-@ French garrison troops were given permission to physically assault those " recognized " as deserters and most of them were eventually arrested . Polish officers — particularly those from the Austrian partition — were forced to enlist in the Austrian army or deported to partitioned Poland , and a similar fate befell Polish NCOs and regular soldiers , many of whom were also forced to suffer physical punishment by being beaten with rods . This marked the end of the Second Legion of the Polish Legions . Foissac @-@ Latour was later criticized by the Poles for what they considered " betrayal " , but also by the French : for his surrender , Napoleon himself ordered Foissac @-@ Latour stricken from the list of generals and forbade him to wear a military uniform . 
 = Battle of Nassau = 
 The Battle of Nassau ( March 3 – 4 , 1776 ) was a naval action and amphibious assault by American forces against the British port of Nassau , Bahamas , during the American Revolutionary War ( also known as the American War of Independence ) . It is considered the first cruise and one of the first engagements of the newly established Continental Navy and the Continental Marines , the progenitors of the United States Navy and Marine Corps . The action was also the marines ' first amphibious landing . It is sometimes known as the " Raid of Nassau " . 
 Departing from Cape Henlopen , Delaware , on February 17 , 1776 , the fleet arrived in the Bahamas on March 1 , with the objective of seizing gunpowder and munitions that were known to be stored there . Two days later the marines went ashore and seized Fort Montagu at the eastern end of the Nassau harbor but did not advance to the town , where the gunpowder was stored . That night , Nassau 's governor had most of the gunpowder loaded aboard ships that then sailed for St. Augustine . On March 4 , the Continental Marines advanced and took control of the poorly defended town . 
 The Continental forces remained at Nassau for two weeks and took away all the remaining gunpowder and munitions they could . The fleet returned to New London , Connecticut , in early April , after capturing a few British supply ships , and failed to capture HMS Glasgow in an action on April 6 . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the American Revolutionary War broke out in 1775 , Lord Dunmore , the British provincial governor of the Colony of Virginia , with the British forces under his command , had removed Virginia 's store of provincial arms and gunpowder to the island of New Providence in the Crown Colony of the Bahamas , in order to keep it from falling into the hands of the rebel militia . Montfort Browne , the Bahamian governor , was alerted by General Thomas Gage in August 1775 that the rebel colonists might make attempts to seize these supplies . 
 The desperate shortage of gunpowder available to the Continental Army had led the Second Continental Congress to organize a naval expedition , one of whose goals was the seizure of the military supplies at Nassau . While the orders issued by the congress to Esek Hopkins , the fleet captain selected to lead the expedition , included only instructions for patrolling and raiding British naval targets on the Virginia and Carolina coastline , additional instructions may have been given to Hopkins in secret meetings of the congress ' naval committee . The instructions that Hopkins issued to his fleet 's captains before it sailed from Cape Henlopen , Delaware , on February 17 , 1776 , included instructions to rendezvous at Great Abaco Island in the Bahamas . 
 The fleet that Hopkins launched consisted of Alfred , Hornet , Wasp , Fly , Andrew Doria , Cabot , Providence , and Columbus . In addition to ships ' crews , it carried 200 marines under the command of Samuel Nicholas . In spite of gale force winds , the fleet remained together for two days , when Fly and Hornet became separated from the fleet . Hornet was forced to return to port for repairs , and Fly eventually caught up with the fleet at Nassau , after the raid took place . Hopkins did not let the apparent loss of the two ships dissuade him ; he had intelligence that much of the British fleet was in port due to the high winds . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Browne received further intelligence in late February that a rebel fleet was assembling off the Delaware coast , but apparently took no significant actions to prepare a defense . New Providence 's harbor had two primary defenses , Fort Nassau and Fort Montagu . Fort Nassau was located in Nassau , but was poorly sited to defend the port against amphibious attacks , and had walls that were not strong enough to support the action of its 46 cannons . As a result , Fort Montagu had been constructed in 1742 on the eastern end of the harbor , commanding its entrance . At the time of the raid , it was fortified with 17 cannons , although most of the gunpowder and ordnance was at Fort Nassau . 
 The fleet arrived at Abaco Island on March 1 , 1776 . The force captured two sloops owned by Loyalists , one of those men being Captain Gideon Lowe of Green Turtle Cay , and pressed their owners to serve as pilots . George Dorsett , a local ship 's captain , got away from Abaco and alerted Browne to the presence of the rebel fleet . The landing force was transferred to the two captured sloops and Providence the next day , and plans were formulated for the assault . While the main fleet held back , the three ships carrying the landing force were to enter the port at daybreak on March 3 , and gain control of the town before the alarm could be raised . 
 The decision to land at daybreak turned out to be a mistake , as the alarm was raised in Nassau when the three ships were spotted in the morning light , rousing Browne from his bed . He ordered four guns fired from Fort Nassau to alert the militia ; two of the guns came off their mounts when they were fired . At 7 : 00am he held a discussion with Samuel Gambier , one of his councilors , over the idea that the gunpowder should be removed from the islands on the Mississippi Packet , a fast ship docked in the harbor . They ultimately did not act on the idea , but Browne ordered thirty mostly unarmed militiamen to occupy Fort Montagu , before retiring to his house to make himself " a little decent " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Landing and capture = = = 
 When the guns at Fort Nassau were heard by the attackers , they realized their surprise was lost and aborted the assault . The elements of the fleet rejoined in Hanover Sound , about six nautical miles east of Nassau . There Hopkins held council , and a new plan of attack was developed . According to accounts now discredited , Hopkins ' lieutenant , John Paul Jones , suggested a new landing point and then led the action . Jones was unfamiliar with the local waters , unlike many of the captains present in the council . It is more likely that the landing force was led by Cabot 's lieutenant , Thomas Weaver , who was also familiar with the area . With the force enlarged by 50 sailors , the three ships , with the Wasp offering additional covering support , carried it to a point south and east of Fort Montagu , where they made an unopposed landing between 12 : 00 and 2 : 00 pm . This was the first landing of what eventually became the United States Marine Corps . 
 A Lieutenant Burke led a detachment out from Fort Montagu to investigate the rebel activity . Given that he was severely outnumbered , he opted to send a truce flag to determine their intentions . From this he learned that their objective was the powder and military stores . In the meantime , Browne arrived at Fort Montagu with another eighty militiamen . Upon learning the size of the advancing force , he ordered three of the fort 's guns fired , and withdrew all but a few men back to Nassau . He himself retired to the governor 's house , while most of the militiamen , rather than attempting to make a stand , also returned to their homes . Browne sent Burke out to parley with the rebels a second time , in order to " wait on the command officer of the enemy to know his errand and on what account he had landed his troops . " 
 The firing of Montagu 's guns had given Nichols pause for concern , but his men had occupied the fort , and he was consulting with his officers on their next move when Burke arrived . They obligingly repeated to Burke that they had arrived to take the powder and weapons , and were prepared to assault the town . Burke brought this news back to Browne around 4 : 00 pm . Rather than advance further on Nassau , Nichols and his force remained at Fort Montagu that night . Browne held a war council that evening , in which the decision was made to attempt the removal of the gunpowder . At midnight , 162 of 200 barrels of gunpowder were loaded onto the Mississippi Packet and HMS St. John , and at 2 : 00 am they sailed out of Nassau harbor , bound for Saint Augustine . This feat was made possible because Hopkins had neglected to post even a single ship to guard the harbor 's entrance channels , leaving the fleet safely anchored in Hanover Sound . 
 Nichols ' marines occupied Nassau without resistance the next morning after a leaflet written by Hopkins was distributed throughout the town . They were met en route by a committee of the town 's leaders , who offered up the town 's keys . 
 = = = Return voyage = = = 
 Hopkins and his fleet remained at Nassau for two weeks , loading as much weaponry as would fit onto the ships , including the remaining 38 casks of gunpowder . He pressed into service a local sloop , the Endeavour , to carry some of the material . Browne complained that the rebel officers consumed most of his liquor stores during the occupation , and also wrote that he was taken in chains like a " felon to the gallows " when he was arrested and taken to the Alfred . 
 During their sojourn at Nassau , the Fly arrived . Her captain reported that she and the Hornet had fouled their riggings together and that Hornet suffered significant damage as a consequence . On March 17 , the fleet sailed for Block Island Channel off Newport , Rhode Island , with Browne and other officials as prisoners . The return voyage was uneventful until the fleet reached the waters of Long Island . On April 4 they encountered and captured HMS Hawk , and the next day they captured the Bolton , which was laden with stores that included more armaments and powder . The fleet finally met resistance on April 6 , when it encountered HMS Glasgow , a sixth @-@ rate ship . In the ensuing action , the outnumbered Glasgow managed to escape capture , severely damaging the Cabot in the process , wounding her captain , Hopkins ' son John Burroughs Hopkins , and killing or wounding eleven others . 
 The fleet sailed into the harbor at New London , Connecticut on April 8 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Browne was eventually exchanged for American general William Alexander ( Lord Stirling ) , and was roundly criticized for his handling of the whole affair . Nassau remained relatively poorly defended and was again subjected to American rebel threat in January 1778 . It was then seized by Spanish forces under Bernardo de Gálvez in 1782 , and returned to British control after the war . 
 While Hopkins was initially lauded for the success at Nassau , the failure to capture the Glasgow and crew complaints about some of the captains led to a variety of investigations and courts martial . As a result of these , the Providence 's captain was relieved of his command , which was given to Jones . Jones , who had performed well in the Glasgow encounter in spite of a crew reduced by disease , thereafter received a captain 's commission in the Continental Navy . 
 The manner by which Hopkins distributed the spoils was criticized , and his failure to follow his orders to patrol the Virginia shore resulted in censure by the Continental Congress . After a series of further missteps and accusations , Hopkins was forced out of the navy in 1778 . 
 Two ships of the United States Navy have been christened USS Nassau ; USS Nassau ( LHA @-@ 4 ) , an amphibious assault ship , is named specifically in recognition of this battle , while USS Nassau ( CVE @-@ 16 ) was named for Nassau Sound , the body of water between Florida and the Bahamas . 
 = Andy 's Ancestry = 
 " Andy 's Ancestry " is the third episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office . The episode originally aired on NBC on October 4 , 2012 . The episode was written by Jonathan Green and Gabe Miller , and was directed by David Rogers . The episode guest stars Randall Park as Jim and Pam 's actor friend , Steve . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) brags about his discovery that he is related to First Lady Michelle Obama . Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) finds his new job as Assistant Regional Manager difficult . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) attempts to teach Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) the Dothraki language from HBO series Game of Thrones so that she can impress Andy 's educated family . Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) tells Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) that Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) may be having an affair ; meanwhile , Jim reveals his entrepreneurial plans to Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) in the warehouse . 
 " Andy 's Ancestry " received moderately positive reviews from television critics . Many felt that the emotional elements in the episode were effective and that the cold opening was particularly humorous . Many noted that the episode bore stylistic similarities to early episodes of the show . Some , however , were slightly disappointed by the episode 's various subplots . " Andy 's Ancestry " was viewed by 4 @.@ 14 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 2 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked fourth in its timeslot and was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the cold open , an Asian man ( Randall Park ) arrives to the office and sits at Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) desk . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) asks who he is . The man claims to be the real Jim , and offers proof : he is able to recall his last sales , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) gives him a kiss , and he has a picture of Pam and himself and their two Asian children . Dwight begins to worry , but Pam explains in a talking head that the man is an actor friend of Jim and Pam 's named Steve . 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) demands that Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) research his family tree . To spite him , she falsely tells him that he is related to U.S. First Lady Michelle Obama . He begins to brag about his discovery , which causes his co @-@ workers to wonder if Andy 's family ever owned slaves . In order to get back at his co @-@ workers , Andy asks Nellie to " dig up dirt " on the rest of the office . In turn , she makes up more fake facts as a prank . It is revealed by Andy 's mother that the Bernards never owned slaves : they simply transported them . 
 Meanwhile , Pam has been helping Nellie practice for a driving test . The two bond after Nellie shows appreciation for Pam 's art . After telling her that she is worried that her husband Jim is not telling her something , Nellie immediately states that Jim is probably having an affair . Nellie later asks Pam to paint a mural in the warehouse . 
 Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) has been promoted to Assistant Regional Manager and as a result is inspired to find ways to be more productive , for himself and the office . However , his ideas for the office are ignored by Andy , leading to a discussion with Jim in the warehouse about their increasing dissatisfaction with Dunder Mifflin . Jim tells Darryl about his sports marketing job opportunity in Philadelphia and offers him a possible position . However , as Jim has yet to tell Pam , Darryl says he should before going forward . When Pam comes back , Jim reveals the job opportunity to Pam , who , despite giving her approval , is upset that Jim didn 't consult her beforehand . 
 Dwight attempts to teach Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) the Dothraki language from the HBO series Game of Thrones so that she can impress Andy 's educated family . Andy , however , points out that it is a fictional language , leaving Erin dejected . However , as the office leaves for the day , Pete ( Jake Lacy ) gives Erin a Dothraki farewell . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Andy 's Ancestry " was written by co @-@ executive producers Jonathan Green and Gabe Miller , making it their first joint writing credit for the series . The episode was directed by series editor David Rogers . This was Roger 's seventh directing credit for the series , he previously directed the seventh season entry " Ultimatum " . The episode guest stars Randall Park as Jim and Pam 's actor friend . After the release of the episode 's plot synopsis , <unk> , a genealogy and social networking website , claimed that Ed Helms is in fact Michelle Obama 's 18th cousin once removed . The NBC website later produced the " real " Bernard family tree after the release of the full episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dwight attempts to teach the Dothraki language from the popular book series A Song of Ice and Fire by George R. R. Martin . The books were later turned into the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones . Dwight later compares learning Dothraki to learning Klingon , a fictional language from franchise Star Trek . Andy refers to Ladysmith Black Mambazo as " Ladysmith African @-@ American Mambazo " in an attempt to prove he is not racist . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) later changes Andy 's ringtone to the song " Dixie " . 
 After Andy asks her to find information regarding the relatives of the office members , Nellie intentionally lies and tells Andy that Kevin is related to John Wayne Gacy and John Wayne Bobbitt . He is disappointed to learn that he is not related to either John Wayne or Dwayne " The Rock " Johnson , whom he erroneously calls " Wayne " . Andy also informs the office that Jim is related to former president Richard Nixon and that Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) is related to infamous axe @-@ murder suspect Lizzie Borden . Before he realizes that all of the office members ancestors are fakes , Dwight admits that his were members of the German American Bund , a pro @-@ Nazi group in the 1930s . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Andy 's Ancestry " originally aired on NBC on October 4 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 14 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 2 / 6 percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode marked a slight increase when compared to the previous episode , " Roy 's Wedding " . The Office finished fourth in its time slot , being beaten by an episode of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 8 / 10 percent rating ; an entry of the CBS drama Person of Interest , which received a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 percent rating ; and an installment Fox series Glee , which received a 2 @.@ 6 / 7 percent rating . Despite this , The Office was the highest @-@ rated NBC television program of the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it a " B " . Adams highlighted the serious discussion between Darryl and Jim in the warehouse , noting that " Jim ’ s extrication is something to root for " , and that it honored " Craig Robinson ’ s dedication to the show " . While feeling that some of the episode 's subplots were " forced " , he did , however , compliment the Pam and Nellie pairing due to " Pam ’ s past ability to break through [ people like ] Angela and Dwight ’ s defenses " . Bonnie Stiernberg of Paste magazine noted that , despite Andy 's regression to " his old ways " , it was beneficial for the episode and allowed for many jokes to be played out . Furthermore , Stiernberg applauded the subtle drama that ran throughout the entry , writing Darryl , Erin , and Pete 's interactions with Andy were important to the overall storyline . Mark Trammell of TV Equals named it " the best episode of the final season of “ The Office ” to date " because it " played to the show ’ s strengths " . Furthermore , he complimented the character development of Nellie , writing that she " really started to grow on me this week " and that his favorite line was Darryl 's " words of wisdom " to Jim : “ It ’ s not real until your wife is on board . ” Michael Tedder of New York magazine gave the episode a positive review and noted that " It 's been a while since The Office was this surprising and moving . " He wrote that the main plot allowed for " overdue development " in regards to other characters and applauded the continued drama involving Pam and Jim ; he called the last shot " quietly heartbreaking " . He did , however , call it a " particularly overstuffed episode " , and felt that Erin 's subplot could have been saved for a different episode . 
 E ! Online called Pete " especially charming " after " Andy 's Ancestry " , and named him one of the " Best Things in Pop Culture " . Joseph Kratzer of <unk> ! awarded the episode four out of five stars and called it " another enjoyable episode " which continued to signal " the triumphant return of The Office " . He explained that the success of the first episodes of the ninth season " comes from a fluidity not seen in recent years , an organic component that helped make the series such a success in its second and third seasons " . Ultimately , he noted that it was not " the tightest plotted episode " but that it was " better than 90 % of last season " . IGN writer Cindy White awarded the episode an 8 @.@ 2 , designating a " great " episode . She applauded the fact that " the show is returning to its roots " as well as the fact that the actors themselves " seem more invested " in the series . She also called the conversation between Darryl and Jim a " nice change of pace " . She concluded that the plot allowed for a " good source of laughs in the smartly written " episode . 
 Other reviews were more mixed . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode three and a half stars out of five and called it " another decent episode " . Furthermore , he wrote that Pam and Nellie 's bonding was the subplot that " worked best " . Nick Campbell of TV.com wrote that " the writers [ are ] trying to shove Andy Bernard in a Michael Scott @-@ shaped hole . " Furthermore , he called Nellie " the greatest square peg of them all . " Brett Harrison Davinger of the California Literary Review , despite enjoying the tension between Pam and Jim , felt that the main story never went anywhere . He called the main action of the episode " lifeless " , but wrote that the entry as a whole " set up the conclusion of the series " . Davinger also applauded Darryl 's sound byte call back . 
 The episode 's cold open attracted particular praise . Adams called it a " killer cold open " . <unk> referred to the sequence as " one of the funniest in a long time " . Kratzer called Steve 's remark to Dwight about " not seeing race " one of his " favorite moments " from the episode . Forcella called it " hilarious " and " one of the best openings we 've seen in a long , long time . " Trammell called the prank " classic Office " . 
 = The Matty Johns Show = 
 The Matty Johns Show was an Australian variety television show largely focused on the National Rugby League ( NRL ) competition , starring former rugby league player Matthew " Matty " Johns . It first aired in 2010 on Thursdays at 7 @.@ 30 pm in New South Wales and Queensland , on the Seven Network . The show usually ran for 1 hour . It was produced by Matty Johns and John Singleton . 
 The show 's rugby league content was directly comparable to The Footy Show , produced by the Nine Network , which has been on air since 1994 . The Matty Johns Show was described as a " smut @-@ free " , more family @-@ friendly version of it . The Matty Johns Show also featured interviews , music and character @-@ based skits . Portions of it was co @-@ hosted by Shane Webcke , Jason Stevens and Chloe Maxwell . The house band , Aston , gained attention for their arrangements of popular music , using classical instruments . 
 The show 's first season in 2010 rated strongly , and was compared favorably to The Footy Show by critics . It had been criticised for lacking serious football analysis , but had also been praised for its typically Australian character @-@ based sketches . The Controversy Corner segment of the show was briefly spun off as a standalone Sunday morning program during the 2010 NRL finals . 
 The Matty Johns Show did not return in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 Matty Johns was a professional rugby league player from 1991 to 2002 . He played for nine seasons with the Newcastle Knights , during which he and the Knights won the 1997 ARL season . He then played one season each with the Wigan Warriors and the Cronulla @-@ Sutherland Sharks . During his career , he played in the State of Origin series for New South Wales four times , played international tests for Australia eight times , and was part of the Australian squad that won the 1995 Rugby League World Cup . 
 He made his first forays into entertainment in 1999 , appearing in the low @-@ budget film In Search of the Holy Grail , which screened at the Newcastle Film Festival . He played Reg Reagan , a stereotype of Australian rugby league players . 
 = = = The Footy Show = = = 
 In 2002 , after his retirement from professional rugby league , Matty Johns became a regular performer on The Footy Show . The Footy Show is a popular variety show based on the NRL competition and broadcast by the Nine Network in those states where rugby league is the dominant football code ( New South Wales and Queensland ) . It should not be confused with the identically @-@ named The Footy Show based on Australian rules football , which is targeted at the other states of Australia where Australian rules is dominant . 
 Johns was a popular member of the cast of The Footy Show , and played several characters for the show . He further developed the Reg Reagan character as a beer @-@ swilling rugby league fan , and the character became hugely popular . He also appeared as Trent , a gay flight attendant . In 2004 , Johns recorded a novelty song and wrote a book , This Is My Life in character as Reg Reagan , and produced a DVD featuring both characters . He also commentated on Nine 's telecasts of rugby league games . In 2008 , he wrote a second book , From the Sheds , under his own name . He also became assistant coach of the Melbourne Storm NRL team . 
 However , in 2009 , Johns was suspended by the Nine Network over a sex scandal . It emerged in 2009 that Johns had participated in group sex with several Cronulla players and a young woman seven years earlier , in 2002 , at a hotel in Christchurch , New Zealand . She claimed to Australian current affairs program Four Corners in 2009 that she had suffered psychological problems as a result . 
 Matty Johns and the other players were investigated by police and cleared of any criminal wrongdoing . In May 2009 , Johns appeared on the Nine Network 's A Current Affair program to explain his role in the event . He admitted having sex with the young woman , but claimed that it was consensual . He was later described as appearing during this interview like a " broken @-@ down wreck " . Johns later said that he " disconnected " for a month after his suspension . He stated that his wife and family experienced " great pain " in the midst of the publicity . He said , " It took us a long time to get over it . It pains me they have to go through it again . " There was speculation that his media career was over . 
 During his month off , the Newcastle Knights approached him about coaching their team . He was later approached by Laurie Daley to become an assistant coach to the Country Rugby League side in the City vs Country Origin series . In August 2009 , the Nine Network approached him about returning to commentary duties , reportedly offering $ 600 @,@ 000 a year for him to continue with Nine . However , Johns turned down all of these offers and instead began a collaboration with Australian media stalwart John Singleton . 
 = = = John Singleton = = = 
 John Singleton is an Australian media entrepreneur , a rugby league fan and former part owner of the Brisbane Broncos . Johns and Singleton founded a television production company in November 2009 , in which each owns a 50 % stake . They developed a show to rival The Footy Show , and it was pursued by both the Seven Network and Network Ten . The Seven Network signed the new show and aggressively promoted it , even before it had a name . 
 Johns is under an exclusive contract with the company until 2011 , and may not appear on any other electronic media without Singleton 's approval . According to Paul Kent of The Daily Telegraph , the deal with Singleton and Seven " has the potential to make him wealthy far beyond anything he could have achieved had he remained at Nine . " 
 = = = Recruitment of on @-@ air talent = = = 
 Matty Johns asked former rugby league player Shane Webcke to be his co @-@ host . Webcke played prop forward for the Brisbane Broncos from 1995 to 2006 . He also played State of Origin for Queensland 21 times , played international tests for Australia 20 times , and was part of the Australian squad that won the 2000 Rugby League World Cup . Webcke provided rugby league commentary for Seven News and read the sports bulletin for Seven News Brisbane . Webcke was initially hesitant before he accepted the offer to co @-@ host The Matty Johns Show , and said at the time : 
 " I was pretty thorough in terms of going and seeing Matt and seeing what they had in mind ; the actual guts of the show , what they were going to be about and that it was definitely something new ... I wanted to make sure that we were trying to do something that was rugby league , that was different and that I just liked the feel of . " 
 It was reported that Johns also pursued former rugby league player Mario Fenech , who appears on The Footy Show , and that Fenech declined the offer to join the new show . Matt <unk> , former rugby league player turned screenwriter , worked as a writer on the show . 
 = = = Premiere = = = 
 The first episode of The Matty Johns Show aired Thursday evening , 25 March 2010 , three weeks into the NRL season . It was Johns ' first television appearance since appearing on A Current Affair in relation to the sex scandal . The Australian Associated Press reported that Matty Johns ' performance on his first show was " impressive " , and that he appeared " nervous but cheerful " . The Daily Telegraph 's Phil <unk> compared the " far brighter and more radiant " appearance of Johns in his first show to the " broken down wreck " seen on A Current Affair in May 2009 in the context of the sex scandal . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 Towards the end of the 2010 season , Matty Johns said , " I 've been really happy with what we 've done - particularly the mix at the back end of the year . " The show was slated to return in 2011 , as the show was initially contracted for two years . 
 Seven offered Johns the 10.30pm Thursday timeslot , which Johns had the option of declining owing to a clause in his contract . Co @-@ host Webcke was not happy with the late time , and Johns ' producers perceived that there may be difficulty in booking guests at that time . Consequently , Johns declined the offer and sat out 2011 on full pay . It has also been suggested that success of The Matty Johns Show depended on the success of related AFL show The Bounce , which failed in 2010 . The future of The Matty Johns Show is currently unclear . 
 = = = Related projects = = = 
 Johns discussed the possibility of new projects with the Seven Network during 2010 . He also developed two sitcoms , which are being shopped to the major commercial networks . 
 The popular Controversy Corner segment was spun off into a Sunday morning one @-@ hour program during the 2010 NRL finals series . There was also a " Daily Telegraph edition " of Controversy Corner in the week before the 2010 NRL Grand Final . Starting in the summer of 2010 , co @-@ host Jason Stevens began hosting a variety program on 7Two called Big J 's Place . 
 = = Style = = 
 The Matty Johns Show was pitched as a family @-@ friendly variety show based on the National Rugby League ( NRL ) competition . It is primarily aimed at New South Wales and Queensland audiences ( in which NRL is the dominant football code ) . The show features many comedy sketches , recurring characters and celebrity interviews in a variety format . This mixture has resulted in criticism from some media observers for a perceived lack of serious football analysis . Sports website The Roar notes that the show appears to be made to slick ( and expensive ) production values . 
 = = = Comparison with The Footy Show = = = 
 The Footy Show is a variety show based on the National Rugby League ( NRL ) competition , broadcast weekly by the Nine Network . The rugby league component of The Matty Johns Show is directly comparable to The Footy Show , and The Matty Johns Show has been described as a " smut @-@ free " version of it . Being on the Seven Network , The Matty Johns Show cannot incorporate NRL footage ( the rights to which are currently held by the Nine Network , and put to use on The Footy Show ) . The Matty Johns Show is not sanctioned by the NRL , while The Footy Show is . 
 The main cast of The Matty Johns Show was initially not invited to the 2010 Dally M Awards night ( an annual ceremony to honour the best NRL players of the year ) , while the cast of The Footy Show was invited . Johns said of the snub , " ... with the politics going around and with the rights coming up , and with Seven being an integral part of the NRL getting the money they are after , it 's a little surprising that Seven weren 't extended an invitation . " Matty Johns and his team were belatedly invited . Johns reacted to the incident by appearing at the awards night in character as Harry Hardman , and attempting to interview Footy Show regulars for his program , in spite of the fact that they were contractually forbidden from appearing on his show . 
 = = = Comparison with other shows = = = 
 The Matty Johns Show has also been compared to The Bounce , which was a show based on the Australian Football League ( AFL ) and targeted at those states in which AFL predominates . Johns plays a range of recurring Australian characters , in a style that has drawn comparisons to comic Paul Hogan , star of The Paul Hogan Show . The variety elements of the show have inspired comparisons with Hey Hey It 's Saturday . The set has been compared to that of Rove Live , a variety show formerly produced at Global Television . 
 = = Format = = 
 The show was produced during the 2010 NRL season ( corresponding to winter in the Southern Hemisphere ) . In New South Wales and Queensland , ( in which NRL is the dominant football code ) , The Matty Johns Show was broadcast on Thursdays at 7 @.@ 30 pm , two hours before The Footy Show . In all other states ( in which the Australian Football League predominates ) , The Matty Johns Show may have been broadcast Thursdays at 7 @.@ 30 pm , or broadcast around midnight , after The AFL Footy Show . When broadcast at 7 @.@ 30 pm , the show followed long @-@ running soap opera Home and Away . 
 It was pre @-@ taped the day of broadcast , and usually ran for 60 minutes ( including commercials ) . Once , the running time was extended in order to provide coverage of important League news ( the Melbourne Storm salary cap scandal ) . The show was recorded at Global Television studios in Eveleigh , Sydney . However , it has recorded one episode in South Bank Parklands , Brisbane . The 2010 Grand Final episode was recorded at the Overseas Passenger Terminal of Sydney Harbour . 
 = = = Hosts = = = 
 The show is hosted by Matty Johns and Shane Webcke . In a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek review , satirical website The Un @-@ Australian describes Johns as " a buffoonish , <unk> ( sic ) Australian sportsperson spouting <unk> " , and describes co @-@ host Shane Webcke as " surprisingly articulate " . 
 Also featured are Jason Stevens and Chloe Maxwell . Stevens is a former prop for the St. George Dragons and Cronulla @-@ Sutherland Sharks rugby teams , known for his Christian faith and clean image . Chloe Maxwell is a model , best known for her appearance in a series of advertisements for Jeans West . She is the wife of rugby player Mat Rogers . Sonia Kruger has also co @-@ hosted . 
 = = = Guests = = = 
 The guests on the show are a mix of rugby league identities and entertainment figures . For example , on the 19 August 2010 episode , Sydney Roosters player Anthony Minichiello appeared alongside Hollywood stars Will Ferrell and Mark Wahlberg . 
 = = = House band = = = 
 The house band is Aston , a group of six young music students from the Sydney Conservatorium of Music . Their style is to " take contemporary hits and classics and re @-@ arrange them into classical form " , using classical instruments . In April 2010 they posted a classical version of the song " Telephone " by Lady Gaga , released on YouTube . The video caught the attention of blogger Perez Hilton , and became the most watched Australian music video of the year with 700 @,@ 000 views in two weeks . Aston have recorded their first album , and it is expected to be released shortly by Warner Music Australia . 
 = = = Segments = = = 
 Controversy Corner is a segment in which Johns and Webcke , along with guest Paul Kent ( a sports writer from Sydney 's Daily Telegraph ) discuss NRL news . They are usually joined by rugby league personalities . Controversy Corner is a revival of a segment originated by Rex <unk> on the Seven Network . Johns hosted a weekly Sunday morning one @-@ hour version of Controversy Corner during the 2010 NRL finals . Branded as Matty Johns ' Controversy Corner , it ran Sundays from 12 September to 3 October 2010 at 10am . In New South Wales and Queensland it was broadcast on Seven , and in other markets it was broadcast on 7Two . Johns also hosted a short " Daily Telegraph edition " of Controversy Corner in the week before the 2010 NRL Grand Final , featuring Jason Stevens , Paul Kent and Steve " Blocker " Roach . This video was streamed online on the Daily Telegraph website , and transcribed for the print and online versions of the newspaper . 
 Home When You 're Away is a segment in which two rugby league players from the same team ( usually from a team scheduled to play " away " from their home ground in the next match ) visit the home of one of their supporters . The person whose home is featured then answers questions . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Don Kirk is a parody of Australian gardening expert Don Burke . He is shown as being accident prone , arrogant and ignorant . Alby Sandals is a parody of Alby Mangels , a Dutch @-@ Australian adventurer and documentary @-@ maker . He travels around visiting rugby @-@ supporting towns with his pet chihuahua , Alan . Sandals usually runs into a battle with the town 's team mascot . Steven the Man Child is portrayed as a 10 @-@ year @-@ old child , who is inexplicably mature for his age , playing rugby league . He has a <unk> and is mute . Harry Hardman is a " <unk> " ( rubbish collector ) who vents his frustrations with the game of rugby league . While in character as Hardman , Matty Johns " ambushed " The Footy Show regulars at the 2010 Dally M Awards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = First shows = = = 
 Reviews of the debut show were mixed . Despite this , the first episode of The Matty Johns Show was that day 's most @-@ watched program in Sydney with 396 @,@ 000 viewers , and it collected another 199 @,@ 000 viewers in Brisbane . Of the initial ratings , Johns said in a press statement , " We ’ re humbled by the support for our show ... Our aim was to produce a great fun footy show for the whole family and we ’ re glad people liked it . " Reporters Amanda Meade from The Australian and Michael Idato from The Sydney Morning Herald suggested after the first episode that the earlier timeslot gives The Matty Johns Show a ratings advantage over The Footy Show . The Daily Telegraph 's Phil <unk> stated that the first show put " pressure " on Paul <unk> , host of The Footy Show . 
 Both The Matty Johns Show and The Footy Show had improved ratings the following Thursday , after news broke of the Melbourne Storm salary cap scandal earlier that day . 
 = = = First series = = = 
 The show continued to rate well throughout 2010 . In mid @-@ July , an unnamed Seven spokesperson stated , " Matthew has destroyed The Footy Show in Sydney and Brisbane . That 's what counts . " The first series faced stiff competition from the very popular MasterChef Australia , which aired on Network Ten in the same timeslot as The Matty Johns Show . After MasterChef ended , The Matty Johns Show 's ratings rose 25 % over the previous week , which Seven 's head of programming conceded was probably due to the end of MasterChef . 
 = A Day in the Life = 
 " A Day in the Life " is the final song on the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band album . Credited to Lennon – McCartney , the song comprises distinct sections written independently by John Lennon and Paul McCartney , with orchestral additions . While Lennon 's lyrics were inspired by contemporary newspaper articles , McCartney 's lyrics were based on reminiscences about his youth . The decisions to link sections of the song with orchestral glissandos and to end the song with a sustained piano chord were made only after the rest of the song had been recorded . 
 The supposed drug reference in the line " I 'd love to turn you on " resulted in the song initially being banned from broadcast by the BBC . Since its original album release , " A Day in the Life " has been released as a B @-@ side , and also on various compilation albums . It has been covered by other artists , and since 2008 , by McCartney in his live performances . It was ranked the 28th greatest song of all time by Rolling Stone magazine . On a different list , the magazine ranked it as the greatest Beatles song . 
 = = Lyricism = = 
 According to Lennon , the inspiration for the first two verses was the death of Tara Browne , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old heir to the Guinness fortune who had crashed his Lotus Elan on 18 December 1966 in Redcliffe Gardens , Earls Court . Browne had been a friend of Lennon and McCartney , and had , earlier in 1966 , instigated McCartney 's first experience with LSD . Lennon 's verses were adapted from a story in the 17 January 1967 edition of the Daily Mail , which reported the ruling on a custody action over Browne 's two young children : 
 Guinness heir Tara Browne 's two children will be brought up by their 56 @-@ year @-@ old grandmother , the High Court ruled yesterday . It turned down a plea by their mother , Mrs. Nicky Browne , 24 , that she should have them ... This , she said , happened after Mr. Browne , 21 , from whom she was estranged , had taken them for a holiday in County Wicklow [ Ireland ] with his mother . 
 Mrs. Browne began an action for their return in October [ 1966 ] , naming Mr. Browne and his mother as defendants . The action , held in private , was part way through when Mr. Browne died in a crash in his Lotus Elan car in South Kensington a week before Christmas . 
 " I didn 't copy the accident " , Lennon said . " Tara didn 't blow his mind out , but it was in my mind when I was writing that verse . The details of the accident in the song — not noticing traffic lights and a crowd forming at the scene — were similarly part of the fiction . " McCartney expounded on the subject : " The verse about the politician blowing his mind out in a car we wrote together . It has been attributed to Tara Browne , the Guinness heir , which I don 't believe is the case , certainly as we were writing it , I was not attributing it to Tara in my head . In John 's head it might have been . In my head I was imagining a politician bombed out on drugs who 'd stopped at some traffic lights and didn 't notice that the lights had changed . The ' blew his mind ' was purely a drugs reference , nothing to do with a car crash . " 
 Author Neil Sinyard attributed the third verse line " The English Army had just won the war " to Lennon 's role in the film How I Won the War , released on 18 October 1967 , but having filmed his part in September 1966 : " It 's hard to think of [ the verse ] ... without automatically associating it with Richard Lester 's film . " 
 In the authorized biography Many Years from Now , McCartney said about the line " I 'd love to turn you on " , which concludes both verse sections , " This was the time of Tim Leary 's ' Turn on , tune in , drop out ' and we wrote , ' I 'd love to turn you on . ' John and I gave each other a knowing look : ' Uh @-@ huh , it 's a drug song . You know that , don 't you ? ' " Lennon on composing the song with McCartney : 
 " Paul and I were definitely working together , especially on ' A Day in the Life ' that was a real ... The way we wrote a lot of the time : you 'd write the good bit , the part that was easy , like ' I read the news today ' or whatever it was , then when you got stuck or whenever it got hard , instead of carrying on , you just drop it ; then we would meet each other , and I would sing half , and he would be inspired to write the next bit and vice versa . He was a bit shy about it because I think he thought it 's already a good song . Sometimes we wouldn 't let each other interfere with a song either , because you tend to be a bit lax with someone else 's stuff , you experiment a bit . So we were doing it in his room with the piano . He said ' Should we do this ? ' ' Yeah , let 's do that . ' " 
 McCartney provided the middle section of the song , a short piano piece he had been working on independently , with lyrics about a commuter whose uneventful morning routine leads him to drift off into a dream . McCartney had written the piece as a wistful recollection of his younger years , which included riding the bus to school , smoking , and going to class . This theme matched with the original concept of the album which was going to be about their youth . 
 Lennon wrote the song 's final verse inspired by a Far & Near news brief , in the same 17 January edition of the Daily Mail that had inspired the first two verses . Under the headline " The holes in our roads " , the brief stated : 
 There are 4 @,@ 000 holes in the road in Blackburn , Lancashire , or one twenty @-@ sixth of a hole per person , according to a council survey . If Blackburn is typical , there are two million holes in Britain 's roads and 300 @,@ 000 in London . 
 The story had been sold to the Daily Mail in Manchester by Ron Kennedy of the Star News agency in Blackburn . Ron had noticed a Lancashire Evening Telegraph story about road excavations and in a telephone call to the Borough Engineer 's department had checked the now famous annual number of holes in the road . Lennon had a problem with the words of the final verse , however , not being able to think of how to connect " Now they know how many holes it takes to " and " the Albert Hall " . His friend Terry Doran , managing director of Apple , suggested that they would " fill " the Albert Hall . 
 = = Musical structure and development = = 
 In a 1968 editorial for Jazz & Pop , writer Gene Sculatti called the Beach Boys 1966 single " Good Vibrations " the " ultimate in @-@ studio production trip " , positing that it was a primary influence for the recording of " A Day in the Life " . 
 = = = Basic track = = = 
 The Beatles began recording the song , with a working title " In the Life of ... " , on 19 January 1967 , in the innovative and creative studio atmosphere ushered in by the recording of " Strawberry Fields Forever " and " Penny Lane " over the preceding weeks . The two sections of the song are separated by a 24 @-@ bar bridge . The track was refined with remixing and additional parts added at recording sessions on 20 January and 3 February . 
 Starr elaborated his approach to drumming on the song : 
 I only have one rule and that is to play with the singer . If the singer 's singing , you don 't really have to do anything , just hold it together . If you listen to my playing , I try to become an instrument ; play the mood of the song . For example , ' Four thousand holes in Blackburn , Lancashire , ' - boom ba <unk> . I try to show that ; the <unk> mood . The drum fills are part of it . 
 At first , the Beatles were not sure how to fill its linking section . Thus , at the conclusion of the recording session for the basic tracks , the transition solely consisted of a simple repeated piano chord and the voice of assistant Mal Evans counting the bars . Evans ' guide vocal was treated with gradually increasing amounts of echo . The 24 @-@ bar bridge section ended with the sound of an alarm clock triggered by Evans . The original intent was to edit out the ringing alarm clock when the missing section was filled in ; however it complemented McCartney 's piece well ; the first line of McCartney 's song began " Woke up , fell out of bed " , so the decision was made to keep the sound . Martin later said that editing it out would have been unfeasible in any case . 
 = = = Orchestra = = = 
 As a solution for the missing 24 @-@ bar middle section of the song , McCartney proposed the idea of bringing in a full orchestra to fill the gap . To allay concerns that classically trained musicians would not be able to improvise the section , producer George Martin wrote a loose score for the section . It was an extended , atonal crescendo that encouraged the musicians to improvise within the defined framework . The orchestral part was recorded on 10 February 1967 , with McCartney and Martin conducting a 40 @-@ piece orchestra . The recording session was completed at a total cost of £ 367 ( equivalent to £ 6 @,@ 007 in 2015 ) for the players , an extravagance at the time . Martin later described explaining his improvised score to the puzzled orchestra : 
 What I did there was to write ... the lowest possible note for each of the instruments in the orchestra . At the end of the twenty @-@ four bars , I wrote the highest note ... near a chord of E major . Then I put a squiggly line right through the twenty @-@ four bars , with reference points to tell them roughly what note they should have reached during each bar ... Of course , they all looked at me as though I were completely mad . 
 McCartney noted that the strings were able to keep themselves in the designated time , while the trumpets were " much wilder " . McCartney had originally wanted a 90 @-@ piece orchestra , but this proved impossible ; the difference was made up , as the semi @-@ improvised segment was recorded multiple times and eventually four different recordings were overdubbed into a single massive crescendo . The results were successful ; in the final edit of the song , the orchestral bridge is reprised after the final verse . It was arranged for the orchestral session to be filmed by NEMS Enterprises for use in a planned television special . The film was never released in its entirety , although portions of it can be seen in the " A Day in the Life " promotional film ( included in the three @-@ disc versions of the Beatles ' 2015 video compilation 1 ) , which includes shots of studio guests Mick Jagger , Marianne Faithfull , Keith Richards , Brian Jones , Donovan , Pattie Boyd , and Michael Nesmith . Reflecting the Beatles ' taste for experimentation and the avant @-@ garde at this point in their careers , the orchestra players were asked to wear or were given a costume piece on top of their formal dress . This resulted in different players wearing anything from fake noses to fake stick @-@ on nipples . Martin recalled that the lead violinist performed wearing a gorilla paw , while a bassoon player placed a balloon on the end of his instrument . 
 Due to the multiple takes required to perfect the orchestral cacophony and the final chord , as well as their considerable procrastination in composing the song , the total duration of time spent recording " A Day in the Life " was 34 hours . In contrast , the Beatles ' earliest work , their first album Please Please Me , had been recorded in its entirety in only 10 hours , 45 minutes . 
 = = = Final chord = = = 
 Following the final orchestral crescendo , the song ends with one of the most famous final chords in music history . Lennon , McCartney , Starr , and Evans shared three different pianos , with Martin on the harmonium , and all played an E @-@ major chord simultaneously . The final chord was made to ring out for over forty seconds by increasing the recording sound level as the vibration faded out . Towards the end of the chord the recording level was so high that listeners can hear the sounds of the studio , including rustling papers and a squeaking chair . 
 The piano chord was a replacement for a failed vocal experiment . On the evening following the orchestra recording session , the four Beatles had recorded an ending of their voices humming the chord , but after multiple overdubs they wanted something with more impact . This final E chord represents a VI to the song 's tonic G major , although Pedler argues that the preceding chord changes ( from F ( " them all " ) to E ( " Now they know " ) Em7 ( " takes to fill " ) C ( " love to turn you " ) and B ( " on " ) ) followed by the chromatic ascent , shift our sense of the tonic from G to E ; creating a different feeling from the usual emotional uplift associated with a VI modulation . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 = = Variations = = 
 On the Sgt. Pepper album , the start of " A Day in the Life " is cross @-@ faded with the applause at the end of the previous track " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( Reprise ) " . On The Beatles 1967 – 1970 LP , " A Day in the Life " fades in through the Sgt. Pepper cross @-@ fade , but on Imagine : John Lennon and the CD version of 1967 – 1970 , the song starts cleanly , without any fade or cross @-@ fade . 
 Following " A Day in the Life " on the Sgt. Pepper album ( as first released on LP in the UK and years later worldwide on CD ) is a high @-@ frequency 15 @-@ kilohertz tone and some randomly spliced Beatles studio chatter . The frequency is best understood as what we know as a dog whistle as the frequency is picked up by a dog 's ear and was part of their humour . They joked about picturing barking dogs should they be present when the album would finish . Recorded two months after the mono and stereo masters for " A Day in the Life " had been finalised , the studio chatter ( titled in the session notes " Edit for LP End " ) was added to the run @-@ out groove of the initial British pressing . There are even a few variations of the chatter , though the best known one is them saying during the laughter and chatter " never could see any other way . " 
 The Anthology 2 album includes an early , pre @-@ orchestral version of the song and Anthology 3 includes a version of " The End " that concludes by having the last note fade into the final chord of " A Day in the Life " ( reversed , then played forwards ) . 
 The Love version has the song starting with Lennon 's intro of " sugar plum fairy " , with the strings being more prominent during the crescendos . 
 = = Supposed drug references = = 
 The song became controversial for its supposed references to drugs . The BBC announced that it would not broadcast " A Day in the Life " due to the line " I 'd love to turn you on " , which , according to the corporation , advocated drug use . Other lyrics allegedly referring to drugs include " found my way upstairs and had a smoke / somebody spoke and I went into a dream " . A spokesman for the BBC stated , " We have listened to this song over and over again . And we have decided that it appears to go just a little too far , and could encourage a permissive attitude to drug @-@ taking . " The ban was eventually lifted on 13 March 1972 . 
 Lennon and McCartney denied that there were drug references and publicly complained about the ban at a dinner party at the home of their manager , Brian Epstein , celebrating their album . Lennon said that the song was simply about " a crash and its victim " , and called the line in question " the most innocent of phrases . " McCartney later said " This was the only one in the album written as a deliberate provocation . A stick @-@ that @-@ in @-@ your @-@ pipe ... But what we want is to turn you on to the truth rather than pot . " However , George Martin later commented that he had always suspected that the line " found my way upstairs and had a smoke " was a drug reference , recalling how the Beatles would " disappear and have a little puff " , presumably of cannabis , but not in front of him . " When [ Martin ] was doing his TV programme on Pepper " , McCartney recalled later , " he asked me , ' Do you know what caused Pepper ? ' I said , ' In one word , George , drugs . Pot . ' And George said , ' No , no . But you weren 't on it all the time . ' ' Yes , we were . ' Sgt. Pepper was a drug album . " 
 When Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band was released in South Asia , Malaysia and Hong Kong , " A Day in the Life " " With a Little Help from My Friends " and " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " were excluded because of supposed drug references . 
 = = Recognition and reception = = 
 " A Day in the Life " became one of the Beatles ' most influential songs . Paul <unk> in his book Rockin ' Down the Highway : The Cars and People That Made Rock Roll , called the song " one of the most ambitious , influential , and groundbreaking works in pop music history " . In " From Craft to Art : Formal Structure in the Music of The Beatles " , the song is described thus : " ' A Day in the Life ' is perhaps one of the most important single tracks in the history of rock music ; clocking in at only four minutes and forty @-@ five seconds , it must surely be among the shortest epic pieces in rock . " Richard Goldstein of The New York Times called the song " a deadly earnest excursion in emotive music with a chilling lyric ... [ that ] stands as one of the most important Lennon @-@ McCartney compositions ... an historic Pop event " . 
 The song appears on many top songs lists . It placed twelfth on CBC 's 50 Tracks , the second highest Beatles song on the list after " In My Life " . It placed first in Q Magazine 's list of the 50 greatest British songs of all time , and was at the top of Mojo Magazine 's 101 Greatest Beatles ' Songs , as decided by a panel of musicians and journalists . " A Day in the Life " was also nominated for a Grammy in 1967 for Best Arrangement Accompanying Vocalist Or Instrumentalist . In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked " A Day in the Life " at number 28 on the magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , and in 2010 , the magazine deemed it to be the Beatles ' greatest song . It is listed at number 5 in Pitchfork Media 's The 200 Greatest Songs of the 1960s . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In July 1978 Barry Gibb released a cover version of the song , taken from the multi @-@ platinum double covers compilation album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which is regarded as one of the worst albums ever recorded . 
 On 27 August 1992 Lennon 's handwritten lyrics were sold by the estate of Mal Evans in an auction at Sotheby 's London for $ 100 @,@ 000 ( £ 56 @,@ 600 ) . The lyrics were put up for sale again in March 2006 by Bonhams in New York . Sealed bids were opened on 7 March 2006 and offers started at about $ 2 million but it failed to sell . The lyric sheet was auctioned again by the owner at Sotheby 's in June 2010 . It was purchased by an anonymous American buyer who paid $ 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 ( £ 810 @,@ 000 ) . 
 McCartney has been performing this song in a majority of his live shows since his 2008 tour ; the most recent performance was after the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix on 13 November 2011 . It is played in a medley with " Give Peace a Chance " . The Beatles ' friend and contemporary Bob Dylan references the song 's opening lyrics in his 2012 tribute to John Lennon , " Roll on John " . David Bowie paraphrased the line " I read the news today , oh boy " with the line " I heard the news today , oh boy " on his 1975 single and album title track " Young Americans " as did Devo who paraphrased the line " I read the news today , oh boy " with the line " I saw the news today , oh boy " on their 1988 song " Some Things Never Change " from the album " Total Devo " . 
 In 2015 , the Royal Albert Hall released supposed correspondence between their Chief Executive and John Lennon , showing the RAH 's displeasure at the reference to holes in the building . This was an April Fool stunt . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Paul McCartney performed the song live for the first time by any Beatle on 1 June 2008 at Anfield stadium , Liverpool , England . Both Beatles widows , Olivia Harrison and Yoko Ono , attended the concert . Also he performed the songs at some Spring and Summer shows in 2008 ( Kiev , Quebec City and Tel Aviv ) and 2009 ( Indio , Las Vegas ) and throughout his subsequent tours : Summer Live ' 09 , 2009 Good Evening Europe Tour , 2010 – 2011 Up and Coming Tour and 2011 – 2012 On the Run Tour . 
 = = Covers = = 
 The song has been recorded by many other artists , notably by Jeff Beck on the 2008 album Performing This Week : Live at Ronnie Scott 's Jazz Club which was also used in the film Across the Universe and won the 2010 Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance . As of winter 2013 , the jam band Phish has covered the song 61 times . 
 The London Symphony Orchestra released an orchestral cover of the song in 1978 on Classic Rock : The Second Movement . It was also covered by Barry Gibb in 1978 for the film Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band and was included on the soundtrack of the same name , recorded in September 1977 and produced by George Martin . Gibb 's version was released as a single , with " Nowhere Man " as the B @-@ side ( also recorded by him and intended for the film ) . Also in 1978 , his version was used as the B @-@ side of Robin Gibb 's version of " Oh ! Darling " released only in Italy . 
 = Hurricane Katrina ( 1981 ) = 
 Hurricane Katrina was a late @-@ forming tropical cyclone that impacted portions of the Greater Antilles and Bahamas in November 1981 . The twenty @-@ first tropical cyclone , eleventh named storm , and seventh hurricane of the 1981 Atlantic hurricane season , Katrina developed from an area of cloudiness in the western Caribbean Sea early on November 3 . The initial tropical depression deepened slowly , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Katrina on November 5 . About six hours later , Katrina peaked with sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The storm made landfall along the south coast of Camagüey Province in Cuba early on November 6 . Katrina quickly weakened to a tropical storm , before emerging into the Atlantic Ocean hours later . The system then accelerated northeastward and crossed the Bahamas late on November 6 . Katrina dissipated late on November 7 , shortly before merging with a frontal system . 
 On Grand Cayman , a waterspout ripped out a grape tree and slammed it into the Brac Reef Hotel 's bar . Heavy rainfall was observed on Cuba , peaking at 15 @.@ 74 inches ( 400 mm ) . As a result , Cuba experienced flash flooding in mountainous areas as Katrina moved across the country . In southern Camagüey Province , several bridges and railroads were reportedly washed out . Two sugar mills suffered damage . An estimated 4 @,@ 641 homes suffered impact , 39 of which were destroyed . In addition , approximately 80 % of sugar cane crops were damaged . Two people drowned in Cuba while attempting to cross a swollen river in Camagüey Province . The Bahamas received up to 14 in ( 360 mm ) of rain , causing flood damage to watermelon , tomato and corn crops , particularly on Long Island . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 1 , an area of disturbed weather – a mass of cloudiness and thunderstorms – developed over the western Caribbean Sea . Subsequently , a low pressure area began to form . The system was designated a tropical depression early on November 3 , while located about 150 miles ( 240 km ) to the south of the Cayman Islands . Operationally , the National Hurricane Center began issuing advisories on the tropical depression at 2200 UTC on November 3 . In the initial advisory , it was noted that the depression would slowly strengthen , but reach tropical storm status within 24 hours due to " strong " convection . The depression remained disorganized through early on November 4 , with satellite imagery and weather stations in the Caribbean Sea region indicating no intensification . However , only a few hours later , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Katrina , while drifting northward . 
 Continuing to strengthen , Katrina slowly recurved north @-@ northeastward and eventually to the northeast . The National Hurricane Center operationally classified Katrina as a tropical depression until 1600 UTC on November 4 , after a reconnaissance aircraft flight reported tropical storm force winds . At 0600 UTC on November 5 , the storm strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Later that same day , Katrina attained its peak intensity after another reconnaissance aircraft flight reported a minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( 29 inHg ) , and observed maximum sustained winds of about 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on the surface . However , Katrina weakened slightly while approaching Cuba . Early on November 6 , the storm made landfall in Camagüey Province with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Shortly after moving inland , the system weakened to a tropical storm . A deepening trough offshore the East Coast of the United States caused Katrina to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . By 1330 UTC on November 6 , the storm emerged into the Atlantic Ocean . Katrina slowly weakened while crossing through the central Bahamas later that day . After a reconnaissance aircraft flight failed to locate a closed circulation , the system dissipated late on November 7 , while located about 380 miles ( 610 km ) south @-@ southeast of Bermuda . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In anticipation of Katrina , 150 @,@ 000 people and 120 @,@ 000 head of cattle in central Cuba were evacuated , according to a broadcast by Havana radio . As a result , Cuban Civil Defense officers issued a storm alert for five provinces . A hurricane watch was declared for the central and eastern Bahamas . Along the southeast coast of Florida , small craft were advised to remain close to port . However , the storm was not expected to , and did not , pose a threat to the United States . 
 Throughout the Cayman Islands , Katrina dropped up to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of precipitation . In Grand Cayman , a waterspout ripped out a grape tree and slammed it into the Brac Reef Hotel 's Bar . The highest observed 24 @-@ hour precipitation total in Cuba was 13 @.@ 03 inches ( 331 mm ) , while rainfall in the nation peaked at 15 @.@ 74 inches ( 400 mm ) . As a result , Cuba experienced flash flooding in mountainous areas as Katrina moved across the country . In southern Camagüey Province , a number of bridges and railroads were washed out . Two sugar mills suffered damage . About 4 @,@ 641 homes suffered impact , 39 of which were destroyed . In addition , an estimated 80 % of sugar cane crops were damaged . Two people drowned in Cuba while attempting to cross a swollen river in Camagüey Province . The Bahamas received up to 14 in ( 360 mm ) of rain . Although no deaths or injuries were reported there , heavy rains in the central islands caused flood damage to watermelon , tomato and corn crops on Long Island . Bad weather from Hurricane Katrina caused the cancellation of the 15th running of the Benson and Hedges Gold Cup Race . 
 = Žirmūnai = 
 Žirmūnai ( pronounced : [ <unk> ] ; Polish : <unk> ; Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> ) is the most populous administrative division ( elderate ) in Vilnius . It is also a neighbourhood in the Lithuanian capital city Vilnius , encompassing the city district of the same name , built in the 1960s . 
 Žirmūnai 's history has been traced to the late 14th century , when a Lithuanian fishing village was founded across the River Neris from Vilnius ' Old Town . Several historic sites in Žirmūnai are internationally significant ; it is the home of Lithuania 's largest Jewish cemetery , as well as the location of mass graves of soldiers belonging to Napoleon 's Grande Armée and victims of the NKGB 's and MGB 's executions after World War II . Tuskulėnai Manor , built in 1825 , and the surrounding Peace Park are important historical and cultural attractions in Vilnius . 
 The area was given the name Žirmūnai during the early 1960s , when it became the site of an award @-@ winning residential construction project ; it was the first city district in the Lithuanian SSR to be constructed applying urban planning concepts established in the USSR at the time . The massive Palace of Concerts and Sports and Žalgiris Stadium are other relics of Žirmūnai 's Soviet history . Žirmūnai was important to the industrial sector in the USSR ; since that time , this function has been replaced or supplanted by newer businesses , including some of Lithuania 's leading companies . 
 Žirmūnai has undergone major renovation and development in the 21st century . Šiaurės miestelis ( " North Town " ) is an area of Žirmūnai that has rapidly evolved into one of the key business and residential districts of the city . This quarter was used by a number of regimes as a military garrison , and internationally significant historical findings have been made in the area . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Žirmūnai elderate occupies 5 @.@ 7 km ² or 1 @.@ 4 % of the total area of the municipality of Vilnius according to data used for the 2001 census . Žirmūnai is located north of central Vilnius , along the western bank of the River Neris , on a flat plain which rises to the north . The elderate extends for about 4 @.@ 4 kilometres from north to south , and is about 1 @.@ 5 kilometres across at its widest point . The southernmost point of the Žirmūnai elderate is only some 450 metres from Vilnius ' Cathedral Square , in the centre of the city . Žirmūnai is bordered by the elderates of Verkiai in the north and Šnipiškės in the west , and is separated from Vilnius ' Old Town and Antakalnis by the Neris . Žirmūnai 's western boundary is defined by the following streets ( from north to south ) : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The River Neris serves as Žirmūnai 's northern , eastern and southern boundary . Žirmūnų Street is the district 's main artery . 
 Despite the proximity of the city centre , the Žirmūnai bank of the River Neris is covered with a strip of dense deciduous forest that begins at the Žirmūnai Bridge and continues upstream ( northeasterly ) . The forested strip is largely uninterrupted , with gaps near bridges . At the approximate <unk> of the Žirmūnai shoreline , the forest surrounds a backwater , which had been used to park disused passenger ferries . The forest 's northernmost section is part of a botanical nature reserve within Verkiai Regional Park . 
 The Žirmūnai bank of the River Neris , from a point near Žirmūnai Bridge and continuing downstream , was stabilised during the 1980s with a steeply @-@ sloped concrete net @-@ like structure which includes patches of grass between the " webbing " of the net ; the lower part of the fortification is a concrete tiled walkway , ending just over 4 kilometres downstream , beyond Liubartas Bridge in <unk> . The walkway is used extensively by walkers , joggers , and cyclists , as well as providing seating for anglers . Construction vehicles sometimes use it to reach work areas . The walkway is submerged during the river floods , mostly in springtime . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 As of the census taken in April 2001 , the ethnic makeup of Žirmūnai was 59 @.@ 2 % Lithuanian , 16 @.@ 8 % Russian ( the third highest percentage among Vilnius ' elderates , behind <unk> <unk> and <unk> ) , 14 @.@ 4 % Poles , 3 @.@ 8 % Belarusian , 1 @.@ 7 % Ukrainian , 0 @.@ 8 % Jewish , 0 @.@ 2 % Tatar , 0 @.@ 1 % Latvian , 0 @.@ 1 % Armenian , and 2 @.@ 9 % other or unspecified ethnicity . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 According to the 2001 census , Žirmūnai was the most populous elderate in Vilnius ( 47 @,@ 410 residents , comprising 8 @.@ 7 % of Vilnius ' total population ) and the third most populous in Lithuania after <unk> and Dainava , Kaunas . The population density was 8 @,@ 317 @.@ 5 / km ² . According to the census , there were 21 @,@ 363 private households in the Žirmūnai elderate , making for an average household size of about 2 @.@ 2 persons . The population of Žirmūnai has been rapidly increasing , largely due to construction of residential buildings in the Šiaurės miestelis section of the elderate . A former elder of Žirmūnai estimated its 2002 population to be about 60 @,@ 000 residents – an increase of about 13 @,@ 000 over the 2001 census figure . This rapid growth has placed a strain on city services . 
 = = = Age cohorts = = = 
 Žirmūnai is occasionally described as a " borough of elderly people " or even a " borough of elderly women " . There is a certain statistical basis to the claim : according to the data of the April 2001 census , only about 43 @.@ 5 % of Žirmūnai 's population were male , the second lowest percentage in Vilnius , after <unk> ( 43 @.@ 1 % ) ; 27 @.@ 4 % of the population ( 33 @.@ 2 % of women and 19 @.@ 9 % of men ) were of legal retirement age , which was 57 @.@ 5 years for women and 61 @.@ 5 years for men at the time . This is the highest percentage in Vilnius ; accordingly , Žirmūnai had the lowest percentage of residents that were statistically of working age ( defined as over age 15 and up to the retirement age ) in Vilnius , only 56 @.@ 4 % in total : 52 @.@ 8 % of women and 61 @.@ 1 % of men . 
 The heavy proportion of elderly persons in the district may be attributed to the settled way of life of those residents who arrived during the building boom of the 1960s : the children of these residents moved elsewhere to live , leaving their parents in the old dwelling . The skewed male – female ratio is probably an artifact of the differential between male and female lifespans in Lithuania ( male average lifespan in Lithuania was 66 years in 2004 , as against 78 for females ) , according to the World Health Organization . 
 At the time of the 2001 census , persons aged between 0 and 15 years comprised 16 @.@ 1 % of Žirmūnai 's population , the second lowest percentage among Vilnius ' elderates , slightly higher than <unk> at 15 @.@ 5 % . However , it is likely that the average age of Žirmūnai 's residents has decreased since the last census , and will continue to decrease , as a result of the active construction of new dwellings , which are acquired primarily by younger people . As housing prices rise , retirees are motivated to sell their apartments with the goal of acquiring cheaper housing elsewhere with funds to spare . 
 = = = Crime statistics = = = 
 In 2005 , 2 @,@ 317 crimes were registered in the Žirmūnai elderate . This is the third highest figure among Vilnius ' elderates , behind the Old Town and <unk> . Using the population data of the latest available census ( 2001 ) , this would amount to about 48 @.@ 9 crimes per 1 @,@ 000 residents per year ( only the eighth highest figure , due to the elderate 's large population ; Vilnius ' total crime rate , using the same population data , would be about 51 crimes per 1 @,@ 000 residents ) . In terms of crime density , 406 @.@ 5 crimes per 1 square kilometre were registered ( the fourth highest figure , behind the Old Town , <unk> and Šnipiškės ; Vilnius ' total crime density , using the same population data , would be about 70 @.@ 4 ) . 
 However , thanks largely to the crime prevention programme Saugus <unk> ( " Safe City " ) , crime rates in Žirmūnai , as in all other elderates of Vilnius , are declining . For instance , 886 crimes were registered in Žirmūnai during the first four months of 2005 , versus 672 during the same period of 2006 , a decline of about 24 % . If this trend continues , Žirmūnai 's crime rate for 2006 would decrease to about 37 @.@ 2 crimes per 1 @,@ 000 residents . 
 The most frequently registered crimes during the first four months of 2006 were : theft ( 335 instances , including 19 car thefts , constituting about 50 % of the total number of crimes ) ; rape ( 259 instances or about 38 @.@ 5 % of the total ) ; robbery ( 44 instances or about 6 @.@ 5 % ) ; and bodily injury ( 20 instances or about 3 % ) . Percentage data may overlap as one criminal act may have several features , which are registered separately , but the total number of crimes is calculated per incident . 
 = = History = = 
 The elderate of Žirmūnai embraces three historical suburbs of Vilnius : Žvejai , Tuskulėnai and Šiaurės miestelis . Fishing village Žvejai dating to the 14th century included the only glass factory in the 16th century Lithuania , as well as the largest Jewish cemetery . It became an integral part of Vilnius in the 16th century . The area south of Žvejai became known after the name of the <unk> Manor . Manor itself was a property of noble families and officials , and is the oldest building in Žirmūnai . In the 19th century , a military garrison was established in the present @-@ day Šiaurės miestelis , which was used by Russian , French and Polish armies . These territories were consolidated into Vilnius city during the period of rapid growth that occurred in the 1950s and 1960s . The Tuskulėnai Manor was used as the KGB officers ' apartments back then . In the last years , a housing renovation program was launched in Žirmūnai . Military structures in Šiaurės miestelis of a historical value have been preserved and restored . Šiaurės miestelis became one of the most sought – after residential and commercial areas of Vilnius . 
 = = = 14th – 19th centuries = = = 
 Žirmūnai 's southernmost section , which lies on the bank of the River Neris opposite the Vilnius Castle Complex , was part of the settlement known as Žvejai ; another part of that settlement is now located within the elderate of Šnipiškės . According to archaeological surveys from 2005 , a fishing village may have been located here as early as the late 14th century , giving the area its name , literally , Fishermen ; it was later settled by craftsmen and housed the Orthodox Church of St Barbara . During the 16th century , the only glass factory in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was located in the suburb of Žvejai . In 1563 , after the construction of the first bridge over the River Neris ( at the approximate location of today 's Mindaugas Bridge ) , the suburb of Žvejai became an integral part of the city of Vilnius . During Tsarist rule in the 19th century , the name of Žvejai was superseded by that of Piramont , originating from the small estate of Piramont in the area ( now <unk> 1 ) . <unk> Alley can be seen in a 1904 map of Vilnius where today 's A. <unk> Street in the elderate of Šnipiškės is located , close to the boundary of Žirmūnai . The usage of Piramont as a placename gradually became limited to the southern part of Žvejai . 
 The heritage of Žvejai was retained in the name of <unk> ( " Fishermen 's " ) Street , which runs alongside the River Neris in southern Šnipiškės and Žirmūnai . However , the Žirmūnai section of this street was renamed <unk> ( " Olympians " ) in 2000 to commemorate the achievements of Lithuanian Olympic athletes in the Sydney Olympics . 
 The largest and oldest Jewish cemetery in Lithuania , first mentioned in 1592 , was also located in Žvejai . It was known in the local Jewish community as <unk> . The Yiddish placename later became associated with the whole borough of Šnipiškės , now bordering Žirmūnai on the west . Although the cemetery was officially closed in 1830 and was subject to gradual deterioration , there were further interments . Vilna Gaon , as well as other famous <unk> Jews , were interred in the cemetery . 
 During the years of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , in the area on the right bank of the River Neris opposite the St. Peter and St. Paul 's Church in Antakalnis , a Royal Manor called <unk> ( Polish : <unk> ) , was established in the mid @-@ 16th century by King Sigismund Augustus as an outpost of the Vilnius Castles . The manor was held by the kings Sigismund III Vasa and Władysław IV Vasa , nobleman M. <unk> , the <unk> family , the Grand Hetman of Lithuania Michał Kazimierz Pac , as well by the <unk> family after 1741 . In the mid @-@ 18th century , Lateran monks acquired the manor and named it <unk> , after the resort outside the ancient Roman city of Tusculum . ( see also : Villa Rufinella ) The surrounding forests were used as a game reserve and for sport fishing . Towards the end of the century , the manor was separated into the <unk> of Tuskulėnai , based on the core of the old royal manor , and <unk> . 
 Under the rule of the Russian Empire in the 19th century , the Tuskulėnai Manor was held by various noble families and high @-@ ranking state officials , including Governor General of Lithuanian – Vilna Governorate , Alexander Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . In the mid @-@ 19th century the main palace was transformed into a guesthouse that became a cultural center in Vilnius , often visited by Stanislaw Moniuszko and Józef Ignacy Kraszewski . The manor passed into the possession of <unk> <unk> after 1886 , and then was held by Olga <unk> and her noble family until World War II . 
 The area surrounding Tuskulėnai Manor was referred to as Tuskulėnai ( Russian : <unk> ; Polish : <unk> ) until World War II . This area was also known as <unk> or <unk> , colloquially named after A. Losev , colonel of Special Corps of Gendarmes and later general of the Russian Empire , who owned the folwark of Tuskulėnai in 1869 . The placenames are associated primarily with individual wooden houses , built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , some of which are still scattered among the apartment buildings . 
 A military garrison was built in the approximate location of the modern Šiaurės miestelis ( " North Town " , that is , north of Old Vilnius ) section of Žirmūnai by the Russian Empire during the 19th century . This area went on to be used as a garrison by a number of armies : Napoleon 's Grande Armée in 1812 , Tsarist for the rest of the 19th century and in the beginning of the 20th century ( see : the 27th infantry division 's camp in the map of 1904 ) , the Bolsheviks during World War I , the Polish army in the inter @-@ war period , and the Red Army from the 1950s to 1992 . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 During the interwar period , when Vilnius was under Polish control , the southern part of Žvejai was known as <unk> ; the entire Žvejai area was referred to as <unk> ( Polish for " Fishermen " ) ; modern Šiaurės miestelis had been called Plac broni ( Polish for the " Military training ground " ) ; and the old placename of <unk> , dating back to the times of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , applied to the area north of Tuskulėnai Manor . 
 A map of Vilnius published in 1942 , while the city was under Nazi rule , shows the northern part of Žirmūnai as <unk> , the middle section as <unk> ( " place of soldiers " ) and the southern part , close to the Tuskulėnai Manor , as <unk> ( " a place named in honour of Mantas " ) . One of the streets in the area , <unk> Manto Street , referred to Herkus Mantas ( Herkus Monte ) , a hero of the Great Prussian Uprising ; today H. Manto Street is a short street in the Šnipiškės elderate ending at the boundary of Žirmūnai . 
 A Soviet military base was established in the current Šiaurės miestelis section of Žirmūnai during the 1950s . The heavily wooded northernmost part of the elderate was thinly populated until the 1960s . 
 During the 1960s , Žirmūnai attracted the attention of urban planners ; it became the first city district in the Lithuanian SSR to be constructed applying urban planning concepts established in the USSR at that time . Designed in 1962 , the district consisted of three <unk> - residential and industrial sections centred around public facilities and had been the largest residential area in the city . 
 The first microdistrict , or " Žirmūnai I " , which is district 's middle section , was built in 1962 — 67 in accordance with a project by architect Birutė <unk> , who was <unk> the USSR State Prize in 1968 , together with architect <unk> <unk> and engineers <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; it was the first time this award had been presented to the designers of a large @-@ scale residential construction . The second microdistrict , " Žirmūnai II " , which is the southernmost of the three , was built in 1964 — 68 , its architect being <unk> <unk> . And the third , the northernmost microdistrict , " Žirmūnai III " designed by architect Laima <unk> was built in 1964 — 69 in the site of the former village of <unk> . The city district was then named after the formerly Lithuanian village of Žirmūnai ( Russian : <unk> ) , now situated 16 kilometres from the Lithuania – Belarus border in the <unk> District , Hrodna Province of Belarus . This village is where Karol <unk> , an architect and designer of Tuskulėnai Manor , was born . Hence the future district 's major street Žirmūnų was named after the village as it is seen in the map of 1942 and gave its name to the entire district . 
 The new residential housing in the microdistrict consisted almost exclusively of five @-@ story prefabricated concrete block apartment buildings popularly known as <unk> . Three nine @-@ story high @-@ rise apartment buildings were built in 1969 , and several more were constructed later , as well as seven brick @-@ built twelve @-@ storeys . The apartment buildings were meant primarily to accommodate industrial workers who came to Vilnius from other regions of the Lithuanian SSR and from other Soviet Republics . They typify the Brutalist architecture of the era . The principles governing the design of the microdistrict were set forth in books by the University of Moscow planners , for instance in New Element of <unk> . En Route to the New City published in the USSR in 1966 ( although the concept of the " new element " has been dated to 1959 ) ; the book was later published as The Ideal Communist City in the United States , United Kingdom and Italy . According to the book , the optimal apartment size was about 600 square feet ( 56 square metres ) , with one bathroom and two bedrooms . Single @-@ family homes were considered " too autonomous " . 
 The ancient Jewish cemetery in Žvejai stood in the way of the expansion . Many tombstones were destroyed in 1950 during the construction of Žalgiris Stadium ; the cemetery was completely demolished in 1955 in accordance with a decree issued by local authorities in 1948 . The bodies of Vilna Gaon and several members of his immediate family were relocated , after receiving special permission from the Soviet authorities ; this relocation has been the subject of historical controversy . The cemetery was the subject of an archaeological survey in the late 1990s . A memorial stone was placed in the southeastern portion of the former cemetery with an inscription in Yiddish and Lithuanian , stating that the cemetery was established there in 1478 ( this dating is disputed ) . 
 An incident in Žirmūnai 's history that has been difficult to reconstruct occurred in 1975 , when a pontoon bridge across the River Neris , that was customarily set up from spring to autumn , collapsed due to the weight of a crowd returning from a concert in the Palace of Concerts and Sports . It was rumoured that the bridge supports were not fully connected at the time . There were witnessed fatalities involving drownings and crushing by the bridge structures . Public discussion of the disaster was restricted and the number of casualties remains unknown . The pontoon bridge was never re @-@ erected at the site ; the Mindaugas Bridge now serves this need . 
 Tuskulėnai Manor had been nationalised in 1940 and was later used as KGB officers ' apartments and as a kindergarten . During excavations that took place between 1994 and 1996 in its territory , the remains of 706 bodies were found ; 40 were identified . The area had been used to hide the bodies of Lithuanian residents – mostly resistance fighters against the Soviet occupation and Nazi collaborators – who had been executed by the NKGB and MGB in the Vilnius ' KGB Palace between 1944 and 1947 but also those who died fighting Polish Armia Krajowa soldiers . The remains from the mass grave were placed in a columbarium built underground , beneath an artificial hill , and consecrated in 2004 . 
 In 2001 , workers laying telephone line in Šiaurės miestelis , near the former garrison , discovered a mass grave that was found to contain the bodies of about 2 @,@ 000 soldiers – the remnants of Napoleon 's Grande Armée as it retreated from Moscow . In December 1812 , temperatures in Vilnius had sunk to − 30 ° C , and the frozen ground made proper burials impossible . The Grande Armée at that time comprised French , Portuguese , Italians , Germans , Austrians , Spaniards , and Croats , as well as Lithuanians and Poles . The bones have been intensively studied by forensic pathologists ; DNA evidence showed that many of the deaths were caused by typhus . Most of the remains were re @-@ interred in Antakalnis Cemetery . Other findings included buttons stamped with Napoleon ’ s image , crucifixes , wedding rings , belt buckles , boots and pieces of French uniforms . Footage from the location has been used in the TV series Moments in Time produced by Discovery Channel and Meet the Ancestors by BBC . The archaeological surveys were partially sponsored by the producers . 
 The Red Army military base in Žirmūnai was abandoned in 1992 , a few years after Lithuania 's independence from the Soviet Union ; a grace period was granted in order to ensure the orderly resettlement of the soldiers and their families . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Due to the Soviet principles of urban planning , Žirmūnai , according to the 2001 census data , was among the three Vilnius elderates ( the other two being <unk> and <unk> ) with the lowest percentage of single @-@ family housing in the city ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) . Of the remaining residents , 0 @.@ 4 % owned a share of individual housing , 0 @.@ 7 % lived in hostels , and almost 99 % lived in apartments . The scarcity of lots means that the number of single @-@ family dwellings is not likely to increase ; a reverse process is taking place : old wooden houses are being demolished , making room for new residential and commercial constructions . As of 2007 , there were only a few modern single @-@ family houses in Žirmūnai . 
 Žirmūnai 's housing , especially in its central sections , is in need of extensive renovation , due to wear and tear of its low or medium @-@ quality construction . A program to renew old apartment buildings ( including the installation of better insulation ) is ongoing in Vilnius , partially assisted by the Vilnius City Municipality ; the first finished renovation project – a completely renewed 60 @-@ apartment building built in 1965 – is located in Žirmūnai . The area is , in some ways , analogous to public housing districts in Chicago and London ; although much of the housing was quickly and inexpensively erected in the 1960s , its proximity to downtown Vilnius , its transportation infrastructure , and its access to the River Neris account for its popularity . The principles of Soviet urban planning that led to its growth have converged with the modern concept of " Smart growth " . 
 The Šiaurės miestelis section of Žirmūnai is growing rapidly and in 2007 was one of Vilnius ' most sought @-@ after residential and commercial areas . 
 Many of the military structures that were built in the late 19th century in Šiaurės miestelis have been preserved and restored . Meanwhile , much of the construction that was not deemed to be of permanent value , erected during the Soviet times , has been demolished , leaving room for new streets and housing . The combination of military heritage sites and newer construction is a distinctive feature of Šiaurės miestelis . 
 Reflecting its military history , numerous street names in and around Šiaurės miestelis allude to military concepts , including <unk> ( " Soldiers " ) , <unk> ( " Pilots " ) , <unk> ( " March " ) , <unk> ( " Trenches " ) , <unk> ( " Light Cavalry " ) . The new streets built in Šiaurės miestelis during the beginning of the 21st century were named for prominent figures in Lithuanian military history : Povilas <unk> , Lithuanian army volunteer , the first to perish in the Independence Wars in 1919 with the Bolshevik forces , as well as Kazys <unk> , <unk> Žukauskas , Jonas <unk> @-@ <unk> , Vladas <unk> , and Jurgis <unk> , prominent officers of the inter @-@ war Lithuanian Army , whose histories are not directly related to the area . On the contrary , these personalities distinguished themselves by opposing the Bolshevik and Polish armies that were historically garrisoned in Šiaurės miestelis . The naming was suggested by the Ministry of Defence . There are more streets not far from Šiaurės miestelis that bear military @-@ themed names : <unk> ( " Cavalrymen " ) , <unk> ( " Scouts " ) and <unk> ( " Platoon " ) . 
 An international dispute arose in the 2000s over construction near the Jewish cemetery , with organizations expressing concerns that gravesites could be disturbed . 
 = = Education = = 
 The educational institutions in Žirmūnai include three secondary schools , all Lithuanian @-@ language . Tuskulėnai Secondary School ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> mokykla , formerly Vilnius ' Secondary School No. 31 ) had 1 @,@ 463 students in 2006 , which made it the fifth largest school in Vilnius . The school features advanced classes in the visual arts . St. Christopher 's Gymnasium ( Lithuanian : <unk> . <unk> gimnazija , formerly Vilnius ' Secondary School No. 9 ) was the eighth largest in Vilnius with 1 @,@ 391 students in 2006 . Žirmūnai Gymnasium ( Lithuanian : Žirmūnų gimnazija , formerly Vilnius Secondary School No. 7 ) had 800 students in 2006 . The school was granted the title Gymnasium in 2000 ; it is home to the acclaimed brass band <unk> , established in 1966 . 
 There are three elementary schools located in Žirmūnai : Antoni <unk> , Emilia Plater , and St. Christopher . Šarūnas <unk> Basketball School and Vilnius Sports School offer physical education . The Vilnius School of <unk> and Precision Mechanics ( Lithuanian : Vilniaus <unk> ir <unk> <unk> mokykla ) was established in 1965 to prepare workers for Vilma , a manufacturer of electrical products still operating in Žirmūnai . The Vilnius School of Tourism and Commerce ( Lithuanian : Vilniaus <unk> ir <unk> <unk> mokykla ) offers certificates in retailing , basic bookkeeping , hotel and restaurant services , and other business areas . Vilnius <unk> Youth School serves those students who have special needs and do not succeed in traditional classroom settings . Žirmūnai also has one of the three Children 's Foster Homes in Vilnius . 
 As of the census taken in April 2001 , 26 @.@ 2 % of Žirmūnai 's residents aged 10 or older possessed a bachelor 's or higher degree . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 = = = Parks and museums = = = 
 Tuskulėnai Manor is Žirmūnai 's oldest extant architectural structure . The manor was built in 1825 , following a design by Karol <unk> in the neoclassical style . It consists of the principal building ( the palace ) , an <unk> ( storage house ) , and several adjacent buildings , including a small eclectic chapel of St. Theresa located about 100 metres south of the principal building . The " Little White Manor " , also known as the villa of Franciszek Walicki , was built in 1866 further south from the manor , acquired by Walicki in 1928 , and reconstructed to serve as a summer residence . All of these structures have been restored by 2009 , and are a part of the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ hectare Peace Park ( <unk> <unk> ) that includes the Tuskulėnai Manor , hosting a museum of martyrology in Lithuania in the second half of the 20th century ( a branch of the Lithuanian Museum of Genocide Victims ) , restored landscaping , as well as the columbarium . 
 A Museum of Computing was opened in 2001 in Žirmūnai by the Lithuanian software company <unk> , showcasing the history of Lithuanian computing science and hardware production . It was based on a museum opened in 1985 by Sigma , one of the leading computer manufacturers in the former Soviet Union . The museum 's exhibits include EV @-@ 80 , the first Soviet vacuum tube computing machine manufactured by Sigma , and a copy of the IBM 604 . 
 Three of the 19 brick chapels of the Vilnius Stations of the Cross ( Vilniaus <unk> ) , part of Verkiai Regional Park , are located at the extreme northwestern corner of Žirmūnai , just within the elderate 's border . Once destroyed in 1963 and completely rebuilt , the three chapels , symbolizing the Mount of Olives and the Gardens of Gethsemane , are found only 20 meters away from the relatively busy <unk> Street , and about a hundred meters downhill from a group of Soviet multi @-@ storey apartment buildings . 
 The forested area along the banks of the River Neris in Žirmūnai and its walkways are a popular recreational destination for many <unk> . 
 = = = Governmental offices = = = 
 As a primarily residential area , Žirmūnai hosted only 7 @.@ 4 % of Vilnius ' public offices in 2003 . Žirmūnai is the location of the Personal Identity Documents Centre of Lithuania 's Ministry of the Interior which produces all of Lithuania 's identity cards , passports , and driver 's licenses , as well as residency permits . Issuance of residence permits is controlled by Vilnius City Migration Service , which is housed in Žirmūnai too . The State Tax Inspectorate has an office in Šiaurės <unk> , providing services to private as well as legal persons . There are also several medicine @-@ related institutions , such as the Ministry of Health 's State Public Health Service , the Vilnius city morgue . The Institute of Forensic Medicine of the Mykolas <unk> University was headquartered in Šiaurės <unk> as well . The Lithuanian National Olympic Committee , the Vilnius Department of the Lithuanian Labour Exchange at the Ministry of Social Security and Labour , the Honorary Vice @-@ Consulate of the Kingdom of Spain , and the National Examination Center , established by the Ministry of Education to organize centralized nationwide examinations of high school graduates , all have headquarters in Žirmūnai . 
 = = = Sports and entertainment venues = = = 
 Several notable sports facilities are located in Žirmūnai , including Žalgiris Stadium , Lithuania 's largest stadium , and <unk> Plus fitness club . Rowing practices take place on the River Neris ; there is a base of operation , as well as several piers , on the Žirmūnai bank of the river . One of Lithuania 's largest indoor public swimming pools was situated in Žirmūnai until the 1990s . Part of the annual international Vilnius Marathon course runs along the Žirmūnai bank of the River Neris . 
 The Vilnius Palace of Concerts and Sports ( <unk> ir <unk> <unk> ) , built in 1971 in the southernmost part of Žirmūnai in the middle of the former cemetery , is an example of Soviet Constructivism and Brutalist architecture , remarkable for its vessel @-@ like exterior . The Palace , once one of the architectonic icons of Soviet Vilnius , was , until the 1990s , a major venue for sporting events , especially local and international basketball matches , as well as concerts and shows . Its seating capacity is about 4 @,@ 400 . On 22 – 23 October 1988 the building hosted the statutory meeting of <unk> , the Lithuanian political organization that led the struggle for Lithuanian independence ; on 14 – 15 January 1991 , a public funeral for the victims of the January Events took place at the Palace . Later in the 1990s , the building was used as a temporary shopping mall where space was leased to small entrepreneurs for business exhibitions and fairs . In the 2000s developers announced plans to build multifunctional complexes , incorporating sports , business and residential structures , that would replace Žalgiris Stadium and the Palace of Concerts and Sports ; the projects have been stalled due to the inclusion of the Palace into the list " Registry of Cultural Values " in July 2006 , and related litigation . 
 The Vilnius Palace of Culture , Entertainment and Sports ( an example of Soviet functionalism built in 1980 as the Palace of Culture and Sports of the Ministry of Interior ) , hosts several amateur art clubs ( choirs in particular ) , and is also used for indoor sports ( wrestling , martial arts , artistic gymnastics , volleyball , basketball ) , as well as lawn tennis , including two clay courts . 
 <unk> <unk> Theatre has occupied the former Lietuvos Rytas Arena which was the home of Lithuania 's starring basketball team Lietuvos Rytas until the 2004 season , and was also used by the former women 's basketball team BC Teo . Along with the Vilnius Palace of Culture , Entertainment and Sports , it was used in 2006 as part of the set for 9 / 11 : The Twin Towers , a docudrama about the September 11 , 2001 attacks in New York City , a Dangerous Films production for BBC and Discovery Channel . <unk> <unk> <unk> arena ( " <unk> <unk> Theater Arena " ) is now the venue of performances of <unk> <unk> of Meno Fortas and <unk> <unk> Dance Theatre . 
 Southern Žirmūnai 's sporting connections are reflected in the names of the streets along the Žirmūnai side of the River Neris : <unk> ( " Sports " ) and <unk> ( " Olympians " ) . The Palace of Students ' Technical Creative Work of the Republic is Lithuania 's largest facility for high school students ' after @-@ school activities of a technical nature , such as model building and go @-@ kart racing . The Grand Theater of Vilnius ( Didysis Vilniaus <unk> ) is a small theater ( its misnomer is intentional ) that is formally based in Šiaurės miestelis ; it has no venue of its own and holds performances in other theaters . 
 A building close to the western border of the Žirmūnai elderate , an example of Socialist historicism built soon after the end of World War II , was the home of the <unk> ( " Motherland " ) Cinema until the early 1990s ; it has been hosting the New York musical theatre and club since 2004 . It is unclear whether this building will be demolished to make way for underground parking lots or saved by virtue of its inclusion into the Registry of Cultural Values . 
 = = = Commercial and industrial facilities = = = 
 1 @,@ 414 businesses , comprising 8 @.@ 7 % of all Vilnius ' businesses , were headquartered in the Žirmūnai elderate in 2003 . Lithuania 's largest electricity distribution network operator , <unk> <unk> <unk> , operates from Žirmūnai , as well as <unk> , one of Lithuania 's three mobile communications operators ; <unk> , one of Lithuania 's largest retailers and wholesalers of home appliances ; and <unk> , Lithuania 's largest dealer of heating equipment . 
 In 1992 , the former prominent Lithuanian basketball player Šarūnas <unk> and his business partners opened the Šarūnas Hotel in Žirmūnai . 
 The <unk> and Rimi Hypermarket , located in Šiaurės miestelis , are among Lithuania 's largest shopping centers . Vilniaus <unk> ( " The Bread of Vilnius " ) , Lithuania 's largest baking company , operates one of its bakeries in Žirmūnai . 
 An abundance of automotive service facilities and car dealerships are located in the elderate , including some of the Lithuania 's largest Opel , SAAB , Chevrolet ( <unk> ratas ) , and Nissan ( <unk> ) dealerships . 
 The northern part of Žirmūnai was an important part of the Lithuanian SSR 's industrial sector during the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s . The Kuro <unk> <unk> ( Fuel Equipment Factory ) is now bankrupt ; Sigma , formerly one of the leading manufacturers of electronics and computer components in the Soviet Union , which contributed to the description of the Lithuanian SSR as " The Soviet Silicon Valley " , continues to operate at a minimum level ; and Vilma remains Lithuania 's largest manufacturer of electrical products . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Žirmūnai is well @-@ served by Vilnius ' bus and trolleybus transportation network . One of Vilnius ' trolleybus hubs is located in the northernmost part of Žirmūnai elderate , and Vilniaus <unk> , Vilnius ' main bus operator , is headquartered and has its main depot in Žirmūnai . Žirmūnai suffers from rush hour traffic jams . The street network in the district was primarily designed in the Soviet era for a much lower vehicle traffic . 
 Žirmūnai is linked to the elderate of Antakalnis by three bridges over the River Neris : <unk> Bridge , the longest bridge in Vilnius , built in 1972 ; the <unk> Bridge , built in 1999 , and Žirmūnai Bridge , built in 1965 . The Mindaugas Bridge was built in 2003 to link Žirmūnai with Vilnius ' Old Town . Passenger ferry transport on the Neris was active until the 1990s , but is now limited to occasional chartered sightseeing tours from the Mindaugas Bridge to <unk> in summer . 
 For some time in the first half of the 20th century , a narrow @-@ gauge railway traversed Žirmūnai following the approximate course of the modern <unk> Street ; it crossed over the River Neris on a bridge located near the modern <unk> Bridge , as can be seen in the 1942 map of Vilnius . 
 = Gary Cooper = 
 Gary Cooper ( born Frank James Cooper ; May 7 , 1901 – May 13 , 1961 ) was an American film actor known for his natural , authentic , and understated acting style and screen performances . His career spanned thirty @-@ five years , from 1925 to 1960 , and included leading roles in eighty @-@ four feature films . He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era through the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood . His screen persona appealed strongly to both men and women , and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres . Cooper 's ability to project his own personality onto the characters he played contributed to his appearing natural and authentic on screen . The screen persona he sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero . 
 Cooper began his career as a film extra and stunt rider and soon landed acting roles . After establishing himself as a Western hero in his early silent films , Cooper became a movie star in 1929 with his first sound picture , The Virginian . In the early 1930s , he expanded his heroic image to include more cautious characters in adventure films and dramas such as A Farewell to Arms ( 1932 ) and The Lives of a Bengal Lancer ( 1935 ) . During the height of his career , Cooper portrayed a new type of hero — a champion of the common man — in films such as Mr. Deeds Goes to Town ( 1936 ) , Meet John Doe ( 1941 ) , Sergeant York ( 1941 ) , The Pride of the Yankees ( 1942 ) , and For Whom the Bell Tolls ( 1943 ) . In the post @-@ war years , he portrayed more mature characters at odds with the world in films such as The Fountainhead ( 1949 ) and High Noon ( 1952 ) . In his final films , Cooper played non @-@ violent characters searching for redemption in films such as Friendly Persuasion ( 1956 ) and Man of the West ( 1958 ) . 
 He married New York debutante Veronica Balfe in 1933 , and the couple had one daughter . Their marriage was interrupted by a three @-@ year separation precipitated by Cooper 's love affair with Patricia Neal . Cooper received the Academy Award for Best Actor for his roles in Sergeant York and High Noon . He also received an Academy Honorary Award for his career achievements in 1961 . He was one of the top ten film personalities for twenty @-@ three consecutive years , and was one of the top money @-@ making stars for eighteen years . The American Film Institute ( AFI ) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the twenty five greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frank James Cooper was born on May 7 , 1901 , at 730 Eleventh Avenue in Helena , Montana to English immigrants Alice ( née Brazier , 1873 – 1967 ) and Charles Henry Cooper ( 1865 – 1946 ) . His father emigrated from Houghton Regis , Bedfordshire and became a prominent lawyer , rancher , and eventually a Montana Supreme Court justice . His mother emigrated from Gillingham , Kent and married Charles in Montana . In 1906 , Charles purchased the 600 @-@ acre ( 240 ha ) Seven @-@ Bar @-@ Nine cattle ranch about fifty miles ( eighty kilometers ) north of Helena near the town of Craig on the Missouri River . Frank and his older brother Arthur spent their summers there and learned to ride horses , hunt , and fish . In April 1908 , the Hauser Dam failed and flooded the Missouri River valley along portions of the Cooper property , but Cooper and his family were able to evacuate in time . Cooper attended Central Grade School in Helena . 
 In the summer of 1909 , Alice , wanting her sons to have an English education , accompanied them to England and enrolled them in Dunstable Grammar School in Bedfordshire , where Cooper was educated from 1910 to 1912 . At Dunstable , Cooper studied Latin and French , and took several courses in English history . While he managed to adapt to the discipline of an English school and learned the requisite social graces , he never adjusted to the rigid class structure and formal Eton collars he was forced to wear . After completing confirmation classes , Cooper was baptized into the Anglican Church on December 3 , 1911 , at the Church of All Saints in Houghton Regis . Cooper 's mother accompanied her sons back to the United States in August 1912 , and Cooper resumed his education at Johnson Grammar School in Helena . 
 At the age of fifteen , Cooper injured his hip in a car accident and returned to the Seven @-@ Bar @-@ Nine ranch to recuperate by horseback riding at the recommendation of his doctor . The misguided therapy left him with his characteristic stiff , off @-@ balanced walk and slightly angled riding style . After attending Helena High School for two years , he left school in 1918 and returned to the family ranch to help raise their five hundred head of cattle and work full @-@ time as a cowboy . In 1919 , his father arranged for his son to complete his high school education at Gallatin County High School in Bozeman , Montana . His English teacher , Ida Davis , encouraged him to focus on academics , join the school 's debating team , and get involved in dramatics . His parents would later credit her for helping their son complete high school , and Cooper confirmed , " She was the woman partly responsible for me giving up cowboy @-@ ing and going to college . " 
 In 1920 , while still attending high school , Cooper took three art courses at Montana Agricultural College in Bozeman . His interest in art was inspired years earlier by the Western paintings of Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington . Cooper especially admired and studied Russell 's Lewis and Clark Meeting Indians at Ross ' Hole ( 1910 ) , which still hangs in the state capitol building in Helena . In 1922 , Cooper enrolled in Grinnell College in Iowa to continue his art education . Cooper did well academically in most of his courses , but was not accepted to the school 's drama club . His drawings and watercolors were exhibited throughout the dormitory , and he was named art editor for the college yearbook . During the summers of 1922 and 1923 , Cooper worked at Yellowstone National Park as a tour guide driving the yellow open @-@ top buses . Despite a promising first eighteen months at Grinnell , he left college suddenly in February 1924 , spent a month in Chicago looking for work as an artist , and then returned to Helena , where he sold editorial cartoons to the Independent , a local newspaper . 
 In the autumn of 1924 , Cooper 's father left the Montana Supreme Court bench and moved with his wife to Los Angeles to administer the estates of two relatives . At his father 's request , Cooper joined his parents in California on Thanksgiving Day , November 27 , 1924 . In the coming weeks , after working a series of unpromising jobs , Cooper met two friends from Montana , Jim <unk> and Jim Calloway , who were working as film extras and stunt riders in low @-@ budget Western films for the small movie studios on Poverty Row on Gower Street . They introduced him to another Montana cowboy , rodeo champion Jay " Slim " Talbot , who took him to see a casting director who offered him work . With the goal of saving enough money to pay for a professional art course , Cooper decided to try his hand at working as a film extra for five dollars a day , and as a stunt rider for twice that amount . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Silent films , 1925 – 28 = = = 
 In early 1925 , Cooper began his film career working in silent pictures such as The Thundering Herd and Wild Horse Mesa with Jack Holt , Riders of the Purple Sage and The Lucky Horseshoe with Tom Mix , and The Trail Rider with Buck Jones . He worked for several Poverty Row studios , including Famous Players @-@ Lasky and Fox Film Corporation . While his skills as a horseman led to steady work in Westerns , Cooper found the stunt work " tough and cruel " , sometimes resulting in injury to the horses and riders . Hoping to move beyond the risky stunt work and obtain acting roles , Cooper paid for a screen test and hired casting director Nan Collins to work as his agent . Knowing that other actors were using the name " Frank Cooper " , Collins suggested he change his first name to " Gary " after her hometown of Gary , Indiana . Cooper liked the name immediately . 
 Cooper also found work in a variety of non @-@ Western films , appearing , for example , as a masked Cossack in The Eagle ( 1925 ) , as a Roman guard in Ben @-@ Hur ( 1925 ) , and as a flood survivor in The Johnstown Flood ( 1926 ) . Gradually , he began to land credited roles that offered him more screen time , in films such as Tricks ( 1925 ) , in which he played the film 's antagonist , and the short film Lightnin ' Wins ( 1926 ) . As a featured player , he began to attract the attention of major film studios . On June 1 , 1926 , Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn Productions for fifty dollars a week . 
 Cooper 's first important film role was in The Winning of Barbara Worth ( 1926 ) with Ronald Colman and Vilma <unk> . In the film , Cooper plays a young engineer , Abe Lee , who helps a rival suitor save the woman he loves and her town from an impending dam disaster . Cooper 's experience living among the Montana cowboys gave his performance an " instinctive authenticity " , according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers . The film premiered on October 14 and was a major success . Critics singled out Cooper as a " dynamic new personality " and future star . Goldwyn rushed to offer the actor a long @-@ term contract , but Cooper held out for a better deal — finally signing a five @-@ year contract with Jesse L. Lasky at Paramount Pictures for $ 175 a week . In 1927 , with help from established movie star Clara Bow , Cooper landed high @-@ profile roles in Children of Divorce and Wings , the latter being the first film to win an Academy Award for Best Picture . That year , Cooper also appeared in his first starring roles in Arizona Bound and Nevada — both films directed by John Waters . 
 In 1928 , Paramount paired Cooper with a youthful Fay Wray in The Legion of the Condemned and The First Kiss — advertising them as the studio 's " glorious young lovers " . Their on @-@ screen chemistry failed to generate much excitement with audiences . With each new film , Cooper 's acting skills improved and his popularity continued to grow , especially among female movie @-@ goers . During this time , he was earning as much as $ 2 @,@ 750 per film and receiving a thousand fan letters a week . Looking to exploit Cooper 's growing audience appeal , the studio placed him opposite popular leading ladies such as Evelyn Brent in Beau Sabreur , Florence Vidor in Doomsday , and Esther Ralston in Half a Bride . That year , Cooper also made Lilac Time with Colleen Moore for First National Pictures , his first movie with synchronized music and sound effects . It became one of the most commercially successful films of 1928 . 
 = = = Hollywood stardom , 1929 – 35 = = = 
 Cooper became a major movie star in 1929 with the release of his first sound picture , The Virginian , which was directed by Victor Fleming and co @-@ starred Mary Brian and Walter Huston . Based on the popular novel by Owen Wister , The Virginian was one of the first sound films to define the Western code of honor and helped establish many of the conventions of the Western movie genre that have lasted to the present day . According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers , the romantic image of the tall , handsome , and shy cowboy hero who embodied male freedom , courage , and honor was created in large part by Cooper in the film . Unlike some silent film actors who had trouble adapting to the new sound medium , Cooper transitioned naturally , with his " deep and clear " and " pleasantly drawling " voice , which was perfectly suited for the characters he portrayed on screen , also according to Meyers . Looking to capitalize on Cooper 's growing popularity , Paramount cast him in several Westerns and wartime dramas in 1930 , including Only the Brave , The Texan , Seven Days ' Leave , A Man from Wyoming , and The Spoilers . 
 One of the more important performances in Cooper 's early career was his portrayal of a sullen legionnaire in Josef von Sternberg 's 1930 film Morocco with Marlene Dietrich in her introduction to American audiences . During production , von Sternberg focused his energies on Dietrich and treated Cooper dismissively . Tensions came to a head after von Sternberg yelled directions at Cooper in German . The 6 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 191 cm ) actor approached the 5 @-@ foot @-@ 4 @-@ inch ( 163 cm ) director , physically picked him up by the collar and said , " If you expect to work in this country you 'd better get on to the language we use here . " Despite the tensions on the set , Cooper produced " one of his best performances " , according to Thornton <unk> of the New York Evening Post . In 1931 , after returning to the Western genre in Zane Grey 's Fighting Caravans with French actress Lili Damita , Cooper appeared in the Dashiell Hammett crime film City Streets playing a westerner who gets involved with big @-@ city gangsters in order to save the woman he loves . Cooper concluded the year with appearances in two unsuccessful films : I Take This Woman with Carole Lombard , and His Woman with Claudette Colbert . The demands and pressures of making ten films in two years left Cooper exhausted and in poor health , suffering from anemia and jaundice . He had lost thirty pounds ( fourteen kilograms ) during that period , and felt lonely , isolated , and depressed by his sudden fame and wealth . In May 1931 , Cooper left Hollywood and sailed to Algiers and then Italy , where he lived for the next year . 
 During his time abroad , Cooper stayed with the Countess Dorothy di Frasso at the Villa Madama in Rome , where she taught him about good food and vintage wines , how to read Italian and French menus , and how to socialize among Europe 's nobility and upper classes . After guiding him through the great art museums and galleries of Italy , she accompanied him on a ten @-@ week big @-@ game hunting safari on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa , where he was credited with over sixty kills , including two lions , a rhinoceros , and various antelopes . His safari experience in Africa had a profound influence on Cooper and intensified his love of the wilderness . After returning to Europe , he and the countess set off on a Mediterranean cruise of the Italian and French Rivieras . Rested and rejuvenated by his year @-@ long exile , a healthy Cooper returned to Hollywood in April 1932 and negotiated a new contract with Paramount for two films per year , a salary of $ 4 @,@ 000 a week , and director and script approval . 
 In 1932 , after completing Devil and the Deep with Tallulah Bankhead to fulfill his old contract , Cooper appeared in A Farewell to Arms , the first film adaptation of an Ernest Hemingway novel . Co @-@ starring Helen Hayes , a leading New York theatre star and Academy Award winner , and Adolphe <unk> , the film presented Cooper with one of his most ambitious and challenging dramatic roles , playing an American ambulance driver wounded in Italy who falls in love with an English nurse during World War I. Critics praised his highly intense and emotional performance , and the film became one of the year 's most commercially successful pictures . In 1933 , after making Today We Live with Joan Crawford and One Sunday Afternoon with Fay Wray , Cooper appeared in the Ernst Lubitsch comedy film Design for Living , based on the successful Noël Coward play . Co @-@ starring Miriam Hopkins and Fredric March , the film received mixed reviews and did not do well at the box office . Cooper 's performance — playing an American artist in Europe competing with his playwright friend for the affections of a beautiful woman — was singled out for its versatility and revealed his genuine ability to do light comedy . Cooper changed his name legally to " Gary Cooper " in August 1933 . 
 In 1934 , Cooper was loaned out to MGM for the Civil War drama film Operator 13 with Marion Davies , about a beautiful Union spy who falls in love with a Confederate soldier . Despite Richard Boleslawski 's imaginative direction and George J. Folsey 's lavish cinematography , the film did poorly at the box office . Back at Paramount , Cooper appeared in his first of seven films by director Henry Hathaway , Now and Forever , with Carole Lombard and Shirley Temple . In the film , he plays a confidence man who tries to sell his daughter to the relatives who raised her , but is eventually won over by the adorable girl . Impressed by Temple 's intelligence and charm , Cooper developed a close rapport with her , both on and off screen . The film was a box @-@ office success . 
 The following year , Cooper was loaned out to Samuel Goldwyn Productions to appear in King Vidor 's romance film The Wedding Night with Anna Sten , who was being groomed as " another Garbo " . In the film , Cooper plays an alcoholic novelist who retreats to his family 's New England farm where he meets and falls in love with a beautiful Polish neighbor . Cooper delivered a performance of surprising range and depth , according to biographer Larry Swindell . Despite receiving generally favorable reviews , the film was not popular with American audiences , who may have been offended by the film 's depiction of an extramarital affair and its tragic ending . That same year , Cooper appeared in two Henry Hathaway films : the melodrama Peter Ibbetson with Ann Harding , about a man caught up in a dream world created by his love for a childhood sweetheart , and the adventure film The Lives of a Bengal Lancer , about a daring British officer and his men who defend their stronghold at Bengal against rebellious local tribes . While the former was more successful in Europe than in the United States , the latter was nominated for six Academy Awards and became one of Cooper 's most popular and successful adventure films . Hathaway had the highest respect for Cooper 's acting ability , calling him " the best actor of all of them " . 
 = = = American folk hero , 1936 – 43 = = = 
 = = = = From Mr. Deeds to The Real Glory = = = = 
 The year 1936 marked an important turning point in Cooper 's career . After making Frank Borzage 's romantic comedy film Desire with Marlene Dietrich at Paramount — delivering a performance considered by some contemporary critics as one of his finest — Cooper returned to Poverty Row for the first time since his early silent film days to make Frank Capra 's screwball comedy Mr. Deeds Goes to Town with Jean Arthur for Columbia Pictures . In the film , Cooper plays the character of Longfellow Deeds , a quiet , innocent writer of greeting cards who inherits a fortune , leaves behind his idyllic life in Vermont , and travels to New York where he faces a world of corruption and deceit . Capra and screenwriter Robert Riskin were able to use Cooper 's well @-@ established screen persona as the " quintessential American hero " — a symbol of honesty , courage , and goodness — to create a new type of " folk hero " for the common man . Commenting on Cooper 's impact on the character and the film , Capra observed : 
 As soon as I thought of Gary Cooper , it wasn 't possible to conceive anyone else in the role . He could not have been any closer to my idea of Longfellow Deeds , and as soon as he could think in terms of Cooper , Bob Riskin found it easier to develop the Deeds character in terms of dialogue . So it just had to be Cooper . Every line in his face spelled honesty . Our Mr. Deeds had to symbolize <unk> , and in my mind Gary Cooper was that symbol . 
 Both Desire and Mr. Deeds opened in April 1936 to critical praise and were major box @-@ office successes . In his review in The New York Times , Frank Nugent wrote that Cooper was " proving himself one of the best light comedians in Hollywood " . For his performance in Mr. Deeds , Cooper received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Actor . 
 Cooper appeared in two other Paramount films in 1936 . In Lewis Milestone 's adventure film The General Died at Dawn with Madeleine Carroll , he plays an American soldier of fortune in China who helps the peasants defend themselves against the oppression of a cruel warlord . Written by playwright Clifford Odets , the film was a critical and commercial success . In Cecil B. DeMille 's sprawling frontier epic The Plainsman — his first of four films with the director — Cooper portrays Wild Bill Hickok in a highly fictionalized version of the opening of the American western frontier . The film was an even greater box @-@ office hit than its predecessor , due in large part to Jean Arthur 's definitive depiction of Calamity Jane and Cooper 's inspired portrayal of <unk> as an enigmatic figure of " deepening mythic substance " . That year , Cooper appeared for the first time on the Motion Picture Herald exhibitor 's poll of top ten film personalities , where he would remain for the next twenty @-@ three years . 
 In late 1936 , while Paramount was preparing a new contract for Cooper that would raise his salary to $ 8 @,@ 000 a week , Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn for six films over six years with a minimum guarantee of $ 150 @,@ 000 per picture . Paramount brought suit against Goldwyn and Cooper , and the court ruled that Cooper 's new Goldwyn contract afforded the actor sufficient time to also honor his Paramount agreement . Cooper continued to make films with both studios , and by 1939 the United States Treasury reported that Cooper was the country 's highest wage earner , at $ 482 @,@ 819 ( equivalent to $ 8 @.@ 21 million in 2015 ) . 
 In contrast to his output the previous year , Cooper appeared in only one picture in 1937 , Henry Hathaway 's adventure film Souls at Sea . A critical and box @-@ office failure , Cooper referred to it as his " almost picture " , saying , " It was almost exciting , and almost interesting . And I was almost good . " In 1938 , he appeared in Archie Mayo 's biographical film The Adventures of Marco Polo . Plagued by production problems and a weak screenplay , the film became Goldwyn 's biggest failure to that date , losing $ 700 @,@ 000 . During this period , Cooper turned down several important roles , including the role of Rhett Butler in Gone with the Wind . Cooper was producer David O. Selznick 's first choice for the part . He made several overtures to the actor , but Cooper had doubts about the project , and did not feel suited to the role . Cooper later admitted , " It was one of the best roles ever offered in Hollywood ... But I said no . I didn 't see myself as quite that dashing , and later , when I saw Clark Gable play the role to perfection , I knew I was right . " 
 Back at Paramount , Cooper returned to a more comfortable genre in Ernst Lubitsch 's romantic comedy Bluebeard 's Eighth Wife ( 1938 ) with Claudette Colbert . In the film , Cooper plays a wealthy American businessman in France who falls in love with an impoverished aristocrat 's daughter and persuades her to become his eighth wife . Despite the clever screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder , and solid performances by Cooper and Colbert , audiences had trouble accepting Cooper in the role of a shallow philanderer . For many of his fans , Cooper had become " Mr. Deeds incarnate " . In the fall of 1938 , Cooper appeared in H. C. Potter 's romantic comedy The Cowboy and the Lady with Merle Oberon , about a sweet @-@ natured rodeo cowboy who falls in love with the wealthy daughter of a presidential hopeful , believing her to be a poor , hard @-@ working lady 's maid . The efforts of three directors and several eminent screenwriters could not salvage what could have been a fine vehicle for Cooper . While more successful than its predecessor , the film was Cooper 's fourth consecutive box @-@ office failure . 
 In the next two years , Cooper was more discerning about the roles he accepted and made four successful large @-@ scale adventure and cowboy films . In William A. Wellman 's adventure film Beau Geste ( 1939 ) , he plays one of three daring English brothers who join the French Foreign Legion in the Sahara to fight local tribes . Filmed in the same Mojave Desert locations as the original 1926 version with Ronald Colman , Beau Geste provided Cooper with magnificent sets , exotic settings , high @-@ spirited action , and a role tailored to his personality and screen persona . This was the last film in Cooper 's contract with Paramount . In Henry Hathaway 's The Real Glory ( 1939 ) , he plays a military doctor who accompanies a small group of American Army officers to the Philippines to help the Christian Filipinos defend themselves against Muslim radicals . Many film critics praised Cooper 's performance , including author and film critic Graham Greene who recognized that he " never acted better " . 
 = = = = From The Westerner to For Whom the Bell Tolls = = = = 
 Cooper returned to the Western genre in William Wyler 's The Westerner ( 1940 ) with Walter Brennan and Doris Davenport , about a drifting cowboy who defends homesteaders against Roy Bean , a corrupt judge known as the " law west of the Pecos " . Screenwriter Niven Busch relied on Cooper 's extensive knowledge of Western history while working on the script . The film received positive reviews and did well at the box @-@ office , with reviewers praising the performances of the two lead actors . That same year , Cooper appeared in his first all @-@ Technicolor feature , Cecil B. DeMille 's adventure film North West Mounted Police ( 1940 ) . In the film , Cooper plays a Texas Ranger who pursues an outlaw into western Canada where he joins forces with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who are after the same man , a leader of the North @-@ West Rebellion . While not as popular with critics as its predecessor , the film was another box @-@ office success — the sixth @-@ highest grossing film of 1940 . 
 The early 1940s were Cooper 's prime years as an actor . In a relatively short period , he appeared in five critically successful and popular films that produced some of his finest performances . When Frank Capra offered him the lead role in Meet John Doe before Robert Riskin even developed the script , Cooper accepted his friend 's offer , saying , " It 's okay , Frank , I don 't need a script . " In the film , Cooper plays Long John Willoughby , a down @-@ and @-@ out bush @-@ league pitcher hired by a newspaper to pretend to be a man who promises to commit suicide on Christmas Eve to protest all the hypocrisy and corruption in the country . Considered by some critics to be Capra 's best film at the time , Meet John Doe was received as a " national event " with Cooper appearing on the front page of Time magazine on March 3 , 1941 . In his review in the New York Herald Tribune , Howard Barnes called Cooper 's performance a " splendid and utterly persuasive portrayal " and praised his " utterly realistic acting which comes through with such authority " . Bosley Crowther , in The New York Times , wrote , " Gary Cooper , of course , is ' John Doe ' to the life and in the whole — shy , bewildered , non @-@ aggressive , but a veritable tiger when aroused . " 
 That same year , Cooper made two films with director and good friend Howard Hawks . In the biographical film Sergeant York , Cooper portrays war hero Alvin C. York , one of the most decorated American soldiers in World War I. The film chronicles York 's early backwoods days in Tennessee , his religious conversion and subsequent piety , his stand as a conscientious objector , and finally his heroic actions at the Battle of the Argonne Forest , which earned him the Medal of Honor . Initially , Cooper was nervous and uncertain about playing a living hero , so he traveled to Tennessee to visit York at his home , and the two quiet men established an immediate rapport and discovered they had much in common . Inspired by York 's encouragement , Cooper delivered a performance that Howard Barnes of the New York Herald Tribune called " one of extraordinary conviction and versatility " , and that Archer Winston of the New York Post called " one of his best " . After the film 's release , Cooper was awarded the Distinguished Citizenship Medal by the Veterans of Foreign Wars for his " powerful contribution to the promotion of patriotism and loyalty " . York admired Cooper 's performance and helped promote the film for Warner Bros. Sergeant York became the top @-@ grossing film of the year and was nominated for eleven Academy Awards . Accepting his first Academy Award for Best Actor from his friend James Stewart , Cooper said , " It was Sergeant Alvin York who won this award . <unk> , I 've been in the business sixteen years and sometimes dreamed I might get one of these . That 's all I can say ... Funny when I was dreaming I always made a better speech . " 
 Cooper concluded the year back at Goldwyn with Howard Hawks to make the romantic comedy Ball of Fire with Barbara Stanwyck . In the film , Cooper plays a shy linguistics professor who leads a team of seven scholars who are writing an encyclopedia . While researching slang , he meets Stanwyck 's flirtatious burlesque stripper <unk> O 'Shea who blows the dust off their staid life of books . The screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder provided Cooper the opportunity to exercise the full range of his light comedy skills . In his review for the New York Herald Tribune , Howard Barnes wrote that Cooper handled the role with " great skill and comic emphasis " and that his performance was " utterly delightful " . Though small in scale , Ball of Fire was one of the top @-@ grossing films of the year — Cooper 's fourth consecutive picture to make the top twenty . 
 Cooper 's only film appearance in 1942 was also his last under his Goldwyn contract . In Sam Wood 's biographical film The Pride of the Yankees , Cooper portrays baseball star Lou Gehrig who established a record with the New York Yankees for playing in 2 @,@ 130 consecutive games . Cooper was reluctant to play the seven @-@ time All @-@ Star , who only died the previous year from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) — now commonly called " Lou Gehrig 's disease " . Beyond the challenges of effectively portraying such a popular and nationally recognized figure , Cooper knew very little about baseball and was not left @-@ handed like Gehrig . After Gehrig 's widow visited the actor and expressed her desire that he portray her husband , Cooper accepted the role that covered a twenty @-@ year span of Gehrig 's life — his early love of baseball , his rise to greatness , his loving marriage , and his struggle with illness , culminating in his farewell speech at Yankee Stadium on July 4 , 1939 before 62 @,@ 000 fans . Cooper quickly learned the physical movements of a baseball player and developed a fluid , believable swing . The handedness issue was solved by reversing the print for certain batting scenes . The film was one of the year 's top ten pictures and received eleven Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture and Best Actor ( Cooper 's third ) . 
 Soon after the publication of Ernest Hemingway 's novel For Whom the Bell Tolls , Paramount paid $ 150 @,@ 000 for the film rights with the express intent of casting Cooper in the lead role of Robert Jordan , an American explosives expert who fights alongside the Republican loyalists during the Spanish Civil War . The original director , Cecil B. DeMille , was replaced by Sam Wood who brought in Dudley Nichols for the screenplay . After the start of principal photography in the Sierra Nevada in late 1942 , Ingrid Bergman was brought in to replace ballerina Vera <unk> as the female lead — a change supported by Cooper and Hemingway . The love scenes between Bergman and Cooper were " rapturous " and passionate . Howard Barnes in the New York Herald Tribune wrote that both actors performed with " the true stature and authority of stars " . While the film distorted the novel 's original political themes and meaning , For Whom the Bell Tolls was a critical and commercial success and received ten Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture and Best Actor ( Cooper 's fourth ) . 
 Cooper did not serve in the military during World War II due to his age and health , but like many of his colleagues , he got involved in the war effort by entertaining the troops . In June 1943 , he visited military hospitals in San Diego , and often appeared at the Hollywood Canteen serving food to the servicemen . In late 1943 , Cooper undertook a 23 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 37 @,@ 000 km ) tour of the South West Pacific with actresses Una Merkel and Phyllis Brooks , and accordionist Andy <unk> . Traveling on a B @-@ 24A Liberator bomber , the group toured the Cook Islands , Fiji , New Caledonia , Queensland , Brisbane — where General Douglas MacArthur told Cooper he was watching Sergeant York in a Manila theater when Japanese bombs began falling — New Guinea , Jayapura , and throughout the Solomon Islands . The group often shared the same sparse living conditions and K @-@ rations as the troops . Cooper met with the servicemen and women , visited military hospitals , introduced his attractive colleagues , and participated in occasional skits . The shows concluded with Cooper 's moving recitation of Lou Gehrig 's farewell speech . When he returned to the United States , he visited military hospitals throughout the country . Cooper later called his time with the troops the " greatest emotional experience " of his life . 
 = = = Mature roles , 1944 – 52 = = = 
 In 1944 , Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille 's wartime adventure film The Story of Dr. Wassell with Laraine Day — his third movie with the director . In the film , Cooper plays American doctor and missionary Corydon M. Wassell , who leads a group of wounded sailors through the jungles of Java to safety . Despite receiving poor reviews , Dr. Wassell was one of the top @-@ grossing films of the year . With his Goldwyn and Paramount contracts now concluded , Cooper decided to remain independent and formed his own production company , International Pictures , with Leo Spitz , William Goetz , and Nunnally Johnson . The fledgling studio 's first offering was Sam Wood 's romantic comedy Casanova Brown with Teresa Wright , about a man who learns his soon @-@ to @-@ be ex @-@ wife is pregnant with his child , just as he is about to marry another woman . The film received poor reviews , with the New York Daily News calling it " delightful nonsense " , and Bosley Crowther , in The New York Times , criticizing Cooper 's " somewhat obvious and ridiculous clowning " . The film was barely profitable . In 1945 , Cooper starred in and produced Stuart Heisler 's Western comedy Along Came Jones with Loretta Young for International . In this lighthearted parody of his past heroic image , Cooper plays comically inept cowboy Melody Jones who is mistaken for a ruthless killer . Audiences embraced Cooper 's character , and the film was one of the top box @-@ office pictures of the year — a testament to Cooper 's still vital audience appeal . It was also International 's biggest financial success during its brief history before being sold off to Universal Studios in 1946 . 
 Cooper 's career during the post @-@ war years drifted in new directions as American society was changing . While he still played conventional heroic roles , his films now relied less on his heroic screen persona and more on novel stories and exotic settings . In November 1945 , Cooper appeared in Sam Wood 's nineteenth century period drama Saratoga Trunk with Ingrid Bergman , about a Texas cowboy and his relationship with a beautiful fortune @-@ hunter . Filmed in early 1943 , the movie 's release was delayed for two years due to the increased demand for war movies . Despite poor reviews , Saratoga Trunk did well at the box office and became one of the top money @-@ makers of the year for Warner Bros. Cooper 's only film in 1946 was Fritz Lang 's romantic thriller Cloak and Dagger , about a mild @-@ mannered physics professor recruited by the OSS during the last years of World War II to investigate the German atomic bomb program . Playing a part loosely based on physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer , Cooper was uneasy with the role and was unable to convey the " inner sense " of the character . The film received poor reviews and was a box @-@ office failure . In 1947 , Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille 's epic adventure film Unconquered with Paulette Goddard , about a Virginia militiaman who defends settlers against an unscrupulous gun trader and hostile Indians on the Western frontier during the eighteenth century . The film received mixed reviews , but even long @-@ time DeMille critic James Agee acknowledged the picture had " some authentic flavor of the period " . This last of four films made with DeMille was Cooper 's most lucrative , earning the actor over $ 300 @,@ 000 in salary and percentage of profits . Unconquered would be his last unqualified box @-@ office success for the next five years . 
 In 1948 , after making Leo McCarey 's romantic comedy Good Sam , Cooper sold his company to Universal Studios and signed a long @-@ term contract with Warner Bros. that gave him script and director approval and a guaranteed $ 295 @,@ 000 per picture . His first film under the new contract was King Vidor 's drama The Fountainhead ( 1949 ) with Patricia Neal and Raymond Massey . In the film , Cooper plays an idealistic and uncompromising architect who struggles to maintain his integrity and individualism in the face of societal pressures to conform to popular standards . Based on the novel by Ayn Rand who also wrote the screenplay , the film reflects her Objectivist philosophy and attacks the concepts of altruism and collectivism while promoting the virtues of selfishness and individualism . For most critics , Cooper was hopelessly miscast in the role of Howard Roark . In his review for The New York Times , Bosley Crowther concluded he was " Mr. Deeds out of his element " . Cooper returned to his element in Delmer Daves ' war drama Task Force ( 1949 ) , about a retiring rear admiral who reminisces about his long career as a naval aviator and his role in the development of aircraft carriers . Cooper 's performance and the Technicolor newsreel footage supplied by the United States Navy made the film one of Cooper 's most popular during this period . In the next two years , Cooper made four poorly received films : Michael Curtiz ' period drama Bright Leaf ( 1950 ) , Stuart Heisler 's Western melodrama Dallas ( 1950 ) , Henry Hathaway 's wartime comedy You 're in the Navy Now ( 1951 ) , and Raoul Walsh 's Western action film Distant Drums ( 1951 ) . 
 Cooper 's most important film during the post @-@ war years was Fred Zinnemann 's Western drama High Noon ( 1952 ) with Grace Kelly for United Artists . In the film , Cooper plays retiring sheriff Will Kane who is preparing to leave town on his honeymoon when he learns that an outlaw he helped put away and his three henchmen are returning to seek their revenge . Unable to gain the support of the frightened townspeople , and abandoned by his young bride , Kane nevertheless stays to face the outlaws alone . During the filming , Cooper was in poor health and in considerable pain from stomach ulcers . His ravaged face and discomfort in some scenes " photographed as self @-@ doubt " , according to biographer Hector Arce , and contributed to the effectiveness of his performance . Considered one of the first " adult " Westerns for its theme of moral courage , High Noon received enthusiastic reviews for its artistry , with Time magazine placing it in the ranks of Stagecoach and The Gunfighter . Bosley Crowther , in The New York Times , wrote that Cooper was " at the top of his form " , and John McCarten , in The New Yorker , wrote that Cooper was never more effective . The film earned $ 3 @.@ 75 million in the United States and $ 18 million worldwide . Following the example of his friend James Stewart , Cooper accepted a lower salary in exchange for a percent of the profits , and ended up making $ 600 @,@ 000 . Cooper 's understated performance was widely praised , and earned him his second Academy Award for Best Actor . 
 = = = Later films , 1953 – 61 = = = 
 After appearing in André de Toth 's Civil War drama Springfield Rifle ( 1952 ) — a standard Warner Bros. film that was overshadowed by the success of its predecessor — Cooper made four films outside the United States . In Mark Robson 's drama Return to Paradise ( 1953 ) , Cooper plays an American wanderer who liberates the inhabitants of a Polynesian island from the puritanical rule of a misguided pastor . Cooper endured spartan living conditions , long hours , and ill health during the three @-@ month location shoot on the island of Upolu in Western Samoa . Despite its beautiful cinematography , the film received poor reviews . Cooper 's next three films were shot in Mexico . In Hugo <unk> 's action adventure film Blowing Wild ( 1953 ) with Barbara Stanwyck , he plays a wildcatter in Mexico who gets involved with an oil company executive and his unscrupulous wife with whom he once had an affair . In 1954 , Cooper appeared in Henry Hathaway 's Western drama Garden of Evil with Susan Hayward , about three soldiers of fortune in Mexico hired to rescue a woman 's husband . That same year , he appeared in Robert Aldrich 's Western adventure Vera Cruz with Burt Lancaster . In the film , Cooper plays an American adventurer hired by Emperor Maximilian I to escort a countess to Vera Cruz during the Mexican Rebellion of 1866 . All of these films received poor reviews but did well at the box @-@ office . For his work in Vera Cruz , Cooper earned $ 1 @.@ 4 million in salary and percent of the gross . 
 During this period , Cooper struggled with health problems . As well as his ongoing treatment for ulcers , he suffered a severe shoulder injury during the filming of Blowing Wild when he was hit by metal fragments from a dynamited oil well . During the filming of Vera Cruz , he reinjured his hip falling from a horse , and was burned when Lancaster fired his rifle too close and the wadding from the blank shell pierced his clothing . In 1955 , he appeared in Otto Preminger 's biographical war drama The Court @-@ Martial of Billy Mitchell , about the World War I general who tried to convince government officials of the importance of air power , and was court @-@ martialed after blaming the War Department for a series of air disasters . Some critics felt that Cooper was miscast , and that his dull , tight @-@ lipped performance did not reflect Mitchell 's dynamic and caustic personality . In 1956 , Cooper was more effective playing a gentle Indiana Quaker in William Wyler 's Civil War drama Friendly Persuasion with Dorothy McGuire . Like Sergeant York and High Noon , the film addresses the conflict between religious pacifism and civic duty . For his performance , Cooper received his second Golden Globe nomination for Best Motion Picture Actor . The film was nominated for six Academy Awards , was awarded the Palme d 'Or at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival , and went on to earn $ 8 million worldwide . 
 In 1956 , Cooper traveled to France to make Billy Wilder 's romantic comedy Love in the Afternoon with Audrey Hepburn and Maurice Chevalier . In the film , Cooper plays a middle @-@ aged American playboy in Paris who pursues and eventually falls in love with a much younger woman . Despite receiving some positive reviews — including from Bosley Crowther who praised the film 's " charming performances " — most reviewers concluded that Cooper was simply too old for the part . While audiences may not have welcomed seeing Cooper 's heroic screen image tarnished by his playing an aging roué trying to seduce an innocent young girl , the film was still a box @-@ office success . The following year , Cooper appeared in Philip Dunne 's romantic drama Ten North Frederick In the film , which was based on the novel by John O 'Hara , Cooper plays an attorney whose life is ruined by a double @-@ crossing politician and his own secret affair with his daughter 's young roommate . While Cooper brought " conviction and controlled anguish " to his performance , according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers , it was not enough to save what Bosley Crowther called a " hapless film " . 
 Despite his ongoing health problems and several operations for ulcers and hernias , Cooper continued to work in action films . In 1958 , he appeared in Anthony Mann 's Western drama Man of the West ( 1958 ) with Julie London and Lee J. Cobb , about a reformed outlaw and killer who is forced to confront his violent past when the train he is riding in is held up by his former gang members . The film has been called Cooper 's " most pathological Western " , with its themes of impotent rage , sexual humiliation , and sadism . According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers , Cooper , who struggled with moral conflicts in his personal life , " understood the anguish of a character striving to retain his integrity ... [ and ] brought authentic feeling to the role of a tempted and tormented , yet essentially decent man " . Mostly ignored by critics at the time , the film is now well @-@ regarded by film scholars and is considered Cooper 's last great film . 
 After his Warner Bros. contract ended , Cooper formed his own production company , Baroda Productions , and made three unusual films in 1959 about redemption . In Delmer Daves ' Western drama The Hanging Tree , Cooper plays a frontier doctor who saves a criminal from a lynch mob , and later tries to exploit his sordid past . Cooper delivered a " powerful and persuasive " performance of an emotionally scarred man whose need to dominate others is transformed by the love and sacrifice of a woman . In Robert Rossen 's historical adventure They Came to <unk> with Rita Hayworth , he plays an army officer who is found guilty of cowardice and assigned the degrading task of recommending soldiers for the Medal of Honor during the Pancho Villa Expedition of 1916 . While Cooper received positive reviews , Variety and Films in Review felt he was too old for the part . In Michael Anderson 's action drama The Wreck of the Mary Deare with Charlton Heston , Cooper plays a disgraced merchant marine officer who decides to stay aboard his sinking cargo ship in order to prove the vessel was deliberately scuttled and to redeem his good name . Like its two predecessors , the film was physically demanding . Cooper , who was a trained scuba diver , did most of his own underwater scenes . Biographer Jeffrey Meyers observed that in all three roles , Cooper effectively conveyed the sense of lost honor and desire for redemption — what Joseph Conrad in Lord Jim called the " struggles of an individual trying to save from the fire his idea of what his moral identity should be " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Cooper was formally introduced to his future wife , twenty @-@ year @-@ old New York debutante Veronica Balfe , on Easter Sunday 1933 at a party given by her uncle , art director Cedric Gibbons . Called " Rocky " by her family and friends , she grew up on Park Avenue and attended finishing schools . Her stepfather was Wall Street tycoon Paul Shields . Cooper and Rocky were quietly married at her parents ' Park Avenue residence on December 15 , 1933 . According to his friends , the marriage had a positive impact on Cooper , who turned away from past indiscretions and took control of his life . Athletic and a lover of the outdoors , Rocky shared many of Cooper 's interests , including riding , skiing , and skeet @-@ shooting . She organized their social life , and her wealth and social connections provided Cooper access to New York high society . Cooper and his wife owned homes in the Los Angeles area in Encino ( 1933 – 36 ) , Brentwood ( 1936 – 53 ) , and Holmby Hills ( 1954 – 61 ) , and owned a vacation home in Aspen , Colorado ( 1949 – 53 ) . 
 Cooper 's daughter Maria Veronica Cooper was born on September 15 , 1937 . By all accounts , he was a patient and affectionate father , teaching Maria to ride a bicycle , play tennis , ski , and ride horses . Sharing many of her parents ' interests , she accompanied them on their travels and was often photographed with them . Like her father , she developed a love for art and drawing . As a family they vacationed together in Sun Valley , Idaho , spent time at Rocky 's parents ' country house in Southampton , New York , and took frequent trips to Europe . Cooper and Rocky were legally separated on May 16 , 1951 , when Cooper moved out of their home . For over two years , they maintained a fragile and uneasy family life with their daughter . Cooper moved back into their home in November 1953 , and their formal reconciliation occurred in February 1954 . 
 = = = Romantic relationships = = = 
 Prior to his marriage , Cooper had a series of romantic relationships with leading actresses , beginning in 1927 with Clara Bow , who advanced his career by helping him get one of his first leading roles in Children of Divorce . Bow was also responsible for getting Cooper a role in Wings , which generated an enormous amount of fan mail for the young actor . In 1928 , he had a relationship with another experienced actress , Evelyn Brent , whom he met while filming Beau Sabreur . In 1929 , while filming The Wolf Song , Cooper began an intense affair with Lupe Vélez , which was the most important romance of his early life . During their two years together , Cooper also had brief affairs with Marlene Dietrich while filming Morocco in 1930 and with Carole Lombard while making I Take This Woman in 1931 . During his year abroad in 1931 – 32 , Cooper had an affair with the married Countess Dorothy di Frasso , while staying at her Villa Madama in Rome . 
 After he was married in December 1933 , Cooper remained faithful to his wife until the summer of 1942 , when he began an affair with Ingrid Bergman during the production of For Whom the Bell Tolls . Their relationship lasted through the completion of filming Saratoga Trunk in June 1943 . In 1948 , after finishing work on The Fountainhead , Cooper began an affair with actress Patricia Neal , his co @-@ star . At first they kept their affair discreet , but eventually it became an open secret in Hollywood , and Cooper 's wife confronted him with the rumors , which he admitted were true . He also confessed that he was in love with Neal , and continued to see her . Cooper and his wife were legally separated in May 1951 , but he did not seek a divorce . Neal ended their relationship in late December 1951 . During his three @-@ year separation from his wife , Cooper had affairs with Grace Kelly , Lorraine Chanel , and Gisèle Pascal . 
 = = = Friendships , interests , and character = = = 
 For me the really satisfying things I do are offered me , free , for nothing . Ever go out in the fall and do a little hunting ? See the frost on the grass and the leaves turning ? Spend a day in the hills alone , or with good companions ? Watch a sunset and a moonrise ? Notice a bird in the wind ? A stream in the woods , a storm at sea , cross the country by train , and catch a glimpse of something beautiful in the desert , or the farmlands ? Free to everybody ... 
 Cooper 's twenty @-@ year friendship with Ernest Hemingway began at Sun Valley in October 1940 . The previous year , Hemingway drew upon Cooper 's image when he created the character of Robert Jordan for the novel For Whom the Bell Tolls . The two shared a passion for the outdoors , and for years they hunted duck and pheasant , and skied together in Sun Valley . Both men admired the work of Rudyard Kipling — Cooper kept a copy of the poem " If — " in his dressing room — and retained as adults Kipling 's sense of boyish adventure . As well as admiring Cooper 's hunting skills and knowledge of the outdoors , Hemingway believed his character matched his screen persona , once telling a friend , " If you made up a character like Coop , nobody would believe it . He 's just too good to be true . " They saw each other often , and their friendship remained strong through the years . 
 Cooper 's social life generally centered on sports , outdoor activities , and dinner parties with his family and friends from the film industry , including directors Henry Hathaway , Howard Hawks , William Wellman , and Fred Zinnemann , and actors Joel McCrea , James Stewart , Barbara Stanwyck , and Robert Taylor . As well as hunting , Cooper enjoyed riding , fishing , skiing , and later in life , scuba diving . He never abandoned his early love for art and drawing , and over the years , he and his wife acquired a private collection of modern paintings , including works by Pierre @-@ Auguste Renoir , Paul Gauguin , and Georgia O 'Keeffe . Cooper owned several works by Pablo Picasso , whom he met in 1956 . Cooper had a lifelong passion for automobiles , with a collection that included a 1930 Duesenberg . 
 Cooper was naturally reserved and introspective , and loved the solitude of outdoor activities . Not unlike his screen persona , his communication style frequently consisted of long silences with an occasional " yup " and " shucks " . He once said , " If others have more interesting things to say than I have , I keep quiet . " According to his friends , Cooper could also be an articulate , well @-@ informed conversationalist on topics ranging from horses , guns , and Western history to film production , sports cars , and modern art . He was modest and unpretentious , frequently downplaying his acting abilities and career accomplishments . His friends and colleagues described him as charming , well @-@ mannered , and thoughtful , with a lively boyish sense of humor . Cooper maintained a sense of propriety throughout his career and never misused his movie star status — never sought special treatment or refused to work with a director or leading lady . His close friend Joel McCrea recalled , " Coop never fought , he never got mad , he never told anybody off that I know of ; everybody that worked with him liked him . " 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Cooper was a conservative Republican like his father , and voted for Calvin Coolidge in 1924 , Herbert Hoover in 1928 and 1932 , and campaigned for Wendell Willkie in 1940 . When Franklin D. Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented fourth presidential term in 1944 , Cooper campaigned for Thomas E. Dewey and criticized Roosevelt for being dishonest and adopting " foreign " ideas . In a radio address that he paid for himself just prior to the election , Cooper said , " I disagree with the New Deal belief that the America all of us love is old and worn @-@ out and finished — and has to borrow foreign notions that don 't even seem to work any too well where they come from ... Our country is a young country that just has to make up its mind to be itself again . " He also attended a Republican rally at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum that drew 93 @,@ 000 Dewey supporters . 
 Cooper was one of the founding members of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals , a conservative organization dedicated , according to its statement of principles , to preserving the " American way of life " and opposing communism and fascism . The organization — whose membership included Walt Disney , Clark Gable , Ronald Reagan , Barbara Stanwyck , and John Wayne — pressured the United States Congress to investigate communist influence in the motion picture industry . On October 23 , 1947 , Cooper appeared before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) and was asked if he had observed any " communistic influence " in Hollywood . Cooper recounted statements he 'd heard suggesting that the Constitution was out of date and that Congress was an unnecessary institution — comments that Cooper said he found to be " very un @-@ American " . He also testified that he had rejected several scripts because he thought they were " tinged with communist ideas " . Unlike some other witnesses , Cooper did not name any individuals during his testimony . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Cooper was baptized in the Anglican Church in December 1911 in England , and was raised in the Episcopal Church in the United States . While he was never an observant Christian during his adult life , many of his friends believed he had a deeply spiritual side . 
 On June 26 , 1953 , Cooper accompanied his wife and daughter , who were devout Catholics , to Rome , where they had an audience with Pope Pius XII . Cooper and his wife were still separated at the time , but the papal visit marked the beginning of their gradual reconciliation . In the coming years , Cooper contemplated his mortality and his personal behavior , and started discussing Catholicism with his family . He began attending church with them regularly , and met with their parish priest , who offered Cooper spiritual guidance . After several months of study , Cooper was baptized as a Roman Catholic on April 9 , 1959 , before a small group of family and friends at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills . 
 = = Final year and death = = 
 On April 14 , 1960 , Cooper underwent surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston for prostate cancer after it had metastasized to his colon . He fell ill again on May 31 and underwent further surgery at Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles in early June to remove a malignant tumor from his large intestine . After recuperating over the summer , Cooper took his family on vacation to the south of France before traveling to England in the fall to make his last film , The Naked Edge . In December 1960 , he worked on the NBC television documentary The Real West , which was part of the company 's Project 20 series . On December 27 , his wife learned from their family doctor that Cooper 's cancer had spread to his lungs and bones and was inoperable . His family decided not to tell him immediately . 
 On January 9 , 1961 , Cooper attended a dinner given in his honor at the Friars Club hosted by Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin . Attended by many of his industry friends , the dinner concluded with a brief speech by Cooper who said , " The only achievement I 'm proud of is the friends I 've made in this community . " In mid @-@ January , Cooper took his family to Sun Valley for their last vacation together . Cooper and Hemingway hiked through the snow together for the last time . On February 27 , after returning to Los Angeles , Cooper learned that he was dying . He later told his family , " We 'll pray for a miracle ; but if not , and that 's God 's will , that 's all right too . " On April 17 , Cooper watched the Academy Awards ceremony on television and saw his good friend James Stewart , who had presented Cooper with his first Oscar years earlier , accept on Cooper 's behalf an honorary award for lifetime achievement — his third Oscar . Speaking to Cooper , an emotional Stewart said , " Coop , I want you to know I 'll get it to you right away . With it goes all the friendship and affection and the admiration and deep respect of all of us . We 're very , very proud of you , Coop . " The following day , newspapers around the world announced the news that Cooper was dying . In the coming days he received numerous messages of appreciation and encouragement , including telegrams from Pope John XXIII and Queen Elizabeth II , and a phone call from President John F. Kennedy . 
 On May 4 , Cooper , in his last public statement , said , " I know that what is happening is God 's will . I am not afraid of the future . " He received the last rites on May 12 . Cooper died quietly the following day , Saturday , May 13 , 1961 , at 12 : 47 pm , less than a week after his sixtieth birthday . A requiem mass was held on May 18 at the Church of the Good Shepherd , attended by many of Cooper 's friends , including James Stewart , Henry Hathaway , Joel McCrea , Audrey Hepburn , Jack L. Warner , John Ford , John Wayne , Edward G. Robinson , Frank Sinatra , Dean Martin , Randolph Scott , Walter Pidgeon , Bob Hope and Marlene Dietrich . Cooper was buried in the Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes in Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City , California . In May 1974 , after his family relocated to New York , Cooper 's remains were exhumed and reburied in Sacred Hearts Cemetery in Southampton . His grave is marked by a three @-@ ton boulder from a Montauk quarry . 
 = = Acting style and reputation = = 
 Naturalness is hard to talk about , but I guess it boils down to this : You find out what people expect of your type of character and then you give them what they want . That way , an actor never seems unnatural or affected no matter what role he plays . 
 Cooper 's acting style consisted of three essential characteristics : his ability to project elements of his own personality onto the characters he portrayed , to appear natural and authentic in his roles , and to underplay and deliver restrained performances calibrated for the camera and the screen . Acting teacher Lee Strasberg once observed : " The simplest examples of Stanislavsky 's ideas are actors such as Gary Cooper , John Wayne , and Spencer Tracy . They try not to act but to be themselves , to respond or react . They refuse to say or do anything they feel not to be consonant with their own characters . " Film director François Truffaut ranked Cooper among " the greatest actors " because of his ability to deliver great performances " without direction " . This ability to project elements of his own personality onto his characters produced a continuity across his performances to the extent that critics and audiences were convinced that he was simply " playing himself " . 
 Cooper 's ability to project his personality onto his characters played an important part in his appearing natural and authentic on screen . Actor John Barrymore said of Cooper , " This fellow is the world 's greatest actor . He does without effort what the rest of us spend our lives trying to learn — namely , to be natural . " Charles Laughton , who played opposite Cooper in Devil and the Deep agreed , " In truth , that boy hasn 't the least idea how well he acts ... He gets at it from the inside , from his own clear way of looking at life . " William Wyler , who directed Cooper in two films , called him a " superb actor , a master of movie acting " . In his review of Cooper 's performance in The Real Glory , Graham Greene wrote , " Sometimes his lean photogenic face seems to leave everything to the lens , but there is no question here of his not acting . Watch him inoculate the girl against cholera — the casual jab of the needle , and the dressing slapped on while he talks , as though a thousand arms had taught him where to stab and he doesn 't have to think anymore . " 
 Cooper 's style of underplaying before the camera surprised many of his directors and fellow actors . Even in his earliest feature films , he recognized the camera 's ability to pick up slight gestures and facial movements . Commenting on Cooper 's performance in Sergeant York , director Howard Hawks observed , " He worked very hard and yet he didn 't seem to be working . He was a strange actor because you 'd look at him during a scene and you 'd think ... this isn 't going to be any good . But when you saw the rushes in the projection room the next day you could read in his face all the things he 'd been thinking . " Sam Wood , who directed Cooper in four films , had similar observations about Cooper 's performance in Pride of the Yankees , noting , " What I thought was underplaying turned out to be just the right approach . On the screen he 's perfect , yet on the set you 'd swear it 's the worst job of acting in the history of motion pictures . " His fellow actors also admired his abilities as an actor . Commenting on her two films playing opposite Cooper , actress Ingrid Bergman concluded , " The personality of this man was so enormous , so overpowering — and that expression in his eyes and his face , it was so delicate and so underplayed . You just didn 't notice it until you saw it on the screen . I thought he was marvelous ; the most underplaying and the most natural actor I ever worked with . " 
 = = Career assessment and legacy = = 
 Cooper 's career spanned thirty @-@ six years , from 1925 to 1961 . During that time , he appeared in eighty @-@ four feature films in a leading role . He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era to the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood . His natural and authentic acting style appealed powerfully to both men and women , and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres , including Westerns , war films , adventure films , drama films , crime films , romance films , comedy films , and romantic comedy films . He appeared on the Motion Picture Herald exhibitor 's poll of top ten film personalities for twenty @-@ three consecutive years , from 1936 to 1958 . According to Quigley 's annual poll , Cooper was one of the top money @-@ making stars for eighteen years , appearing in the top ten in 1936 – 37 , 1941 – 49 , and 1951 – 57 . He topped the list in 1953 . In Quigley 's list of all @-@ time money @-@ making stars , Cooper is listed fourth , after John Wayne , Clint Eastwood , and Tom Cruise . At the time of his death , it was estimated that his films grossed well over $ 200 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 58 billion in 2015 ) . 
 In over half of his feature films , Cooper portrayed Westerners , soldiers , pilots , sailors , and explorers — all men of action . In the rest he played a wide range of characters , included doctors , professors , artists , architects , clerks , and baseball players . Cooper 's heroic screen image changed with each period of his career . In his early films , he played the young naive hero sure of his moral position and trusting in the triumph of simple virtues ( The Virginian ) . After becoming a major star , his Western screen persona was replaced by a more cautious hero in adventure films and dramas ( A Farewell to Arms ) . During the height of his career , from 1936 to 1943 , he played a new type of hero — a champion of the common man willing to sacrifice himself for others ( Mr. Deeds , Meet John Doe , and For Whom the Bell Tolls ) . In the post @-@ war years , Cooper attempted broader variations on his screen image , which now reflected a hero increasingly at odds with the world who must face adversity alone ( The Fountainhead and High Noon ) . In his final films , Cooper 's hero rejects the violence of the past , and seeks to reclaim lost honor and find redemption ( Friendly Persuasion and Man of the West ) . The screen persona he developed and sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero — a tall , handsome , and sincere man of steadfast integrity who emphasized action over intellect , and combined the heroic qualities of the romantic lover , the adventurer , and the common man . 
 On February 6 , 1960 , Cooper was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to the film industry . He was also awarded a star on the sidewalk outside the Ellen Theater in Bozeman , Montana . On May 6 , 1961 , he was awarded the French Order of Arts and Letters in recognition of his significant contribution to the arts . On July 30 , 1961 , he was posthumously awarded the David di Donatello Special Award in Italy for his career achievements . In 1966 , he was inducted into the Hall of Great Western Performers at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City . The American Film Institute ( AFI ) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the 25 male stars of classic Hollywood . Three of his characters — Will Kane , Lou Gehrig , and Sergeant York — made AFI 's list of the one hundred greatest heroes and villains , all of them as heroes . His Lou Gehrig line , " Today , I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth . " , is ranked by AFI as the thirty @-@ eighth greatest movie quote of all time . More than a half century after his death , Cooper 's enduring legacy , according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers , is his image of the ideal American hero preserved in his film performances . Charlton Heston once observed , " He projected the kind of man Americans would like to be , probably more than any actor that 's ever lived . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 The following is a list of feature films in which Cooper appeared in a leading role . 
 = Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In Theater Restaurant = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In Theater Restaurant is a theme restaurant at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , one of the four main theme parks at Walt Disney World in Bay Lake , Florida , United States . Established in May 1991 , the restaurant is modeled after a 1950s drive @-@ in theater . Walt Disney Imagineering designed the booths to resemble convertibles of the period , and some servers act as carhops while wearing roller skates . While eating , guests watch a large projection screen displaying film clips from such 1950s and 1960s films as Frankenstein Meets the Space Monster , Plan 9 from Outer Space , and Attack of the 50 Foot Woman . 
 The restaurant serves traditional cuisine of the United States . Popcorn functions as a complimentary hors d 'oeuvre . Initially , the menu listed items with themed names , such as " Tossed in Space " ( garden salad ) , " The Cheesecake that Ate New York " , and " Attack of the Killer Club Sandwich " , but these playful names were later altered so that they now describe the dishes in a more standard and straightforward manner . 
 In 1991 , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In opened along with nineteen other new Walt Disney World attractions marking the complex 's twentieth anniversary . By the following year , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In was serving upwards of 2 @,@ 200 people daily during peak periods , making it the park 's most popular restaurant . Thai movie theater operator EGV Entertainment opened the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe in Bangkok in 2003 , in a very similar style to the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In has received mixed reviews . USA Today 's list of the best restaurants in American amusement parks ranks the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In fifteenth , but many reviewers rate it more highly for its atmosphere than for its cuisine . Ed Bumgardner of the Winston @-@ Salem Journal wrote that the food is more expensive than it is worth , specifically calling the restaurant 's roast beef sandwich both delicious and a ripoff . In their book Vegetarian Walt Disney World and Greater Orlando , Susan Shumaker and Than Saffel call the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In " the wackiest dining experience in any Disney park " . 
 = = History = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , located on Commissary Lane across from Star Tours and adjacent to ABC Commissary , opened in May 1991 as one of the twenty new attractions opened at Walt Disney World to mark the complex 's twentieth anniversary . The restaurant was created with a strong emphasis on theme , in emulation of the 50 's Prime Time Café , which had opened two years prior . Disney hoped that the focus on theme would bring the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In the level of success that had been garnered by the 50 's Prime Time Café . Within five weeks of opening , it was serving between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 meals on a daily basis , just as the 50 's Prime Time Café was doing . A year after opening , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In had become the most popular restaurant in the park , serving more than 2 @,@ 200 people per day at peak periods . Starting from its earliest days , the restaurant equipped its servers with point of sale mobile devices that relayed orders to a printer in the kitchen , which was considered at the time to be in keeping with the science fiction theme because the technology had been developed shortly prior . 
 In 2003 , there were twenty character meals offered at Walt Disney World , during which actors portraying various Disney characters would interact with guests while they ate at the parks ' restaurants , and Disney was in the process of increasing the presence of costumed characters in the parks at the time . Nonetheless , Minnie Mouse character meals held at Hollywood & Vine were discontinued that year , and Robert Johnson of the Orlando Sentinel partially attributed this cancellation to competition from the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , which he said " almost always has a line of customers waiting " . 
 = = Theme = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is modeled after a 1950s drive @-@ in theater . The entrance is made to look like a box office , and guests can walk from there along a tall fence to the dining room , where guests sit at formica countertops in booths made to look like convertibles from the 1940s and 1950s . These booths were designed by Walt Disney Imagineering and are made of fiberglass with much chrome plating . The cars have whitewall tires , and speakers are mounted on poles next to each car . The license plates are dated from 1955 , and each convertible seats four people , although these mock vehicles were initially six @-@ seaters when the restaurant first opened . There are six picnic tables near the back of the room that are only used when the rest of the restaurant is full and there are guests who are willing to forego the experience of sitting in the cars . All guests who make reservations are seated in the cars , although this was not the case the year the restaurant first opened . The restaurant has a total seating capacity of 260 . 
 Some of the servers at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In wear roller skates , acting as carhops , while others improvise characters such as a police officer ostensibly in search of people who have sneaked into the theater without paying . The dining room is dark and air @-@ conditioned , and measures 8 @,@ 400 square feet ( 780 m2 ) . The ceiling simulates a night sky replete with twinkling stars made from optical fibers . There is the facade of a snack counter at the back of the room , behind which is the kitchen . The upper walls of the dining room display a cyclorama of Southern California as seen over a fence . 
 While eating at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , guests watch film clips from 1950s and 1960s science fiction films , B horror films , monster movies , pseudo @-@ documentaries , bizarre newsreels , and animated cartoons , all on a loop that lasts 47 minutes . The film clips are taken from such films as The Blob , Frankenstein Meets the Space Monster , Teenagers from Outer Space , The Amazing Colossal Man , Plan 9 from Outer Space , Invasion of the Saucer Men , and Cat @-@ Women of the Moon . The original Attack of the 50 Foot Woman trailer is also included . The clips are shown on a large projection screen . During Star Wars Weekends , a special breakfast is offered called the Star Wars Dine @-@ In Galactic Breakfast , during which guests can interact with Star Wars characters and watch clips from the Star Wars films . 
 = = Food = = 
 At the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , lunch guests stay for an average of fifty minutes and dinner guests for an average of just longer than an hour , with lunch and dinner guests being served their food on average five and ten minutes after ordering respectively . The restaurant participates in the Disney Dining Plan . Meals are served starting at 10 : 30 a.m. on Sundays and Wednesdays , and starting at 11 : 00 a.m. every other day of the week . The restaurant closes each day at the same time that the park does , which is in the late evening . The menu is the same all day , without a distinction between lunch and dinner . A full bar service is available , and there is also a limited wine selection . 
 Food selection at the restaurant comes from the traditional cuisine of the United States . Popcorn is served as a free hors d 'oeuvre . Other food items include milkshakes , hot fudge sundaes , seafood salad , turkey sloppy joes , fried pickles , St. Louis @-@ style barbecue ribs , beef @-@ and @-@ blue @-@ cheese salads , sautéed shrimp with <unk> , French fries , cucumber salads , Buffalo wings , Boca Burgers , <unk> , and steaks . Drinks include souvenir phosphorescent ice cubes . The desserts are served in larger portions than are customary elsewhere . There are vegetarian options . The chefs at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In sometimes cater for special requests in advance . The cookbook Delicious Disney Just for Kids contains a recipe for the BLT soup served at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . 
 Items in the restaurant 's menu used to have themed names , such as " The Galactic Grill " ( triple @-@ decker grilled cheese sandwich ) , " Beast from 1 @,@ 000 Islands " ( Reuben sandwich ) , " Tossed in Space " ( garden salad ) , " The Cheesecake that Ate New York " , " Attack of the Killer Club Sandwich " , " Beach Party Panic " ( fish fillet ) , " Saucer Sightings " ( rib eye steak ) , " Terror of the Tides " ( broiled fish ) , and " Journey to the Center of the Pasta " ( vegetable lasagne ) , but these have since been replaced with more descriptive names . A popcorn bisque was once on the menu , but it was removed due to poor reception . 
 = = Imitation = = 
 In 2003 , EGV Entertainment , a movie theater operator in Thailand , opened the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe in Bangkok , explicitly modeling the restaurant after the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . <unk> Poolwaraluk , the company 's executive president and chief executive officer , visited the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In in 2000 , and was inspired to open a similar restaurant . He said that , while he was eating at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , the other guests seemed more interested in their food than in the film clips on the screen , and he therefore considered the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In more of a restaurant than a theater , with the film reel simply being a gimmick . Appealing to EGV 's identity as a movie theater operator , Poolwaraluk said that the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe " can probably do a better job blending the cinema and the food together and also concentrate on both of them " . Like the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In , the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe features classic cars for seating , but , instead of showing film clips on a loop , the EGV Drive @-@ in Cafe shows entire short films . 
 In 2014 , NBCUniversal opened a new Universal Orlando hotel called Cabana Bay Beach Resort , which houses the Bayliner Diner , a restaurant that borrows its premise from the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In . Both restaurants play old film footage on a loop . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In has received mixed reviews . Jack Hayes of Nation 's Restaurant News calls the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In " wacky " and " on the cutting edge of sheer dining fun " . In USA Today 's list of the sixteen best restaurants in American amusement parks , the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ranks fifteenth . Samuel Muston of The Independent writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is " memorable in the best way " . In the Evansville Courier & Press , Pete <unk> writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ranks among the most unusual of the restaurants at Disney 's Hollywood Studios . In The Unofficial Guide to Walt Disney World 2015 , Bob Sehlinger and Len Testa call the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In the most entertaining restaurant in Walt Disney World , writing that " everyone gets a kick out of this unusual dining room " . 
 Multiple reviewers have called the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In more notable for being an attraction than a food destination . One reviewer from The Guardian compares the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In to Epcot 's Coral Reef Restaurant , writing that both restaurants " are great settings " where " eating is awful " . Sehlinger and Testa consider the prices too high , and the food too simple , although they praise the Reuben sandwich and the ribs . Schultz writes that the food is simple and that some of the beers are decent . The book DK Eyewitness Travel Guide : Walt Disney World Resort & Orlando also states that the food is more expensive than it is worth . Ed Bumgardner of the Winston @-@ Salem Journal shared this opinion as well , specifically singling out the restaurant 's roast beef sandwich as a ripoff , despite calling it delicious . Peggy <unk> of the Tampa Bay Times writes that , although the food is mediocre , " Who cares ? Food is besides the point " . She goes on to argue that the prices are low , particularly for sandwiches . In Frommer 's Walt Disney World and Orlando 2012 , Laura Lea Miller expresses disappointment that the menu no longer contains the playful item names it once did . She writes positively of the atmosphere , but considers the food mediocre . In the book Walt Disney World Resort : Also Includes Seaworld and Central Florida , Corey Sandler writes that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In is " a must @-@ see eatery ... for adults and adventurous kids " and that " the food is appropriate for a drive @-@ in theater — very ordinary , but that 's not really the reason you came " . 
 Some food items at the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In have been received favorably by reviewers . Rona <unk> and Jennifer Greenhill @-@ Taylor write highly of the restaurant 's hot @-@ fudge sundaes in Fodor 's 2012 Walt Disney World . In Plan Your Walt Disney World Vacation in No Time , Douglas Ingersoll writes very positively of the milkshakes , and argues that the sandwiches and burgers are better than at the fast food restaurants in the park . A reviewer for the United Kingdom 's The Sentinel also writes positively of the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In 's milkshakes , and writes that , " if you chose to treat yourself to a good lunch in one of the Disney parks , then this is the one " . 
 Positive reviews of the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In have indicated diverse reasons for appreciating the restaurant . In Vegetarian Walt Disney World and Greater Orlando , Susan Shumaker and Than Saffel write that the restaurant has " the wackiest dining experience in any Disney park " . Shumaker and Saffel contend that the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In provides a reasonable compromise when vegetarians and non @-@ vegetarians are looking to eat together , and that it is also suitable for both large and small families with young children . The restaurant tends to be popular with children , and it is common for people who lived through the 1950s to enjoy the restaurant for its nostalgia value . Paul Schultz of the Daily News writes , " Anyone who is a fan of trashy sci @-@ fi movies of the 1950s should check [ the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In ] out " . In his book Sci @-@ Fi Movie Freak , Robert Ring calls the Sci @-@ Fi Dine @-@ In film clips " hokey " , while David Steele of The Rotarian calls them " classically awful " , and Rick <unk> of Restaurant Business Magazine calls them " campy " . 
 = The Elegance of the Hedgehog = 
 The Elegance of the Hedgehog ( French : L <unk> du hérisson ) is a novel by the French novelist and professor of philosophy Muriel Barbery . The book follows events in the life of a concierge , Renée Michel , whose deliberately concealed intelligence is uncovered by an unstable but intellectually precocious girl named Paloma Josse . Paloma is the daughter of an upper @-@ class family living in the upscale Parisian apartment building where Renée works . 
 Featuring a number of erudite characters , The Elegance of the Hedgehog is full of allusions to literary works , music , films , and paintings . It incorporates themes relating to philosophy , class consciousness , and personal conflict . The events and ideas of the novel are presented through the thoughts and reactions , interleaved throughout the novel , of two narrators , Renée and Paloma . The changes of narrator are marked by switches of typeface . In the case of Paloma , the narration takes the form of her written journal entries and other philosophical reflections ; Renée 's story is also told in the first person but more <unk> and in the present tense . 
 First released in August 2006 by Gallimard , the novel became a publishing success in France the following year , selling over two million copies . It has been translated into more than forty languages , and published in numerous countries outside France , including the United Kingdom ( Gallic Books , London ) and the United States ( Europa Editions , New York ) , and has attracted critical praise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story revolves mainly around the characters of Renée Michel and Paloma Josse , residents of an upper @-@ middle class Left Bank apartment building at 7 Rue de Grenelle – one of the most elegant streets in Paris . Divided into eight luxury apartments , all occupied by distinctly bourgeois families , the building has a courtyard and private garden . 
 The widow Renée is a concierge who has supervised the building for 27 years . She is an autodidact in literature and philosophy , but conceals it to keep her job and , she believes , to avoid the condemnation of the building 's tenants . Likewise , she wants to be alone to avoid her tenants ' curiosity . She effects this by pretending to indulge in concierge @-@ type food and low @-@ quality television , while in her back room she actually enjoys high @-@ quality food , listens to opera , and reads works by Leo Tolstoy and Edmund Husserl . Her perspective is that " [ t ] o be poor , ugly and , moreover , intelligent condemns one , in our society , to a dark and disillusioned life , a condition one ought to accept at an early age " . 
 Twelve @-@ year @-@ old Paloma lives on the fifth floor with her parents and sister whom she considers snobs . A precocious girl , she hides her intelligence to avoid exclusion at school . Dismayed by the privileged people around her , she decides that life is meaningless , and that unless she can find something worth living for , beyond the " vacuousness of bourgeois existence " , she will commit suicide on June 16 , her thirteenth birthday . Planning to burn down the apartment before dying , she also steals her mother 's pills . For the time being she journals her observations of the outside world , including her perceptions of Renée . 
 Paloma is the only tenant who suspects Renée 's refinement , and for most of the novel , the two " cross each other but don ’ t see each other " , in the words of Time Out reviewer Elisabeth Vincentelli . Although they share interests in philosophy and literature , nothing happens between them until the death of a celebrated restaurant critic who had been living upstairs . A cultured Japanese businessman named Kakuro Ozu , whom Renée and Paloma befriend , then takes a room in the same apartment building . Ozu comes to share Paloma 's fascination with Renée : that the concierge has the " same simple refinement as the hedgehog " . 
 Towards the end of the novel , Renée comes out of her internal seclusion , teaching young Paloma that not all adults pursue vanity at the expense of their intelligence and humanity . However , only shortly after Renée realizes that the beauty of life and her connections with the world makes life worth living , she dies in the same way as Roland <unk> ; she is struck down by a laundry van . This leaves Paloma and Ozu devastated but leads Paloma not to commit suicide . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Renée Michel = = = 
 Renée Michel is a 54 @-@ year @-@ old widowed concierge . She has never been to college because she considers herself to always have been poor , discreet , and of no significance . Renée , however is self @-@ taught ; she reads works of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant and Russian writer Leo Tolstoy ( and even names her cat " Leo " ) , disdains the philosophy of Edmund Husserl , adores 17th @-@ century Dutch paintings , likes Japanese art @-@ house films by Yasujirō Ozu , and listens to the music of composers Henry Purcell and Gustav Mahler . 
 Renée , who conceals her true self to conform to the lowly image of typical <unk> , introduces herself as " a widow , short , ugly , chubby " , with " <unk> on my feet and , on certain difficult mornings , it seems , the breath of a mammoth " . Her outward appearance is summarized by The Guardian reviewer Ian Samson as " prickly and <unk> " . When Paloma eventually discovers Renée 's identity , she describes the latter in her journal as having the " elegance of the hedgehog " — although like the spines of the hedgehog , she is covered in quills and prickly , within , she has in the words of the English translation of the book quoted by Viv Groskop " the same simple refinement as the hedgehog : a deceptively indolent little creature , fiercely solitary — and terribly elegant " . 
 = = = Paloma Josse = = = 
 Paloma Josse , an advanced soon to be twelve @-@ year @-@ old , belongs to one of the conventional families living in the posh apartment building where Renée works . Daughter of an important parliamentarian father ( a former government minister ) , and a Flaubert @-@ quoting mother , Paloma has a penchant for absurdism . She regards her sister 's scholarship as " cold and trivial " and deems her mother 's culture as conventional and useless . Paloma herself values Japanese works , and reads manga , haiku , and tanka . She keeps two diaries , one called " Journal of the Movement of the World " to record her observations of the world around her , and the other called " Profound Thoughts " to record her many and wide @-@ ranging reflections on art , poetry , people and herself . She is introspective , and truly kind , though she tries her best to avoid the inquisition of others . She understands many facets of the world that are unseen by others , and deeply understand the way the world works , and the many perils and pitfalls of adulthood and the many hypocrisies of modern society , and therefore resolves in not an all melodramatic way , to commit suicide . However , a drastic plot twist at the end of the tale opens to her an amazing new truth : beauty , that provides meaning to our lives . 
 = = = Minor characters = = = 
 Other characters developed by Barbery in the novel include Kakuro Ozu , the cultured Japanese businessman , and Manuela , a Portuguese cleaner . Ozu , a tenant , shares Paloma 's fascination with Renée 's masked intelligence and brings her out of her shell ( and also happens to set the entire book in forward motion ) , while Manuela is responsible for cleaning the apartments ' toilets and is Renée 's only real friend . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Style and character development = = = 
 Barbery developed the character of Renée because she was " inspired by the idea of a reserved , cultured concierge who turned stereotypes on their head and at the same time created a compelling comic effect " ; for the author , Renée " opened the door on a kind of social criticism " . In an interview with Time magazine , Barbery added that she created characters " who love the things [ she does ] , and who allowed [ her ] to celebrate that through them " . Barbery dedicates the book to her husband , Stéphane , a sociologist , with whom she wrote the book . 
 The novel 's two narrators , Renée and Paloma , alternate in each mostly short chapter , although the former dominates throughout . The novel consists of the " diaries " of the protagonists , and the heading styles and fonts change as it develops , signalling the change of the narrators ' character . 
 Most critics considered Barbery 's narrative presentation to be <unk> ; the individual chapters are more akin to essays than fiction , as The New York Times ' Caryn James expresses it , " so carefully build [ ing ] in explanations for the literary and philosophical references that she seems to be assessing what a mass audience needs " . The early pages of the novel contain a short critique by Renée on the topic of phenomenology . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Barbery incorporates several themes into the novel . References to philosophy , for instance , abound throughout , getting increasingly dense as the story progresses . Barbery confesses to having " followed a long , boring course of studies in philosophy " , and comments that " I expected it to help me understand better that which surrounds me : but it didn 't work out that way . Literature has taught me more . I was interested in exploring the bearing philosophy could really have on one 's life , and how . I wanted to illuminate this process . That 's where the desire to anchor philosophy to a story , a work of fiction , was born : to give it more meaning , make it more physically real , and render it , perhaps , even entertaining . " 
 Themes of class consciousness and conflict are also present in the book . Critics interpreted the stance the novel took against French class @-@ based discrimination and hypocrisy as quite radical , although some French critics found that this made the novel an unsubtle satire of fading social stereotypes . There are also literary allusions in the novel , referencing comic books , movies , music , and paintings . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The Elegance of the Hedgehog was first published in August 2006 under the title L <unk> du hérisson by the leading French publisher Éditions Gallimard . The initial print run of the novel was 4000 copies , but by the following year , over a million had been produced . On September 25 , 2007 , Gallimard released the fiftieth reprint of the novel . 
 The French Voice program extended help to Gallimard in the translation of the novel to other languages and publication outside France . In partnership with the PEN American Center , French Voice funds the translation and publication of up to ten contemporary French and Francophone works each year . The Elegance of the Hedgehog was one of 30 works chosen between 2005 and 2008 by the organization , spearheaded by a committee in its selection process of professional experts . 
 The novel 's translation rights have been sold to 31 countries , and it has been translated to a half @-@ dozen languages . Novelist Alison Anderson translated L <unk> du hérisson into English as The Elegance of the Hedgehog , and this version was released in September 2008 by Europa Editions . Europa is an independent press based in Italy and New York , which focuses on translated works . In the United States , it will be among French novels receiving patronage from a major American writer , as yet unspecified . In the United Kingdom , the rights were bought by Gallic Books , a publisher specializing in French translations . 
 = = Reception = = 
 An acclaimed literary work , The Elegance of the Hedgehog has been considered by critics and press alike as a publishing phenomenon . Upon the novel 's release , it had received significant support from booksellers . The novel has earned Barbery the 2007 French Booksellers Prize , the 2007 Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde Reader 's Prize , and the Prix du Rotary International in France . The Elegance of the Hedgehog has been adapted into the film Le hérisson ( 2009 ) . 
 The novel was a best @-@ seller and long @-@ seller in France , amassing sales of 1 @.@ 2 million copies in hardback alone . It stayed on the country 's best @-@ seller for 102 straight weeks from its publication , longer than American novelist Dan Brown 's best @-@ selling books . According to reviewer Viv Groskop , the philosophical element in the novel partly explains its appeal in France , where philosophy remains a compulsory subject . Anderson agreed , commenting that the novel became popular in France because it is " a story where people manage to transcend their class barriers " . The novel also received a warm response in Korea , and sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in Italy . The release of the novel helped increase the sales of Barbery 's first novel , Une <unk> . 
 A week after the novel was published in the United Kingdom , The Guardian ran an article about French best @-@ sellers published in English , focusing on The Elegance of the Hedgehog . In it , writer Alison Flood contended that " fiction in translation is not an easy sell to Brits , and French fiction is perhaps the hardest sell of all " . Promotions buyer Jonathan <unk> predicted that the novel would struggle to gain a readership in the United Kingdom because , according to him , in the UK market " the plot is what people want more than anything else " and the novel 's storyline is not its central aspect . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 The Elegance of the Hedgehog was well received by critics . In the earliest known review , for the Italian newspaper La Repubblica , Maurizio Bono writes that " [ t ] he formula that made more than half a million readers in France fall in love with [ The Elegance of the Hedgehog ] has , among other ingredients : intelligent humor , fine sentiments , an excellent literary and philosophical backdrop , taste that is sophisticated but substantial " . French magazine Elle reviewer Natalie <unk> pronounced it one of " the most exhilarating and extraordinary novels in recent years " . <unk> , however , tagged the novel 's title as " most curious and least appealing " . Praising the novel in his review for The Guardian , Ian Samson wrote that " The Elegance of the Hedgehog aspires to be great and pretends to philosophy : it is , at least , charming . " In an earlier review in the same paper , Groskop opined that the novel is a " profound but accessible book ... which elegantly treads the line between literary and commercial fiction " . She added that " clever , informative and moving , it is essentially a crash course in philosophy interwoven with a platonic love story " . A review in The Telegraph conjectured that " [ i ] f [ the novel were ] a piece of furniture , it would be an Ikea bestseller : popular , but not likely to be passed down the generations " . A review in The Times Literary Supplement went further , calling the book " pretentious and cynical , with barely any story . It reads more like a tract than a novel , but lacks even a tract ’ s certainty of purpose . The characters are problematic : most are puppets , and those that aren ’ t are stereotypes " . 
 Michael Dirda of The Washington Post complimented Barbery , saying , " Certainly , the intelligent Muriel Barbery has served readers well by giving us the gently satirical , exceptionally winning and inevitably bittersweet Elegance of the Hedgehog . " Louise McCready of The New York Observer praised Anderson 's translation of the novel as " smooth and accurate " . Caryn James of The New York Times hailed the novel as " studied yet appealing commercial hit " , adding that it " belongs to a distinct subgenre : the accessible book that flatters readers with its intellectual veneer " . Los Angeles Times ' Susan Salter Reynolds wrote that " [ The Elegance of the Hedgehog ] is a high @-@ wire performance ; its characters teeter on the surreal edge of normalcy . Their efforts to conceal their true natures , the pressures of the solitary mind , make the book hum " . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 The novel was adapted into a film The Hedgehog ( Le hérisson ) released in France in July 2009 , starring <unk> <unk> as Renée Michel , <unk> Le <unk> as Paloma Josse , and Togo Igawa as Kakuro Ozu , with a score by Gabriel Yared . The rights for the film were bought by <unk> Film and it was released by the company in America on August 19 . Its reception at festivals was positive and it won the Filmfest DC 2011 , the Best of Fest Palm Springs 2011 , the Seattle International Film Festival 2010 , and the 2010 Col @-@ <unk> Film Festival . Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times called it " Whimsical and touching ... Mona <unk> 's adaptation is wistful perfection " . Stephen Holden of The New York Times said it " suggests a sort of Gallic Harold and Maude " . 
 = The Dougy Center = 
 The Dougy Center , The National Center for Grieving Children & Families is a nonprofit organization based in Portland , Oregon that offers support groups and services to grieving children and young adults . Its peer support program and network of children 's grief services make the organization the first of its kind in the United States . 500 independent programs around the world are based on its model , more than 300 of which have staff who were trained by the organization 's staff . The Dougy Center serves 400 children and 250 adults from the Portland metropolitan area each month , free of charge . Its main building is located in the Creston @-@ Kenilworth neighborhood , and its satellite locations in Canby and Hillsboro are called The Dougy Center Walker 's House and The Dougy Center Linklater Commons , respectively . 
 The organization was founded in 1982 by Beverly Chappell , in tribute to Dougy Turno , who died of a brain tumor at age thirteen . In August 1981 , Dougy wrote a letter to Elisabeth Kübler @-@ Ross , a pioneer in near @-@ death studies , on the subject of his own death . This prompted Kübler @-@ Ross to connect Chappell with Dougy and his family , and Chappell to create support groups for grieving children . Since its establishment , more than 20 @,@ 000 children and their family members have received support from the organization . 
 In 2009 , an unidentified arsonist destroyed the center . Construction on a new building began in April 2012 , but in the interim , the center operated in Northeast Portland . Following $ 4 @.@ 5 million in construction costs , the current 11 @,@ 750 @-@ square @-@ foot facility opened in February 2013 in its original location . 
 = = Mission and model = = 
 The Dougy Center , established in 1982 in Portland , Oregon offers support groups and services to grieving children . It has been described as a " safe haven where grief is normal " , and is assisted by support groups , professional staff , and trained volunteer facilitators . Groups are separated by age ( for example , the " Littles " group is for children ages 3 – 5 ) and type of death . Through a peer support model , children are encouraged to talk and play with one another , sharing their experiences in the process . Its peer support program and network of children 's grief services make the organization the first of its kind in the United States . 500 independent programs around the world are based on its model , more than 300 of which have staff who were trained by the organization 's staff . Its Summer Institute offers training for the leaders of other grief support programs . 
 The center serves 400 children and 250 adults each month , focusing its efforts on children and teens ( ages 3 – 18 ) and young adults ( ages 19 – 30 ) . Since its establishment , more than 20 @,@ 000 children and their family members in the Portland metropolitan area have benefited from The Dougy Center , free of charge . Support groups are offered in Canby , Hillsboro , and Portland . In 2004 , 140 volunteer facilitators donated more than 10 @,@ 500 hours of service to the center . The organization employs a staff of around fifteen individuals , and is supported by an advisory board and board of directors . 
 The Dougy Center 's main building contains round rooms designed with " creative " tunnels , some geared towards specific age groups ; interactive features , such as slides and toys ; and an art room . There exists a popular " Volcano Room " , which contains gymnastics padding , a punching bag , and soft objects , allowing children to " express their feelings in whatever form they 're comfortable with " . 
 The organization has satellite locations in Canby and Hillsboro , called The Dougy Center Walker 's House and The Dougy Center Linklater Commons , respectively . As of 2011 , the Hillsboro location serves 45 children and teens in three groups . 
 The Dougy Center is a registered 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) nonprofit organization that has various revenue streams . According to Partnership Northwest , the center receives little government financial support and depends on donations from businesses , foundations , and individuals . In 2012 , the center received more than $ 10 @,@ 000 from <unk> Blue Cross Blue Shield and the Portland Rose Festival , via the <unk> Grand Floral Walk . Other funding sources have included a concert headlined by a local singer @-@ songwriter . The Dougy Center hosts an annual Reflection Benefit , which includes a silent auction , dinner , and live auction . Porsche <unk> have been raffled off at the benefit for fifteen years . In April 2010 , Oregon Public Broadcasting sponsored a benefit event at Oaks Amusement Park called " Cookies with Cookie Monster " , featuring a walkaround plush Cookie Monster . The event raised awareness for a program from the producers of Sesame Street called " When Families Grieve " . 
 = = History = = 
 Beverly Chappell founded The Dougy Center in 1982 in tribute to Dougy Turno , who died of a brain tumor at age thirteen . In August 1981 , Dougy wrote a letter to psychiatrist and author Elisabeth Kübler @-@ Ross , a pioneer in near @-@ death studies , on the subject of his own death . This prompted Kübler @-@ Ross to connect Chappell with Dougy and his family , and Chappell to create support groups for grieving children . Despite Kübler @-@ Ross ' early influence on the organization , The Dougy Center does not subscribe to the Kübler @-@ Ross model ( a series of five emotional stages experienced by survivors of an intimate 's death : denial , anger , bargaining , depression and acceptance ) and has even expressed skepticism about the model . 
 In June 2009 , an unidentified arsonist destroyed the center . According to Schuurman , the center suffered three arson attempts previously : a fire burned the professional building three months prior and was followed by the discovery of a soda can filled with flammable liquid , then the burning down of the center 's play structure . Building and content losses were estimated at $ 750 @,@ 000 . Business and financial records , as well as program materials were lost in the fire . The organization spent a year attempting to recover a " fair " insurance settlement , during which the building remained vacant and was subjected to vandalism ( stolen copper pipes resulted in a flooded basement ) . Deconstruction and demolition of the building began in May 2010 , following receipt of a $ 1 @.@ 2 million settlement . During the construction of the new center , which began in April 2012 , the center operated on Northeast <unk> Street near 22nd Avenue in Northeast Portland and reportedly never cancelled a single support meeting . 
 On February 2 , 2013 , the center hosted a celebration to commemorate the completion and grand opening of its new facility . The 11 @,@ 750 @-@ square @-@ foot building , located at its original site on Southeast 52nd Avenue in Portland 's Creston @-@ Kenilworth neighborhood , cost $ 4 @.@ 5 million and was designed by Scott Edwards Architecture and built by <unk> Construction . Donations and the insurance settlement supplied seventy percent of the construction costs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2013 , Schuurman was awarded the Clinical Practice Award by Association for Death Education and Counseling , one of the oldest organizations in the field of dying , death and bereavement . In 2014 , the center 's reconstructed building design earned Scott Edwards Architecture an Award of Merit ( also known as the Building Industry Community Spirit award ) at the Gold Nugget Awards , which recognize " design excellence of U.S. and international projects submitted by builders , developers , architects and land planners " . The firm also received the Against All Odds Award at the 2014 Design Excellence Awards , presented by the Oregon chapter of the International Interior Design Association . 
 = = Publications = = 
 35 Ways to Help a Grieving Child . 35 <unk> de <unk> a un niño <unk> o <unk> ( in Spanish ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 08 @-@ 0 . 
 Helping Children Cope with Death . ISBN 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 00 @-@ 5 . Cómo <unk> a un niño a <unk> una muerte ( in Spanish ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 09 @-@ 7 . 
 Helping the Grieving Student : A Guide for Teachers . 1998 . ISBN 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 01 @-@ 3 . 
 Helping Teens Cope with Death . 1999 . ISBN 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 02 @-@ 1 . <unk> para adolescents <unk> una muerte de un <unk> ( in Spanish ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 12 @-@ 7 . 
 I wish I was in a lonely meadow ( 1999 ) 
 We don 't like remembering them as a field of grass ( 1991 ) 
 What About the Kids ? Understanding Their Needs in Funeral Planning & Services . 1999 . ISBN 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 04 @-@ 8 . 
 When Death Impacts Your School : A Guide for Administrators . 2000 . ISBN 1 @-@ 890534 @-@ 05 @-@ 6 . 
 = Test Track = 
 Test Track is a slot car attraction at Epcot at the Walt Disney World Resort in Bay Lake , Florida . The ride is a simulated excursion through the rigorous testing procedures that General Motors uses to evaluate its concept cars , culminating in a high @-@ speed drive around the exterior of the attraction . It closed for refurbishment on April 5 , 2012 and re @-@ opened on December 6 , 2012 . It is now sponsored by the Chevrolet brand rather than General Motors as a whole , who sponsored the attraction from 1999 until the refurbishment . 
 Test Track soft @-@ opened to the public December 19 , 1998 after a long delay due to problems revealed during testing and changes to the ride design which prevented the ride from opening on its original date , May 1997 . Instead , the attraction officially opened on March 17 , 1999 . Test Track replaced World of Motion , though it uses the same ride building . 
 Before the 2012 refurbishment , guests rode in " test vehicles " in a GM " testing facility " and were taken through a series of assessments to illustrate how automobile prototype evaluations are conducted . The highlight of the attraction was ( and still is ) a speed trial on a track around the exterior of the Test Track building at a top speed of 64 @.@ 9 miles per hour ( 104 @.@ 6 km / h ) making it one of the fastest Disney theme park attractions ever built . After the 2012 refurbishment , guests design their own car in the Chevrolet Design Studio . Then they board a " Sim @-@ Car " and are taken through the " digital " testing ground of the " <unk> " . Throughout the ride , guests see how their designs performed in each individual test . After the ride , guests can see how their car did overall , film a commercial , and race their designs . 
 General Motors is the last @-@ surviving " original eight " Epcot sponsor while not counting <unk> and / or Innoventions ( referring to those attractions being built and opened from Epcot 's opening day 1982 until 1989 with Wonders of Life ; General Electric dropped sponsorship for Horizons in 1993 whereas Kraft also permanently terminated their sponsorship for The Land pavilion the same year thus becoming the first companies to drop sponsorship at Epcot . It was then followed by United Technologies when they yanked sponsorship of The Living Seas in 1998 . <unk> followed suit for its Wonders of Life sponsorship in 2001 , followed by both <unk> and AT & T pulling their sponsorship for Universe of Energy and Spaceship Earth in 2004 , respectively . Six years later , in 2010 , Kodak too declined to renew their sponsorship for Journey into Imagination and instead simply letting it permanently lapse owing to that company 's then @-@ bankruptcy phase ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Test Track ( March 1999 – April 2012 ) = = = 
 World of Motion was an attraction that was located in the current building of Test Track and was sponsored by General Motors . When the sponsorship expired , GM was in the process of conducting lay @-@ offs and cutbacks forcing the company to question whether or not to sign another sponsorship agreement . Upon deciding to sign another agreement , GM wanted Disney to construct a new ride ( in the location of World of Motion ) that focused specifically around their automobiles , rather than the fanciful history of transportation from the pre @-@ historic ( animal transportation ) to modern age ( automobiles , planes , etc . ) previously housed in the space . In 1976 , Disney Imagineers had visited the Milford Proving Ground ( owned by General Motors ) and later made a second trip to the facility and worked with GM to create Test Track . After numerous problems encountered during the construction of the ride , Test Track soft @-@ opened on December 19 , 1998 but didn 't officially open until March 17 , 1999 , nearly 2 years after the original scheduled opening date . 
 After World of Motion had closed on January 2 , 1996 , everything inside the ride building was removed . After , new track was constructed outside of the building which is used as the high @-@ speed test for Test Track . Work inside the building also continued at the same time . It was scheduled to open 19 months after World of Motion 's closing , in May 1997 , but after numerous problems rose , the ride opening was delayed by nearly 2 years . Also , the cars used on the ride were designed to resemble the look of a test car that is used to go through multiple safety tests . 
 Over the course of the construction of Test Track , numerous problems occurred causing delays in the ride opening . One problem that Imagineers had to overcome was that the wheels used on the ride vehicles could not stand up to the demand of the ride course and speed . This problem was resolved but a second , more severe problem caused the ride to be delayed by over a year . In order for Test Track to run with the highest hourly capacity possible , twenty @-@ nine ride vehicles would be needed . The ride programming system could only handle operating a maximum of six cars over the layout of the ride . One by one , programmers were able to get the computer system able to run twenty @-@ nine ride vehicles all at once . After these problems were resolved , Test Track soft @-@ opened to the public on December 19 , 1998 . The ride was still prone to breakdowns and didn 't officially open until March 17 , 1999 . 
 = = = Test Track Presented by Chevrolet ( December 2012 – present ) = = = 
 On January 6 , 2012 , Disney Parks announced plans to renovate Test Track during the second and third quarters of the year and re @-@ open the ride by fall 2012 . As part of the update , Test Track 's sponsor became General Motors ' Chevrolet marque instead of GM as a whole . The new additions include a pre @-@ show area where guests " design " a new car for testing in the Chevrolet Design Center , then they will board Test Track 's existing six @-@ passenger ride vehicles , to be known as " <unk> " , to see how their design fares on the Center 's driving course . The experience concludes in a renovated showroom featuring current and future Chevrolet products . Also , the ride vehicles used on the original Test Track , will remain the same but receive new " skin " . On April 27 , 2012 , Walt Disney 's social media manager Jennifer <unk> @-@ Baker released a set of concept design photos . Within the photos , it was confirmed that the ride will have 4 main tests : capability , efficiency , responsiveness , and power . The ride closed on April 15 , 2012 and soon later , barriers were placed along all walk @-@ ways leading to either the entrance or exit of the ride . Also , a musical show called " Test Track All Stars " has been added in front of the former main entrance to Test Track . The refurbished attraction first opened to guests during a soft opening on December 3 , 2012 . The grand re @-@ opening took place on December 6 , 2012 , and has since received generally mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews . 
 = = Ride overview = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2012 = = = 
 = = = = Queue = = = = 
 During the first part of the queue , guests viewed a sample repair and test shop . As guests entered the queue in the welcome center they were shown tests performed on cars and parts before being released . The queue wound by different tests for tires and car doors , an <unk> chamber for radio receivers , and an area for crash test dummies to be tested . At the end of the queue a group of guests would be brought into a briefing room where they were shown automobile testing facilities and examples of tests being performed . The host , Bill McKim ( John Michael Higgins ) told the guests that they would take part in some of these tests and also told the technician Sherrie what tests to set up . Small videos of each test were shown as he spoke . He finally told her to choose one final " surprise test , " and a video of a car crashing into a barrier was shown as a door opened for guests to enter the interior queue . 
 = = = = Ride = = = = 
 Upon reaching the end of the second queue , guests were loaded into test cars . Upon dispatching from the loading dock , the car was brought through an accelerated hill climb . Next , the car 's suspension was tested over different types of road surfaces , including German and Belgian blocks & cobblestones . Next , the car 's anti @-@ lock braking system was turned off and the car tried to navigate a course of cones , knocking many over in the process . The anti @-@ lock brakes were then turned back on and a similar cone course was navigated easily . Guests were shown a video overlay of the difference . Then , the cars were brought through 3 environmental chambers : a heat chamber , a cold chamber , and a corrosion chamber . 
 The handling of the car was then tested . It climbed a set of hills with blind turns while increasing its speed by 10 % each time . At the top , the car almost crashes into an oncoming semi @-@ truck before swerving out of the way . The car was now brought to the final test shown in the briefing room : the barrier test . The car lined up across from a barrier and began to accelerate towards it . Just before hitting the barrier a series of flashes occurred , where a picture of the guests was taken , and the barrier opened to a track outside . The car took a lap around the building with banked turns and a max speed of 64 @.@ 9 mph ( 104 @.@ 6 km / h ) . As the car returned to the loading dock , a thermal scan was taken of the guests and shown on a large screen . 
 Like many Disney attractions , Test Track exited into a themed gift shop featuring merchandise associated with the attraction . Guests could also view and purchase photos taken of their vehicle on the ride or scan their <unk> to view or purchase the photos later . There was also an area where there was a showroom of all new , prototype , or legendary GM vehicles . 
 = = = = Post Show : The Assembly Experience = = = = 
 Experience designer Bob Rogers and the design team BRC Imagination Arts , were commissioned to create the new post show experience entitled : " The Assembly Experience . " The Assembly Experience is a walk @-@ through environment , giving guest the illusion that they are on the floor of a vast automotive assembly plant . Automotive doors , seats and engines glide overhead on assembly line <unk> , while simulated automotive die @-@ press caused the floor to " rumble " as each automotive part was pressed . Video monitors provided real GM workers a chance to tell EPCOT visitors how they felt about their products and their work . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 = = = = Queue = = = = 
 The first queue uses the same area as the old but is themed to Chevrolet 's Design Studio . Riders pass by two concept cars , the Chevrolet Tru and the Chevrolet EN @-@ V. After , the standby queue leads to a section where a small model car is drawn on through projections while one of Chevrolet 's employees discusses the design process for cars . The standby queue goes by large touchscreens where riders can take tutorials on how to design a car . Once at the front of the queue , riders use their MagicBand , park ticket , or receive a white RFID card called a " design key " and wait for a set of doors to open leading into one of the two design studios . Once in the studio , riders have a set amount of time ( that depends on how busy the attraction is ) to design their own " Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle " that will be tested on the sim @-@ track . Once the time expires , riders move to the second queue which leads to the boarding area . For <unk> + riders , the queue goes directly to the main design studios . For single riders , guests use their MagicBand , ticket , or a design key to select a pre @-@ designed car from one of the four performance attributes : Capability , Efficiency , <unk> or Power . Once 30 seconds expire , riders move to the same second queue . While waiting to board the sim @-@ cars , all guests must scan their MagicBand , ticket , or design key again at the gate to upload their Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle to the sim @-@ car . 
 = = = = Ride = = = = 
 After riders board the sim @-@ cars and the seat belts are fastened , the car that they designed will undergo four different tests : capability , efficiency , responsiveness , and power . In the capability test the car first connects to OnStar , then accelerates past a rain / snow projection and skids out of control . Next , the continuing path disappears and the sim @-@ car turns around to speed up again . A short time later , the sim @-@ car makes a sharp left turn as a lighting bolt strikes . The car then passes by a futuristic city . Following the capability test , the results of which car designs scored the best in the test are displayed . The sim @-@ car then begins the efficiency test . In the first part , the sim @-@ cars are scanned for " optimum eco @-@ efficiency " . The second test performs an aero @-@ dynamic test on the vehicle . Finally , a " hyper @-@ spectrum imaging " takes place . Again , after the test is complete , the best scores are displayed . The third test , responsiveness , is next . The sim @-@ car accelerates around hairpin turns with laser @-@ projected trees . It then enters a tunnel to encounter the 18 @-@ wheeler from the original version though it is now shown with lasers . When the vehicle exits the tunnel , the results for the responsiveness test are displayed and all of the test icons are displayed . The final test is power where the sim @-@ car stops for a moment then accelerates through flashing purple arches to a wall with the ride 's logo on it leading to the outside portion of the ride . As the sim @-@ car 's speed is increased , it makes a right turn , followed by a wide left , a straight section , and one final long left turn . When the test is complete , the vehicle returns to the loading station where the next riders board . Then , guests use their MagicBand , ticket , or design key that has their Chevrolet Custom Concept Vehicle that they made in the Design Studio to play games in the " Chevrolet Showroom . " There is also a shop located at the exit like the original version of the ride . 
 In the current version , many World of Motion logos can be found throughout the attraction , such as on trash bins , murals , and also the attraction 's main sign . 
 = Street , Somerset = 
 Street is a large village and civil parish in the county of Somerset , England . The 2011 census recorded the parish as having a population of 11 @,@ 805 . It is situated on a dry spot in the Somerset Levels , at the end of the Polden Hills , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ west of Glastonbury . There is evidence of Roman occupation . Much of the history of the village is dominated by Glastonbury Abbey until the Dissolution of the Monasteries , and indeed its name comes from a 12th @-@ century causeway from Glastonbury which was built to transport local Blue Lias stone from what is now Street to rebuild the Abbey , although it had previously been known as <unk> and Lega . 
 The Society of Friends had become established there by the mid @-@ 17th century . One Quaker family , the Clarks , started a business in sheepskin rugs , woollen slippers and , later , boots and shoes . This became C & J Clark which still has its headquarters in Street , but shoes are no longer manufactured there . Instead , in 1993 , redundant factory buildings were converted to form Clarks Village , the first purpose @-@ built factory outlet in the United Kingdom . The Shoe Museum provides information about the history of Clarks and footwear manufacture in general . 
 The Clark family 's former mansion and its estate at the edge of the town are now owned by Millfield School , an independent co @-@ educational boarding school . Street is also home to Crispin School and Strode College . 
 To the north of Street is the River Brue , which marks the boundary with Glastonbury . South of Street are the Walton and Ivythorn Hills and East Polden Grasslands biological Sites of Special Scientific Interest . Street has two public swimming pools , one indoor which is part of the Strode complex , and the outdoor lido , Greenbank . Strode Theatre provides a venue for films , exhibitions and live performances . The Anglican Parish Church of The Holy Trinity dates from the 14th century and has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 The settlement 's earliest known name is <unk> , meaning the sacred enclosure of Kea , a Celtic saint . In the Domesday Book it was recorded as Strate , and also Lega , a name still used throughout the country in the modern form , " Leigh " . The centre of Street is where Lower Leigh hamlet was , and the road called Middle Leigh and the community called <unk> are to the south of the village . In the 12th century , a causeway from Glastonbury was built to transport stone from what is now Street for rebuilding Glastonbury Abbey after a fire , and Street 's name is derived from the Latin strata – a paved road . The causeway is about 100 yards ( 90 m ) north of a Roman road . 
 The parish of Street was part of the Whitley Hundred . 
 Quarries of the local blue lias stone were worked from as early as the 12th century to the end of the 19th century . It is a geological formation in southern England , part of the Lias Group . The Blue Lias consists of a sequence of limestone and shale layers , laid down in latest Triassic and early Jurassic times , between 195 and 200 million years ago . Its age corresponds to the Rhaetian to lower Sinemurian stages of the geologic timescale , thus fully including the Hettangian stage . It is the lowest of the three divisions of the Lower Jurassic period and , as such , is also given the name Lower Lias . It consists of thin blue argillaceous , or clay @-@ like , limestone . The Blue Lias contains many fossils , especially ammonites . Fossils discovered in the lias include many ichthyosaurs , one of which has been adopted as the badge of Street . There is a display of Street fossils in the Natural History Museum in London . 
 The churchyard of the Parish Church has yielded one Iron Age coin , however the origin and significance is unclear , although the Dobunni were known to have produced coins in the area . A number of Roman pottery fragments , now in the Museum of Somerset . Remains of Roman villas exist on the south edge of Street near Marshalls Elm and Ivythorn . Buried remains of a Roman road were excavated in the early 20th century on the flood @-@ plain of the river Brue between Glastonbury and Street . The parish churchyard is on the first flood @-@ free ground near the river Brue and was probably the first land to be inhabited . The form of the large churchyard suggests a lan , a sacred area of a kind that was built in the first half of the 6th century . Llan or Lan is a common place name element in Brythonic languages such as Welsh , Cornish , Breton , Cumbric , and possibly Pictish . The original meaning of llan in Welsh is " an enclosed piece of land " , but it later evolved to mean the parish surrounding a church . 
 One biography of St Gildas has the saint spending some time in Glastonbury Abbey , and moving to a site by the river , where he built a chapel to the Holy Trinity and there died . The Parish Church , now Holy Trinity , has at times been known as St Gildas ' church . Glastonbury Abbey controlled Street until the Dissolution . 
 Sharpham Park is a 300 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) historic park , approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Street , which dates back to the Bronze Age . The first known reference is a grant by King <unk> to the then <unk> in 957 . In 1191 Sharpham Park was conferred by the soon @-@ to @-@ be King John I to the Abbots of Glastonbury , who remained in possession of the park and house until the dissolution of the monasteries in 1539 . From 1539 to 1707 the park was owned by the Duke of Somerset , Sir Edward Seymour , brother of Queen Jane ; the Thynne family of Longleat , and the family of Sir Henry Gould . Edward Dyer was born here in 1543 . The house is now a private residence and Grade II * listed building . It was the birthplace of Sir Edward Dyer ( died 1607 ) an Elizabethan poet and courtier , the writer Henry Fielding ( 1707 – 54 ) , and the cleric William Gould . 
 Ivythorn Manor on Pages Hill was a medieval monastic house . It was rebuilt in 1488 for Abbot John Selwood of Glastonbury Abbey . After the dissolution of the monasteries it became a manor house owned by the Marshall and Sydenham families . Sir John Sydenham added a wing 1578 which was later demolished . By 1834 the house was largely ruined until its restoration around 1904 , and a west wing was added in 1938 . It is a Grade II * listed building . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The parish council is responsible for some local issues , and sets an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover its council ’ s operating costs . The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The parish council also initiates projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , and consults with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . Conservation ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council . Having previously been part of Street Urban District , the village now falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of Mendip , which was formed on 1 April 1974 , under the Local Government Act 1972 , and is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . There are currently three wards of the Mendip Council in Street which elect councillors every four years . As of 2010 the two councillors for Street North are both Liberal Democrats , Street West has one Liberal Democrat councillor and Street South is represented by two councillors one of which is a Liberal Democrat and the other is independent of any political party . 
 Somerset County Council is responsible for the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , libraries , main roads , public transport , policing and fire services , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning . 
 There are three electoral wards in Street ( North , South and West ) . The total population equates to that shown above . 
 Street is in the Wells parliamentary constituency , which elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system . The current MP is James Heappey , elected in 2015 , of the Conservative Party . Street is also in the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . Street is twinned with <unk> im <unk> , a town in south @-@ eastern Baden @-@ Württemberg , Germany , and Notre Dame de <unk> in Normandy , France . Both twinnings are announced on the signs that welcome visitors to Street . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The River Brue marks the boundary with Glastonbury , to the north of Street . At the time of King Arthur , the Brue formed a lake just south of the hilly ground on which Glastonbury stands . This lake is one of the locations suggested by Arthurian legend as the home of the Lady of the Lake . Pomparles Bridge stood at the western end of this lake , guarding Glastonbury from the south , and it was here that Sir Bedivere is thought to have thrown the sword Excalibur into the waters after King Arthur fell at the Battle of Camlann . The old bridge was replaced by a reinforced concrete arch bridge in 1911 . 
 Before the 13th century , the direct route to the sea at Highbridge was blocked by gravel banks and peat near Westhay . The course of the river partially encircled Glastonbury from the south , around the western side ( through Beckery ) , and then north through the Panborough @-@ Bleadney gap in the Wedmore @-@ Wookey Hills , to join the River Axe just north of Bleadney . This route made it difficult for the officials of Glastonbury Abbey to transport produce from their outlying estates to the Abbey , and when the valley of the river Axe was in flood it backed up to flood Glastonbury itself . Sometime between 1230 and 1250 , a new channel was constructed westwards into Meare Pool north of Meare , and further westwards to Mark Moor . The Brue Valley Living Landscape is a conservation project based on the Somerset Levels and Moors and managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . 
 The Walton and Ivythorn Hills biological Site of Special Scientific Interest south of the town lies at the end of the Polden Hills . This site is owned and managed by the National Trust . Walton and Ivythorn Hills support a complex mosaic of semi @-@ natural habitats which includes unimproved calcareous grassland , dense and scattered scrub and broadleaved woodland . Structural diversity within the habitats , together with the extensive areas of sheltered wood @-@ edge and scrub @-@ edge margins provide ideal conditions for many species of invertebrate . Butterflies , leafhoppers , spiders and soldier flies are particularly well represented . The great green bush cricket ( <unk> <unk> ) is also of interest . It is adjacent to the East Polden Grasslands which has typical examples of species @-@ rich , unimproved , calcareous grassland with scrub and amongst the many plant species found in this habitat is the early gentian ( Gentianella anglica ) , which is endemic to Britain . Its other main interest lies in its suitability as a habitat for the large blue butterfly ( Phengaris arion ) , which has been successfully reintroduced onto the site . There are two nationally scarce grasshopper species present ; rufous grasshopper ( <unk> rufus ) and woodland grasshopper ( <unk> rufipes ) . Several nationally scarce species of moth , beetle , bee and ant also occur . 
 Street Heath is a nature reserve , managed by Somerset Wildlife Trust , and has outstanding examples of communities which were once common on the Somerset Levels . The vegetation consists of wet and dry heath , species @-@ rich bog and carr woodland , with transitions between all these habitats . Rare ferns present include marsh fern ( <unk> palustris ) and royal fern ( Osmunda regalis ) . Old peat workings and rhynes have a wetland community which includes bulrush ( Typha latifolia ) , yellow flag iris ( pseudacorus ) , <unk> @-@ like sedge ( Carex <unk> ) and lesser bur @-@ reed ( <unk> natans ) . Insects recorded include 33 species of butterflies , 200 moths and 12 grasshoppers and crickets , with several notable rarities . Birds breeding in the carr woodland include the local willow tit 
 Merriman Park is named after Nathaniel James Merriman . He was Curate then Vicar of Street , until he emigrated to South Africa . He rose to become Archdeacon of Grahamstown then Dean of Cape Town before being elevated the Episcopate . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Street has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = C. and J. Clark Ltd = = 
 The Society of Friends established itself here in the mid @-@ 17th century , and among the close @-@ knit group of Quaker families were the Clarks : Cyrus started a business in sheepskin rugs , later joined by his brother James , who introduced the production of woollen slippers and , later , boots and shoes . Under James 's son , William , the business flourished , but most of the profits were ploughed back into employee welfare , housing and education . 
 C & J Clark still has its headquarters in Street , behind a frontage which includes the clock tower and water tower , but shoes are no longer manufactured there . Instead , in 1993 , redundant factory buildings were converted to form Clarks Village , the first purpose @-@ built factory outlet in the United Kingdom . Despite strong concerns being voiced by local retailers at the time , the retail outlets have not led to a demise of the existing shops . The Shoe Museum provides information about the history of Clarks and footwear manufacture in general , and a selection of shop display <unk> from the 1930s , 1950s and 1960s , and television advertisements . 
 The Clark family mansion and its estate at the edge of the village are now owned by Millfield School . The company , through the Society of Friends , also had its own small sanatorium and convalescent home on Ivythorn Hill overlooking the town . In 1931 , this chalet style building was leased to the Youth Hostel Association and became the first youth hostel in Somerset . It is still used for this purpose . 
 = = Transport = = 
 In Roman times Street was close to the route of the Fosse Way and is now on the route of the modern A39 road which runs from Bath to Cornwall , and the A361 . 
 Glastonbury and Street railway station was the biggest station on the original Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway main line from Highbridge to Evercreech Junction until closed in 1966 under the Beeching axe . Opened in 1854 as Glastonbury , and renamed in 1886 , it had three platforms , two for Evercreech to Highbridge services and one for the branch service to Wells . The station had a large goods yard controlled from a signal box . The site is now a timber yard for a local company . The nearest stations are now around 13 miles away , at Castle Cary and Bridgwater . Replica level crossing gates have been placed at the old station entrance . 
 = = Education = = 
 Primary infant / junior schools include Avalon , Brookside , <unk> , and Elmhurst . 
 Crispin School is a secondary school teaching 11- to 16 @-@ year @-@ old students from Street and many local villages . It has 1084 students between the ages of 11 and 16 years enrolled . The school shares its campus with Strode College of further education . In 1997 it became the first Beacon School in Somerset . It is a Technology College and has a second specialism as a Language College . The school shares its campus with Strode College , a tertiary institution and further education college which provides education for 16 + students after they leave secondary school , these courses are usually A @-@ levels or Business and Technology Education Councils ( <unk> ) . The college also provides education for older / mature students , and provides some university level courses . The college is part of The University of Plymouth Colleges network . 
 At the edge of town is Millfield School , an independent co @-@ educational boarding school which currently caters for 1 @,@ 260 pupils , of which 910 are boarders . It was founded in 1935 by Boss Meyer , in the house and grounds originally owned by the Clark family , who owned and ran the major shoe manufacturer Clarks . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Street has a Non @-@ League football club Street F.C. who play at The Tannery . 
 Street has two public swimming pools , one indoor and one outdoor . The indoor pool forms part of the Strode complex . The outdoor pool , Greenbank , is open daily from early May until mid September each year . 
 The only single use cinema in Street was closed down and converted into a nightclub in the 1990s . Strode Theatre , linked to the Crispin School and Strode College complex , is now the only place to see films , exhibitions and live performances . It opened on 5 October 1963 with a performance by the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra . In 1999 the theatre was expanded with a new foyer , bar and box office along with improved rehearsal space and stage access , at a cost of £ 750 @,@ 000 by the Steel , Coleman Davis partnership who received an award for the design . The expansion was funded by the Arts Council England . 
 The town is on the route of the Samaritans Way South West . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The Anglican Parish Church of The Holy Trinity dates from the 14th century but underwent extensive restoration in the 19th century . It has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building . The chancel pre dates the rest of the building , having been built about 1270 . The first recorded Rector was John de <unk> in 1304 . The parish is linked with Street Mission Church in Vestry Road and the church in Walton . There is also a Baptist church on Glaston Road . The Quaker Friends Meeting House was built in 1850 , by J. Francis Cottrell of Bath . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Helen Chamberlain , an English television presenter was born in Street in 1967 @,@ 
 Henry John " Harry " Patch , known as " the Last Fighting Tommy " moved to Street in the early 1940s , he ran a plumbing company in the town until his retirement at age 65 . 
 Jaye Jacobs , actress 
 John Hinde was born in Street before going on to become a photographer whose idealistic and nostalgic style influenced the art of postcard photography and was widely known for his meticulously planned shoots . 
 John X. Merriman was born in Street in 1841 , His parents were Nathaniel James Merriman , curate of the parish of Street and later third Bishop of Grahamstown , and the former Julia Potter . He emigrated to the Cape Colony with his parents in 1849 , aged 8 . He was the last prime minister of the Cape Colony before the formation of the Union of South Africa in 1910 . 
 Laurence Housman an English playwright , writer and illustrator , lived in Street for 35 years before his death in 1959 . 
 Edwin Edwards ( organist ) , organist , composer , Director of Music at Rugby College , was born in Street in 1830 . 
 = Mauna Loa = 
 Mauna Loa ( / <unk> <unk> / or / <unk> <unk> / ; Hawaiian : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; English : Long Mountain ) is one of five volcanoes that form the Island of Hawaii in the U.S. state of Hawaiʻi in the Pacific Ocean . The largest subaerial volcano in both mass and volume , Mauna Loa has historically been considered the largest volcano on Earth . It is an active shield volcano with relatively gentle slopes , with a volume estimated at approximately 18 @,@ 000 cubic miles ( 75 @,@ 000 km3 ) , although its peak is about 120 feet ( 37 m ) lower than that of its neighbor , Mauna Kea . Lava eruptions from Mauna Loa are silica @-@ poor and very fluid , and they tend to be non @-@ explosive . 
 Mauna Loa has probably been erupting for at least 700 @,@ 000 years , and may have emerged above sea level about 400 @,@ 000 years ago . The oldest @-@ known dated rocks are not older than 200 @,@ 000 years . The volcano 's magma comes from the Hawaii hotspot , which has been responsible for the creation of the Hawaiian island chain over tens of millions of years . The slow drift of the Pacific Plate will eventually carry Mauna Loa away from the hotspot within 500 @,@ 000 to one million years from now , at which point it will become extinct . 
 Mauna Loa 's most recent eruption occurred from March 24 to April 15 , 1984 . No recent eruptions of the volcano have caused fatalities , but eruptions in 1926 and 1950 destroyed villages , and the city of Hilo is partly built on lava flows from the late 19th century . Because of the potential hazards it poses to population centers , Mauna Loa is part of the Decade Volcanoes program , which encourages studies of the world 's most dangerous volcanoes . Mauna Loa has been monitored intensively by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory since 1912 . Observations of the atmosphere are undertaken at the Mauna Loa Observatory , and of the Sun at the Mauna Loa Solar Observatory , both located near the mountain 's summit . Hawaii Volcanoes National Park covers the summit and the southeastern flank of the volcano , and also incorporates Kīlauea , a separate volcano . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Like all Hawaiian volcanoes , Mauna Loa was created as the Pacific tectonic plate moved over the Hawaiian hotspot in the Earth 's underlying mantle . The Hawaii island volcanoes are the most recent evidence of this process that , over 70 million years , has created the 3 @,@ 700 mi ( 6 @,@ 000 km ) -long Hawaiian – Emperor seamount chain . The prevailing view states that the hotspot has been largely stationary within the planet 's mantle for much , if not all of the Cenozoic Era . However , while the Hawaiian mantle plume is well @-@ understood and extensively studied , the nature of hotspots themselves remain fairly enigmatic . 
 Mauna Loa is one of five subaerial volcanoes that make up the island of Hawaiʻi , created by the Hawaii hotspot . The oldest volcano on the island , Kohala , is more than a million years old , and Kīlauea , the youngest , is believed to be between 300 @,@ 000 and 600 @,@ 000 years of age . Lōʻihi Seamount on the island 's flank is even younger , but has yet to breach the surface . At 1 million to 700 @,@ 000 years of age , Mauna Loa is the second youngest of the five volcanoes on the island , making it the third youngest volcano in the Hawaiian – Emperor seamount chain , a chain of shield volcanoes and seamounts extending from Hawaii to the Kuril – Kamchatka Trench in Russia . 
 Following the pattern of Hawaiian volcano formation , Mauna Loa would have started as a submarine volcano , gradually building itself up through underwater eruptions of alkali basalt before emerging from the sea through a series of <unk> eruptions about 400 @,@ 000 years ago . Since then , the volcano has remained active , with a history of effusive and explosive eruptions , including 33 eruptions since the first well @-@ documented eruption in 1843 . Although Mauna Loa 's activity has been overshadowed in recent years by that of its neighbor Kīlauea , it remains active . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Mauna Loa is the largest subaerial and second largest overall volcano in the world ( behind Tamu Massif ) , covering a land area of 5 @,@ 271 km2 ( 2 @,@ 035 sq mi ) and spans a maximum width of 120 km ( 75 mi ) . Consisting of approximately 65 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 km3 ( 15 @,@ 600 to 19 @,@ 200 cu mi ) of solid rock , it makes up more than half of the surface area of the island of Hawaiʻi . Combining the volcano 's extensive submarine flanks ( 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) to the sea floor ) and 4 @,@ 170 m ( 13 @,@ 680 ft ) subaerial height , Mauna Loa rises 9 @,@ 170 m ( 30 @,@ 085 ft ) from base to summit , greater than the 8 @,@ 848 m or 29 @,@ 029 ft elevation of Mount Everest from sea level to its summit . In addition , much of the mountain is invisible even underwater : its mass depresses the crust beneath it by another 8 km ( 5 mi ) , in the shape of an inverse mountain , meaning the total height of Mauna Loa from the start of its eruptive history is about 17 @,@ 170 m ( 56 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 Mauna Loa is a typical shield volcano in form , taking the shape of a long , broad dome extending down to the ocean floor whose slopes are about 12 ° at their steepest , a consequence of its extremely fluid lava . The shield @-@ stage lavas that built the enormous main mass of the mountain are tholeiitic basalts , like those of Mauna Kea , created through the mixing of primary magma and subducted oceanic crust . Mauna Loa 's summit hosts three overlapping pit craters arranged northeast @-@ southwest , the first and last roughly 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) in diameter and the second an oblong 4 @.@ 2 km × 2 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 6 mi × 1 @.@ 6 mi ) feature ; together these three craters make up the 6 @.@ 2 by 2 @.@ 5 km ( 3 @.@ 9 by 1 @.@ 6 mi ) summit caldera Mokuʻāweoweo , so named for the Hawaiian <unk> fish ( <unk> meeki ) , purportedly due to the resemblance of its eruptive fires to the coloration of the fish . Mokuʻāweoweo 's caldera floor lies between 170 and 50 m ( 558 and 164 ft ) beneath its rim and it is only the latest of several calderas that have formed and reformed over the volcano 's life . It was created between 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 500 years ago by a large eruption from Mauna Loa 's northeast rift zone , which emptied out a shallow magma chamber beneath the summit and collapsed it into its present form . Additionally , two smaller pit craters lie southwest of the caldera , named Lua Hou ( New Pit ) and Lua <unk> ( Deep Pit ) . 
 Mauna Loa 's summit is also the focal point for its two prominent rift zones , marked on the surface by well @-@ preserved , relatively recent lava flows ( easily seen in satellite imagery ) and linearly arranged fracture lines intersected by cinder and splatter cones . These rift zones are deeply set structures , driven by dike intrusions along a <unk> fault that is believed to reach down all the way to the volcano 's base , 12 to 14 km ( 7 to 9 mi ) deep . The first is a 60 km ( 37 mi ) rift trending southwest from the caldera to the sea and a further 40 km ( 25 mi ) underwater , with a prominent 40 ° directional change along its length ; this rift zone is historically active across most of its length . The second , northeastern rift zone extends towards Hilo and is historically active across only the first 20 km ( 12 mi ) of its length , with a nearly straight and , in its latter sections , poorly defined trend . The northeastern rift zone takes the form of a succession of cinder cones , the most prominent of which the 60 m ( 197 ft ) high <unk> <unk> , or Red Hill . There is also a less definite northward rift zone that extends towards the <unk> Saddle marking the intersection of Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea . 
 Simplified geophysical models of Mauna Loa 's magma chamber have been constructed , using interferometric synthetic aperture radar measures of ground deformation due to the slow buildup of lava under the volcano 's surface . These models predict a 1 @.@ 1 km ( 1 mi ) wide magma chamber located at a depth of about 4 @.@ 7 km ( 3 mi ) , 0 @.@ 5 km ( 0 mi ) below sea level , near the southeastern margin of Mokuʻāweoweo . This shallow magma chamber is significantly higher @-@ placed than Mauna Loa 's rift zones , suggesting magma intrusion into the deeper and occasional dike injections into the shallower parts of the rift zone drive rift activity ; a similar mechanism has been proposed for neighboring Kīlauea . Earlier models based on Mauna Loa 's two most recent eruptions made a similar prediction , placing the chamber at 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) deep in roughly the same geographic position . 
 Mauna Loa has complex interactions with its neighbors , Hualālai to the west , Mauna Kea to the north , and particularly Kīlauea to the east . Lavas from Mauna Kea intersect with Mauna Loa 's basal flows as a consequence of Kea 's older age , and Mauna Kea 's original rift zones were buried beneath post @-@ shield volcanic rocks of Mauna Loa ; additionally , Mauna Kea shares Mauna Loa 's gravity well , depressing the ocean crust beneath it by 6 km ( 4 mi ) . There are also a series of normal faults on Mauna Loa 's northern and western slopes , between its two major rift zones , that are believed to be the result of combined circumferential tension from the two rift zones and from added pressure due to the westward growth of neighboring Kīlauea . 
 Because Kīlauea lacks a topographical prominence and appears as a bulge on the southeastern flank of Mauna Loa , it was historically interpreted by both native Hawaiians and early geologists to be an active satellite of Mauna Loa . However , analysis of the chemical composition of lavas from the two volcanoes show that they have separate magma chambers , and are thus distinct . Nonetheless , their proximity has led to a historical trend in which high activity at one volcano roughly coincides with low activity at the other . When Kīlauea lay dormant between 1934 and 1952 , Mauna Loa became active , and when the latter remained quiet from 1952 to 1974 , the reverse was true . This is not always the case ; the 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa started during an eruption at Kīlauea , but had no discernible effect on the Kīlauea eruption , and the ongoing inflation of Mauna Loa 's summit , indicative of a future eruption , began the same day as new lava flows at Kīlauea 's Puʻu <unk> crater . Geologists have suggested that " pulses " of magma entering Mauna Loa 's deeper magma system may have increased pressure inside Kīlauea and triggered the concurrent eruptions . 
 Mauna Loa is slumping eastward along its southwestern rift zone , leveraging its mass into Kīlauea and driving the latter eastward at a rate of about 10 cm ( 4 in ) per year ; the interaction between the two volcanoes in this manner has generated a number of large earthquakes in the past , and has resulted in a significant area of debris off of Kīlauea 's seaward flank known as the Hilina Slump . A system of older faults exists on the southeastern side of Mauna Loa that likely formed before Kilauea became large enough to impede Mauna Loa 's slump , the lowest and northernmost of which , the <unk> fault , remains an active earthquake center today . The west side of Mauna Loa , meanwhile , is unimpeded in movement , and indeed is believed to have undergone a massive slump collapse between 100 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 years ago , the residue from which , consisting of a scattering of debris up to several kilometers wide and up to 50 km ( 31 mi ) distant , is still visible today . The damage was so extensive that the headwall of the damage likely intersected its southwestern rift zone . There is very little movement there today , a consequence of the volcano 's geometry . 
 Mauna Loa is tall enough to have experienced glaciation during the last ice age , 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago . Unlike Mauna Kea , on which extensive evidence of glaciation remains even today , Mauna Loa was at the time and has remained active , having grown an additional 150 to 300 m ( 492 to 984 ft ) in height since then and covering any glacial deposits beneath new flows ; strata of that age doesn 't occur until at least 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) down from the volcano 's summit , too low for glacial growth . Mauna Loa also lacks its neighbor 's summit permafrost region , although sporadic ice persists in places . It is speculated that extensive phreatomagmatic activity occurred during this time , contributing extensively to ash deposits on the summit . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 = = = Prehistoric eruptions = = = 
 To have reached its enormous size within its relatively short ( geologically speaking ) 600 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 years of life , Mauna Loa would logically have had to have grown extremely rapidly through its developmental history , and extensive charcoal @-@ based radiocarbon dating ( perhaps the most extensive such prehistorical eruptive dating on Earth ) has amassed a record of almost two hundred reliably dated extant flows confirming this hypothesis . 
 The oldest exposed flows on Mauna Loa are thought to be the <unk> Hills on its southern flank , subaerial basalt rock dating back approximately 100 to 200 thousand years . They form a terrace against which younger flows have since banked , heavily eroded and incised against its slope in terms of direction ; this is believed to be the result of a period of erosion because of a change in the direction of lava flow caused by the volcano 's prehistoric slump . These are followed by two units of lava flows separated by an intervening ash layer known as the Pāhala ash layer : the older <unk> basalt , sparsely exposed on the lower southwest rift , and the younger and far more widespread <unk> basalt , which appear more widely on the volcano . The Pāhala ashes themselves were produced over a long period of time circa 13 to 30 thousand years ago , although heavy vitrification and interactions with post and pre- creation flows has hindered exact dating . Their age roughly corresponding with the glaciation of Mauna Loa during the last ice age , raising the distinct possibility that it is the product of phreatomagmatic interaction between the long @-@ gone glaciers and Mauna Loa 's eruptive activities . 
 Studies have shown that a cycle occurs in which volcanic activity at the summit is dominant for several hundred years , after which activity shifts to the rift zones for several more centuries , and then back to the summit again . Two cycles have been clearly identified , each lasting 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 years . This cyclical behavior is unique to Mauna Loa among the Hawaiian volcanoes . Between about 7 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 years ago Mauna Loa was largely inactive . The cause of this cessation in activity is not known , and no known similar hiatus has been found at other Hawaiian volcanoes except for those currently in the post @-@ shield stage . Between 11 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 years ago , activity was more intense than it is today . However , Mauna Loa 's overall rate of growth has probably begun to slow over the last 100 @,@ 000 years , and the volcano may in fact be nearing the end of its tholeiitic basalt shield @-@ building phase . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 Ancient Hawaiians have been present on Hawaiʻi island for about 1 @,@ 500 years , but they preserved almost no records on volcanic activity on the island beyond a few fragmentary accounts dating to the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Possible eruptions occurred around 1730 and 1750 and sometime during 1780 and 1803 . A June 1832 eruption was witnessed by a missionary on Maui , but the 190 km ( 118 mi ) between the two islands and lack of apparent geological evidence have cast this testimony in doubt . Thus the first entirely confirmed historically witnessed eruption was a January 1843 event , since which Mauna Loa has erupted anew 32 times . 
 Historical eruptions at Mauna Loa are typically Hawaiian in character and rarely violent , starting with the emergence of lava fountains over a several kilometer long rift colloquially known as the " curtain of fire " ( often , but not always , propagating from Mauna Loa 's summit ) and eventually concentrating at a single vent , its long @-@ term eruptive center . Activity centered on its summit are usually followed by flank eruptions up to a few months distant , and although Mauna Loa is historically less active than that of its neighbor Kilauea , it tends to produce greater volumes of lava over shorter periods of time . Most eruptions are centered at either the summit or either of its two major rift zones ; within the last two hundred years , 38 percent of eruptions occurred at the summit , 31 percent at the northeast rift zone , 25 percent at the southwest rift zone , and the remaining 6 percent from northwest vents . 40 percent of the volcano 's surface consists of lavas less than a thousand years old , and 98 percent of lavas less than 10 @,@ 000 years old . In addition to the summit and rift zones , Mauna Loa 's northwestern flank has also been the source of three historical eruptions . 
 The 1843 event was followed by eruptions in 1849 , 1851 , 1852 , and 1855 , with the 1855 flows being particularly extensive . 1859 marked the largest of the three historical flows that have been centered on Mauna Loa 's northwestern flank , producing a long lava flow that reached the ocean on Hawaii island 's west coast , north of Kiholo Bay . An eruption in 1868 occurred alongside the enormous 1868 Hawaii earthquake , a magnitude eight event that claimed 77 lives and remains the largest earthquake ever to hit the island . Following further activity in 1871 , Mauna Loa experienced nearly continuous activity from August 1872 through 1877 , a long @-@ lasting and voluminous eruption lasting approximately 1 @,@ 200 days and never moving beyond its summit . A short single @-@ day eruption in 1877 was unusual in that it took place underwater , in Kealakekua Bay and within a mile of the shoreline ; curious onlookers approaching the area in boats reported unusually turbulent water and occasional floating blocks of hardened lava . Further eruptions occurred in 1879 and then twice in 1880 , the latter of which extended into 1881 and came within the present boundaries of the island 's largest city , Hilo ; however at the time the settlement was a shore @-@ side village located further down the volcano 's slope , and so was unaffected . 
 Mauna Loa continued its activity , and of the eruptions that occurred in 1887 , 1892 , 1896 , 1899 , 1903 ( twice ) , 1907 , 1914 , 1916 , 1919 , and 1926 , three ( in 1887 , 1919 , and 1926 ) were partially subaerial . The 1926 eruption in particular is noteworthy for having inundated of a village near <unk> , destroying 12 houses , a church , and a small harbor . After an event in 1933 , Mauna Loa 's 1935 eruption caused a public crisis when its flows started to head towards Hilo . A bombing operation was decided upon to try and divert the flows , planned out by then @-@ lieutenant colonel George S. Patton . The bombing , conducted on December 27 , was declared a success by Thomas A. Jaggar , director of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory , and lava stopped flowing by January 2 , 1936 . However , the role the bombing played in ending the eruption has since been heavily disputed by volcanologists . A longer but summit @-@ bound event in 1940 was comparatively less interesting . 
 Mauna Loa 's 1942 eruption occurred only four months after the attack on Pearl Harbor and United States entry into World War II , and created a unique problem for the wartime United States . Occurring during an enforced nighttime blackout on the island , the eruption 's luminosity forced the government to issue a gag order on the local press , hoping to prevent news of its occurrence spreading for fear that the Japanese would use it to launch a bombing run on the island . However , as flows from the eruption rapidly spread down the volcano 's flank and threatened the <unk> flume , Mountain View 's primary water source , the United States Air Force decided to drop its own bombs on the island in the hopes of redirecting the flows away from the flume ; sixteen bombs weighing between 300 and 600 lb ( 136 and 272 kg ) each were dropped on the island , but produced little effect . Eventually the eruption ceased on its own . 
 Following a 1949 event the next major eruption at Mauna Loa occurred in 1950 . Originating from the volcano 's southwestern rift zone , the eruption remains the largest rift event in the volcano 's modern history , lasting 23 days , emitting 376 million cubic meters of lava , and reaching 24 km ( 15 mi ) out to the ocean within 3 hours . The 1950 eruption was not the most voluminous eruption on the volcano ( the long @-@ lived 1872 @-@ 1877 event produced more than twice as much material ) but it was easily one of the fastest @-@ acting , producing the same amount of lava as the 1859 eruption in a tenth of the time . Flows overtook the village of Hoʻokena @-@ <unk> in South Kona , crossed Hawaii Route 11 , and reached the sea within four hours of eruption , and although there was no loss of life the village was permanently destroyed . After the 1950 event Mauna Loa entered an extended period of dormancy , interrupted only by a small single @-@ day summit event in 1975 . However it rumbled to life again in 1984 , manifesting first at Mauna Loa 's summit and then producing a narrow , channelized ' a 'a flow that advanced downslope to within 6 km ( 4 mi ) of Hilo , close enough to illuminate the city at nighttime . However the flow got no closer , as two natural levees further up its pathway consequently broke and diverted active flows . 
 Mauna Loa has not erupted since , and as of January 2013 has remained quiet for nearly 29 years , its longest period of quiet in recorded history . 
 = = = Hazards = = = 
 Mauna Loa has been designated a Decade Volcano , one of the sixteen volcanoes identified by the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth 's Interior ( <unk> ) as being worthy of particular study in light of their history of large , destructive eruptions and proximity to populated areas . The United States Geological Survey maintains a hazard zone mapping of the island done on a one to nine scale , with the most dangerous areas corresponding the smallest numbers . Based on this classification Mauna Loa 's continuously active summit caldera and rift zones have been given a level one designation . Much of the area immediately surrounding the rift zones is considered level two , and about 20 percent of the area has been covered in lava in historical times . Much of the remainder of the volcano is hazard level three , about 15 to 20 percent of which has been covered by flows within the last 750 years . However , two sections of the volcano , the first in the <unk> area and the second on the southeastern flank of Mauna Loa 's rift zone , are protected from eruptive activity by local topography , and have thus been designated hazard level 6 , comparable with a similarly isolated segment on Kīlauea . 
 Although volcanic eruptions in Hawaiʻi rarely produce casualties ( the only direct historical fatality due to volcanic activity on the island occurred at Kīlauea in 1924 , when an unusually explosive eruption hurled rocks at an onlooker ) , property damage due to inundation by lava is a common and costly hazard . Hawaiian @-@ type eruptions usually produce extremely slow @-@ moving flows that advance at walking pace , presenting little danger to human life , but this is not strictly the case ; Mauna Loa 's 1950 eruption emitted as much lava in three weeks as Kīlauea 's current eruption produces in three years and reached sea level within four hours of its start , overrunning the village of Hoʻokena <unk> and a major highway on the way there . An earlier eruption in 1926 overran the village of <unk> Makai , and Hilo , partly built on lavas from the 1880 @-@ 81 eruption , is at risk from future eruptions . The 1984 eruption nearly reached the city , but stopped short after the flow was redirected upstream . 
 A potentially greater hazard at Mauna Loa is a sudden , massive collapse of the volcano 's flanks , like the one that struck the volcano 's west flank between 100 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 years ago and formed the present @-@ day Kealakekua Bay . Deep fault lines are a common feature on Hawaiian volcanoes , allowing large portions of their flanks to gradually slide downwards and forming structures like the Hilina Slump and the ancient <unk> Hills ; large earthquakes could trigger rapid flank collapses along these lines , creating massive landslides and possibly triggering equally large tsunamis . Undersea surveys have revealed numerous landslides along the Hawaiian chain and evidence of two such giant tsunami events : 200 @,@ 000 years ago , <unk> experienced a 75 m ( 246 ft ) tsunami , and 100 @,@ 000 years ago a megatsunami 325 m ( 1 @,@ 066 ft ) high struck Lānaʻi . A more recent example of the risks associated with slumps occurred in 1975 , when the Hilina Slump suddenly lurched forward several meters , triggering a 7 @.@ 2 Mw earthquake and a 14 m ( 46 ft ) tsunami that killed two campers at <unk> . 
 = = = Monitoring = = = 
 Established on Kīlauea in 1912 , the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory ( HVO ) , presently a branch of the United States Geological Survey , is the primary organization associated with the monitoring , observance , and study of Hawaiian volcanoes . Thomas A. Jaggar , the observatory 's founder , attempted a summit expedition to the volcano to observe its 1914 eruption , but was rebuffed by the arduous trek required ( see Ascents ) . After soliciting help from Lorrin A. Thurston , in 1915 he was able to persuade the US Army to construct a " simple route to the summit " for public and scientific use , a project completed in December of that year ; the Observatory has maintained a presence on the volcano ever since . 
 Eruptions on Mauna Loa are almost always preceded and accompanied by prolonged episodes of seismic activity , the monitoring of which was the primary and often only warning mechanism in the past and which remains viable today . Seismic stations have been maintained on Hawaiʻi since the Observatory 's inception , but these were concentrated primarily on Kīlauea , with coverage on Mauna Loa improving only slowly through the 20th century . Following the invention of modern monitoring equipment , the backbone of the present @-@ day monitoring system was installed on the volcano in the 1970s . Mauna Loa 's July 1975 eruption was forewarned by more than a year of seismic unrest , with the HVO issuing warnings to the general public from late 1974 ; the 1984 eruption was similarly preceded by as much as three years of unusually high seismic activity , with volcanologists predicting an eruption within two years in 1983 . 
 The modern monitoring system on Mauna Loa is constituted not only by its locally seismic network but also of a large number of GPS stations , tiltmeters , and <unk> that have been anchored on the volcano to monitor ground deformation due to swelling in Mauna Loa 's subterranean magma chamber , which presents a more complete picture of the events proceeding eruptive activity . The GPS network is the most durable and wide @-@ ranging of the three systems , while the tiltmeters provide the most sensitive predictive data , but are prone to erroneous results unrelated to actual ground deformation ; nonetheless a survey line across the caldera measured a 76 mm ( 3 in ) increase in its width over the year preceding the 1975 eruption , and a similar increase in 1984 eruption . <unk> , by contrast , are relatively rare . The Observatory also maintains two gas detectors at Mokuʻāweoweo , Mauna Loa 's summit caldera , as well as a publicly accessible live webcam and occasional screenings by interferometric synthetic aperture radar imaging . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ contact = = = 
 The first Ancient Hawaiians to arrive on Hawaii island lived along the shores where food and water were plentiful . Flightless birds that had previously known no predators became a staple food source . Early settlements had a major impact on the local ecosystem , and caused many extinctions , particularly amongst bird species , as well as introducing foreign plants and animals and increasing erosion rates . The prevailing lowland forest ecosystem was transformed from forest to grassland ; some of this change was caused by the use of fire , but the main reason appears to have been the introduction of the Polynesian Rat ( Rattus exulans ) . 
 Ancient Hawaiian religious practice holds that the five volcanic peaks of the island are sacred , and regards Mauna Loa , the largest of them all , with great admiration ; but what mythology survives today consists mainly of oral accounts from the 18th century first compiled in the 19th . Most of these stories agree that the Hawaiian volcano deity , Pele , resides in Halemaʻumaʻu Crater on Kilauea ; however a few place her home at Mauna Loa 's summit caldera Mokuʻāweoweo , and the mythos in general associates her with all volcanic activity on the island . Regardless , Kīlauea 's lack of a geographic outline and strong volcanic link to Mauna Loa led to it being considered an offshoot of Mauna Loa by the Ancient Hawaiians , meaning much of the mythos now associated with Kīlauea was originally directed at Mauna Loa proper as well . 
 Ancient Hawaiians constructed an extensive trail system on Hawaiʻi island , today known as the Ala <unk> National Historic Trail . The network consisted of short trailheads servicing local areas along the main roads and more extensive networks within and around agricultural centers . The positioning of the trails were practical , connecting living areas to farms and ports and regions to resources , with a few upland sections reserved for gathering and most lines marked well enough to remain identifiable long after regular use has ended . One of these trails , the <unk> Trail , ascended from the village of <unk> over 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 155 ft ) in about 56 km ( 35 mi ) and ended at Mokuʻāweoweo at Mauna Loa 's summit . Although the journey was arduous and required several days and many porters , ancient Hawaiians likely made the journey during eruptions to leave offerings and prayers to honor Pele , much as they did at Halemaʻumaʻu , neighboring Kilauea 's more active and more easily accessible caldera . Several camps established along the way supplied water and food for travelers . 
 = = = European summiting attempts = = = 
 James Cook 's third voyage was the first to make landfall on Hawaiʻi island , in 1778 , and following adventures along the North American west coast Cook returned to the island in 1779 . On his second visit John Ledyard , a corporal of the Royal Marines aboard the HMS Resolution , proposed and receiving approval for an expedition to summit Mauna Loa to learn " about that part of the island , particularly the peak , the tip of which is generally covered with snow , and had excited great curiosity . " Using a compass , Ledyard and small group of ships ' mates and native attendants attempted to make a direct course for the summit . However , on the second day of traveling the route became steeper , rougher , and blocked by " impenetrable thickets , " and the group was forced to abandon their attempt and return to Kealakekua Bay , reckoning they had " penetrated 24 miles and we suppose [ were ] within 11 miles of the peak " ; in reality , Mokuʻāweoweo lies only 32 km ( 20 mi ) east of the bay , a severe overestimation on Ledyard 's part . Another of Cook 's men , Lieutenant James King , estimated the peak to be at least 5 @,@ 600 m ( 18 @,@ 373 ft ) high based on its snow line . 
 The next attempt to summit Mauna Loa was an expedition led by Archibald Menzies , a botanist and naturalist on the 1793 Vancouver Expedition . In February of that year Menzies , two ships ' mates , and a small group of native Hawaiian attendants attempted a direct course for the summit from Kealakekua Bay , making it 26 km ( 16 mi ) inland by their reckoning ( an overestimation ) before they were turned away by the thickness of the forest . On a second visit by the expedition to the island in January of the next year Menzies was placed in charge of exploring the island interior , and after traversing the flanks of Hualālai he and his party arrived at the high plateau separating the two volcanoes . Menzies decided to make a second attempt ( above the objections of the accompanying island chief ) , but again his progress was arrested by unassailable thickets . 
 Menzies made a third attempt to summit Mauna Loa in February of 1794 . This time the botanist consulted King Kamehameha I for advice and learned that he could take canoes to the south and follow the ʻAinapō Trail , not knowing of its existence beforehand . Significantly better prepared , Menzies , Lieutenant Joseph Baker and Midshipman George McKenzie of the Discovery , and a servant ( most likely Jonathan <unk> , listed on the ship 's muster as " Botanist 's L 't " ) reached the summit , which Menzies estimated to be 4 @,@ 156 m ( 13 @,@ 635 ft ) high with the aid of a barometer ( consistent with a modern value of 4 @,@ 169 m ( 13 @,@ 678 ft ) ) . He was surprised to find heavy snow and morning temperatures of − 3 ° C ( 27 ° F ) , and was unable to compare the heights of Mauna Loa and Kea but correctly supposed the latter to be taller based on its larger snow cap . The feat of summitting Mauna Loa was not to be repeated for forty years . 
 The Hawaiian Islands were the site of fervent missionary work , with the first group of missionaries arrived at Honolulu in 1820 and the second in 1823 . Some of these missionaries left for Hawaiʻi island , and spent ten weeks traveling around it , preaching at local villages and climbing Kilauea , from which one of its members , William Ellis , observed Mauna Loa with the aid of a telescope and ascertained it and Kea to be " perhaps 15 @,@ 000 to 16 @,@ 000 feet above the level of the sea " ; they did not , however , attempt to climb the volcano itself . It is sometimes reported that the missionary Joseph Goodrich reached the summit around this time , but he never claimed this himself , though he did summit Mauna Kea and describe Mokuʻāweoweo with the aid of another telescope . 
 The next successful ascent was made on January 29 , 1834 , 40 years later , by the Scottish botanist David Douglas , who also reached the summit caldera using the ʻAinapō Trail . By the time Douglas reached the summit the environment had put him under extreme duress , but he nonetheless stayed overnight to make measurements of the summit caldera 's proportions and record barometric data on its height , both now known to be widely inaccurate . Douglas collected biological samples on the way both up and down , and after a difficult and distressing descent began collating his samples ; he planned to return to England , but instead several months later his body was mysteriously discovered crushed in a pit besides a dead wild boar . 
 Isidor <unk> successfully climbed Mauna Loa in February 1839 , only the third successful climb in 60 years . 
 = = = Wilkes expedition = = = 
 The United States Exploring Expedition led by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes was tasked with a vast survey of the Pacific Ocean starting in 1838 . In September 1840 they arrived in Honolulu , where repairs to the ships took longer than expected . Wilkes decided to spend the winter in Hawaii and take the opportunity to explore its volcanoes while waiting for better weather to continue the expedition . King Kamehameha III assigned American medical missionary Dr. Gerrit P. Judd to the expedition as a translator . 
 Wilkes sailed to Hilo on the island of Hawaiʻi and decided to climb Mauna Loa first , since it looked easier than Mauna Kea . On December 14 he hired about 200 porters , but after he left he realized only about half the equipment had been taken , so he had to hire more Hawaiians at higher pay . When they reached Kīlauea after two days , their guide <unk> headed off to the established ʻAinapō Trail . Wilkes did not want to head back downhill so he blazed his own way through dense forest directed by a compass . The Hawaiians were offended by the waste of sacred trees which did not help morale . At about 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) elevation they established a camp called " Sunday Station " at the edge of the forest . 
 Two guides joined them at Sunday Station : <unk> , " the bird @-@ catcher " and another whose Hawaiian name is not recorded , called " <unk> " . Although Wilkes thought he was almost to the summit , the guides knew they were less than halfway up . Since there was no water at Sunday Station , porters had to be sent back ten miles ( 16 km ) to a lava tube on ʻAinapō Trail which had a known supply . After an entire day replenishing stocks , they continued up to a second camp they called " Recruiting Station " at about 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) elevation . After another full day 's hike they established " Flag Station " on December 22 , and by this time were on the ʻAinapō Trail . Most of the porters were sent back down to get another load . 
 At the Flag Station Wilkes and his eight remaining men built a circular wall of lava rocks and covered the shelter with a canvas tent . A snowstorm was in progress and several suffered from altitude sickness . That night ( December 23 ) , the snow on the canvas roof caused it to collapse . At daylight some of the group went down the trail to retrieve firewood and the gear abandoned on the trail the day before . After another day 's climb , nine men reached the rim of Mokuʻāweoweo . They could not find a way down its steep sides so chose a smooth place on the rim for the camp site , at coordinates 19 ° 27 ′ 59 ″ N 155 ° 34 ′ 54 ″ W. Their tent was pitched within 60 feet ( 18 m ) of the crater 's edge , secured by lava blocks . 
 The next morning they were unable to start a fire using friction due to the thin air at that altitude , and sent for matches . By this time , the naval officers and Hawaiians could not agree on terms to continue hiring porters , so sailors and marines were ordered from the ships . Dr. Judd traveled between the summit and the Recruiting Station to tend the many who suffered from altitude sickness or had worn out their shoes on the rough rock . Christmas Day was spent building rock walls around the camp to give some protection from the high winds and blowing snow . It took another week to bring all the equipment to the summit , including a pendulum designed for measuring slight variations in gravity . 
 On December 31 , 1840 the pre @-@ fabricated pendulum house was assembled . Axes and chisels cut away the rock surface for the pendulum 's base . It took another three days to adjust the clock to the point where the experiments could begin . However , the high winds made so much noise that the ticks could often not be heard , and varied the temperature to make measurements inaccurate . Grass had to be painstakingly brought from the lowest elevations for insulation to get accurate measurements . 
 On Monday , January 11 , Wilkes hiked around the summit crater . Using an optical method , he estimated Mauna Kea was only 193 feet ( 59 m ) higher ( modern measurements are 104 feet ( 32 m ) ) . On January 13 , 1841 , he had " Pendulum Peak , January 1841 U.S. Ex , Ex . " cut into a rock at the site . The tents were dismantled and Hawaiians carried the gear down over the next three days , while Wilkes enjoyed a <unk> Hawaiian massage . He continued his measurements at lower elevations and left the island on March 5 . For all the effort he did not obtain any significant results , attributing gravity discrepancies to " the tides " . 
