 The Wilkes expedition 's camp site 's ruins are the only known physical evidence in the Pacific of the U. S. Exploring Expedition . The camp site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on July 24 , 1974 as site <unk> , and is state historic site 10 @-@ 52 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Today = = = 
 A summit shelter was built with some of the stones from Wilkes ' camp site and mortar in 1934 . In 1916 Mokuʻāweoweo was included in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park , and a new trail was built directly from park headquarters at Kīlauea , an even more direct route than the one taken by Wilkes . This trail , arriving at the summit from the east via Red Hill , became the preferred route due to its easier access and gentler slope . The historic ʻAinapō Trail fell into disuse , and was reopened in the 1990s . A third modern route to the summit is from the Saddle Road up to the Mauna Loa Observatory which is at 11 @,@ 135 feet ( 3 @,@ 394 m ) elevation a few miles north of Mokuʻāweoweo and the North Pit trail . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Trade winds blow from east to west across the Hawaiian islands , and the presence of Mauna Loa strongly affects the local climate . At low elevations , the eastern ( windward ) side of the volcano receives heavy rain ; the city of Hilo is the wettest in the United States . The rainfall supports extensive forestation . The western ( leeward ) side has a much drier climate . At higher elevations , the amount of precipitation decreases , and skies are very often clear . Very low temperatures mean that precipitation often occurs in the form of snow , and the summit of Mauna Loa is described as a periglacial region , where freezing and thawing play a significant role in shaping the landscape . 
 Mauna Loa has a tropical climate with warm temperatures at lower elevations and cool to cold temperatures higher up year @-@ round . Below is the table for the slope observatory , which is at 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) in the alpine zone . The highest recorded temperature was 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) and the lowest was 18 ° F ( − 8 ° C ) on February 18 , 2003 and February 20 , 1962 , respectively . 
 = = Observatories = = 
 The location of Mauna Loa has made it an important location for atmospheric monitoring by the Global Atmosphere Watch and other scientific observations . The Mauna Loa Solar Observatory ( <unk> ) , located at 11 @,@ 155 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) on the northern slope of the mountain , has long been prominent in observations of the Sun . The NOAA Mauna Loa Observatory ( <unk> ) is located close by . From its location well above local human @-@ generated influences , the <unk> monitors the global atmosphere , including the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide . Measurements are adjusted to account for local outgassing of CO2 from the volcano . 
 The Yuan @-@ Tseh Lee Array for Microwave Background Anisotropy ( AMiBA ) sits at an elevation of 11 @,@ 155 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) . It was established in October 2006 by the Academia Sinica Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics ( <unk> ) to examine cosmic microwave background radiation . 
 = White House travel office controversy = 
 The White House travel office controversy , sometimes referred to as Travelgate , was the first major ethics controversy of the Clinton administration . It began in May 1993 , when seven employees of the White House Travel Office were fired . This action was unusual because although theoretically staff employees serve at the pleasure of the President and could be dismissed without cause , in practice , such employees usually remain in their posts for many years . 
 The White House stated the firings were done because financial improprieties in the Travel Office operation during previous administrations had been revealed by an FBI investigation . Critics contended the firings were done to allow friends of President Bill Clinton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton to take over the travel business and that the involvement of the FBI was unwarranted . Heavy media attention forced the White House to reinstate most of the employees in other jobs and remove the Clinton associates from the travel role . 
 Further investigations by the FBI and the Department of Justice , the White House itself , the General Accounting Office , the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee , and the Whitewater Independent Counsel all took place over the subsequent years . Travel Office Director Billy Dale was charged with embezzlement but found not guilty in 1995 . In 1998 , Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr exonerated Bill Clinton of any involvement in the matter . 
 Hillary Clinton gradually came under scrutiny for allegedly having played a central role in the firings and making false statements about her role in it . In 2000 , Independent Counsel Robert Ray issued his final report on Travelgate . He sought no charges against her , saying that while some of Clinton 's statements were factually false , there was insufficient evidence that these statements were either knowingly false or that she understood that her statements led to the firings . 
 = = The White House Travel Office = = 
 The White House Travel Office , known officially as either the White House Travel and Telegraph Office or the White House Telegraph and Travel Office , dates back to the Andrew Jackson administration and serves to handle travel arrangements for the White House press corps , with costs billed to the participating news organizations . By the time of the start of the Clinton administration , it was quartered in the Old Executive Office Building , and had seven employees with a yearly budget of $ 7 million . Staffers serve at the pleasure of the president ; however , in practice , the staffers were career employees who in some cases had worked in the Travel Office since the 1960s and 1970s , through both Democratic and Republican administrations . 
 Travel Office Director Billy Ray Dale had held that position since 1982 , serving through most of the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations , and had started in the Travel Office in 1961 . To handle the frequent last @-@ minute arrangements of presidential travel and the specialized requirements of the press , Dale did not conduct competitive bidding for travel services , but relied upon a charter company called Airline of the Americas . 
 = = Initial White House actions = = 
 According to the White House , the incoming Clinton administration had heard reports of irregularities in the Travel Office and possible kickbacks to an office employee from a charter air company . They looked at a review by KPMG Peat Marwick which discovered that Dale kept an off @-@ book ledger , had $ 18 @,@ 000 of unaccounted @-@ for checks , and kept chaotic office records . White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty and the White House counsels thus decided to fire the Travel Office staff and reorganize it . The actual terminations were done on May 19 , 1993 , by White House director of administration David Watkins . There was also a feeling among the White House and its supporters that the Travel Office had never been investigated by the media due to its close relationship with press corps members and the plush accommodations it afforded them and favors it did for them . ( Congress would later discover that in October 1988 , a whistleblower within the Travel Office had alleged financial improprieties ; the Reagan White House counsel looked into the claim but took no action . ) 
 Republicans and other critics saw the events differently . They alleged that friends of President Bill Clinton , including his third cousin Catherine Cornelius , had sought the firings in order to get the business for themselves . Dale and his staff had been replaced with Little Rock , Arkansas @-@ based World Wide Travel , a company with a substantial reputation in the industry but with several ties to the Clintons . In addition , Hollywood producer and Inauguration chairman Harry Thomason , a friend of both Clintons , and his business partner , Darnell Martens , were looking to get their air charter company , TRM , the White House business in place of Airline of the Americas . The Clinton campaign had been TRM 's sole client during 1992 , collecting commissions from booking charter flights for the campaign . Martens wanted the White House to award TRM a $ 500 @,@ 000 contract for an aircraft audit , while also seeking Travel Office charter business as an intermediary which did not own any planes . 
 Attention initially focused on the role of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , since on May 12 , 1993 , a week before the firings , associate White House counsel William Kennedy had requested that the FBI look into possible improprieties in the Travel Office operation . FBI agents went there and , although initially reluctant , authorized a preliminary investigation . Deputy White House Counsel Vince Foster became worried about the firings about to take place and ordered the KPMG Peat Marwick review , asking the FBI to hold off in the meantime . The accounting review started on May 14 and the report was given to the White House on May 17 . KPMG was unable to do an actual audit , because there were so few records in the Travel Office that could be audited and because the office did not use the double @-@ entry bookkeeping system that audits are based upon . One KPMG representative later described the office as " an ungodly mess in terms of records " with ten years of material piled up in a closet . When the review came back with its reports of irregularities , Watkins went ahead with the terminations on May 19 . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 The travel office affair quickly became the first major ethics controversy of the Clinton presidency and an embarrassment for the new administration . Criticism from political opponents and especially the news media became intense ; the White House was later described as having been " paralyzed for a week " . The effect was intensified by cable television news and the advent of the 24 @-@ hour news cycle . Within three days of the firings , World Wide Travel voluntarily withdrew from the White House travel operation and were replaced on a temporary basis by American Express Travel Services . ( Later , after a competitive bid , American Express received the permanent role to book press charters . ) 
 Various investigations took place . 
 = = = FBI = = = 
 The role of the White House staff in pressuring the FBI to launch an investigation had been heavily criticized ; on May 28 , 1993 , the FBI issued a report saying it had done nothing wrong in its contacts with the White House . ( This conclusion was reiterated by a March 1994 report by the Justice Department 's Office of Professional Responsibility . ) 
 Meanwhile , the FBI investigation of the Travel Office practices themselves continued , soon focusing on Dale . During the summer of 1993 the other staffers of the office were informed that they were no longer a target of investigation . 
 = = = Clinton White House report = = = 
 On July 3 , 1993 , the White House issued its own 80 @-@ page report on the firings , one that the New York Times termed " strikingly self @-@ critical " . Co @-@ written by Chief of Staff McLarty , it criticized five White House officials , included McLarty himself , Watkins , Kennedy , Cornelius , and another , for dismissing the Travel Office members improperly , for appearing to pressure the FBI into its involvement , and for allowing friends of the Clintons to become involved in a matter with which they had a business stake . It said that the employees should instead have been placed on administrative leave . However , the White House said no illegal actions had occurred , and no officials would be terminated ; this did not satisfy Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole , who called for an independent investigation . As Chief of Staff McLarty personally apologized to the fired Travel Office employees — some of whom had all their personal documents and travel photographs related to years of service thrown out during the firing process — and said they would be given other jobs ( which five of them were ; Dale and his assistant director retired . ) The White House report also contained the initial indications of First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton 's involvement in the firings , saying that she had taken an interest in Travel Office mismanagement and had been informed two days in advance that the firings would take place . There was no indication of involvement from President Clinton himself , although he had earlier taken broad public responsibility for what had happened . 
 The travel office controversy was subsequently judged to have been a factor in Vince Foster 's depression and July 20 , 1993 , suicide . In his torn @-@ up resignation note from a few days before , he wrote " No one in The White House , to my knowledge , violated any law or standard of conduct , including any action in the Travel Office . There was no intent to benefit any individual or specific group . [ ... ] The press is covering up the illegal benefits they received from the travel staff " . ( In the last part , Foster may have been referring to lax customs treatment by the Travel Office of goods brought back from foreign trips by reporters . ) 
 = = = GAO Report = = = 
 In July 1993 , Congress requested the non @-@ partisan General Accounting Office investigate the firings ; on May 2 , 1994 , the GAO concluded that the White House did have legal authority to terminate the Travel Office employees without cause , because they served at the pleasure of the president . However , it also concluded that Cornelius , Thomason , and Martens , who all had potential business interests involved , had possibly influenced the decision . Moreover , the GAO report indicated that First Lady Hillary Clinton played a larger role than previously thought before the firings , with Watkins saying she had urged " that action be taken to get ' our people ' into the travel office . " The First Lady , who had given a written statement to the inquiry , said she did " not recall this conversation with the same level of detail as Mr. Watkins . " 
 = = = Independent Counsel investigation begins = = = 
 Special prosecutor Robert B. Fiske tangentially investigated travel office events during the first half of 1994 , as part of investigating the circumstances surrounding Foster 's death . 
 In August 1994 , Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr took over from Fiske in investigating Whitewater , Foster , and indirectly the travel office matter . On July 22 , 1995 , Hillary Clinton gave a deposition under oath to the Independent Counsel that touched on travel office questions ; she denied having had a role in the firings , but was unable to recall many specifics of conversations with Foster and Watkins . 
 = = = Oversight Committee investigation begins = = = 
 In late 1994 , following the 1994 Congressional elections which switched Congress from Democratic to Republican control , the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee , chaired by Pennsylvania Republican William Clinger , launched an investigation into the White House Travel Office firings . In October 1995 , the committee began hearings on the matter ; Clinger soon accused the White House of withholding pertinent documents and sought subpoenas to compel witnesses to appear . 
 = = = Private investigations = = = 
 Not all investigations were by governmental bodies . The magazine The American Spectator , which had a well @-@ established animus towards the First Couple , focused on the Travelgate story as one of many Clinton @-@ related matters it thought scandalous , describing it as " a story about influence @-@ peddling and sleazy deal @-@ making ... in the Clinton White House " . Spectator publisher R. Emmett Tyrrell , Jr. would claim that the magazine 's early Travelgate stories provided useful material to the congressional investigations . In general , Clinton administration controversies such as Travelgate allowed opinion magazines and political debate television shows to attract subscribers and viewers . 
 = = Prosecution and acquittal of Billy Dale = = 
 Meanwhile , as a consequence of the FBI investigation , former Travel Office Director Billy Dale was indicted by a federal grand jury on December 7 , 1994 , on two counts of embezzlement and criminal conversion , charged with wrongfully depositing into his own bank account $ 68 @,@ 000 in checks from media organizations traveling with the president during the period between 1988 and 1991 . He faced up to 20 years in prison if convicted . Dale 's attorneys conceded that funds had been co @-@ mingled , but stated that Dale had not stolen anything but rather used the monies for the substantial tips and off @-@ the @-@ book payments that the job required , especially in foreign countries , and that anything left over was used as a discount against future trips . 
 At the 13 @-@ day trial in October and November 1995 , prominent journalists such as ABC News ' Sam Donaldson and The Los Angeles Times ' Jack Nelson testified as character witnesses on Dale 's behalf . Much of the trial focused on the details of the movement of Travel Office funds into Dale 's personal account , and not on the political overtones of the case . The jury acquitted Dale of both charges on November 16 , 1995 , following less than two hours of deliberations . 
 = = A memo surfaces regarding Hillary Clinton = = 
 On January 5 , 1996 , a new development thrust the travel office matter again to the forefront . A two @-@ year @-@ old memo from White House director of administration David Watkins surfaced that identified First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton as the motivating force behind the firings , with the additional involvement of Vince Foster and Harry Thomason . " Foster regularly informed me that the First Lady was concerned and desired action . The action desired was the firing of the Travel Office staff . " Written in fall 1993 , apparently intended for McLarty , the Watkins memo also said " we both know that there would be hell to pay " if " we failed to take swift and decisive action in conformity with the First Lady 's wishes . " This memo contradicted the First Lady 's previous statements in the GAO investigation , that she had played no role in the firings and had not consulted with Thomason beforehand ; the White House also found it difficult to explain why the memo was so late in surfacing when all the previous investigations had requested all relevant materials . House committee chair Clinger charged a cover @-@ up was taking place and vowed to pursue new material . 
 These developments , following Hillary Clinton 's prior disputed statements about her cattle futures dealings and Whitewater , led to a famous exchange in which high @-@ profile New York Times columnist William Safire , who had endorsed Bill Clinton in the previous election , wrote that many Americans were coming to the " sad realization that our First Lady — a woman of undoubted talents who was a role model for many in her generation — is a congenital liar , " followed by White House Press Secretary Mike McCurry saying that " the President , if he were not the President , would have delivered a more forceful response to that — on the bridge of Mr. Safire 's nose . " 
 As a result of the discovery of the Watkins memo , and based upon a suggestion from the Office of Independent Counsel , on March 20 , 1996 , Attorney General Janet Reno requested that Whitewater Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr expand his inquiry to specifically include the travel office affair , in particular allegations that White House employees had lied about Hillary Clinton 's role in the firings , and that David Watkins or Hillary Clinton had made false statements in previous testimony to the GAO , Congress , or the Independent Counsel . 
 The Congressional investigation continued ; on March 21 , 1996 , Hillary Clinton submitted a deposition under oath to the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee , again acknowledging concern about irregularities in the Travel Office but denying a direct role in the firings and expressing a lack of recollection to a number of questions . A battle of wills took place between the legislative and executive branches . On May 9 , 1996 , President Clinton refused to turn over additional documents related to the matter , claiming executive privilege . House committee chair Clinger threatened a contempt of Congress resolution against the president , and the White House partially backed down on May 30 , surrendering 1 @,@ 000 of the 3 @,@ 000 documents the committee asked for . 
 Meanwhile , the seven dismissed employees were back in the picture . In March 1996 the House voted 350 – 43 to reimburse them for all of their legal expenses ; in September 1996 , Democratic Senator Harry Reid led an unsuccessful attempt to block this measure . In May 1996 , the seven filed a $ 35 million lawsuit against Harry Thomason and Darnell Martens , alleging unlawful interference with their employment and emotional distress . 
 On June 5 , 1996 , Clinger announced that the committee 's investigations had discovered that the White House had requested access to Billy Dale 's FBI background check report seven months after the terminations , in what Clinger said was an improper effort to justify the firings . It was rapidly discovered that the White House had additionally gotten improper access to hundreds of other FBI background reports , many on former White House employees in Republican administrations ; thus was born the Filegate controversy . 
 The Senator Al D 'Amato @-@ chaired Senate Special Whitewater Committee , which had begun the previous year , issued its findings in a majority report on June 18 , 1996 ; it did not investigate Travelgate directly , but did say that " [ Hillary ] Clinton , upon learning of [ Vince ] Foster 's death , at least realized its connection to [ the ] Travelgate scandal , and perhaps to the Whitewater matter , and dispatched her trusted lieutenants to contain any potential embarrassment or political damage . " Minority Democratic members of the Committee derided these findings as " a legislative travesty , " " a witch hunt , " and " a political game . " 
 The House Government Reform and Oversight Committee issued its majority report on September 18 , 1996 , in which it accused the Clinton administration of having obstructed the committee 's efforts to investigate the Travelgate scandal . It portrayed Bill Clinton as being heavily involved in the travel office affair , more than any other investigation . The report 's chapter titles were lurid : " The White House <unk> All Investigations into the White House Travel Office <unk> and Related Matters " , " The White House Initiated a Full @-@ Scale Campaign of Misinformation in the Aftermath of the Travel Office <unk> and President Clinton Led the Misinformation Campaign from the First Days of the Travelgate <unk> " , " Foster 's Death Shattered a White House Just Recovering from an <unk> First 6 Months of Administration " , and so forth . Democratic members of the Committee walked out in protest over the report , with ranking member Henry Waxman calling it " an embarrassment to you [ Chairman Clinger ] , this committee and this Congress " and " a crassly partisan smear campaign against President Clinton , Mrs. Clinton and this administration . " The following month Clinger forwarded the report , along with one on Filegate , to the Independent Counsel , suggesting that the testimony of several witnesses be looked at for possible perjury or obstruction of justice . Democrats said this was politically motivated in an attempt to influence the 1996 presidential election . 
 = = Independent Counsel findings = = 
 Almost two years passed . Independent Counsel Starr continued his investigation . Starr wanted access to notes that Vince Foster 's attorney took in a conversation with Foster about the travel office affair shortly before Foster 's suicide , but on June 25 , 1998 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6 – 3 against Starr in Swidler & Berlin v. United States , stating that attorney – client privilege extends beyond the grave . In September 1998 Independent Counsel Starr released the famous Starr Report , concerning offenses that may have been committed by President Clinton as part of the Lewinsky scandal . It did not mention the travel office matter . 
 On November 19 , 1998 , Starr testified before the House Judiciary Committee in connection with the impeachment of Bill Clinton over charges related to the Lewinsky scandal . Here , for the first time , Starr exonerated President Clinton of complicity in the travel office affair , saying that while investigations were not complete , " the president was not involved in our ... investigation . " ( Starr also chose this occasion to clear President Clinton in the Filegate matter , and to say he had not committed impeachable wrongdoing in the Whitewater matter ; Democrats on the committee immediately criticized Starr for withholding all these findings until after the 1998 Congressional elections . ) 
 Starr explicitly did not exonerate Hillary Clinton , however ; her case remained unsettled . More time passed . By 2000 , she was a candidate for United States Senator from New York , and Starr had been replaced as Independent Counsel by prosecutor Robert Ray , who once worked for Rudy Giuliani , Clinton 's then @-@ opponent in the Senate race . Regardless , Ray vowed his investigation would have " no untoward effect on the political process . " Ray was determined to wrap up the case before the end of Bill Clinton 's term . 
 On June 23 , 2000 , the suspense ended when Ray submitted the final Independent Counsel report on the travel office affair under seal to the judicial panel in charge of the investigation and publicly announced that he would seek no criminal charges against Hillary Clinton . Ray said that she had , contrary to her statements , " ultimately influenced " the decision to fire the employees . However , " the evidence was insufficient to prove to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt that any of Mrs. Clinton 's statements and testimony regarding her involvement in the travel office firings were knowingly false , " and thus prosecution was declined . White House press secretary Joe Lockhart was critical of Ray 's statement : " By inappropriately characterizing the results of a legally sealed report through innuendo , the Office of Independent Counsel has further politicized an investigation that has dragged on far too long . " 
 Ray 's full 243 @-@ page report was unsealed and made public on October 18 , 2000 , three weeks before the Senatorial election . It confirmed that neither Hillary Clinton nor David Watkins would be indicted . It included some new detail , including a somewhat unsubstantiated claim from a friend of Watkins saying that the First Lady had told Watkins to " fire the sons of bitches . " Ray cited eight separate conversations between the First Lady and senior staff and concluded : " Mrs. Clinton ’ s input into the process was significant , if not the significant factor influencing the pace of events in the Travel Office firings and the ultimate decision to fire the employees . " Moreover , Ray determined Hillary Clinton had given " factually false " testimony when questioned by the GAO , the Independent Counsel , and Congress about the travel office firings , but reiterated that " the evidence was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt " that she knew her statements were false or understood that they may have prompted the firings . 
 Immediate reactions to the report differed . David E. Kendall , Hillary Clinton 's lawyer , said that Ray 's words were " highly unfair and misleading " and that Ray 's conclusions were inconsistent , that evidence regarding her innocence had been buried in the document , and that the report confirmed that her fears about financial improprieties in the Travel Office were warranted . On the other hand , Bill Powers , chair of the New York Republican State Committee , said the report " once again makes us question " the believability of Clinton , and Congressman Rick Lazio , her Republican opponent in the Senate election , said " We believe that character counts in public service . " New York Times columnist Safire updated his description of Hillary Clinton to " habitual <unk> " , saying " the evidence that she has been lying all along is damning " and comparing her dark side to that of Richard Nixon , in whose White House he had once worked . 
 Regardless , after 7 ½ years , Travelgate was finally over . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the legal aftermath , Swidler & Berlin v. United States became an important Supreme Court decision . The length , expense , and results of the Travelgate and the other investigations grouped under the Whitewater umbrella turned much of the public against the Independent Counsel mechanism . As such , the Independent Counsel law expired in 1999 , with critics saying it cost too much with too few results ; even Kenneth Starr favored the law 's demise . 
 Opinions would differ over the legacy of the affair . Some agreed with Safire , who had said that Hillary Clinton was " a vindictive power player who used the FBI to ruin the lives of people standing in the way of juicy patronage . " Conservative commentator Barbara Olson would entitle her highly unflattering 1999 book Hell to Pay : The Unfolding Story of Hillary Rodham Clinton , in reference to Clinton 's Travelgate phrase . However , these had little effect on Hillary Clinton 's career , as she won the 2000 election to the Senate , won re @-@ election in 2006 , became a strong contender for the Democratic Party nomination in the 2008 presidential election , then served as U.S. Secretary of State from 2009 to 2013 , and then ran for president again in 2016 . 
 Bill Clinton later described the allegations and investigation as " a fraud " , while in her 2003 autobiography Hillary Clinton gave short shrift to the matter , never mentioning Billy Dale by name and saying that " ' Travelgate ' ... was perhaps worthy of a two- or three @-@ week life span ; instead , in a partisan political climate , it became the first manifestation of an obsession for investigation that persisted into the next millennium . " Many in the Clinton inner circle would always believe that political motivations had been behind the investigation , including an attempt to derail Hillary Clinton 's role in the 1993 health care reform plan . But associate White House counsel William Kennedy would also later reflect that some of it was just " pure palpable hatred of the Clintons . It started and it never quit . " 
 = Paid in Full ( album ) = 
 Paid in Full is the debut album of American hip hop duo Eric B. & Rakim , released on August 25 , 1987 , by Island @-@ subsidiary label 4th & B 'way Records . The duo recorded the album at hip hop producer Marley Marl 's home studio and Power Play Studios in New York City , following Rakim 's response to Eric B. ' s search for a rapper to complement his disc jockey work in 1985 . The album peaked at number fifty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 chart and produced five singles , " Eric B. Is President " , " I Ain 't No Joke " , " I Know You Got Soul " , " Move the Crowd " , and " Paid in Full " . 
 Paid in Full is credited as a benchmark album of golden age hip hop . Rakim 's rapping , which pioneered the use of internal rhymes in hip hop , set a higher standard of lyricism in the genre and served as a template for future rappers . The album 's heavy sampling by Eric B. became influential in hip hop production . The record has sold over a million copies and the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it platinum in 1995 . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 228 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Eric B. and Rakim met in 1985 after Eric B. looked for a rapper to complement his turntable work at the New York City radio station <unk> . After Rakim responded to Eric B. ' s search for " New York 's top MC " , Eric B 's friend and roommate Marley Marl allowed him to use his home studio . The first track they recorded , " Eric B. Is President " , was released as a single on the independent <unk> Records in 1986 . After Def Jam Recordings founder Russell Simmons heard the single , the duo were signed to Island Records and began recording the album in Manhattan 's Power Play Studios in early 1987 . Rakim wrote his songs in approximately one hour while listening to the beat . He then recorded his vocals in the booth by reading his lyrics from a paper . In 2006 , Rakim revealed , " When I hear my first album today I hear myself reading my rhymes but I 'm my worst critic . " The duo completed the album in one week . They have said that they worked in 48 @-@ hour shifts and recorded in single takes in order complete the album within budget . In a 2008 interview with AllHipHop , Eric B. stated , " [ T ] o sit here and say we put together this calculated album to be a great album would be a lie . We were just doing records that felt good . " 
 The album 's success led to a contract with Uni Records and MCA Records in 1988 , who released their second album , Follow the Leader . Eric B. & Rakim are credited as officially producing Paid in Full . Although Marley Marl claimed to have produced two tracks ( " My Melody " and " Eric B. Is President " ) , Eric B. has argued that Marley Marl was only an engineer . In 2003 , Eric B. alleged the duo had not been fully paid for their work , and filed a lawsuit against the Island Def Jam Music Group , <unk> Cohen , and Russell Simmons . 
 = = Music = = 
 Rakim 's rhyming deviated from the simple rhyme patterns of early 1980s hip hop . His free @-@ rhythm style ignored bar lines and had earned comparisons to Thelonious Monk . The New York Times ' Ben Ratliff wrote that Rakim 's " <unk> rapping developed the form beyond the flat @-@ footed rhythms of schoolyard rhymes " . While many rappers developed their technique through improvisation , Rakim was one of the first to demonstrate advantages of a writerly style , as with for instance his pioneering use of internal rhyme . Unlike previous rappers such as LL Cool J and Run @-@ D.M.C. who delivered their vocals with high energy , Rakim employed a relaxed , stoic delivery . According to MTV , " We 'd been used to MCs like Run and DMC , Chuck D and KRS @-@ One leaping on the mic shouting with energy and irreverence , but Rakim took a methodical approach to his microphone <unk> . He had a slow flow , and every line was blunt , mesmeric . " Rakim 's relaxed delivery resulted from his jazz influences ; he had played the saxophone and was a John Coltrane fan . His subject matter often covered his own rapping skills and lyrical superiority over other rappers . 
 Allmusic editor Steve Huey characterized Rakim for his " complex internal rhymes , literate imagery , velvet @-@ smooth flow , and unpredictable , off @-@ the @-@ beat rhythms . " Pitchfork Media writer Jess Harvell described his rapping as " authoritative , burnished , [ and ] possessing an unflappable sense of rhythm " . Paid in Full , which contains gritty , heavy , and dark beats , marked the beginning of heavy sampling in hip hop records . Of the album 's ten tracks , three are instrumentals . As a disc jockey , Eric B. had reinstated the art of live turntable mixing . His soul @-@ filled sampling became influential in future hip hop production . Music critic Robert Christgau noted that Eric B. had incorporated " touches of horn or whistle deep in the mix " of his sampled percussion and scratches . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Eric B. Is President " was released as the first single with " My Melody " as the B @-@ side . It peaked at number 48 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number forty on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales . The track sparked debate on the legality of unauthorized sampling when James Brown sued to prevent the duo 's use of his music . PopMatters ' Mark Anthony Neal called it " the most danceable hip @-@ hop recording " of 1986 . According to Touré of The New York Times , " It is Rakim 's verbal dexterity as well as his calm , deep voice and dark tone that has made this song a rap classic : ' I came in the door / I said it before / I 'll never let the mic magnetize me no more / But it 's <unk> ' me / Fightin ' me / <unk> ' me to rhyme / I can 't hold it back / I 'm looking for the line / Takin ' off my coat / <unk> ' my throat / The rhyme will be kickin ' it / Til I hit my last note . ' " The second single , " I Ain 't No Joke " , peaked at number 38 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . Described as one of the album 's " monumental singles " , Michael Di Bella wrote in the All Music Guide to Rock that " Rakim grabs the listener by the throat and illustrates his mastery of the rhyming craft " . 
 The third single , " I Know You Got Soul " , peaked at number 39 on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart , number 34 on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales , and number 64 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . The track 's production contains " digitized cymbal crashes , breathing sounds , and a bumping bass line . " The song popularized James Brown samples in hip hop songs . The British band M | A | R | R | S sampled the line , " Pump up the volume " , on their number one UK single , " Pump Up the Volume " . Rolling Stone ranked it at number 386 on " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . The fourth single , " Move the Crowd " , peaked at number three on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart and number 25 on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales . The track 's B @-@ side , " Paid in Full " , was released as a single in 1987 and later remixed by the production duo Coldcut . The remix used several vocal samples , most prominently " Im Nin <unk> " by Israeli singer Ofra Haza . In 2008 , the song was ranked at number 24 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Hip Hop Songs " . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 In a contemporary review for The Washington Post , Mark Jenkins highlighted the single " Eric B. Is President " but was unimpressed by the rest of Paid in Full : " Its beats are monotonous , and the attempts to take ' jazz and the quiet storm ' and ' convert into hip @-@ hop form ' fall flat . " Robert Christgau from The Village Voice said it has " four groundbreaking masterworks " in " I Ain 't No Joke " , " I Know You Got Soul " , " Paid in Full " , and " Eric B. Is President " , but was less enthusiastic about the other six songs : " They 're pure , innovative , in @-@ your @-@ <unk> doubt . But they 're also turntablism with spoken decoration , of small use to anyone who hasn 't internalized the ' real ' hip hop aesthetic . " In the newspaper 's annual Pazz & Jop critics poll , it was named the 27th best album of 1987 . 
 Paid in Full was released during what became known as the golden age hip hop era . In The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Sasha Frere @-@ Jones called it " one of hip @-@ hop 's perfect records " , while Alex Ogg considered it to be the duo 's magnum opus in his book The Men Behind Def Jam . Rakim 's rapping on the album set a blueprint for future rappers and helped secure East Coast hip hop 's reputation for innovative lyrical technique . Author William Cobb stated in To the Break of Dawn that his rapping had " stepped outside " of the preceding era of old school hip hop and that while the vocabulary and lyrical dexterity of newer rappers had improved , it was " nowhere near what Rakim introduced to the genre " . The New York Times ' Dimitri Ehrlich , who described the album as " an artistic and commercial benchmark " , credited Rakim for helping " give birth to a musical genre " and leading " a quiet musical revolution , introducing a soft @-@ spoken rapping style " . Allmusic 's Steve Huey declared Paid in Full one of hip @-@ hop 's most influential albums and " essential listening " for those interested in the genre 's " basic musical foundations " . MTV ranked it at number one in " The Greatest Hip @-@ Hop Albums of All Time " , stating it raised the standards of hip @-@ hop " both sonically and poetically " and described it as " captivating , profound , innovative and instantly influential " . The album is broken down track @-@ by @-@ track by Rakim in Brian Coleman 's book Check the Technique . 
 In 2003 , Rolling Stone listed Paid in Full at number 228 on " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , calling it " Ice @-@ grilled , laid @-@ back , diamond @-@ sharp : Rakim is a front @-@ runner in the race for Best Rapper Ever , and this album is a big reason why . " Similarly , Blender magazine included the album in its " 500 CDs You Must Own Before You Die " . Time magazine listed it as one of the eighteen albums of the 1980s in its " All @-@ TIME 100 " albums ; editor Alan Light acknowledged the record changed the " sound , flow , and potential " of hip hop and that if Rakim is " the greatest MC of all time , as many argue , this album is the evidence " . Jess Harvell of Pitchfork Media complimented Rakim for an " endless display of pure skill " and described the album as " laidback and funky " , but believed it contained " too much filler to get a free ' classic ' pass " . Pitchfork Media placed Paid in Full at number fifty @-@ two in its " Top 100 Albums of the 1980s " ; editor Sam Chennault wrote that Rakim inspired a generation of MCs and " defined what it meant to be a hip @-@ hop lyricist " . Slant Magazine listed the album at # 32 on its list of " Best Albums of the 1980s " saying " For his part , Rakim didn 't need to rely on macho jargon and trite <unk> for his self @-@ aggrandizing sermons ; he would simply reel off line after line of spellbinding wordplay , influencing an entire decade of tongue @-@ twisting MCs in the process . " 
 Rakim is credited with influencing rappers including the Wu @-@ Tang Clan , Jay @-@ Z , 50 Cent , and Nas , who cited Paid in Full as one of his favorite albums . 50 Cent told NME that Paid in Full was the first album he bought : " I used to get my grandmother 's tape recorder – the one she used to tape church services – and record hip @-@ hop off the radio . And , with Eric B. & Rakim , I think that was the first moment where I felt like , ' I 've got to own this . This is crucial . " 
 On July 11 , 1995 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album platinum . As of December 1997 , it has sold over a million copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and officially produced by Eric B. & Rakim . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Information taken from Allmusic . 
 Art direction – Ruth Kaplan 
 Engineer – Patrick Adams 
 Executive producer – Robert Hill 
 Mastering – Herb Powers 
 Photography – Ron <unk> 
 Producer – Eric B. & Rakim 
 Remixing – Marley Marl 
 = = Chart history = = 
 = = Reissues = = 
 = The Boat Race 1969 = 
 The 115th Boat Race took place on 5 April 1969 . Held annually , it is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race featured the heaviest oarsman in the history of the event in Cambridge 's David Cruttenden . It was won by Cambridge who passed the finishing post four lengths ahead of Oxford , securing Cambridge 's second consecutive victory . The winning time of 18 minutes 4 seconds was the third fastest in modern Boat Race history . 
 In the reserve race , Goldie beat Isis , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 63 victories to Oxford 's 51 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 The race was umpired by Alastair Graham who had rowed for Oxford , while the timekeepers for the race were Dickie Burnell and G. G. H. Page . Oxford 's coach was Derek Drury while Cambridge were led by Lou Barry . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 9 lb ( 86 @.@ 5 kg ) , 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . At 15 st 11 lb , Cambridge 's number four David Cruttenden was the heaviest oarsman to have ever participated in the race , half a stone heavier than American rower Josh Jensen who rowed for Oxford in the 1967 race . Cambridge 's Robin Winckless and Nick Hornsby were rowing in their third Boat Race , while Chris Powell and Graeme Hall were also returning Light Blues . Peter Saltmarsh returned for Oxford , making his third appearance in the event . Australian Ashton Calvert , the Oxford cox , was the only non @-@ British competitor registered in the race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . With helicopters hovering above the start , Douglas Calder of The Times reported that it was unlikely that either the crews could hear the umpire nor the umpire hear the crews at the start ; instead just the flag dropping notified the strokes of the start . Cambridge took an early lead , and their advantage was compounded when the umpire warned Oxford at Beverley Brook to move away to avoid a clash of oars . Cambridge were two seconds ahead at the Mile Post ; through rough water , the Light Blue boat coped better and extended their lead to six seconds ahead at Hammersmith Bridge , and at least a length clear of Oxford . While the conditions improved beyond Hammersmith , Cambridge continued to extend their lead , and held an advantage of eight seconds ahead at Chiswick Steps , increasing to eleven seconds ahead at Barnes Bridge . Cambridge won by four lengths and 14 seconds , in a time of 18 minutes 4 seconds , the third fastest time in the history of the event on the Championship Course , bettered only in the 1934 and 1948 races . Oxford 's coach Derek Drury was philosophical in defeat : " That 's the way the cookie crumbles . " 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by two lengths and in a time of 18 minutes 50 seconds , in their third consecutive victory . In the 24th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their seventh consecutive victory . 
 = Seasons in the Abyss = 
 Seasons in the Abyss is the fifth studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer . It was released on October 9 , 1990 , through Def American Records , and later through American Recordings after the record label changed its name . The album 's recording sessions began in March 1990 . The sessions began at Hit City West , Hollywood Sound , and in June , the sessions ended at Record Plant in Los Angeles , California . It was the band 's last studio album to feature original drummer Dave Lombardo until 2006 's Christ Illusion . 
 The musical style of the album is similar and was compared by critics to the band 's previous two albums : South of Heaven and Reign in Blood . The album 's reception was generally positive . It peaked number 18 in the United Kingdom and also charted on the Billboard 200 at number 40 . It was certified gold in the United States and Canada . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The album was recorded from January to June 1990 in two separate studios : Hit City West , Hollywood Sound , and Record Plant in Los Angeles , California . Seasons in the Abyss was produced by Rick Rubin , who had also produced their previous two albums Reign in Blood and South of Heaven . 
 Track eight , " Temptation " , featured an overdub of lead vocalist Tom Araya 's singing ; the vocal arrangement on the track was unintentional . Araya sang the song twice : once the way he felt it sounded best ; the second time at the insistence of Kerry King the way he thought it should be sung . By accident both tracks were played back simultaneously on the instrumental background , and the producer suggested that both vocal tracks should be used on the album . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Nathan Brackett , author of The Rolling Stone Album Guide , Seasons in the Abyss continued the band 's sound as displayed in their first four albums . The songs on the album have complex guitar riffs that proceed at both " blinding speed " tempos and mid @-@ tempo <unk> . Brackett said that the songs ' themes shy away from the " fantasy and into the hells here on Earth " and instead was " music to conquer nations by . " 
 The album combines " grim " vocals and " frenetic " guitars . Blabbermouth.net said that the album is " considered to be among the genre 's all @-@ time classics " . " War Ensemble " , " Dead Skin Mask " , and " Seasons In The Abyss " were described as setting the album 's standard and the songs , according to the site , produced a sound that could not be matched by anyone else . 
 AllMusic said that it combines the mid @-@ tempo grooves of South of Heaven with " manic bursts of aggression " à la Reign in Blood . Allmusic also said that when writing the album 's lyrics , Slayer " rarely turns to demonic visions of the afterlife anymore , preferring instead to find tangible horror in real life — war , murder , [ and ] human weakness . There 's even full @-@ fledged social criticism , which should convince any doubters that Slayer aren 't trying to promote the subjects they sing about . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Slayer released Seasons in the Abyss on October 9 , 1990 , through Def American Records . Later that year it was released again through Warner Music Group . It was re @-@ released in 1994 through American Recordings . Although it was " unwelcome " to music shows and rock – radio outlets , it got substantial airplay on MTV 's now @-@ defunct " Headbangers Ball " . Seasons in the Abyss features Slayer 's first music video , filmed in Cairo . 
 The album received generally positive reviews by critics . CMJ New Music Report said that the album cover was " a culinary goof on the veteran metal band " . AllMusic 's Steve Huey said that it " brought back some of the pounding speed of Reign in Blood for their third major @-@ label album " , and addressed it to be " their most accessible album , displaying the full range of their abilities all in one place , with sharp , clean production " . Huey later wrote that the album " paints Reagan @-@ era America as a cesspool of corruption and cruelty , and the music is as devilishly effective as ever " . 
 J. D. Considine noted about " War Ensemble " : " it 's not a pretty song by any means . An aural blitzkrieg whose chorus climaxes with the lines , ' The final swing is not a drill / It 's how many people I can kill , ' it is filled with brutal images and blaring guitars , all propelled at the breathless pace of thrash metal . " Considine would later say that the album 's music " so accurately sums up the controlled panic of combat that the Army itself has been using Slayer songs to psych its troops for military maneuvers in the Saudi desert " . Mike Stagno from <unk> said that the album was a well @-@ received return by Slayer . Entertainment Weekly reviewer David Browne said that listening to Seasons in the Abyss was " like listening to a single speed @-@ metal song — the world 's longest " . 
 The album peaked at number 40 on the Billboard 200 and number 18 on the UK Albums Chart . Seasons in the Abyss was certified gold in both the United States and Canada . The title track and " War Ensemble " earned Slayer its heaviest airplay on MTV to date . In an October 2007 interview , Evile frontman Matt Drake described Seasons in the Abyss as " the perfect mix " between the two styles ( " speed " and " slow material " ) showcased on Reign in Blood and South of Heaven respectively . Children of Bodom bassist <unk> T. Blacksmith hailed Seasons in the Abyss as " the best metal album ever " . The thrash / crossover supergroup S.O.D. released a single named " Seasoning The Obese " in tribute to the album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Slayer 
 Tom Araya – bass , lead vocals 
 Jeff Hanneman – lead and rhythm guitar 
 Kerry King – lead and rhythm guitar 
 Dave Lombardo – drums 
 Production 
 Rick Rubin – production 
 Andy Wallace – co @-@ production , engineering , mixing 
 Larry Carroll – artwork , illustrations 
 Chris Rich – assistant engineer 
 David <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Allen <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Robert Fisher – graphic design 
 Rick Sales – management 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 Sunny Bak – photography 
 Marty <unk> – photography 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Croatia national football team = 
 The Croatia national football team ( Croatian : Hrvatska <unk> <unk> ) represents Croatia in international football . The team is controlled by the Croatian Football Federation , the nation 's governing body of football . A FIFA @-@ sanctioned national side previously represented the short @-@ lived Banovina of Croatia and Independent State of Croatia in nineteen friendly matches between 1940 and 1944 . This team was dissolved in 1945 as Croatia became a constituent federal republic of SFR Yugoslavia . In the period between 1945 and 1990 , Croatia was ineligible to field a separate team for competitive matches ; local players instead played for the Yugoslavia national football team . 
 The modern Croatian team was formed in 1990 , shortly before Croatia 's independence from Yugoslavia , and by 1993 had gained membership in FIFA and UEFA . The team played their first competitive matches in the successful qualifying campaign for UEFA Euro 1996 , leading to their first appearance at a major tournament . In Croatia 's FIFA World Cup debut in 1998 the team finished third and provided the tournament 's top scorer , Davor Šuker . Since becoming eligible to compete in international tournaments , Croatia have failed to qualify for only one World Cup ( in 2010 ) and one European Championship ( in 2000 ) . 
 Most home matches are played at the Maksimir Stadium in Zagreb , with some fixtures also taking place at the Poljud Stadium in Split or at other , smaller venues , such as <unk> Stadium in Rijeka or Gradski <unk> in Osijek . The team was undefeated in its first 36 home competitive matches at Maksimir , the run ending with a heavy defeat to England in September 2008 . The team 's traditional nickname is <unk> ( " The Blazers " ) . 
 The team was named FIFA 's " Best Mover of the Year " in 1994 and 1998 , the only team — along with Colombia — to win the award more than once . On admission to FIFA , Croatia was ranked 125th in the world ; following the 1998 World Cup campaign , the side rose to third place in the rankings , making it the most volatile team in FIFA Rankings history . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ independence = = = 
 Association football was first introduced to Croatia by English expatriates working on industrial projects in Rijeka and Županja in 1873 . By 1907 , local clubs had been established in Croatia and a modern edition of the sport 's laws was translated and published . Before the nation 's independence , Croatian footballers played for the national teams of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ( 1919 – 39 ) and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( 1945 – 90 ) , though during periods of political upheaval , ethnically Croatian sides occasionally formed to play unofficial matches . A hastily arranged Croatian side , managed by Hugo <unk> , played a few matches in 1918 – 19 . 
 In 1940 , Jozo <unk> led an unofficial national team representing the Banovina of Croatia ( part of Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in four friendly matches , against Switzerland and Hungary . Following invasion by the Axis powers , the Croatian Football Federation became briefly active , joining FIFA on 17 July 1941 , representing the Independent State of Croatia . The side , led by Rudolf <unk> , went on to play 15 friendly matches , 14 of those as a member of FIFA . Croatia 's first recorded result as a FIFA member was a 1 – 1 draw with Slovakia on 8 September in Bratislava . The Independent State of Croatia continued playing matches until 1945 and the end of World War II , when SR Croatia was formed as constituent part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . 
 From 1950 to 1956 , unofficial Croatian teams were briefly active — they won games against Indonesia and a Yugoslav team playing as " Serbia " . The Yugoslavia squad at the 1956 Summer Olympics included Croatian footballers , as did Yugoslavia in World Cup and European Championship tournaments up to 1990 . 
 = = = Official formation = = = 
 The last Yugoslav team to field a considerable Croatian contingent played against Faroe Islands on 16 May 1991 , days before Croatia 's independence referendum . However , an unofficial Croatian team was formed shortly before , and played the team 's first modern international game , against the United States on 17 October 1990 at Maksimir Stadium . The game , which Croatia won 2 – 1 , was one of three games played under caretaker manager <unk> Jerković . The match against the American side also marked the introduction of Croatia 's national jersey , inspired by the chequered design of the country 's coat of arms . Although Croatia was still officially part of Yugoslavia until its independence declaration on 8 October 1991 , this team already served as a de facto national side . Croatia went on to win two more friendly games under Jerković , against Romania in December 1990 and Slovenia in June 1991 . 
 On 3 July 1992 , Croatia was re @-@ admitted to FIFA , playing its first official matches in the modern era against Australia in Melbourne , Adelaide and Sydney . This team was led by Stanko <unk> as part of an international exhibition tour ; in April 1993 , Vlatko Marković was appointed as manager . Croatia finally gained admission into UEFA in June 1993 , which was too late for the national team to enter the 1994 FIFA World Cup qualifiers , as these already commenced the year before . Marković only led the team in one match , a home win against Ukraine in June 1993 , before being dismissed in February 1994 and replaced by Miroslav Blažević the following month . The team 's performances before Croatia 's official independence were not recorded by FIFA , so they entered the World Rankings in 125th place . Blažević led Croatia 's qualifying campaign for Euro 1996 , beginning with the nation 's first post @-@ independence competitive victory , a 2 – 0 win over Estonia on 4 September 1994 . Their first competitive defeat came on 11 June 1995 in a 1 – 0 away loss to Ukraine during the same qualifying campaign . They eventually finished first in their qualifying group and won FIFA 's 1994 Best Mover of the Year award as they moved up to 62nd in the rankings by the end of the year . 
 = = = Golden Generation ( 1994 – 99 ) = = = 
 Goran <unk> scored the team 's first goal at a major tournament , a late winner against Turkey at the City Ground in Nottingham in their first group match at Euro 96 . After their opening victory , Croatia beat reigning champions Denmark 3 – 0 , but went on to lose against Portugal by the same scoreline in their final group fixture . Croatia still advanced to the knockout stage , but were beaten in the quarter @-@ finals 1 – 2 by Germany , who went on to win the tournament . 
 In spite of the quarter @-@ final exit , Blažević continued to lead Croatia in the 1998 World Cup qualifying campaign , which ended successfully after an aggregate victory against Ukraine in the two @-@ legged play @-@ off . In the group stage of the World Cup , Croatia beat Jamaica and Japan but lost to Argentina , before defeating Romania to reach a quarter @-@ final tie against Germany , then ranked second in the world . Though regarded as underdogs , Croatia won 3 – 0 with goals from Robert Jarni , Goran <unk> and Davor Šuker , all after Christian <unk> had been sent off . Croatia then faced the host nation , France , in the semi @-@ final . After a goalless first @-@ half , Croatia took the lead , only to concede two goals by opposing defender Lilian Thuram and lose 1 – 2 . In the third @-@ place match , Croatia beat the Netherlands 2 – 1 , with Davor Šuker winning the Golden Boot award for scoring the most goals of the tournament with six goals in seven games . Croatia 's performance in 1998 was among the best debut performances in the World Cup ( equaling Portugal 's third place debut finish at the 1966 World Cup ) , and as a result , Croatia rose to number three in the January 1999 FIFA World Rankings , their highest ranking to date . For their achievements , the team of the 1990s was dubbed the " Golden Generation . " A considerable portion of this squad ( Jarni , Štimac , Boban , <unk> and Šuker ) , previously won the 1987 FIFA World Youth Championship with the Yugoslavia under @-@ 20 team . 
 Despite good performances in their first two major competitions , Croatia 's qualifying campaign for Euro 2000 was less successful , as they finished third in their qualifying group behind Yugoslavia and Republic of Ireland , and thus failed to qualify . Both fixtures against archenemies Yugoslavia ( the rump state later renamed Serbia and Montenegro ) ended in draws , which prevented Croatia from qualifying for the tournament . 
 = = = Jozić and Barić period ( 2000 – 04 ) = = = 
 Although Blažević continued his tenure in spite of failure to qualify for Euro 2000 , he resigned in October 2000 following draws against Belgium and Scotland in the first two games of the 2002 World Cup qualifiers . His successor at the helm of the national team was Mirko Jozić , who previously led the Yugoslavia under @-@ 20 team to a World Cup triumph in 1987 . Despite the retirement of many Golden Generation players , Croatia went unbeaten during the rest of the qualifiers . They opened their 2002 World Cup campaign with a narrow loss to Mexico before producing a surprise 2 – 1 victory over Euro 2000 finalists Italy in the next fixture , giving life to hopes of passing through to the knockout stage . However , they lost their final group fixture to Ecuador and were eliminated . Jozić then resigned , and was replaced in July 2002 by Croatian @-@ Austrian Otto Barić , the team 's first manager born outside the Balkans . 
 During Barić 's tenure , most of the remaining players from the Golden Generation squad were gradually replaced by younger players over the course of the Euro 2004 qualifiers . Croatia went on to qualify for the tournament with a playoff victory against Slovenia , winning 2 @-@ 1 on aggregate after <unk> <unk> 's decisive late goal in the second leg . At the finals tournament in Portugal , Croatia drew 0 – 0 with Switzerland and 2 – 2 with reigning champions France only to lose to England 2 – 4 and suffer another elimination in the group stage . Barić 's two @-@ year contract ended in June 2004 and was not renewed . 
 = = = Kranjčar period ( 2004 – 06 ) = = = 
 Former Croatia international Zlatko Kranjčar , appointed to succeed Barić in July 2004 , led the team through the 2006 World Cup qualifiers without losing a single match and topping the group ahead of Sweden and Bulgaria . However , local media outlets accused him of nepotism for selecting his son Niko Kranjčar for the national squad . At the 2006 World Cup , Croatia lost their opening game to Brazil and drew 0 – 0 with Japan after Darijo Srna missed a first @-@ half penalty . A 2 – 2 draw with Australia , in which three players were sent off , confirmed Croatia 's exit in the group stage . The game was also notable for a mistake by referee Graham Poll , who gave three yellow cards to Croatian defender Josip Šimunić , failing to send him off after his second offense . He later stated that he mistook Šimunić for an Australian player due to his Australian accent . Poll was heavily criticised for losing control of the match , and retired from refereeing shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Bilić period ( 2006 – 12 ) = = = 
 In July 2006 , the Croatian Football Federation replaced Kranjčar with Slaven Bilić , who played for the national team during their Golden Generation era . Bilić , who previously managed the under @-@ 21 team between 2004 and 2006 , introduced a host of young players into the squad , which ultimately proved successful . His first game was a friendly away victory against 2006 World Cup champions Italy . After controversially suspending Darijo Srna , Ivica Olić and Boško Balaban for missing a curfew after a <unk> nightclub outing , Bilić led the team through qualifiers for Euro 2008 . Croatia topped their group , losing only one game to Macedonia and beating England twice , who as a result failed to qualify for the first time since 1984 . 
 Shortly before the European Championships , first @-@ choice striker Eduardo , who was the team 's top goalscorer during qualifying , suffered a compound fracture while playing for Arsenal in the Premier League . Bilić was forced to alter his final Euro 2008 squad significantly and recruited Nikola <unk> and Nikola <unk> , neither of whom had yet played competitive games for the national team . The team received criticism after poor attacking performances in warm @-@ up games against Scotland and Moldova , but at the tournament they beat Austria , Germany and Poland in the group stages to reach the quarter @-@ finals with maximum group points for the first time in their tournament history . Niko Kovač remained team captain at what was expected to be his final international tournament , except in the final group fixture when Dario Šimić temporarily held the captain 's armband . Croatia 's campaign ended dramatically when they lost a penalty shoot @-@ out to Turkey , with Luka Modrić , Mladen <unk> and Ivan Rakitić all missing their penalties . Croatia left the tournament with records for fewest goals conceded ( 2 ) , fewest games lost ( 0 ) , and earliest goal ( in the fourth minute of their opening game against Austria ; this was also the all @-@ time earliest successful penalty at the European Championship Finals ) . 
 Following the tournament , Bilić renewed his contract , becoming the first manager since Blažević to lead Croatia to successive tournaments . Croatia were again drawn to play England in the qualifying stages for the 2010 World Cup ; the tie was voted the most anticipated of the campaign on <unk> After a home win against Kazakhstan Croatia lost at home to England , ending a 14 @-@ year unbeaten home record . The team was eventually weakened due to a number of key players ' injuries and went on to suffer their heaviest defeat in history , losing 5 – 1 to England at Wembley Stadium . Although Croatia defeated Kazakhstan in their final qualifying fixture , they were ultimately eliminated as Ukraine , who had previously defeated group leaders England , beat Andorra to win second place in the group . Bilić was once again heavily expected to resign as national coach , but instead vowed to renew his contract and remain in charge . 
 Despite heavy loss of form , which also saw the team fall outside the top ten in the FIFA rankings , Croatia were placed in the top tier of teams for the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying draw ; Croatia was previously a candidate to co @-@ host the tournament with Hungary which would have allowed the team to qualify automatically , but UEFA eventually chose Poland and Ukraine as hosts instead . Despite being top @-@ seeds in their qualifying group , Croatia finished second behind Greece , settling for a play @-@ off against Euro 2008 rivals Turkey . Croatia proceeded to beat Turkey 3 – 0 on aggregate , with all three goals coming in the away leg in Istanbul , thereby qualifying for the 2012 European championship . In the proceeding group @-@ stage draw for the tournament , Croatia were placed in the third tier of teams , and were eventually grouped with Ireland , Italy and defending champions Spain . 
 In the buildup towards the UEFA Euro 2012 tournament , the team 's first major competition since their 2008 run at the same event , manager Slaven Bilić formally agreed a deal to manage Russian club Lokomotiv Moscow , thereby announcing he would resign from the national team when the tournament ended . Croatia opened their campaign with a comfortable 3 – 1 victory over the Republic of Ireland , with striker Mario Mandžukić scoring twice . Mandžukić continued his run at the tournament with an equaliser in the 1 – 1 draw against Italy , which was marred by controversial fan reactions and referee decisions from English official Howard Webb . In their last group match , Croatia suffered a 0 – 1 defeat to Spain . The late Spanish goal by Jesús Navas , along with Italy 's victory over the Republic of Ireland in the final round , forced Croatia to exit the tournament in the group stage once again . Upon his formal departure , Bilić was also praised for his long @-@ standing service to the national side . Jutarnji List daily labelled him as Croatia 's only manager to depart on such positive terms and credited him for his strong revival of the national side during his six @-@ year tenure . 
 = = = Štimac , Kovač and Čačić period ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 Following Bilić 's departure , former player and pundit Igor Štimac was appointed manager of the national team . Croatia 's all @-@ time top goalscorer Davor Šuker also took over as president of the Croatian Football Federation ( HNS ) after the death of Vlatko Marković ended a 14 @-@ year tenure . Štimac 's managerial campaign was unsuccessful , as the team endured a succession of poor performances and narrowly finished second in their 2014 World Cup qualifying group . After only a year of his appointment , Štimac was replaced by former captain Niko Kovač , who previously managed the under @-@ 21 youth side . Kovač led the team to a 2 – 0 aggregate victory against Iceland in the qualifying playoffs for the 2014 World Cup , with both goals coming in the home leg in Zagreb . 
 At the World Cup , Croatia were drawn with host @-@ nation Brazil , Mexico and Cameroon . In the opening game of the tournament , Croatia lost 3 – 1 to Brazil . The match garnered heavy media attention as Japanese referee Yuichi Nishimura was scrutinized for a number of controversial decisions . In their second game , Croatia won 4 – 0 against Cameroon , but did not progress from the group as they lost 3 – 1 to Mexico in their final fixture . 
 In the Euro 2016 qualifying campaign , Croatia were drawn against Italy , Bulgaria , Norway , Azerbaijan and Malta . Following a goalless away draw against Azerbaijan and an away defeat to Norway , in early September 2015 , the Executive Committee of the Croatian Football Federation unanimously decided to terminate Kovač 's contract . On 21 September 2015 , Ante Čačić was named as the head coach of the Croatian national team . On 13 October 2015 , Croatia qualified for the finals by finishing as runners up in group H. Under Čačić , Croatia broke the record for most goals scored in one match , by beating San Marino in a friendly 10 – 0 . 
 In Group D of UEFA Euro 2016 , Croatia were drawn against Turkey , Czech Republic , and Spain . They defeated Turkey 1 @-@ 0 , on a goal by Luka Modrić , and drew 2 @-@ 2 against the Czechs in a match marred by fans throwing flares on the pitch during the 86th minute . They ended group play by defeating Spain 2 @-@ 1 on an 87th @-@ minute goal by Ivan Perišić , handing the Spanish their first loss in Euro competition since Euro 2004 and winning the group for Croatia . 
 = = Colours = = 
 Croatia 's initial jersey was designed in 1990 by painter Miroslav <unk> , who also designed the nation 's coat of arms . Although slightly altered by manufacturer Lotto ( the 1998 jersey was a white jersey with the <unk> on the right side , like a flying flag ) and Nike since its original release , the chequered motif was adopted as a symbol of national identity and similar designs are used by all Croatian national sports teams . 
 = = = Kit history = = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 The majority of home matches take place at the Stadion Maksimir in Zagreb , which is also the home @-@ ground of local football club Dinamo Zagreb . The venue , built in 1912 and refurbished in 1997 , is named after the surrounding neighbourhood of Maksimir and has hosted national team games since Croatia 's competitive home debut against Lithuania . The Croatian Football Federation ( HNS ) previously agreed on extensive plans with the government to renovate the stadium and increase its current forty @-@ thousand seating capacity , however the proposal was eventually rejected by Zagreb Mayor Milan Bandić in 2008 due to high construction costs . 
 Some home matches are occasionally played at other , smaller venues around the country . The Poljud Stadium in Split has hosted several qualifying fixtures since 1995 , the first being a 1 – 1 draw with Italy . In the period between 1995 and 2011 , Croatia never won a competitive match at Poljud , which the local media dubbed " <unk> <unk> " ( " the Poljud curse " ) . The run was finally ended after the team came from behind to beat Georgia on 3 June 2011 . Qualifying fixtures have also been played at the Stadion <unk> in Rijeka , along with the Gradski vrt stadium in Osijek and the Stadion <unk> <unk> in Varaždin . However , these venues are rarely used due to their remote locations and smaller seating capacity , despite objections from local residents and some players . 
 = = = Home venues record = = = 
 The following table provides a summary Croatia results at various venues used for home games . Since Croatia 's first match in October 1990 , they played home games at eleven stadiums around the country . The following table provides a summary of Croatia 's results at home venues . 
 Key : Pld – games played , W – games won , D – games drawn ; L – games lost , % – win percentage 
 Last updated : Croatia vs. San Marino , 4 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Football is Croatia 's most popular team sport , and the national team has developed an extensive fan @-@ base since its official formation in 1991 . Following Croatia 's successful 1998 World Cup campaign , three years after the Croatian war of independence , there was a rapid rise in domestic and global attention for the national side . British journalist Marcus Tanner of Balkan Insight commented that the national team became a symbol of Croatian independence from Yugoslavia . However , after the death of former @-@ president Franjo Tuđman , local political ties with the national team have loosened . 
 A large part of the team 's support base consists of fans of Hajduk Split and Dinamo Zagreb , the two best @-@ supported clubs in the Croatian domestic league , the Prva HNL . The clubs ' ultra @-@ style supporter groups , the Bad Blue Boys of Zagreb and The <unk> from Split , have both been associated with hooliganism , though violence between the two groups does not usually occur at international games . Heavy support for the Croatian national team also comes from Croats in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , particularly from fans of <unk> Mostar . The official Croatia supporters ' club endorsed by the Croatian Football Federation is called <unk> <unk> ( Always Faithful ) . 
 Fans ' behaviour at international games has led to various sanctions against the national team . Croatia was penalized and threatened with expulsion from UEFA for reports of racist behaviour by travelling fans at Euro 2004 . UEFA and FIFA have both penalized the Croatian Football Federation ( HNS ) for similar incidents in the past . During a friendly match against Italy in Livorno , a small group of Croatia fans formed the shape of a swastika . Croatian fans were also heavily scrutinized for racist behavior against Turkey in 2008 , as well as an incident of racial abuse towards English striker Emile Heskey in 2010 . During the 2006 World Cup a Croatian fan evaded security at a German venue and approached Croatian players on the field ; he was arrested and banned for trespassing . There were also reports of violent clashes between Croatian and Turkish supporters at Euro 2008 , as well as improper conduct by Croatia fans at Euro 2012 and the 2014 World Cup . 
 Croatia supporters often use flares during international matches , which has also caused sanctions as the use of pyrotechnics is strictly banned . In November 2014 , the Croatian fans again attracted criticism by chanting the Ustaše slogan " Za Dom ! <unk> " led by defender Josip Šimunić after beating Iceland in the World Cup play @-@ offs . Croatia 's Euro 2016 qualifying fixture against Italy in Milan was temporarily suspended due to flares being thrown onto the field by a small section of Croatia supporters . The players and manager condemned this behavior as detrimental to the national team . The incident was suspected to be a protest against the Croatian Football Federation for allegations of corruption . In June 2015 , during the home game against Italy , played behind closed doors in Split , a swastika appeared embedded on the pitch . Croatian Football Federation called the incident an act of " sabotage " against the national team . The federation later apologized for the incident and called for a criminal investigation against the perpetrators . 
 Maksimir Stadium was the scene of a politically @-@ fueled riot between Croat and Serb fans at a Dinamo Zagreb – Red Star Belgrade game following the 1990 parliamentary election . However , there have been no major issues between Croatian and Serbian supporters since then . The Croatian Football Federation and the Football Association of Serbia ( FSS ) both agreed to play the scheduled 2014 World Cup qualifying matches between the two sides without away supporters . 
 The team 's games are regularly broadcast live on HRT . Shortly after becoming manager , Slaven Bilić and his rock band released a single , " <unk> <unk> " ( Fiery Madness ) , which recalled the team 's progress during the 1998 World Cup and praised their present ambitions . The song reached the top position on the Croatian music charts and was widely played during Euro 2008 . Other Croatian artists such as Dino <unk> , Connect , <unk> <unk> and <unk> have recorded songs in support of the team , among which are " Malo nas je al nas ima " ( We are few , but we exist ) , " Samo je <unk> " ( There is but one thing [ in my life ] ) , " <unk> dom je Hrvatska " ( My Home is Croatia ) , " <unk> <unk> " ( Fiery Heart ) , and " Hrvatska je <unk> <unk> " ( Croatia are World Champions ) . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Croatia has a fierce rivalry with Serbia . This rivalry stems from political roots , and is listed as one of the 10 greatest international rivalries by Goal.com and as the most politically @-@ charged football rivalry by Bleacher Report . 
 = = Competitive record = = 
 = = = FIFA World Cup = = = 
 Croatia qualified for and competed in three consecutive World Cup finals between 1998 and 2006 , but failed to qualify for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa after finishing 3rd in Group 6 of their Qualification Group behind England , and Ukraine . Although they had joined both FIFA and UEFA by 1992 , they were unable to enter the 1994 World Cup as qualification had started before the side was officially recognised . The nation 's best performance came in their first World Cup where they finished third . In their following two World Cup campaigns they were eliminated after finishing third in their groups . 
 Champions Runners @-@ up Third Place Fourth Place 
 * Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks ; correct as of 23 June 2014 ( Croatia v. Mexico ) 
 = = = UEFA European Championship = = = 
 Croatia 's best results in UEFA Championships were quarter final finishes on their debut , in 1996 , and in 2008 . They did not qualify for the 2000 tournament . The HNS raised an unsuccessful joint bid with the Hungarian Football Federation to co @-@ host the 2012 tournament , which was awarded instead to Poland and Ukraine . 
 * Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks ; correct as of 21 June 2016 ( Croatia v. Spain ) 
 = = Recent results and fixtures = = 
 = = = 2015 – 2016 = = = 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 The following is the final list of players for the UEFA Euro 2016.Caps , goals and numbers correct as of 25 June 2016 after the match against Portugal . 
 Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = = Recent call @-@ ups = = = 
 The following players have also been called up to the Croatia squad in the last 12 months and are still eligible for selection . 
 Status is applicable for the last game only . 
 Notes 
 INJ 
 = Not eligible because of injury 
 RET = 
 Retired 
 = = = Previous squads = = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Managers = = = 
 Before Croatia 's independence distinct Croatian football federations and teams were occasionally formed separately from the official Yugoslavian organisations . Ivo Kraljević served as the manager of the initial federation , established in 1939 , and organised non @-@ sanctioned matches played by unofficial national squads up to 1956 . These temporary sides , playing non @-@ competitive fixtures , were led by seven different managers . 
 Statistically , <unk> Jerković and Vlatko Marković are the most successful managers in Croatia 's history ; they both recorded victories in each of their few games in charge . Miroslav Blažević holds the highest number of competitive victories , having led Croatia to their best performances at major international tournaments . 
 The following table provides a summary of the complete record of each Croatia manager including their results regarding World Cups and European Championships . 
 Key : Pld – games played , W – games won , D – games drawn ; L – games lost , % – win percentage 
 Last updated : Croatia vs. Portugal , 25 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = = Most appearances = = = 
 Last updated : Croatia vs. Portugal , 25 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = = Top goalscorers = = = 
 Last updated : Croatia vs. Portugal , 25 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = = 1940s participants = = = 
 From 1940 to 1944 , FIFA affiliated national teams played under the banner of the Banovina of Croatia ( part of Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in four matches and Independent State of Croatia fourteen friendly matches , of which it won nine , drew four and lost six . Twelve players scored for the team during this period . 
 = = Records = = 
 Dario Šimić was Croatia 's first player to reach 100 appearances , doing so before his retirement in 2008 . This allowed him to surpass Robert Jarni 's previous record of 81 appearances . On 6 February 2013 , captain Darijo Srna , Josip Šimunić and Stipe <unk> each also played their 100th cap for Croatia in a 4 – 0 friendly victory over South Korea in London . The trio went on to set a new joint @-@ record of 101 appearances for the national team on 22 March 2013 in a World Cup qualifying victory against Serbia in Zagreb . Srna eventually surpassed his teammates and accrued 121 international caps for Croatia ( as of November 2014 ) . Ivica Olić has since also appeared 100 times for Croatia , with his 100th cap coming against Italy at San Siro on 16 November 2014 . 
 With 45 goals scored , Davor Šuker , the current president of the Croatian Football Federation , is the team 's highest @-@ scoring player . He was named Croatia 's " Golden Player " at the UEFA jubilee celebration in 2004 in recognition of this achievement . Eduardo reached a distant second position with 29 goals before announcing his retirement from international football in 2014 . Mladen <unk> holds the national team record for goals in a single match , having scored four times during Croatia 's 7 – 0 home victory over Andorra on 7 October 2006 . 
 The national team 's record for highest @-@ scoring victory was achieved in 2016 , a 10 – 0 result over San Marino . Croatia 's worst defeat is a joint record ; the Independent State of Croatia side lost 5 – 1 to Germany twice in the 1940s . The modern Croatian team also lost to England by the same scoreline in a 2010 World Cup qualifying fixture in London . 
 = = = All @-@ time team record = = = 
 The following tables show Croatia 's all @-@ time international record , correct as of 25 June 2016 after the match against Portugal . 
 * Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks . 
 = = = = Modern Croatian team ( 1990 – present ) = = = = 
 = = = = Pre @-@ independence team ( 1940 – 1944 , 1956 ) = = = = 
 For explanation see : Croatia national football team games – 1940s , Croatia v Indonesia ( 1956 ) , Pre @-@ independence period ( above ) , Croatia – List of international matches . 
 All fixtures were friendly . 
 = = Honours = = 
 FIFA World Cup 
 03 ! Third place ( 1 ) : 1998 
 = = = Friendly titles = = = 
 King Hassan II Cup 
 01 ! Winners ( 1 ) : 1996 
 Korea Cup 
 01 ! Winners ( 1 ) : 1999 
 = = = Other awards = = = 
 Best Mover of the Year 
 1994 
 1998 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ramet . P , Sabrina ( 2005 ) . Thinking about Yugoslavia . Cambridge University . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Mladen ( 2004 ) . <unk> leksikon . Miroslav Krleža lexicographic institute . ISBN 953 @-@ <unk> @-@ 84 @-@ 3 . 
 Foster , Jane ( 2004 ) . Footprint Croatia . Footprint Travel Guides . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 79 @-@ 6 . 
 Bellamy . J , Alex ( 2003 ) . The Formation of Croatian National Identity . Manchester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7190 @-@ 6502 @-@ X. 
 <unk> , Richard ( 1997 ) . Entering the Field : New Perspectives on World Football . Berg Publishers . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 198 @-@ 8 . 
 = Kristallnacht = 
 Kristallnacht ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; English : " Crystal Night " ) or <unk> [ <unk> ] , also referred to as the Night of Broken Glass , <unk> [ <unk> ] or simply <unk> [ <unk> ] , and <unk> [ <unk> ] , was a pogrom against Jews throughout Nazi Germany on the 9 – 10 November 1938 , carried out by SA paramilitary forces and German civilians . German authorities looked on without intervening . The name Kristallnacht comes from the shards of broken glass that littered the streets after Jewish @-@ owned stores , buildings , and synagogues had their windows smashed . 
 Estimates of the number of fatalities caused by the pogrom have varied . Early reporting estimated that 91 Jewish people were murdered during the attacks . Modern analysis of German scholarly sources by historians such as Richard J. Evans puts the number much higher . When deaths from post @-@ arrest maltreatment and subsequent suicides are included , the death toll climbs into the hundreds . Additionally , 30 @,@ 000 were arrested and incarcerated in Nazi concentration camps . 
 Jewish homes , hospitals , and schools were ransacked , as the attackers demolished buildings with sledgehammers . Over 1 @,@ 000 synagogues were burned ( 95 in Vienna alone ) and over 7 @,@ 000 Jewish businesses destroyed or damaged . Martin Gilbert writes that no event in the history of German Jews between 1933 and 1945 was so widely reported as it was happening , and the accounts from the foreign journalists working in Germany sent shock waves around the world . The Times wrote at the time : " No foreign propagandist bent upon blackening Germany before the world could outdo the tale of burnings and beatings , of <unk> assaults on defenseless and innocent people , which disgraced that country yesterday . " 
 The pretext for the attacks was the assassination of the German diplomat Ernst vom Rath by Herschel Grynszpan , a German @-@ born Polish Jew living in Paris . Kristallnacht was followed by additional economic and political persecution of Jews , and is viewed by historians as part of Nazi Germany 's broader racial policy , and the beginning of the Final Solution and The Holocaust . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The incident was originally referred to as die Kristallnacht ( literally " crystal night " ) , alluding to the enormous number of glass windows broken throughout the night , mostly in synagogues and Jewish @-@ owned shops . The prefix <unk> ( imperial ) was later added ( <unk> ) as a sardonic comment on the Nazis ' propensity to add this prefix to various terms and titles like Reichsführer @-@ SS or Reichsmarschall . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early Nazi persecutions = = = 
 In the 1920s , most German Jews were fully integrated into German society as German citizens . They served in the German army and navy and contributed to every field of German business , science and culture . Conditions for the Jews began to change after the appointment of Adolf Hitler ( the Austrian @-@ born leader of the National Socialist Workers ' Party ) as Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933 , and the Enabling Act ( 23 March 1933 ) assumption of power by Hitler after the Reichstag fire of 27 February 1933 . From its inception , Hitler 's régime moved quickly to introduce anti @-@ Jewish policies . Nazi propaganda singled out the 500 @,@ 000 Jews in Germany , who accounted for only 0 @.@ 86 % of the overall population , as an enemy within who were responsible for Germany 's defeat in the First World War and for its subsequent economic disasters , such as the 1920s hyperinflation and Wall Street Crash Great Depression . Beginning in 1933 , the German government enacted a series of anti @-@ Jewish laws restricting the rights of German Jews to earn a living , to enjoy full citizenship and to gain education , including the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service of 7 April 1933 , which forbade Jews to work in the civil service . The subsequent 1935 Nuremberg Laws stripped German Jews of their citizenship and forbade Jews to marry non @-@ Jewish Germans . 
 These laws resulted in the exclusion of Jews from German social and political life . Many sought asylum abroad ; hundreds of thousands emigrated , but as Chaim Weizmann wrote in 1936 , " The world seemed to be divided into two parts — those places where the Jews could not live and those where they could not enter . " The international Évian Conference on 6 July 1938 addressed the issue of Jewish and Gypsy immigration to other countries . By the time the conference took place , more than 250 @,@ 000 Jews had fled Germany and Austria , which had been annexed by Germany in March 1938 ; more than 300 @,@ 000 German and Austrian Jews continued to seek refuge and asylum from oppression . As the number of Jews and Gypsies wanting to leave increased , the restrictions against them grew , with many countries tightening their rules for admission . By 1938 , Germany " had entered a new radical phase in anti @-@ Semitic activity " . Some historians believe that the Nazi government had been contemplating a planned outbreak of violence against the Jews and were waiting for an appropriate provocation ; there is evidence of this planning dating to 1937 . In a 1997 interview , the German historian Hans Mommsen claimed that a major motive for the pogrom was the desire of the Gauleiters of the NSDAP to seize Jewish property and businesses . Mommsen stated : 
 The need for money by the party organization stemmed from the fact that Franz Xaver Schwarz , the party treasurer , kept the local and regional organizations of the party short of money . In the fall of 1938 , the increased pressure on Jewish property nourished the party 's ambition , especially since Hjalmar Schacht had been ousted as Reich minister for economics . This , however , was only one aspect of the origin of the November 1938 pogrom . The Polish government threatened to extradite all Jews who were Polish citizens , but would stay in Germany , thus creating a burden of responsibility on the German side . The immediate reaction by the Gestapo was to push the Polish Jews — 16 @,@ 000 persons — over the borderline , but this measure failed due to the stubbornness of the Polish customs officers . The loss of prestige as a result of this abortive operation called for some sort of compensation . Thus , the overreaction to Herschel Grynszpan 's attempt against the diplomat Ernst vom Rath came into being and led to the November pogrom . The background of the pogrom was signified by a sharp cleavage of interests between the different agencies of party and state . While the Nazi party was interested in improving its financial strength on the regional and local level by taking over Jewish property , Hermann Göring , in charge of the Four @-@ Year Plan , hoped to acquire access to foreign currency in order to pay for the import of urgently @-@ needed raw material . Heydrich and Himmler were interested in fostering Jewish emigration " . 
 The Zionist leadership in the British Mandate of Palestine wrote in February 1938 that according to " a very reliable private source — one which can be traced back to the highest echelons of the SS leadership " , there was " an intention to carry out a genuine and dramatic pogrom in Germany on a large scale in the near future " . 
 = = = Expulsion of Polish Jews in Germany = = = 
 In August 1938 the German authorities announced that residence permits for foreigners were being cancelled and would have to be renewed . This included German @-@ born Jews of foreign origin . Poland stated that it would not accept Jews of Polish origin after the end of October . In the so @-@ called " <unk> " , more than 12 @,@ 000 Polish @-@ born Jews , among them the philosopher and theologian Rabbi Abraham Joshua <unk> , and future literary critic Marcel Reich @-@ <unk> , were expelled from Germany on 28 October 1938 , on Hitler 's orders . They were ordered to leave their homes in a single night , and were allowed only one suitcase per person to carry their belongings . As the Jews were taken away , their remaining possessions were seized as loot both by the Nazi authorities and by their neighbors . 
 The deportees were taken from their homes to railway stations and were put on trains to the Polish border , where Polish border guards sent them back over the river into Germany . This stalemate continued for days in the pouring rain , with the Jews marching without food or shelter between the borders . Four thousand were granted entry into Poland , but the remaining 8 @,@ 000 were forced to stay at the border . They waited there in harsh conditions to be allowed to enter Poland . A British newspaper told its readers that hundreds " are reported to be lying about , penniless and deserted , in little villages along the frontier near where they had been driven out by the Gestapo and left . " Conditions in the refugee camps " were so bad that some actually tried to escape back into Germany and were shot " , recalled a British woman who was sent to help those who had been expelled . 
 = = = Shooting of vom Rath = = = 
 Among those expelled was the family of <unk> and Riva Grynszpan , Polish Jews who had emigrated to Germany in 1911 and settled in Hanover , Germany . At the trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 , <unk> Grynszpan recounted the events of their deportation from Hanover on the night of 27 October 1938 : " Then they took us in police trucks , in prisoners ' lorries , about 20 men in each truck , and they took us to the railway station . The streets were full of people shouting : ' Juden <unk> ! Auf nach <unk> ! ' " ( " Jews out , out to Palestine ! " ) . Their seventeen @-@ year @-@ old son Herschel was living in Paris with an uncle . Herschel received a postcard from his family from the Polish border , describing the family 's expulsion : " No one told us what was up , but we realised this was going to be the end ... We haven 't a penny . Could you send us something ? " He received the postcard on 3 November 1938 . 
 On the morning of Monday , 7 November 1938 , he purchased a revolver and a box of bullets , then went to the German embassy and asked to see an embassy official . After he was taken to the office of Ernst vom Rath , Grynszpan fired five bullets at Vom Rath , two of which hit him in the abdomen . Vom Rath was a professional diplomat with the Foreign Office who expressed anti @-@ Nazi sympathies , largely based on the Nazis ' treatment of the Jews , and was under Gestapo investigation for being politically unreliable . Grynszpan made no attempt to escape the French police and freely confessed to the shooting . In his pocket , he carried a postcard to his parents with the message , " May God forgive me ... I must protest so that the whole world hears my protest , and that I will do . " 
 The next day , the German government retaliated , barring Jewish children from German state elementary schools , indefinitely suspending Jewish cultural activities , and putting a halt to the publication of Jewish newspapers and magazines , including the three national German Jewish newspapers . A newspaper in Britain described the last move , which cut off the Jewish populace from their leaders , as " intended to disrupt the Jewish community and rob it of the last frail ties which hold it together . " Their rights as citizens had been stripped . 
 = = Pogrom = = 
 = = = Death of vom Rath = = = 
 Ernst vom Rath died of his wounds on 9 November . Word of his death reached Hitler that evening while he was with several key members of the Nazi party at a dinner commemorating the 1923 Beer Hall Putsch . After intense discussions , Hitler left the assembly abruptly without giving his usual address . Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels delivered the speech , in his place , and said that " the Führer has decided that ... demonstrations should not be prepared or organized by the party , but insofar as they erupt spontaneously , they are not to be hampered . " The chief party judge Walter Buch later stated that the message was clear ; with these words Goebbels had commanded the party leaders to organize a pogrom . 
 Some leading party officials disagreed with Goebbels ' actions , fearing the diplomatic crisis it would provoke . Heinrich Himmler wrote , " I suppose that it is Goebbels 's megalomania ... and stupidity which are responsible for starting this operation now , in a particularly difficult diplomatic situation . " The Israeli historian Saul Friedländer believes that Goebbels had personal reasons for wanting to bring about Kristallnacht . Goebbels had recently suffered humiliation for the ineffectiveness of his propaganda campaign during the Sudeten crisis , and was in some disgrace over an affair with a Czech actress , Lída Baarová . Goebbels needed a chance to improve his standing in the eyes of Hitler . At 01 : 20 am on 10 November 1938 , Reinhard Heydrich sent an urgent secret telegram to the Sicherheitspolizei ( Security Police ) and the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) , containing instructions regarding the riots . This included guidelines for the protection of foreigners and non @-@ Jewish businesses and property . Police were instructed not to interfere with the riots unless the guidelines were violated . Police were also instructed to seize Jewish archives from synagogues and community offices , and to arrest and detain " healthy male Jews , who are not too old " , for eventual transfer to ( labor ) concentration camps . 
 = = = Riots = = = 
 The timing of the riots varied from unit to unit . The Gauleiters started at about 10 : 30pm , only two hours after news of Vom Rath 's death reached Germany . They were followed by the SA at 11pm , and the SS at around 1 : <unk> . Most were wearing civilian clothes and were armed with sledgehammers and axes , and soon went to work on the destruction of Jewish property . The orders given to these men were very specific , however : no measures endangering non @-@ Jewish German life or property were to be taken ( synagogues too close to non @-@ Jewish property were smashed rather than burned ) ; Jewish businesses or dwellings could be destroyed but not looted ; foreigners ( even Jewish foreigners ) were not to be the subjects of violence ; and synagogue archives were to be transferred to the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ) . The men were also ordered to arrest as many Jews as the local jails would hold , the preferred targets being healthy young men . 
 The SA of adjacent cities shattered the storefronts of about 7 @,@ 500 Jewish stores and businesses , hence the appellation Kristallnacht ( Crystal Night ) . Jewish homes were ransacked all throughout Germany . Although violence against Jews had not been explicitly condoned by the authorities , there were cases of Jews being beaten or assaulted . 
 This pogrom damaged , and in many cases destroyed , about 200 synagogues ( constituting nearly all Germany had ) , many Jewish cemeteries , more than 7 @,@ 000 Jewish shops , and 29 department stores . Some Jews were beaten to death while others were forced to watch . More than 30 @,@ 000 Jewish men were arrested and taken to concentration camps ; primarily Dachau , Buchenwald , and Sachsenhausen . The treatment of prisoners in the camps was brutal , but most were released during the following three months on condition that they leave Germany . The number of German Jews killed is uncertain . The number killed in the two @-@ day riot is most often cited as 91 . In addition , it is thought that there were hundreds of suicides . Counting deaths in the concentration camps , around 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 500 deaths were directly or indirectly attributable to the Kristallnacht pogrom . A few non @-@ Jewish Germans , mistaken for Jews , were also killed . 
 The synagogues , some centuries old , were also victims of considerable violence and vandalism , with the tactics the <unk> practised on these and other sacred sites described as " approaching the ghoulish " by the United States Consul in Leipzig . Tombstones were uprooted and graves violated . Fires were lit , and prayer books , scrolls , artwork and philosophy texts were thrown upon them , and precious buildings were either burned or smashed until unrecognisable . Eric Lucas recalls the destruction of the synagogue that a tiny Jewish community had constructed in a small village only twelve years earlier : 
 It did not take long before the first heavy grey stones came tumbling down , and the children of the village amused themselves as they flung stones into the many coloured windows . When the first rays of a cold and pale November sun penetrated the heavy dark clouds , the little synagogue was but a heap of stone , broken glass and smashed @-@ up <unk> 
 After this , the Jewish community was fined 1 billion <unk> . In addition , it cost 4 million marks to repair the windows . Events in recently annexed Austria were no less horrendous . Of the entire Kristallnacht , only the pogrom in Vienna was completed . Most of Vienna 's 94 synagogues and prayer @-@ houses were partially or totally destroyed . People were subjected to all manner of humiliations , including being forced to scrub the pavements whilst being tormented by their fellow Austrians , some of whom had been their friends and neighbours . Official figures released after the event by Reinhard Heydrich stated that 191 synagogues were destroyed , with 76 completely demolished ; 100 @,@ 000 Jews were arrested ; three foreigners were arrested ; 174 people were arrested for looting Jewish shops ; and 815 Jewish businesses were destroyed . 
 The Daily Telegraph correspondent , Hugh Greene , wrote of events in Berlin : 
 Mob law ruled in Berlin throughout the afternoon and evening and hordes of hooligans indulged in an orgy of destruction . I have seen several anti @-@ Jewish outbreaks in Germany during the last five years , but never anything as nauseating as this . Racial hatred and hysteria seemed to have taken complete hold of otherwise decent people . I saw fashionably dressed women clapping their hands and screaming with glee , while respectable middle @-@ class mothers held up their babies to see the " fun " . 
 Many Berliners were however deeply ashamed of the pogrom , and some took great personal risks to offer help . The son of a US consular official heard the janitor of his block cry : 
 <unk> must have emptied the insane asylums and penitentiaries to find people who 'd do things like that ! ' 
 Tucson News TV channel briefly reported on a 2008 remembrance meeting at a local Jewish congregation . According to eye @-@ witness Esther Harris : 
 They ripped up the belongings , the books , knocked over furniture , shouted obscenities . 
 Historian Gerhard Weinberg is quoted as saying : 
 Houses of worship burned down , vandalized , in every community in the country where people either participate or watch . 
 = = = Concentration camps = = = 
 The violence was officially called to a stop by Goebbels on 11 November , but it continued against the Jews in the concentration camps despite orders requesting " special treatment " to ensure that this did not happen . On 23 November , the News Chronicle of London published an article on an incident which took place at the concentration camp of Sachsenhausen . Sixty @-@ two Jews suffered punishment so severe that the police , " unable to bear their cries , turned their backs " . They were beaten until they fell and , when they fell , they were further beaten . At the end of it , " twelve of the sixty @-@ two were dead , their skulls smashed . The others were all unconscious . The eyes of some had been knocked out , their faces flattened and shapeless " . The 30 @,@ 000 Jewish men who had been imprisoned during Kristallnacht were released over the next three months but , by then , more than 2 @,@ 000 had died . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Hermann Göring , who was in favor of expropriating the Jews rather than destroy Jewish property as had happened in the <unk> , complained directly to Chief of Police and Head of Reich Main Security Office Reinhard Heydrich immediately after the events : " I 'd rather you guys had done in two @-@ hundred Jews than destroy so many valuable assets ! " ( " Mir <unk> lieber <unk> , ihr <unk> 200 Juden <unk> und <unk> nicht <unk> <unk> <unk> ! " ) . Göring met with other members of the Nazi leadership on 12 November to plan the next steps after the riot , setting the stage for formal government action . In the transcript of the meeting , Göring said , 
 I have received a letter written on the Führer 's orders requesting that the Jewish question be now , once and for all , coordinated and solved one way or another ... I should not want to leave any doubt , gentlemen , as to the aim of today 's meeting . We have not come together merely to talk again , but to make decisions , and I implore competent agencies to take all measures for the elimination of the Jew from the German economy , and to submit them to me . 
 The persecution and economic damage done to German Jews continued after the pogrom , even as their places of business were ransacked . They were forced to pay <unk> , a collective fine of one billion marks for the murder of vom Rath ( equal to roughly $ US 5 @.@ 5 billion in today ’ s currency ) , which was levied by the compulsory acquisition of 20 % of all Jewish property by the state . Six million Reichsmarks of insurance payments for property damage due to the Jewish community were to be paid to the government instead as " damages to the German Nation " . 
 The number of emigrating Jews surged , as those who were able left the country . In the ten months following Kristallnacht , more than 115 @,@ 000 Jews emigrated from the Reich . The majority went to other European countries , the US and Palestine , and at least 14 @,@ 000 made it to Shanghai , China . As part of government policy , the Nazis seized houses , shops , and other property the émigrés left behind . Many of the destroyed remains of Jewish property plundered during Kristallnacht were dumped near Brandenburg . In October 2008 , this <unk> was discovered by Yaron <unk> , an investigative journalist . The site , the size of four Association football fields , contained an extensive array of personal and ceremonial items looted during the riots against Jewish property and places of worship on the night of 9 November 1938 . It is believed the goods were brought by rail to the outskirts of the village and dumped on designated land . Among the items found were glass bottles engraved with the Star of David , mezuzot , painted window sills , and the armrests of chairs found in synagogues , in addition to an ornamental swastika . 
 = = Responses to Kristallnacht = = 
 = = = From the Germans = = = 
 The reaction of non @-@ Jewish Germans to Kristallnacht was varied . Many spectators gathered on the scenes , most of them in silence . The local fire departments confined themselves to prevent the flames spreading to neighbouring buildings . In Berlin , police Lieutenant Otto <unk> barred SA troopers from setting the New Synagogue on fire , earning his superior officer a verbal reprimand from the commissioner . The British historian Martin Gilbert believes that " many non @-@ Jews resented the round up " , his opinion being supported by German witness Dr. Arthur <unk> who recalls seeing " people crying while watching from behind their curtains " . The extent of the damage was so great that many Germans are said to have expressed their disapproval of it , and to have described it as senseless . 
 In an article released for publication on the evening of 11 November , Goebbels ascribed the events of Kristallnacht to the " healthy instincts " of the German people . He went on to explain : " The German people is anti @-@ Semitic . It has no desire to have its rights restricted or to be provoked in the future by parasites of the Jewish race . " Less than 24 hours after the Kristallnacht Adolf Hitler made a one hour long speech in front of a group of journalists where he managed to completely ignore the recent events on everyone 's mind . According to Eugene Davidson the reason for this was that Hitler wished to avoid being directly connected to an event that he was aware that many of those present condemned , regardless of Goebbels 's unconvincing explanation that Kristallnacht was caused by popular wrath . 
 In 1938 , just after Kristallnacht , the psychologist Muller @-@ Claudius interviewed 41 randomly selected Nazi Party members on their attitudes towards racial persecution . Of the interviewed party @-@ members 63 % expressed extreme indignation against it , while only 5 % expressed approval of racial persecution , the rest being noncommittal . A study conducted in 1933 had then shown that 33 % of Nazi Party members held no racial prejudice while 13 % supported persecution . Sarah Ann Gordon sees two possible reasons for this difference . First , by 1938 large numbers of Germans had joined the Nazi Party for pragmatic reasons rather than ideology thus diluting the percentage of rabid antisemites ; second , the Kristallnacht could have caused party members to reject Antisemitism that had been acceptable to them in abstract terms but which they could not support when they saw it concretely enacted . During the Kristallnacht several Gauleiter and deputy Gauleiters had refused orders to enact the Kristallnacht , and many leaders of the SA and of the Hitler Youth also openly refused party orders , while expressing disgust . Some Nazis helped Jews during the Kristallnacht . 
 As it was aware that the German public did not support the Kristallnacht , the propaganda ministry directed the German press to portray opponents of racial persecution as disloyal . The press was also under orders to downplay the Kristallnacht , describing general events at local level only , with prohibition against depictions of individual events . In 1939 this was extended to a prohibition on reporting any anti @-@ Jewish measures . 
 The vast majority of the German public disapproved of the Kristallnacht as for example evidenced by the torrent of reports attesting to this by diplomats in Germany . 
 The US ambassador to Germany reported : 
 In view of this being a totalitarian state a surprising characteristic of the situation here is the intensity and scope among German citizens of condemnation of the recent happenings against Jews . 
 To the consternation of the Nazis the Kristallnacht affected public opinion counter to their desires , the peak of opposition against the Nazi racial policies was reached just then , when according to almost all accounts the vast majority of Germans rejected the violence perpetrated against the Jews . Verbal complaints grew rapidly in numbers , and for example the <unk> branch of the Gestapo reported a sharp decline in anti @-@ Semitic attitudes among the population . 
 There are many indications of Protestant and Catholic disapproval of racial persecution ; for example the Catholic church had already distributed Pastoral letters critical of Nazi racial ideology , and the Nazi regime expected to encounter organised resistance from it following Kristallnacht . The Catholic leadership however , just as the various Protestant churches , refrained from responding with organised action . While individual Catholics and Protestants took action , the churches as a whole chose silence publicly . Nevertheless , individuals continued to show courage , for example a Parson paid the medical bills of a Jewish cancer patient and was sentenced to a large fine and several months in prison in 1941 , and a Catholic nun was sentenced to death in 1945 for helping Jews . A Protestant parson spoke out in 1943 and was sent to Dachau concentration camp where he died after a few days . 
 Martin Sasse , Nazi Party member and bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Thuringia , leading member of the Nazi German Christians , one of the schismatic factions of German Protestantism , published a compendium of Martin Luther 's writings shortly after the Kristallnacht ; Sasse " applauded the burning of the synagogues " and the coincidence of the day , writing in the introduction , " On 10 November 1938 , on Luther 's birthday , the synagogues are burning in Germany . " The German people , he urged , ought to heed these words " of the greatest anti @-@ Semite of his time , the <unk> of his people against the Jews . " Diarmaid MacCulloch argued that Luther 's 1543 pamphlet , On the Jews and Their Lies was a " blueprint " for the Kristallnacht . 
 = = = From the global community = = = 
 Kristallnacht sparked international outrage . It discredited pro @-@ Nazi movements in Europe and North America , leading to eventual decline of their support . Many newspapers condemned Kristallnacht , with some comparing it to the murderous pogroms incited by Imperial Russia in the 1880s . The United States recalled its ambassador ( but did not break off diplomatic relations ) while other governments severed diplomatic relations with Germany in protest . The British government approved the <unk> program for refugee children . As such , Kristallnacht also marked a turning point in relations between Nazi Germany and the rest of the world . The brutality of the pogrom , and the Nazi government 's deliberate policy of encouraging the violence once it had begun , laid bare the repressive nature and widespread anti @-@ Semitism entrenched in Germany , and turned world opinion sharply against the Nazi regime , with some politicians calling for war . The private protest against the Germans following Kristallnacht was held on 6 December 1938 . William Cooper , an Aboriginal Australian , led a delegation of the Australian Aboriginal League on a march through Melbourne to the German Consulate to deliver a petition which condemned the " cruel persecution of the Jewish people by the Nazi government of Germany " . German officials refused to accept the tendered document . 
 After the Kristallnacht , Salvador Allende , Gabriel González Videla , Marmaduke Grove , Florencio Durán and other members of the Congress of Chile sent a telegram to Adolf Hitler denouncing the persecution of Jews . A more personal response , in 1939 , was the oratorio A Child of Our Time by the English composer Michael Tippett . 
 = = Kristallnacht as a turning point = = 
 Kristallnacht changed the nature of persecution from economic , political , and social to physical with beatings , incarceration , and murder ; the event is often referred to as the beginning of the Holocaust . In the words of historian Max Rein in 1988 , " Kristallnacht came ... and everything was changed . " 
 While November 1938 predated overt articulation of " the Final Solution " , it foreshadowed the genocide to come . Around the time of Kristallnacht , the SS newspaper Das Schwarze Korps called for a " destruction by swords and flames . " At a conference on the day after the pogrom , Hermann Göring said : " The Jewish problem will reach its solution if , in any time soon , we will be drawn into war beyond our border — then it is obvious that we will have to manage a final account with the Jews . " 
 Specifically , the Nazis managed to achieve in Kristallnacht all the theoretical targets they set for themselves : confiscation of Jewish belongings to provide finances for the military buildup to war , separation and isolation of the Jews , and most importantly , the move from the antisemitic policy of discrimination to one of physical damage , which began that night and continued until the end of World War II . The event showed the public attitude was not solidly behind the perpetrators . Many Germans at the time found the pogroms troubling , because they equated them with the days of the SA street rule and lawlessness . The British Embassy in Berlin and British Consular offices throughout Germany received many protests and expressions of disquiet from members of the German public about the anti @-@ Jewish actions of the time . 
 = = Modern responses = = 
 Many decades later , association with the Kristallnacht anniversary was cited as the main reason against choosing 9 November ( " <unk> " ) , the day the Berlin Wall came down in 1989 , as the new German national holiday ; a different day was chosen ( 3 October 1990 , German reunification ) . The avant @-@ garde guitarist Gary Lucas 's 1988 composition " <unk> Kristallnacht " , which juxtaposes the Israeli national anthem , " Hatikvah " , with phrases from " Deutschland Über Alles " amid wild electronic shrieks and noise , is intended to be a sonic representation of the horrors of Kristallnacht . It was premiered at the 1988 Berlin Jazz Festival and received rave reviews . ( The title is a reference to Arnold Schoenberg 's 1899 work " <unk> Nacht " that presaged his pioneering work on atonal music ; Schoenberg was an Austrian Jew who would move to the United States to escape the Nazis ) . 
 On its 40th anniversary in 1978 , members of two fraternities at the University of Florida gathered in front of the fraternity house of Tau Epsilon Phi and " shouted expressions like ' F _ _ _ the Jews , ' " and " Your mother was bright but she was a lampshade . " 
 Kristallnacht was the inspiration for the 1993 album Kristallnacht by the composer John Zorn . The German power metal band Masterplan 's debut album , Masterplan ( 2003 ) , features an anti @-@ Nazism song entitled " Crystal Night " as the fourth track . The German band BAP published a song titled " <unk> " in their Cologne dialect , dealing with the emotions of the Kristallnacht . 
 Kristallnacht was the inspiration for the 1988 composition <unk> <unk> by the composer Frederic <unk> , of which he says : " I began writing this piece in November , 1988 , on the 50th anniversary of the Kristallnacht ... My piece is a reflection on that vanished part of Jewish tradition which so strongly colors , by its absence , the culture of our time " . 
 Kristallnacht has been depicted on the screen in a number of Holocaust @-@ themed films and television shows , among them 1978 's Holocaust ( TV miniseries ) and 1990 's Europa Europa . 
 = Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban = 
 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban is the third novel in the Harry Potter series , written by J. K. Rowling . The book follows Harry Potter , a young wizard , in his third year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . Along with friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , Harry investigates Sirius Black , an escaped prisoner from Azkaban who they believe is one of Lord Voldemort 's old allies . 
 The book was published in the United Kingdom on 8 July 1999 by Bloomsbury and in the United States on 8 September 1999 by Scholastic Inc . Rowling found the book easy to write , finishing it just a year after she had begun writing it . The book sold 68 @,@ 000 copies in just three days after its release in the United Kingdom , and since has sold over three million in the country . The book won the 1999 Whitbread Children 's Book Award , the Bram Stoker Award , the 2000 Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel , and was short @-@ listed for other awards , including the Hugo . 
 The film adaptation of the novel was released in 2004 , grossing more than $ 796 million and earned notable critical acclaim . Video games loosely based on Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban were also released for several platforms , and most obtained favourable reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Harry is back at the Dursleys , where he sees on Muggle television that a prisoner named Sirius Black has escaped . Harry involuntarily inflates Aunt Marge when she comes to visit after she insults Harry and his parents . This leads to his running away and getting picked up by the Knight Bus . He travels to Diagon Alley , where he meets Cornelius Fudge , the Minister for Magic , who asks Harry to stay in Diagon Alley for the remaining three weeks before the start of the school year at Hogwarts . 
 The night before he is expected to leave for Hogwarts , Harry learns that the escaped prisoner , Sirius Black , is a convicted murderer , and it is believed that he wants to murder Harry . On the way to Hogwarts , a Dementor boards the train , causing Harry to faint , but he is helped by the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher , Remus Lupin . Harry , Ron , and Hermione learn that the Dementors will be patrolling the school in an attempt to protect Harry from Black . 
 At Hogwarts , Harry has several problems with the Dementors , including an episode at a Quidditch match , during which he faints and falls off his broomstick from around 50 feet in the air . His broom is smashed by the Whomping Willow . Working with Harry outside class , Lupin teaches him the Patronus Charm to repel Dementors . 
 On an illegal visit to the village of Hogsmeade ( thanks to the Invisibility Cloak and the The Marauder 's Map , given to him by George Weasley and Fred Weasley ) , Harry overhears some of his teachers talking with Fudge about Black , saying that Black was a friend of Harry 's parents , but he betrayed them and gave Voldemort access to their house , and that he also killed thirteen Muggles and his former friend Peter Pettigrew . 
 Ron and Hermione 's friendship later suffers when Ron believes that Hermione 's cat , <unk> , ate his rat , Scabbers . At Christmas , Harry receives a mysterious present , a late @-@ model Firebolt broom . Fearing it might be cursed , Hermione reports the gift to Professor McGonagall , which leads to bad feelings between her and Ron and Harry . 
 Ron , Hermione , and Harry join the effort to save Hagrid 's <unk> , Buckbeak , from being executed for attacking Draco Malfoy , after Draco provoked him . Their efforts are unsuccessful , but Scabbers reappears shortly after they hear Buckbeak being executed . 
 Ron chases Scabbers , only to be attacked by a big black dog , which Harry has seen several times before . The dog drags Ron through a tunnel under the Whomping Willow into the Shrieking Shack . Harry and Hermione follow , and there is a brief standoff when they find Ron and Sirius , who has transformed from the dog . Lupin enters , and they explain the situation to Harry and his friends : Lupin is a werewolf , which led to his friends James Potter , Sirius Black , and Peter Pettigrew becoming <unk> . Lupin explains that Scabbers is Pettigrew in his animal form ; he has been hiding from Black , whom he had framed for the murders of Harry 's parents and the thirteen Muggles . 
 Professor Snape arrives to apprehend Black but Harry knocks him unconscious . Lupin and Black transform Pettigrew back into human form and prepare to kill him , but they are stopped by Harry , as he feels his father would not have wanted it . 
 As they move back toward Hogwarts , Lupin turns into a werewolf and becomes violent , having missed a dose of a potion he had been taking that would allow him to keep his human mind when in animal form . Pettigrew escapes again , but Black prevents Lupin , in his werewolf form , from attacking the others . Some Dementors approach , and the three lose consciousness . 
 When they wake up in the hospital , Harry , Ron , and Hermione are told that Black has been sentenced to receive the Dementor 's kiss , which removes the soul of the recipient . Dumbledore advises Hermione and Harry to use Hermione 's time @-@ turner , a device she has been using to double @-@ up on classes , which permits them to go back in time and save Buckbeak , who carries Black away to safety . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release history = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban is the third book in the Harry Potter series . The first , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone in the US ) , was published by Bloomsbury on 26 June 1997 and the second , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was published on 2 July 1998 . Rowling started to write the Prisoner of Azkaban the day after she finished The Chamber of Secrets . 
 Of the first three books in the series , Prisoner of Azkaban took the shortest amount of time to write – Philosopher 's Stone took five years to complete and Chamber of Secrets required two years , while Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was written in one year . Rowling 's favourite aspect of this book was introducing the character Remus Lupin , Rowling additionally said that Prisoner of Azkaban was " the best writing experience I ever had ... I was in a very comfortable place writing ( number ) three . Immediate financial worries were over , and press attention wasn 't yet by any means excessive " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Gregory Maguire wrote a review in The New York Times for Prisoner of Azkaban : in it he said , " So far , in terms of plot , the books do nothing new , but they do it brilliantly ... so far , so good . " In a newspaper review in The New York Times , it was said that " ' The Prisoner of Azkaban ' may be the best ' Harry Potter ' book yet " . A reviewer for <unk> said , " This crisply @-@ paced fantasy will leave you hungry for the four additional Harry books that J.K. Rowling is working on . Harry 's third year is a charm . Don 't miss it . " Kirkus Reviews did not give a starred review but said , " a properly pulse @-@ pounding climax ... The main characters and the continuing story both come along so smartly ... that the book seems shorter than its page count : have readers clear their calendars if they are fans , or get out of the way if they are not . " Martha V. <unk> also gave a positive review for The Horn Book Magazine , calling it " quite a good book . " In addition , a Publishers Weekly review said , " Rowling 's wit never flags , whether constructing the workings of the wizard world ... or tossing off quick jokes ... The Potter spell is holding strong . 
 However , Anthony Holden , who was one of the judges against Prisoner of Azkaban for the Whitbread Award , was negative about the book , saying that the characters are " all black @-@ and @-@ white " , and the " story @-@ lines are predictable , the suspense minimal , the sentimentality cloying every page " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban won several awards , including the 1999 Booklist Editors ' Choice Award , the 1999 Bram Stoker Award for Best Work for Young Readers , the 1999 <unk> Children 's Book Award , the 1999 Whitbread Book of the Year for children 's books . , and the 2000 Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel , . It was also nominated for the 2000 Hugo Award for Best Novel but lost to A <unk> in the Sky . Prisoner of Azkaban additionally won the 2004 Indian Paintbrush Book Award and the 2004 Colorado Blue Spruce Young Adult Book Award . Additionally , it was named an American Library Association Notable Children 's Book in 2000 as well as one of their Best Books for Young Adults . As with the previous two books in the series , Prisoner of Azkaban won the Nestlé Smarties Book Prize Gold Medal for children aged 9 – 11 and made the top of the New York Times Best Seller list . In both cases , it was the last in the series to do so . However , in the latter case , a Children 's Best Sellers list was created just before the release of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire in July 2000 in order to free up more room on the original list . In 2003 , the novel was listed at number 24 on the BBC 's survey The Big Read . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Prisoner of Azkaban sold more than 68 @,@ 000 copies in the UK within three days of publication , which made it the fastest selling British book of the time . The sales total by 2012 is said by The Guardian to be 3 @,@ 377 @,@ 906 . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was released in hardcover in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September . The British paperback edition was released on 1 April 2000 , while the US paperback was released 2 October 2001 . 
 Bloomsbury additionally released an adult edition with a different cover design to the original , in paperback on 10 July 2004 and in hardcover on October 2004 . A hardcover special edition , featuring a green border and signature , was released on 8 July 1999 . In May 2004 , Bloomsbury released a Celebratory Edition , with a blue and purple border . On 1 November 2010 , they released the 10th anniversary Signature edition illustrated by Clare <unk> and in July 2013 a new adult cover illustrated by Andrew Davidson , both these editions were designed by Webb & Webb Design Limited . 
 Beginning on 27 August 2013 , Scholastic will release new covers for the paperback editions of Harry Potter in the United States to celebrate 15 years of the series . The covers were designed by the author and illustrator Kazu Kibuishi . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The film version of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was released in 2004 and was directed by Alfonso Cuarón from a screenplay by Steve Kloves . The film débuted at number one at the box office and held that position for two weeks . It made a total of $ 796 @.@ 7 million worldwide , which made it the second highest @-@ grossing film of 2004 behind Shrek 2 . However , among all eight entries in the Harry Potter franchise , Prisoner of Azkaban grossed the lowest . The film ranks at number 471 in Empire magazine 's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Three unique video games by different developers were released in 2004 by Electronic Arts , loosely based on the book : 
 = Sajmište concentration camp = 
 The Sajmište concentration camp ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) was a Nazi concentration and extermination camp during World War II . It was located at the former Belgrade fairground site near the town of Zemun , in the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) . The camp was organized and operated by SS Einsatzgruppen units stationed in occupied Serbia . It became operational in September 1941 and was officially opened on 28 October of that year . The Germans dubbed it the Jewish camp in Zemun ( German : Judenlager Semlin ) . At the end of 1941 and the beginning of 1942 , thousands of Jewish women , children and old men were brought to the camp , along with 500 Jewish men and 292 Romani women and children , most of whom were from the Serbian towns of Niš , Smederevo and Šabac . Women and children were placed in makeshift barracks and suffered during numerous influenza epidemics . Kept in squalid conditions , they were provided with inadequate amounts of food and many froze to death during the winter of 1941 – 42 . Between March and May 1942 , the Germans used a gas van sent from Berlin to kill thousands of Jewish inmates . 
 With the gassings complete , it was renamed Zemun concentration camp ( German : Anhaltelager Semlin ) and served to hold one last group of Jews who were arrested upon the surrender of Italy in September 1943 . During this time it also held captured Yugoslav Partisans , Chetniks , sympathizers of the Greek and Albanian resistance movements , and Serb peasants from villages in other parts of the NDH . An estimated 32 @,@ 000 prisoners ( mostly Serbs ) passed through the camp during this period , 10 @,@ 600 of whom were killed or died due to hunger and disease . Conditions in Sajmište were so poor that some began comparing it to Jasenovac and other large concentration camps throughout Europe . In 1943 and 1944 , evidence of atrocities committed in the camp was destroyed by the units of SS @-@ Standartenführer Paul Blobel , and thousands of corpses were exhumed from mass graves and incinerated . In May 1944 , the Germans transferred control of the camp over to the NDH , and it was closed that July . Estimates of the number of deaths at Sajmište range from 20 @,@ 000 to 23 @,@ 000 , with the number of Jewish deaths estimated at 7 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 . It is thought that half of all Serbian Jews perished at the camp . 
 Most of the Germans responsible for the operation of the camp were captured and brought to trial . Several were extradited to Yugoslavia and executed . Camp commander Herbert Andorfer and his deputy Edgar Enge were arrested in the 1960s after many years of hiding . Both were given short prison sentences in West Germany and Austria , respectively , though Enge never served any time given his old age and poor health . 
 = = Background = = 
 The site that became the Sajmište concentration camp during World War II had originally been an exhibition centre built by the Belgrade municipality in 1937 in an attempt to attract international commerce to the city . The centre 's modernist pavilions featured elaborate displays of industrial progress and design from European countries , including Germany . Its architectural centerpiece was a large tower which was used by Philips to transmit the earliest television broadcasts in Europe . Much of the centre stood empty and unused until the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 . The country was dismembered following the invasion , with Serbia being reduced to its pre @-@ 1912 borders and placed under a government of German military occupation . Milan Nedić , a pre @-@ war politician who was known to have pro @-@ Axis leanings , was then selected by the Germans to lead the collaborationist Government of National Salvation in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia . The civilian administration in the country was headed by SS @-@ Gruppenführer Harald Turner , who commanded the Einsatzgruppen Serbien . Originally led by SS @-@ Standartenführer Wilhelm Fuchs , and later by SS @-@ Gruppenführer August Meyszner with SS @-@ Standartenführer Emanuel Schäfer as his deputy , the group was responsible for ensuring internal security , fighting opponents of the occupation , and dealing with Jews . 
 Meanwhile , the extreme Croat nationalist and fascist Ante Pavelić , who had been in exile in Benito Mussolini 's Italy , was appointed Poglavnik ( " leader " ) of an Ustaše @-@ led Croatian state – the Independent State of Croatia ( often called the NDH , from the Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska ) . The NDH combined almost all of modern @-@ day Croatia , all of modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of modern @-@ day Serbia into an " Italian @-@ German quasi @-@ protectorate . " NDH authorities , led by the Ustaše militia , subsequently implemented genocidal policies against the Serb , Jewish and Romani populations living within the borders of the new state . The territory of the former Belgrade municipality was divided between occupied Serbia and the NDH . Zemun , the area where the Sajmište fairgrounds were located , came under Croatian control . The occupation of Zemun would last until late 1944 , and saw the Ustaše relentlessly persecute the district 's non @-@ Croat population , especially Serbs , Jews and Romanis . By the end of the war , more than one @-@ quarter of the municipality 's pre @-@ war population of 65 @,@ 000 had perished . 
 A large @-@ scale uprising erupted in Serbia following the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 . Although they took no part in the rebellion , Jews were targeted for retaliatory execution by the Germans . The Germans soon implemented a number of anti @-@ Jewish laws , and by the end of August 1941 , all Serbian Jewish males were interned in concentration camps , primarily at <unk> <unk> in Belgrade . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 In the fall of 1941 , Turner ordered that all Jewish women and children in Serbia be concentrated in a camp . At first the Germans considered creating a ghetto for the Jews in the Gypsy quarter of Belgrade , but this idea was quickly dismissed due to the area being considered " too filthy and <unk> . " When several other plans to intern the Jewish and Romani populations of Belgrade failed , a concentration camp was established on a peninsula surrounded on three sides by the Sava river , and located in full view of Belgrade 's central Terazije Square . The camp was positioned in a manner which made escape almost impossible . It was located near administrative and police centres , as well as the Belgrade central railway station , which allowed for the efficient transport of Jews to the camp from the many towns in the region . Its purpose was to detain Jewish women and children that the Germans claimed " endangered " public safety and the Wehrmacht . 
 The Germans dubbed Sajmište the " Jewish camp in Zemun " ( German : Judenlager Semlin ) . The camp was intended to hold as many as 500 @,@ 000 people captured from rebels areas across occupied Yugoslavia . The name " Semlin " was derived from the German word for the former Austro @-@ Hungarian frontier town of Zemun , where the camp was located . Despite being located on the territory of the NDH , it was controlled by the German military police apparatus in occupied Serbia . NDH authorities did not object to its establishment and told the Germans that it could be located on NDH territory as long as its guards were German rather than Serb . Soon after the camp was established , SS @-@ Scharführer Edgar Enge of the Belgrade Gestapo became its commander . Initially , the campgrounds held about 500 male Jewish inmates who were given the task of running the camp 's so @-@ called " self @-@ administration " and were made responsible for distributing food , dividing up labour , and organizing a Jewish guard force which patrolled along the camp . The exterior of the camp , however , was guarded on a rotation basis by twenty @-@ five members of Reserve Police Battalion 64 . By October , all male Jewish inmates and most male Romani inmates were killed . Most were executed in four major waves , with frequent killings occurring in mid @-@ September and between 9 and 11 October . On each occasion , inmates were told that they were being transported to a camp in Austria with better labour conditions but were instead taken to Jabuka in the Banat or to a firing range on the outskirts of Belgrade , where they were killed . Sajmište officially opened on a wider scale on 28 October 1941 . The last of the initial male Jewish inmates were killed on 11 November . 
 = = = Judenlager Semlin = = = 
 At the end of 1941 and the beginning of 1942 , approximately 7 @,@ 000 Jewish women , children and old men were brought to the camp , along with a further 500 Jewish men and 292 Romani women and children . Most of these people were from the outlying Serbian towns , primarily Niš , Smederevo and Šabac . Women and children were placed in makeshift barracks that were barely heated , and whose windows were shattered due to German bombing raids carried out during the invasion of Yugoslavia . Originally constructed as fair pavilions , the largest of these barracks held up to 5 @,@ 000 prisoners . Inmates suffered during numerous influenza epidemics , slept on wet straw or bare floorboards , and were provided with inadequate amounts of food . Starvation was widespread , and Jewish inmates appealed unsuccessfully to Serbian authorities for more food to be provided to the camp . Consequently , a high number of detainees , especially children , died in late 1941 and early 1942 , with many inmates freezing to death in one of the coldest winters on record . The Romani inmates were kept in far more miserable conditions than their Jewish counterparts . They also slept on straw in an unheated hall , but were kept separate from non @-@ Romani prisoners . The majority of Romani inmates were released after six weeks of detention . Most Jewish inmates remained detained , with the exception of ten Jewish women who were married to Christian men . 
 In January 1942 , SS @-@ Untersturmführer Herbert Andorfer was appointed to replace the inexperienced Enge as commander of the camp . Enge was subsequently made Andorfer 's deputy . That month , German military authorities demanded the camp be cleared of Jews in order to accommodate the growing number of captives taken in battles with the Partisans . By February the camp held about 6 @,@ 500 inmates , ten percent of whom were Romani . In early March , Andorfer was informed that a gas van had been sent to the camp from Berlin . The Sauer van had been delivered upon the request of the German military administration chief in Serbia , Harald Turner . Stricken with guilt over having to play a central role in the murder of the Jewish inmates , some of whom he had developed good relations with , Andorfer requested a transfer ; this was denied . In order to ensure the quickness and efficiency of the gassings , he made announcements intended to convince the prisoners that they were going to be transferred to another , better @-@ equipped camp . He went so far as to post fictitious camp regulations , and announced that prisoners would be allowed to take their bags with them . Many detainees registered for the supposed transfer , hoping to escape the camp 's terrible living conditions . Inmates who had volunteered to leave the previous evening climbed into the van the next day in groups of between 50 and 80 . The drivers of the van , SS @-@ <unk> Meier and Götz , distributed candy to children in order to win their affection . Afterwards , the doors of the van were sealed shut . The van then followed a small car driven by Andorfer and Enge , before crossing the border into German @-@ occupied Serbia . It was here that one of the drivers exited the van and crawled underneath it , diverting its exhaust into the interior of the vehicle and killing the inmates with carbon monoxide gas . The van was then taken to the Avala firing range , where corpses were dumped into mass graves freshly dug by Serbian and Romani prisoners . Such gassings became routine , and the gas van arrived every day except Sunday . Rumours quickly circulated about the gassings , with news reaching German troops stationed in Belgrade and even some Serbians . Consequently , the gas van was nicknamed the " soul killer " ( Serbian : <unk> ) by the Serb population exposed to these rumours . It is thought that the gassings took the lives of as many as 8 @,@ 000 inmates , mostly women and children . The seven Serbian prisoners that had participated in unloading the murdered inmates from the van were shot after the gassings stopped , but the gravedigger , a Serb named Vladimir Milutinović , survived . " Eighty @-@ one or eighty @-@ two trenches were prepared and I helped dig all of them , " he recalled . " At least 100 people [ fit ] into each trench [ ... ] These ones were only for those suffocated in the truck . We dug a different set for those who were shot . " 
 Few inmates remained in the camp after the gassings stopped , mostly non @-@ Jewish women who had been married to Jews . They were released several days later , after being sworn to secrecy . Apart from Sajmište inmates , the 500 patients and staff of the Belgrade Jewish Hospital , as well as Jewish prisoners from the nearby Banjica concentration camp , were also killed in the gas van . The last Jewish prisoner in Sajmište was killed on 8 May 1942 , and the gas van used at the camp was returned to Berlin on 9 June 1942 . It received a technical upgrade there , and was then transferred to Belarus where it was used to gas Jews in Minsk . Shortly after leading the extermination of the Jewish inmates in Sajmište , Andorfer and Enge were assigned different Security Police roles . Andorfer later received an Iron Cross 2nd Class for running the camp , and won a promotion . 
 = = = Anhaltelager Semlin = = = 
 With the extermination of the original Jewish inmates completed , the camp was renamed Zemun concentration camp ( German : Anhaltelager Semlin ) and served to hold one last group of Jews who were arrested upon the surrender of Italy in September 1943 . It also held captured Yugoslav Partisans , Chetniks , sympathizers of the Greek and Albanian resistance movements , and Serb peasants from villages in the Croatian Ustaše @-@ controlled regions of Srem and Kozara , where they had been detained in the Jasenovac concentration camp . During this period , Montenegrin separatist leader Sekula Drljević became the camp 's administrator . Conditions deteriorated to such an extent that some began comparing it to Jasenovac and other large concentration camps throughout Europe . The camp became the main transit point for Yugoslav prisoners and detainees on their way to labour locations and concentration camps in Germany . An estimated 32 @,@ 000 mostly Serb prisoners passed through Sajmište during this period , 10 @,@ 600 of whom were killed or died due to hunger and disease . 
 Alarmed by the fact that the campgrounds could easily be seen from across the Sava , in late 1943 , the new German ambassador to Serbia proposed that the camp be moved deeper into NDH territory , because its " [ continuing existence ] before the eyes of the people of Belgrade was politically intolerable for reasons of public feeling . " His requests were ignored by German authorities . By the end of 1943 , the Germans made an effort to erase all traces of the atrocities committed in the camp by burning records , incinerating corpses , and destroying other pieces of evidence . This task was undertaken by SS @-@ Standartenführer Paul Blobel , who arrived in Belgrade in November 1943 . Upon arrival , he ordered the head of the local Gestapo , SS @-@ Sturmbannführer Bruno Sattler , to form a special detachment that was to be responsible for the exhumation and burning of bodies . The detachment was led by Lieutenant Erich Grunwald , and composed of ten security policemen and 48 military policemen . The digging battalions were composed of 100 Serbian and Jewish prisoners . Exhumations occurred from December 1943 to April 1944 , and thousands of bodies were burned . All of the prisoners who were present during the exhumations were shot , except for three Serbs who managed to escape . Allied aircraft bombed Sajmište in April 1944 , killing many inmates and inflicting heavy damage on the camp itself . On 17 May 1944 , the Germans transferred control of the camp over to the NDH . The camp was closed that July . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 After the war , Yugoslavia 's new communist government announced that Sajmište had held a total of 100 @,@ 000 prisoners during the war , half of whom were killed . The Yugoslav State War Crimes Commission later estimated that as many as 40 @,@ 000 may have been killed in the camp , including 7 @,@ 000 Jews . According to the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia , the overall death toll was greatly exaggerated by the communists for political purposes , and the real number of inmates was about 50 @,@ 000 , with 20 @,@ 000 killed . It is estimated that half of all Serbian Jews were killed at Sajmište . The Staro Sajmište memorial estimates that 23 @,@ 000 people perished in the camp , of whom 10 @,@ 000 were Jews . 
 Most of the Germans who were responsible for the operation of the camp were captured and brought to trial . Many of those who had been prominent German officials during the occupation of Serbia , including Turner , Fuchs and Meyszner , were extradited to Yugoslavia by the Allies after the war , where they were executed . Camp commander Andorfer managed to escape with the assistance of the Roman Catholic Church , which helped him flee to South America . He returned to Austria from Venezuela in the 1960s , and was subsequently apprehended and tried on the minor charge of being an accessory to murder — for which he was sentenced to two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years imprisonment . Andorfer 's deputy , Enge , was apprehended in the 1960s , and sentenced to one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years imprisonment . His sentence was never carried out due to his old age and poor health . German guards suspected of executing Serbian prisoners were never tried , although they served as witnesses in several trials in West Germany . 
 Belgrade Jews murdered during the Holocaust , including those at Sajmište , were not commemorated by Yugoslavia 's post @-@ war Communist government until thirty years after the events . Croatian author Anto Knežević caused considerable controversy in May 1993 when he suggested that Serbs , not Germans , had been responsible for running the camp . This claim was vehemently denied by Jewish historians and Belgrade 's Jewish community . At present , the old Sajmište fairgrounds are marked by small plaques and a monument to commemorate those detained or killed in the camp . The plaques were dedicated in 1974 and 1984 , respectively . In 1987 , the Sajmište fairgrounds were granted cultural landmark status by the government of Yugoslavia . A monument , 10 m ( 33 ft ) high and created by the artist Miodrag Popović , was erected on the banks of the Sava in 1995 . No memorial centres or museums have ever been built on the former campgrounds . Today , the area where the camp was located is used as a state @-@ run facility housing low @-@ income residents of Belgrade . As of February 2013 , an estimated 2 @,@ 500 people live on the grounds of the former camp . 
 = Halley 's Comet = 
 Halley 's Comet or Comet Halley ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / , named after astronomer Edmond Halley ) , officially designated 1P / Halley , is a short @-@ period comet visible from Earth every 75 – 76 years . Halley is the only known short @-@ period comet that is clearly visible to the naked eye from Earth , and the only naked @-@ eye comet that might appear twice in a human lifetime . Halley last appeared in the inner parts of the Solar System in 1986 and will next appear in mid @-@ 2061 . 
 Halley 's returns to the inner Solar System have been observed and recorded by astronomers since at least 240 BC . Clear records of the comet 's appearances were made by Chinese , Babylonian , and medieval European chroniclers , but were not recognized as reappearances of the same object at the time . The comet 's periodicity was first determined in 1705 by English astronomer Edmond Halley , after whom it is now named . 
 During its 1986 apparition , Halley 's Comet became the first comet to be observed in detail by spacecraft , providing the first observational data on the structure of a comet nucleus and the mechanism of coma and tail formation . These observations supported a number of longstanding hypotheses about comet construction , particularly Fred Whipple 's " dirty snowball " model , which correctly predicted that Halley would be composed of a mixture of volatile ices – such as water , carbon dioxide , and ammonia – and dust . The missions also provided data that substantially reformed and reconfigured these ideas ; for instance , now it is understood that the surface of Halley is largely composed of dusty , non @-@ volatile materials , and that only a small portion of it is icy . 
 = = Pronunciation = = 
 Comet Halley is commonly pronounced / <unk> / , rhyming with valley , or / <unk> / , rhyming with daily . Spellings of Edmond Halley 's name during his lifetime included Hailey , Haley , Hayley , Halley , Hawley , and <unk> , so its contemporary pronunciation is uncertain . 
 = = Computation of orbit = = 
 Halley was the first comet to be recognized as periodic . Until the Renaissance , the philosophical consensus on the nature of comets , promoted by Aristotle , was that they were disturbances in Earth 's atmosphere . This idea was disproved in 1577 by Tycho Brahe , who used parallax measurements to show that comets must lie beyond the Moon . Many were still unconvinced that comets orbited the Sun , and assumed instead that they must follow straight paths through the Solar System . 
 In 1687 , Sir Isaac Newton published his Principia , in which he outlined his laws of gravity and motion . His work on comets was decidedly incomplete . Although he had suspected that two comets that had appeared in succession in 1680 and 1681 were the same comet before and after passing behind the Sun ( he was later found to be correct ; see Newton 's Comet ) , he was unable to completely reconcile comets into his model . 
 Ultimately , it was Newton 's friend , editor and publisher , Edmond Halley , who , in his 1705 Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets , used Newton 's new laws to calculate the gravitational effects of Jupiter and Saturn on cometary orbits . This calculation enabled him , after examining historical records , to determine that the orbital elements of a second comet that had appeared in 1682 were nearly the same as those of two comets that had appeared in 1531 ( observed by Petrus <unk> ) and 1607 ( observed by Johannes Kepler ) . Halley thus concluded that all three comets were , in fact , the same object returning every 76 years , a period that has since been amended to every 75 – 76 years . After a rough estimate of the perturbations the comet would sustain from the gravitational attraction of the planets , he predicted its return for 1758 . 
 Halley 's prediction of the comet 's return proved to be correct , although it was not seen until 25 December 1758 , by Johann Georg <unk> , a German farmer and amateur astronomer . It did not pass through its perihelion until 13 March 1759 , the attraction of Jupiter and Saturn having caused a retardation of 618 days . This effect was computed prior to its return ( with a one @-@ month error to 13 April ) by a team of three French mathematicians , Alexis Clairaut , Joseph Lalande , and Nicole @-@ Reine <unk> . Halley did not live to see the comet return , as he died in 1742 . The confirmation of the comet 's return was the first time anything other than planets had been shown to orbit the Sun . It was also one of the earliest successful tests of Newtonian physics , and a clear demonstration of its explanatory power . The comet was first named in Halley 's honour by French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in 1759 . 
 The possibility has been raised that first @-@ century Jewish astronomers already had recognized Halley 's Comet as periodic . This theory notes a passage in the Talmud that refers to " a star which appears once in seventy years that makes the captains of the ships err . " 
 = = Orbit and origin = = 
 Halley 's orbital period over the last 3 centuries has been between 75 – 76 years , although it has varied between 74 – 79 years since 240 BC . Its orbit around the Sun is highly elliptical , with an orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 967 ( with 0 being a circle and 1 being a parabolic trajectory ) . The perihelion , the point in the comet 's orbit when it is nearest the Sun , is just 0 @.@ 6 AU . This is between the orbits of Mercury and Venus . Its aphelion , or farthest distance from the Sun , is 35 AU ( roughly the distance of Pluto ) . Unusual for an object in the Solar System , Halley 's orbit is retrograde ; it orbits the Sun in the opposite direction to the planets , or , clockwise from above the Sun 's north pole . The orbit is inclined by 18 ° to the ecliptic , with much of it lying south of the ecliptic . ( Because it is retrograde , the true inclination is 162 ° ) . Due to the retrograde orbit , it has one of the highest velocities relative to the Earth of any object in the Solar System . The 1910 passage was at a relative velocity of 70 @.@ 56 km / s ( 157 @,@ 838 mph or 254 @,@ 016 km / h ) . Because its orbit comes close to Earth 's in two places , Halley is the parent body of two meteor showers : the Eta <unk> in early May , and the <unk> in late October . Observations conducted around the time of Halley 's appearance in 1986 , however , suggest that the Eta <unk> meteor shower might not originate from Halley 's Comet , although it might be perturbed by it . 
 Halley is classified as a periodic or short @-@ period comet ; one with an orbit lasting 200 years or less . This contrasts it with long @-@ period comets , whose orbits last for thousands of years . Periodic comets have an average inclination to the ecliptic of only ten degrees , and an orbital period of just 6 @.@ 5 years , so Halley 's orbit is atypical . Most short @-@ period comets ( those with orbital periods shorter than 20 years and inclinations of 20 – 30 degrees or less ) are called Jupiter @-@ family comets . Those resembling Halley , with orbital periods of between 20 and 200 years and inclinations extending from zero to more than 90 degrees , are called Halley @-@ type comets . As of 2015 , only 75 Halley @-@ type comets have been observed , compared with 511 identified Jupiter family comets . 
 The orbits of the Halley @-@ type comets suggest that they were originally long @-@ period comets whose orbits were perturbed by the gravity of the giant planets and directed into the inner Solar System . If Halley was once a long @-@ period comet , it is likely to have originated in the Oort Cloud , a sphere of cometary bodies that has an inner edge of 20 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 AU . Conversely the Jupiter @-@ family comets are generally believed to originate in the Kuiper belt , a flat disc of icy debris between 30 AU ( Neptune 's orbit ) and 50 AU from the Sun ( in the scattered disc ) . Another point of origin for the Halley @-@ type comets was proposed in 2008 , when a trans @-@ Neptunian object with a retrograde orbit similar to Halley 's was discovered , 2008 <unk> , whose orbit takes it from just outside that of Uranus to twice the distance of Pluto . It may be a member of a new population of small Solar System bodies that serves as the source of Halley @-@ type comets . 
 Halley has probably been in its current orbit for 16 @,@ 000 – 200 @,@ 000 years , although it is not possible to numerically integrate its orbit for more than a few tens of apparitions , and close approaches before 837 AD can only be verified from recorded observations . The non @-@ gravitational effects can be crucial ; as Halley approaches the Sun , it expels jets of sublimating gas from its surface , which knock it very slightly off its orbital path . These orbital changes cause delays in its perihelion of four days , average . 
 In 1989 , Boris Chirikov and Vitaly <unk> performed an analysis of 46 apparitions of Halley 's Comet taken from historical records and computer simulations . These studies showed that its dynamics were chaotic and unpredictable on long timescales . Halley 's projected lifetime could be as long as 10 million years . More recent work suggests that Halley will evaporate , or split in two , within the next few tens of thousands of years , or will be ejected from the Solar System within a few hundred thousand years . Observations by D.W. Hughes suggest that Halley 's nucleus has been reduced in mass by 80 – 90 % over the last 2000 – 3000 revolutions . 
 = = Structure and composition = = 
 The Giotto and Vega missions gave planetary scientists their first view of Halley 's surface and structure . Like all comets , as Halley nears the Sun , its volatile compounds ( those with low boiling points , such as water , carbon monoxide , carbon dioxide and other ices ) begin to sublime from the surface of its nucleus . This causes the comet to develop a coma , or atmosphere , up to 100 @,@ 000 km across . Evaporation of this dirty ice releases dust particles , which travel with the gas away from the nucleus . Gas molecules in the coma absorb solar light and then re @-@ radiate it at different wavelengths , a phenomenon known as fluorescence , whereas dust particles scatter the solar light . Both processes are responsible for making the coma visible . As a fraction of the gas molecules in the coma are ionized by the solar ultraviolet radiation , pressure from the solar wind , a stream of charged particles emitted by the Sun , pulls the coma 's ions out into a long tail , which may extend more than 100 million kilometers into space . Changes in the flow of the solar wind can cause disconnection events , in which the tail completely breaks off from the nucleus . 
 Despite the vast size of its coma , Halley 's nucleus is relatively small : barely 15 kilometers long , 8 kilometers wide and perhaps 8 kilometers thick . Its shape vaguely resembles that of a peanut . Its mass is relatively low ( roughly 2 @.@ 2 × 1014 kg ) and its average density is about 0 @.@ 6 g / cm3 , indicating that it is made of a large number of small pieces , held together very loosely , forming a structure known as a rubble pile . Ground @-@ based observations of coma brightness suggested that Halley 's rotation period was about 7 @.@ 4 days . Images taken by the various spacecraft , along with observations of the jets and shell , suggested a period of 52 hours . Given the irregular shape of the nucleus , Halley 's rotation is likely to be complex . Although only 25 % of Halley 's surface was imaged in detail during the flyby missions , the images revealed an extremely varied topography , with hills , mountains , ridges , depressions , and at least one crater . 
 Halley is the most active of all the periodic comets , with others , such as Comet Encke and Comet Holmes , being one or two orders of magnitude less active . Its day side ( the side facing the Sun ) is far more active than the night side . Spacecraft observations showed that the gases ejected from the nucleus were 80 % water vapor , 17 % carbon monoxide and 3 – 4 % carbon dioxide , with traces of hydrocarbons although more @-@ recent sources give a value of 10 % for carbon monoxide and also include traces of methane and ammonia . The dust particles were found to be primarily a mixture of carbon – hydrogen – oxygen – nitrogen ( <unk> ) compounds common in the outer Solar System , and silicates , such as are found in terrestrial rocks . The dust particles decreased in size down to the limits of detection ( ~ 0 @.@ 001 µm ) . The ratio of deuterium to hydrogen in the water released by Halley was initially thought to be similar to that found in Earth 's ocean water , suggesting that Halley @-@ type comets may have delivered water to Earth in the distant past . Subsequent observations showed Halley 's deuterium ratio to be far higher than that in found in Earth 's oceans , making such comets unlikely sources for Earth 's water . 
 Giotto provided the first evidence in support of Fred Whipple 's " dirty snowball " hypothesis for comet construction ; Whipple postulated that comets are icy objects warmed by the Sun as they approach the inner Solar System , causing ices on their surfaces to sublimate ( change directly from a solid to a gas ) , and jets of volatile material to burst outward , creating the coma . Giotto showed that this model was broadly correct , though with modifications . Halley 's albedo , for instance , is about 4 % , meaning that it reflects only 4 % of the sunlight hitting it ; about what one would expect for coal . Thus , despite appearing brilliant white to observers on Earth , Halley 's Comet is in fact pitch black . The surface temperature of evaporating " dirty ice " ranges from 170 K ( − 103 ° C ) at higher albedo to 220 K ( − 53 ° C ) at low albedo ; Vega 1 found Halley 's surface temperature to be in the range 300 – 400 K ( 30 – 130 ° C ) . This suggested that only 10 % of Halley 's surface was active , and that large portions of it were coated in a layer of dark dust that retained heat . Together , these observations suggested that Halley was in fact predominantly composed of non @-@ volatile materials , and thus more closely resembled a " snowy <unk> " than a " dirty snowball " . 
 = = Apparitions = = 
 Halley 's calculations enabled the comet 's earlier appearances to be found in the historical record . The following table sets out the astronomical designations for every apparition of Halley 's Comet from 240 BC , the earliest documented widespread sighting . For example , " 1P / 1982 U1 , 1986 III , <unk> " indicates that for the perihelion in 1986 , Halley was the first period comet known ( designated 1P ) and this apparition was the first seen in half @-@ month U ( the second half of October ) in 1982 ( giving 1P / 1982 U1 ) ; it was the third comet past perihelion in 1986 ( 1986 III ) ; and it was the ninth comet spotted in 1982 ( provisional designation <unk> ) . The perihelion dates of each apparition are shown . The perihelion dates farther from the present are approximate , mainly because of uncertainties in the modelling of non @-@ gravitational effects . Perihelion dates of 1531 and earlier are in the Julian calendar , while perihelion dates 1607 and after are in the Gregorian calendar . 
 = = = Prior to 1066 = = = 
 Halley may have been recorded as early as 467 BC , but this is uncertain . A comet was recorded in ancient Greece between 468 and 466 BC ; its timing , location , duration , and associated meteor shower all suggest it was Halley . According to Pliny the Elder , that same year a meteorite fell in the town of Aegospotami , in Thrace . He described it as brown in colour and the size of a wagon load . Chinese chroniclers also mention a comet in that year . 
 The first certain appearance of Halley 's Comet in the historical record is a description from 240 BC , in the Chinese chronicle Records of the Grand Historian or Shiji , which describes a comet that appeared in the east and moved north . The only surviving record of the 164 BC apparition is found on two fragmentary Babylonian tablets , now owned by the British Museum . 
 The apparition of 87 BC was recorded in Babylonian tablets which state that the comet was seen " day beyond day " for a month . This appearance may be recalled in the representation of Tigranes the Great , an Armenian king who is depicted on coins with a crown that features , according to <unk> <unk> and R. Vardanyan , " a star with a curved tail [ that ] may represent the passage of Halley 's Comet in 87 BC . " <unk> and Vardanyan argue that " Tigranes could have seen Halley 's Comet when it passed closest to the Sun on August 6 in 87 BC " as the comet would have been a " most <unk> event " ; for ancient Armenians it could have heralded the New Era of the brilliant King of Kings . 
 The apparition of 12 BC was recorded in the Book of Han by Chinese astronomers of the Han Dynasty who tracked it from August through October . It passed within 0 @.@ 16 AU of Earth . Halley 's appearance in 12 BC , only a few years distant from the conventionally assigned date of the birth of Jesus Christ , has led some theologians and astronomers to suggest that it might explain the biblical story of the Star of Bethlehem . There are other explanations for the phenomenon , such as planetary conjunctions , and there are also records of other comets that appeared closer to the date of Jesus ' birth . 
 If , as has been suggested , the reference in the Talmud to " a star which appears once in seventy years that makes the captains of the ships err " ( see above ) refers to Halley 's Comet , it may be a reference to the 66 AD appearance , because this passage is attributed to the Rabbi Yehoshua ben Hananiah . This apparition was the only one to occur during ben Hananiah 's lifetime . 
 The 141 AD apparition was recorded in Chinese chronicles . It was also recorded in the Tamil work Purananuru , in connection with the death of the south Indian Chera king <unk> <unk> Cheral Irumporai . 
 The 374 AD and 607 approaches each came within 0 @.@ 09 AU of Earth . The 684 AD apparition was recorded in Europe in one of the sources used by the compiler of the 1493 Nuremberg Chronicles . Chinese records also report it as the " broom star " . 
 In 837 , Halley 's Comet may have passed as close as 0 @.@ 03 AU ( 3 @.@ 2 million miles ; 5 @.@ 1 million kilometers ) from Earth , by far its closest approach . Its tail may have stretched 60 degrees across the sky . It was recorded by astronomers in China , Japan , Germany , The Byzantine Empire , and the Middle East . In 912 , Halley is recorded in the Annals of Ulster , which state " A dark and rainy year . A comet appeared . " 
 = = = 1066 = = = 
 In 1066 , the comet was seen in England and thought to be an omen : later that year Harold II of England died at the Battle of Hastings ; it was a bad omen for Harold , but a good omen for the man who defeated him , William the Conqueror . The comet is represented on the Bayeux Tapestry as a fiery star , and the surviving accounts describe it as appearing to be four times the size of Venus and shining with a light equal to a quarter of that of the Moon . Halley came within 0 @.@ 10 AU of Earth at that time . 
 This appearance of the comet is also noted in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . <unk> of Malmesbury may have seen Halley previously in 989 , as he wrote of it in 1066 : " You 've come , have you ? ... You 've come , you source of tears to many mothers , you evil . I hate you ! It is long since I saw you ; but as I see you now you are much more terrible , for I see you brandishing the downfall of my country . I hate you ! " 
 The Irish Annals of the Four Masters recorded the comet as " A star [ that ] appeared on the seventh of the <unk> of May , on Tuesday after Little Easter , than whose light the brilliance or light of The Moon was not greater ; and it was visible to all in this manner till the end of four nights afterwards . " Chaco Native Americans in New Mexico may have recorded the 1066 apparition in their petroglyphs . 
 = = = 1145 – 1378 = = = 
 The 1145 apparition was recorded by the monk Eadwine . The 1986 apparition exhibited a fan tail similar to Eadwine 's drawing . Some claim that Genghis Khan was inspired to turn his conquests toward Europe by the 1222 apparition . The 1301 apparition may have been seen by the artist Giotto di Bondone , who represented the Star of Bethlehem as a fire @-@ colored comet in the Nativity section of his Arena Chapel cycle , completed in 1305 . No record survives of the 1378 apparition . 
 = = = 1456 = = = 
 In 1456 , the year of Halley 's next apparition , the Ottoman Empire invaded the Kingdom of Hungary , culminating in the Siege of Belgrade in July of that year . In a Papal Bull , Pope Calixtus III ordered special prayers be said for the city 's protection . In 1470 , the humanist scholar Bartolomeo Platina wrote in his Lives of the Popes that , 
 A hairy and fiery star having then made its appearance for several days , the mathematicians declared that there would follow grievous pestilence , dearth and some great calamity . Calixtus , to avert the wrath of God , ordered supplications that if evils were impending for the human race He would turn all upon the Turks , the enemies of the Christian name . He likewise ordered , to move God by continual entreaty , that notice should be given by the bells to call the faithful at midday to aid by their prayers those engaged in battle with the Turk . 
 Platina 's account is not mentioned in official records . In the 18th century , a Frenchman further embellished the story , in anger at the Church , by claiming that the Pope had " excommunicated " the comet , though this story was most likely his own invention . 
 Halley 's apparition of 1456 was also witnessed in Kashmir and depicted in great detail by <unk> , a Sanskrit poet and biographer to the Sultans of Kashmir . He read the apparition as a cometary portent of doom foreshadowing the imminent fall of Sultan Zayn al @-@ Abidin ( AD 1418 / 1420 – 1470 ) . 
 After witnessing a bright light in the sky ( which most historians have identified as Halley 's Comet , visible in Ethiopia in 1456 ) , Emperor Zara Yaqob , ruler from 1434 to 1468 , founded the city of Debre Berhan ( tr . City of Light ) and made it his capital for the remainder of his reign . 
 = = = 1531 – 1835 = = = 
 Halley 's periodic returns have been subject to scientific investigation since the 16th century . The three apparitions from 1531 to 1682 were noted by Edmond Halley , enabling him to predict its 1759 return . Streams of vapour observed during the comet 's 1835 apparition prompted astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel to propose that the jet forces of evaporating material could be great enough to significantly alter a comet 's orbit . 
 = = = 1910 = = = 
 The 1910 approach , which came into naked @-@ eye view around 10 April and came to perihelion on 20 April , was notable for several reasons : it was the first approach of which photographs exist , and the first for which spectroscopic data were obtained . Furthermore , the comet made a relatively close approach of 0 @.@ 15 AU , making it a spectacular sight . Indeed , on 19 May , Earth actually passed through the tail of the comet . One of the substances discovered in the tail by spectroscopic analysis was the toxic gas cyanogen , which led astronomer Camille Flammarion to claim that , when Earth passed through the tail , the gas " would impregnate the atmosphere and possibly snuff out all life on the planet . " His pronouncement led to panicked buying of gas masks and quack " anti @-@ comet pills " and " anti @-@ comet umbrellas " by the public . In reality , as other astronomers were quick to point out , the gas is so diffuse that the world suffered no ill effects from the passage through the tail . 
 The comet added to the unrest in China on the eve of Xinhai Revolution that would end the last dynasty in 1911 . As James Hutson , a missionary in Sichuan Province at the time , recorded , 
 The people believe that it indicates calamity such as war , fire , pestilence , and a change of dynasty . In some places on certain days the doors were unopened for half a day , no water was carried and many did not even drink water as it was rumoured that pestilential vapour was being poured down upon the earth from the comet . " 
 The 1910 visitation is also recorded as being the travelling companion of the first known English Muslim to make the Haj pilgrimage to Mecca . However , his explanation of its scientific predictability did not meet with favour in the Holy City . 
 The comet was also fertile ground for hoaxes . One that reached major newspapers claimed that the Sacred Followers , a supposed Oklahoma religious group , attempted to sacrifice a virgin to ward off the impending disaster , but were stopped by the police . 
 American satirist and writer Mark Twain was born on 30 November 1835 , exactly two weeks after the comet 's perihelion . In his autobiography , published in 1909 , he said , 
 I came in with Halley 's comet in 1835 . It is coming again next year , and I expect to go out with it . It will be the greatest disappointment of my life if I don 't go out with Halley 's comet . The Almighty has said , no doubt : ' Now here are these two unaccountable freaks ; they came in together , they must go out <unk> 
 Twain died on 21 April 1910 , the day following the comet 's subsequent perihelion . The 1985 fantasy film The Adventures of Mark Twain was inspired by the quotation . 
 Halley 's 1910 apparition is distinct from the Great Daylight Comet of 1910 , which surpassed Halley in brilliance and was actually visible in broad daylight for a short period , approximately four months before Halley made its appearance . 
 = = = 1986 = = = 
 Halley 's 1986 apparition was the least favorable on record . The comet and Earth were on opposite sides of the Sun in February 1986 , creating the worst viewing circumstances for Earth observers for the last 2 @,@ 000 years . Halley 's closest approach was 0 @.@ 42 AU . Additionally , with increased light pollution from urbanization , many people failed to even see the comet . It was possible to observe it in areas outside of cities with the help of binoculars . Further , the comet appeared brightest when it was almost invisible from the northern hemisphere in March and April . Halley 's approach was first detected by astronomers David Jewitt and G. Edward Danielson on 16 October 1982 using the 5 @.@ 1 m Hale telescope at Mount Palomar and a CCD camera . The first person to visually observe the comet on its 1986 return was amateur astronomer Stephen James O 'Meara on 24 January 1985 . O 'Meara used a home @-@ built 24 @-@ inch telescope on top of Mauna Kea to detect the magnitude 19 @.@ 6 comet . On 8 November 1985 , Stephen Edberg ( then serving as the Coordinator for Amateur Observations at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory ) and Charles Morris were the first to observe Halley 's Comet with the naked eye in its 1986 apparition . 
 The development of space travel gave scientists the opportunity to study the comet at close quarters , and several probes were launched to do so . The Soviet Vega 1 started returning images of Halley on 4 March 1986 , and the first ever of its nucleus , and made its flyby on 6 March , followed by Vega 2 making its flyby on 9 March . On 14 March , the Giotto space probe , launched by the European Space Agency , made the closest pass of the comet 's nucleus . There were also two Japanese probes , <unk> and <unk> . The probes were unofficially known as the Halley Armada . 
 Based on data retrieved by Astron , the largest ultraviolet space telescope of the time , during its Halley 's Comet observations in December 1985 , a group of Soviet scientists developed a model of the comet 's coma . The comet was also observed from space by the International Cometary Explorer . Originally International Sun @-@ Earth Explorer 3 , the probe was renamed and freed from its L1 Lagrangian point location in Earth 's orbit to intercept comets <unk> / <unk> @-@ Zinner and Halley . 
 Two Space Shuttle missions – the ill @-@ fated STS @-@ 51 @-@ L ( ended by the Challenger disaster ) and STS @-@ 61 @-@ E – were scheduled to observe Halley 's Comet from low Earth orbit . STS @-@ 51 @-@ L carried the Shuttle @-@ Pointed Tool for Astronomy ( SPARTAN @-@ 203 ) satellite , also called the Halley 's Comet Experiment Deployable ( <unk> ) . STS @-@ 61 @-@ E was a Columbia mission scheduled for March 1986 , carrying the <unk> @-@ 1 platform to study the comet . Due to the suspension of America 's manned space program after the Challenger explosion , the mission was canceled , and <unk> @-@ 1 would not fly until late 1990 on STS @-@ 35 . 
 = = = After 1986 = = = 
 On 12 February 1991 , at a distance of 14 @.@ 4 AU ( 2 @.@ 15 × 109 km ) from the Sun , Halley displayed an outburst that lasted for several months , releasing a cloud of dust 300 @,@ 000 km across . The outburst likely started in December 1990 , and then the comet brightened from magnitude 24 @.@ 3 to magnitude 18 @.@ 9 . Halley was most recently observed in 2003 by three of the Very Large Telescopes at Paranal , Chile , when Halley 's magnitude was 28 @.@ 2 . The telescopes observed Halley , at the faintest and farthest any comet has ever been imaged , in order to verify a method for finding very faint trans @-@ Neptunian objects . Astronomers are now able to observe the comet at any point in its orbit . 
 The next predicted perihelion of Halley 's Comet is 28 July 2061 , when it is expected to be better positioned for observation than during the 1985 – 1986 apparition , as it will be on the same side of the Sun as Earth . It is expected to have an apparent magnitude of − 0 @.@ 3 , compared with only + 2 @.@ 1 for the 1986 apparition . It has been calculated that on 9 September 2060 , Halley will pass within 0 @.@ 98 AU ( 147 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) of Jupiter , and then on 20 August 2061 will pass within 0 @.@ <unk> AU ( 8 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 km ) of Venus . In 2134 , Halley is expected to pass within 0 @.@ 09 AU ( 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) of Earth . Its apparent magnitude is expected to be − 2 @.@ 0 . 
 = Road to the Multiverse = 
 " Road to the Multiverse " is the first episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . This and most of the Season 8 episodes were produced for season 7 . Directed by Greg Colton and written by Wellesley Wild , the episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on September 27 , 2009 , along with the series premiere of The Cleveland Show . In " Road to the Multiverse " , two of the show 's main characters , baby genius Stewie and anthropomorphic dog Brian , both voiced by series creator Seth MacFarlane , use an " out @-@ of @-@ this @-@ world " remote control to travel through a series of various parallel universes . They eventually end up in a world where dogs rule and humans obey . Brian becomes reluctant to return to his own universe , and he ultimately ends up breaking the remote , much to the dismay of Stewie , who soon seeks a replacement . The " Road to " episodes which have aired throughout various seasons of Family Guy were inspired by the Road to ... comedy films starring Bing Crosby , Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour , though this episode was not originally conceived as a " Road to " show . 
 During the sixth season , episodes of Family Guy were delayed from regular broadcast due to the 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike . MacFarlane , the series creator and executive producer , sided with the Writers Guild and participated in the strike until its conclusion . As a result , the seventh season consisted entirely of hold @-@ overs . " Road to the Multiverse " was the first episode to be produced and aired after the strike ended . It was first announced at the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 Responses to the episode were highly positive ; critics praised its storyline , numerous cultural references , and use of various animation styles . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 10 @.@ 17 million homes during its original airing in the United States . The episode featured guest performances by Kei Ogawa , Kotaro Watanabe and Jamison Yang , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . Greg Colton won a Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Achievement in Animation , for storyboarding the episode , at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . " Road to the Multiverse " was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the Griffin family attend the county fair , Stewie announces that he has bred a winning pedigree pig for the local Quahog Clam Day . Revealing to Brian that he got the pig from a parallel universe , he shows him a remote control that allows access to the various parallel universes . Each universe depicts Quahog in the same time and place but under different conditions . Deciding to test the device , they both visit a universe where Christianity never existed , leading an impressed Brian to ask whether the remote can take them to other alternate realities . Stewie guides them both through several more parallel universes , each having its own portrayal of the Griffin family . As time passes , Brian begins to lose his amazement for the device and eventually comes to realize that Stewie has no idea how to return home . 
 Continuing their explorations , they reach a universe where humans are subservient to dogs . Stewie finally figures out how to modify the remote device so that they can return home ; but Brian , overwhelmed by the thought of a world run by dogs like himself , is reluctant to leave and steals the remote . Stewie and Brian fight over the device , ultimately breaking it , which traps them in the alternate universe . In desperation , the two go to the universe 's version of the Griffin family – who are all dogs except for their pet Brian , who is human – hoping to find a solution . The dog version of Stewie quickly confronts the two , revealing that he has also developed a universe @-@ traveling device that would allow them to return to their own universe . Before Dog Stewie can fetch them his remote control , Human Stewie bites the dog version of his father , Peter , and is sent to the pound where he is to be euthanized later that day . The two Brians and Dog Stewie go to the human pound to free him , and both Stewie and Brian are sent back to their original universe . As they are being transported , human Brian , dreaming of a better life in a world of intelligent inhabitants , leaps into the inter @-@ universe portal at the last moment and successfully makes it to the original universe with the other two . Excited about his new prospects in life , human Brian begins his optimistic adventure in a brand new universe but is quickly struck by a car . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was first announced at the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California , on July 26 , 2008 . It was written by series regular Wellesley Wild and directed by Greg Colton shortly after the conclusion of the seventh production season , which consisted entirely of held @-@ over episodes due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . " Road to the Multiverse " is the fifth episode of the " Road to " hallmarks of the series , which have aired in various seasons of the show , and the second to be directed by Colton . The episodes are a parody of the seven Road to ... comedy films starring Bing Crosby , Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour . Though it was not originally intended to be a " Road to " episode , Greg Colton convinced series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane and " Spies Reminiscent of Us " director Cyndi Tang to change the episode 's title from " Sliders " , parodying the science fiction television series Sliders . Colton 's suggestion of the new title " Road to the Multiverse " was accepted , as was altering the premise of " Spies Reminiscent of Us " , the season 's original " Road to " episode . Executive producer and former Star Trek : Enterprise writer David A. Goodman , a fan of science fiction and the series Sliders , played a key role in the episode 's original development . The production staff of Family Guy , including Wellesley Wild , watched an episode of Sliders before writing the show . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter working as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Road to the Multiverse " . Ron Jones and MacFarlane also contributed to the music and lyrics featured in the episode . 
 The episode features several examples of animation styles that differ greatly from the series ' customary appearance . One such example involves the Disney universe , where the characters are drawn in the style of classic Walt Disney animated films . The sequence was animated entirely in Los Angeles by Main Street Productions , which were approached and recruited by series producer Kara Vallow to create the sequence , rather than in South Korea where the show is normally animated . MacFarlane described the scene as " a bit of challenge " and " kind of an experiment " since every character had to be completely redesigned based on the style of such films as " Pinocchio , Beauty and the Beast and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . " Another difference occurs in the dog universe , where the human characters are redrawn as dogs and Brian is redrawn as a human . MacFarlane found redesigning Brian easiest , simply giving him " a big nose and a collar . " In addition to traditional animation , the episode included a parody by Sarah E. Meyer , Eileen <unk> , Kelly <unk> of Robot Chicken , a stop motion series created by Family Guy cast member Seth Green for the Cartoon Network animation block Adult Swim . Green did not take part in the making of the parody ; it was instead animated by the Los Angeles company Screen Novelties , which had worked on the early seasons of Robot Chicken . 
 " Road to the Multiverse " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The DVDs included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane , various crew and cast members from several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature that discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " and a mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . The set also includes a reprint of the script for the episode . 
 In addition to the regular cast , Japanese actors Kei Ogawa , Kotaro Watanabe and Jamison Yang guest starred in the episode as Japanese @-@ inspired versions of the Griffin family and Glenn Quagmire . Recurring guest voice actor John G. Brennan reprised his recurring role as Mort Goldman and Adam West reprised his role as Mayor Adam West , who appears as an anthropomorphic mouse in the Disney universe . Minor appearances were made by writer and showrunner Steve Callaghan , actor Ralph Garman , writer and showrunner Mark Hentemann and writers Patrick Meighan , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and John Viener . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode opens with Stewie revealing his ability to travel across parallel universes to Brian . The first universe that they decide to visit , after having questioned the origin of Stewie 's pedigree pig , is said to exist in a world where Christianity is absent . In this universe , everything is seemingly years in advance of the 21st century ; Quagmire is able to take a single pill and be instantly cured of the AIDS virus , and flying cars and buildings surround them . As the two travel through the universe , they come upon Stewie 's older sister Meg , who has become significantly more attractive . While they watch her walk down the street , the 1984 single " Drop Dead Legs " by Van Halen plays . Playing on the nonexistence of Christianity , Brian and Stewie visit the Sistine Chapel and discover that a large collection of photos of American actress Jodie Foster has been substituted for The Creation of Adam painting by Michelangelo , who was fired and replaced by John Hinckley . 
 Seeking to explore more alternate realities , Stewie takes Brian to a universe resembling the 1960 animated sitcom The Flintstones . Peter and his wife Lois are shown dressed in a manner similar to Fred Flintstone and Wilma Flintstone respectively . Becoming tired of this universe , the two then transport themselves to a universe where the atomic bombing of Japan never occurred , allowing Japan to conquer the United States in World War II . 
 Another universe references many works by Walt Disney . Meg appears as Ursula from the 1989 film The Little Mermaid and Herbert appears as the Queen from the 1937 film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . Walt Disney 's alleged antisemitism is also referenced by having the universe 's occupants attack the Disney version of Mort Goldman when he enters a room , brutally beating him to death off @-@ screen . Discouraged , Brian and Stewie transport themselves to a universe resembling the Adult Swim series Robot Chicken , a show executive @-@ produced by Family Guy cast member Seth Green . The sequence reveals several action figures of cartoon characters : He @-@ Man , Optimus Prime , Lion @-@ O and Duke from G.I. Joe . 
 Continuing their travels , the two come across a universe where singer and performer Frank Sinatra was never born , resulting in the loss of the 1960 presidential election by President John F. Kennedy to then @-@ Vice President Richard Nixon , which causes World War III . Brian questions whether Lee Harvey Oswald shot Kennedy , and Stewie responds that he shot Mayor <unk> instead . A sequence similar to the Zapruder film , which shows the assassination of Kennedy , is shown , with Jacqueline Kennedy also appearing . Brian and Stewie next discover a universe completely depicted as a political cartoon . The final reference of the episode occurs in the dog universe when Stewie mentions , " Gosh , Brian , I sure hope this next leap , will be the leap home , " a nod to the opening narration of the time travel series Quantum Leap . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Road to the Multiverse " was broadcast on September 27 , 2009 , as a part of the Animation Domination block on Fox , and was preceded by an episode of The Simpsons and the pilot episode of MacFarlane 's new show The Cleveland Show . It was followed by the season premiere of MacFarlane 's other show American Dad ! . It was watched by 10 @.@ 17 million viewers in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , despite being aired simultaneously with the season premiere of Desperate Housewives on ABC , the season premiere of The Amazing Race on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 5 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! , in addition to edging out all three shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings were Family Guy 's highest since the airing of the season six episode " <unk> " . The episode 's first broadcast in Canada , on Global TV , was watched by 1 @.@ 29 million viewers , making it first for its timeslot in the week it was broadcast . 
 " Road to the Multiverse " received critical acclaim , with one calling the storyline " right up there with the best of the early episodes we 've seen on the series . " In a simultaneous review of the episodes of The Simpsons and American Dad ! that preceded and followed the episode respectively and The Cleveland Show pilot , The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff commented that he felt " essentially predisposed to like " the episode , adding that he enjoyed the entire theme of the show , in addition the fact that it was more than just science fiction . In the conclusion of his review VanDerWerff called the episode a " solid start to the eighth season " and rated it as a B + , the best rating between The Simpsons episode " Homer the Whopper " , the American Dad ! episode " In Country ... Club " and The Cleveland Show 's series premiere . Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode a 9 @.@ 6 out of 10 , saying that the episode featured " plenty of memorable lines , some truly stunning animation [ ... ] and a relentless non @-@ stop barrage of witty jokes . " In a subsequent review in January 2010 of " Stewie and Brian 's Greatest Adventures " , Haque called the episode " creative , visually impressive , and features some of the best random gags we 've seen on the show in a long time . " Television critic Alex Rocha of TV Guide also found the episode to have " great laughs , " saying that the show is " definitely off to a great start " to a new season . The director of " Road to the Multiverse " , Greg Colton , was awarded the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation , for storyboarding the episode , on August 21 , 2010 , at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards 's Creative Arts Awards . 
 Although the Parents Television Council , a frequent Family Guy critic , did not name Family Guy its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for " Road to the Multiverse " , it did refer to this episode in its negative review of the following episode , " Family Goy " . The review noted that the appearance of the Griffin family 's Jewish neighbor , Mort Goldman , in " Multiverse " was notable since , in the Disney parody , Mort was beaten to a bloody pulp by Disney @-@ inspired versions of the cast – a reference to Walt Disney 's purported antisemitism . The review goes on to state , " apparently , in Seth MacFarlane 's mind , the best way to fight anti @-@ Semitism is with more anti @-@ Semitism . One must wonder what young , angry , disaffected bigots tuning into the show must think . All they see is a nebbish stereotype getting his teeth knocked out of his skull and a blood @-@ soaked Star of David tumbling to the floor . " 
 In a 2012 interview , Seth MacFarlane stated : " As far as the all @-@ around best episode , " Road to the Multiverse " would have to be up there . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A video game sequel called Family Guy : Back to the Multiverse was made . It is also a continuation of the season 9 episode " The Big Bang Theory " . 
 = New Jersey Route 73 = 
 Route 73 is a state highway in the southern part of the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 34 @.@ 64 mi ( 55 @.@ 75 km ) as an outer bypass of the Camden area from an intersection with U.S. Route 322 in Folsom , Atlantic County to the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge in Palmyra , Burlington County , where it continues into Philadelphia , Pennsylvania as Pennsylvania Route 73 . South of the interchange with the Atlantic City Expressway in Winslow Township , Camden County , Route 73 is a two @-@ lane undivided county @-@ maintained road and is signed as County Route 561 Spur , a spur of County Route 561 ( CR 561 ) . North of the Atlantic City Expressway , the route is maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and is mostly four lanes , with the portion north of the County Route 561 concurrency a divided highway . North of the U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) interchange near Berlin , Route 73 runs through suburban areas of the Delaware Valley , intersecting Route 70 in Marlton , the New Jersey Turnpike and Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) in Mount Laurel Township , Route 38 and Route 41 in Maple Shade Township , Route 90 in Cinnaminson Township , and U.S. Route 130 in Pennsauken Township . 
 What is today Route 73 between the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge and Berlin was legislated as Route S41 in 1927 , a spur of Route 41 . An extension of this spur called Route S41A was designated in 1938 to continue south from Berlin to Route 42 ( now U.S. Route 322 ) in Folsom . In 1953 , both these routes became Route 73 in order to match Pennsylvania Route 73 . The portion of Route 73 between Berlin and the Atlantic City Expressway became a state highway by 1969 . By the 2000s , Route 73 was extended south along County Route 561 Spur to U.S. Route 322 . Several traffic circles along Route 73 have been modified or replaced over time . Among these was the Berlin Circle , which was turned into an at @-@ grade intersection in 2006 . The Marlton Circle at Route 70 , which was modified in 1974 to allow Route 73 to pass through the circle , was replaced with an interchange completed in 2011 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = US 322 to Atlantic City Expressway = = = 
 Route 73 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 322 ( Black Horse Pike ) in Folsom , Atlantic County , heading to the northwest on Blue Anchor Road , a two @-@ lane undivided county @-@ maintained road signed as County Route 561 Spur . This portion of the route is officially considered a part of Route 73 but is not signed as such . The road runs through forested areas of the Pine Barrens with some homes and farms , coming to a crossroads with Route 54 . Following this intersection , the road continues northwest as Mays Landing Road , crossing over a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line . It enters a small corner of Hammonton before it crosses into Winslow Township in Camden County . Here , Route 73 crosses over a Southern Railroad of New Jersey railroad line and intersects County Route 725 . From this point , the road heads north to a partial interchange with the Atlantic City Expressway that has access from southbound Route 73 to the eastbound Atlantic City Expressway and from the westbound Atlantic City Expressway to northbound Route 73 . 
 = = = Atlantic City Expressway to NJ 70 = = = 
 After the Atlantic City Expressway , Route 73 becomes officially signed and maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation , although County Route 561 Spur is still signed along the route . It heads to the north as a four @-@ lane undivided road , passing through wooded areas with some residences and businesses and crosses CR 723 . The route continues to an intersection with CR 561 , where it briefly widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway . At this junction , CR 561 Spur ends and Route 73 forms a concurrency with County Route 561 . The road intersects CR 722 and CR 721 , becoming Camden Road at the latter junction . It heads north through more rural areas , meeting CR 720 . County Route <unk> , a former segment of County Route 561 , splits from Route 73 by heading north through the community of Cedar Brook while Route 73 and CR 561 bypass the community to the east , crossing under a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line . 
 North of Cedar Brook , the route traverses CR 536 , becoming Cedarbrook Road . It intersects CR 680 and CR 711 before widening into a divided highway prior to a junction where CR 712 heads northeast and CR 561 splits from Route 73 by heading north on Cedarbrook Road . Past this intersection , Route 73 becomes an unnamed road and encounters CR 710 at a four @-@ way intersection . A short distance later , the route enters Waterford Township and comes to a modified cloverleaf interchange with U.S. Route 30 ( White Horse Pike ) and County Route 536 Spur . 
 Following US 30 , Route 73 passes through a small corner of Berlin Boro before it goes under New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line near the Atco station . At the railroad crossing , the route enters Berlin Township and meets CR 534 at a crossroad . After the intersection with this route , the road proceeds back into Berlin Boro , where the route runs through a mix of residences and businesses . Route 73 widens to a six @-@ lane highway and comes to the former Berlin Circle , where it meets both CR 689 and CR 708 . From here , the road turns north and reenters Berlin Township as a four @-@ lane divided highway , continuing through developed areas and intersecting CR 692 . Prior to the junction with CR 693 , the route enters Voorhees Township , where it encounters CR 675 . 
 At the intersection with CR 671 , Route 73 comes into Evesham Township , Burlington County . In Evesham , it heads to a junction with CR 544 before coming to Marlton , where it passes by The Promenade at <unk> before turning northwest at CR 607 . The route intersects CR 600 and CR 620 before meeting Route 70 at an interchange that was formerly the Marlton Circle . 
 = = = NJ 70 to Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge = = = 
 Subsequent to the Marlton Circle , Route 73 continues through suburban commercial areas , heading into Mount Laurel Township . The route comes to an intersection with CR 616 , where it turns to the northwest . A short distance later , the road has an access ramp to the New Jersey Turnpike . Following this interchange , Route 73 widens into a six @-@ lane divided highway and encounters CR 673 before coming to a cloverleaf interchange with Interstate 295 . Between the New Jersey Turnpike and Interstate 295 , Route 73 serves as a part of a main route from North Jersey and New York City to Philadelphia as motorists use the turnpike to get to and from points north and I @-@ 295 south to access I @-@ 76 , which provides access to both the Walt Whitman Bridge and Ben Franklin Bridge to Philadelphia . From the I @-@ 295 interchange , the route goes into Maple Shade Township . Route 73 comes to two exits for Route 38 and Route 41 within a short distance of each other . After Route 41 , the road intersects County Route 610 and bypasses the center of Maple Shade to the east as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The route interchanges with CR 537 and runs under a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line before turning northwest and paralleling the North Branch of the Pennsauken Creek , meeting CR 609 . 
 Route 73 enters Cinnaminson Township , where the Route 90 freeway splits from the road before crossing over the South Branch of the Pennsauken Creek into Pennsauken Township , Camden County . In Pennsauken , the route has exits with County Route 644 and U.S. Route 130 . Route 73 briefly enters Cinnaminson Township , Burlington County again before entering Palmyra at the bridge over the Pennsauken Creek . In Palmyra , the road has an interchange with County Route 543 before running under New Jersey Transit ’ s River Line . The route comes to the intersection with Temple Boulevard , where it becomes maintained by the Burlington County Bridge Commission and comes to the northbound toll plaza for the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge . A short distance later , the road traverses the Delaware River on the three @-@ lane Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge , where it continues into Philadelphia , Pennsylvania as Pennsylvania Route 73 . The Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge is a drawbridge designed by Ralph Modjeski , who also engineered the Ben Franklin Bridge and the Manhattan Bridge , that opened to traffic in 1929 , replacing a ferry service across the Delaware River . 
 Route 73 serves as a main road in South Jersey that helps provide access between the Philadelphia area and the southern part of the Jersey Shore as well as connections to several local roads . It has been rated one of the worst roads in the state in terms of traffic , accidents , and driver aggression . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , a spur of Route 41 called Route S41 was legislated to run from the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge south to Berlin along what is today Route 73 . A southern extension of Route S41 called Route S41A was proposed to run from Berlin south to Route 42 ( now U.S. Route 322 ) in Folsom in 1938 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route S41 and Route S41A were renumbered to Route 73 in order to match Pennsylvania Route 73 . With the establishment of the 500 @-@ series county routes in 1952 , the current alignment of Route 73 between Berlin and Blue Anchor became a part of County Route 561 while it became County Route 561 Spur between Blue Anchor and Folsom . By 1969 , Route 73 was designated south of Berlin along County Route 561 and County Route 561 Spur to the Atlantic City Expressway . By the 2000s , Route 73 was extended south along with County Route 561 Spur from the Atlantic City Expressway to U.S. Route 322 . 
 Over the years , several traffic circles have been modified or replaced along Route 73 . The Marlton Circle at Route 70 in Marlton was modified in 1974 to allow Route 73 to run directly straight through the circle . This circle became known for traffic backups and was replaced with an interchange . Construction on this interchange , which cost $ 31 million , began in April 2009 . In May 2010 , the circle was eliminated with a temporary at @-@ grade intersection constructed while the Route 73 bridge over Route 70 was being built . The interchange was completed in June 2011 . A traffic circle that existed at the intersection of Route 38 and Route 41 in Maple Shade Township was removed by the 1960s and replaced by the current set of interchanges . In addition , the Berlin Circle in Berlin was replaced by an at @-@ grade intersection between August 2005 and September 2006 at a cost of $ 73 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mimi Smith = 
 Mary Elizabeth " Mimi " Smith ( née Stanley ; 24 April 1906 – 6 December 1991 ) was the maternal aunt and parental guardian of the English musician , John Lennon . Mimi Stanley was born in Liverpool , England ; the oldest of five daughters . She became a resident trainee nurse at the Woolton Convalescent Hospital , and later worked as a private secretary . On 15 September 1939 , she married George Smith , who ran his family 's dairy farm and a shop in Woolton , a suburb of Liverpool . 
 After her younger sister , Julia Lennon , separated from her husband , she and her son ( Lennon ) , moved in with a new partner , but Mimi contacted Liverpool 's Social Services and complained about him sleeping in the same bed as the two adults . Julia was eventually persuaded to hand the care of Lennon over to the Smiths . Lennon lived with the Smiths for most of his childhood , and remained close to his aunt , even though she was highly dismissive of his musical ambitions , his girlfriends , and wives . 
 She often told the teenage Lennon : " The guitar 's all right John , but you 'll never make a living out of it " . In 1965 , Lennon bought her a bungalow in Poole , Dorset , where she lived until her death in 1991 . Despite later losing touch with other family members , Lennon kept in close contact and telephoned her every week , until his death in 1980 . The Smiths ' house in Liverpool was later donated to The National Trust . 
 = = The Stanley family = = 
 According to Lennon , the Stanley family once owned the whole of Woolton village . Mimi 's father , George Stanley , was born in the Everton district of Liverpool in 1874 , and became a sailor . Her mother , Annie Jane Millward , was born in Chester around 1875 , to Welsh parents . Annie 's first two children , a boy and a girl , died shortly after birth , and she had five additional children : Mary , known as ' Mimi ' ; Elizabeth ' Mater ' ( 1906 to 1991 ) ; Anne ' Nanny ' ( 1911 – 1988 ) ; Julia ' Judy ' ( 1914 – 1958 ) ; and Harriet ' Harrie ' ( 1916 – 1972 ) . 
 After the birth of his daughters , Stanley retired from sailing and found a job with the Liverpool and Glasgow Tug Salvage Company as an insurance investigator . He moved his family to the Liverpool suburb of Allerton , where they lived in a small terraced house at 9 Newcastle Road . According to Beatles biographer Bob Spitz , Mimi assumed a matriarchal role in the Stanley house to help her mother , and dressed " as if she was on her way to a weekly garden club meeting " . Friends of Lennon later stated that his aunt based everything on decorum , honesty , and a black @-@ and @-@ white attitude : " Either you were good enough or you were not . " Lennon 's school friend , Pete Shotton , later commented that she " had a very strong sense of what was right or wrong " . Annie Stanley died in 1945 , so Mimi accepted the responsibility of caring for her father , with help from her younger sister , Julia . 
 When other girls were thinking of marriage , Mimi talked of challenges and adventures that arose from her attitude of " stubborn independence " , and often said that she never wanted to get married because she hated the idea of being " tied to the kitchen sink " . She became a resident trainee nurse at the Woolton Convalescent Hospital , and later worked as a private secretary for Ernest Vickers , who was an industrial magnate with businesses in Manchester and Liverpool . She had long @-@ term plans to buy a house in a " respected suburb " of Liverpool one day so that she could entertain the " scholars and dignitaries of Liverpool society " . 
 = = Marriage and ' Mendips ' = = 
 In early 1932 she met George Smith , who lived across from the hospital where she worked , and to which he delivered milk every morning . Smith and his brother , Frank Smith , operated a dairy farm and a shop in Woolton that had been in the Smith family for four generations . Smith started courting Mimi , but was constantly thwarted by her indifference and her father 's interference . Stanley would only allow the couple to sit in the back room at Newcastle Road when he or his wife were in the front room , and before it grew too late he would burst into the back room and loudly order Smith home . The courtship lasted almost seven years , but Smith grew tired of waiting . After delivering milk to the hospital one morning he gave her an ultimatum that she must marry him , " or nothing at all ! " 
 Mimi and Smith were finally married on 15 September 1939 . They bought a semi @-@ detached house called Mendips — named after the range of hills — at 251 Menlove Avenue , in a middle class area of Liverpool . Menlove Avenue suffered extensive damage during World War II , and she said that she often had to throw a wet blanket on incendiary bombs that fell in the garden . During the war the government took over the Smiths ' farmland for war work , and Smith was called up for service , but was discharged three years later , working in an aircraft factory in Speke until the end of the war . Smith later left the milk trade and started a small bookmaker 's business , which led Mimi to complain later that he was a compulsive gambler , and had lost most of their money . 
 = = Mimi and John Lennon = = 
 Julia Stanley married Alfred ( " Alf " or " Fred " ) Lennon on 3 December 1938 , and on 9 October 1940 , the couple 's first and only child was born . Mimi phoned the Oxford Street Maternity Hospital that evening and was told that Julia had given birth to a boy . According to Mimi , she went straight to the hospital during the middle of an air raid , and was forced to hide in doorways to avoid the shrapnel . She ran , as she later recalled , " as fast as my legs could carry me " . When a parachute @-@ borne landmine fell outside the hospital , she later said , " My sister [ Julia ] stayed in bed , and they put the baby [ Lennon ] under the bed . They wanted me to go into the basement , but I wouldn 't . I ran all the way back to Newcastle Road to tell father [ Stanley ] the news . ' Get under the shelter , ' the wardens were shouting . ' Oh , be quiet , ' I told them . " The story about the air @-@ raid has since been repudiated , as there was no attack that night . The previous raid had been on 21 – 22 September , and the next was on 16 October , when the areas of Walton and Everton were badly hit . 
 After Julia separated from her husband , she and the infant Lennon moved in with her new partner , John Albert " Bobby " Dykins , but Mimi twice contacted Liverpool 's Social Services and complained about Lennon sleeping in the same bed as Julia and Dykins . Julia was eventually persuaded to hand the care of Lennon over to the Smiths , who had no children of their own . Mimi later confided to a relative that although she had never wanted children , she had " always wanted John " . In July 1946 , Alf Lennon visited the Smiths and took Lennon to Blackpool , ostensibly for a long holiday , but with the secret intention of emigrating to New Zealand with him . Julia went to Blackpool and took Lennon back to her house , but a few weeks later she handed him back over to Mimi . Lennon then lived continuously at Mendips , in the smallest bedroom above the front door . Although she was a caring guardian , she was also known for being very strict , compared to the more relaxed influence of her husband and Lennon 's mother . Family friends described Mimi as stubborn , impatient , and unforgiving , but also said that she had a strong sense of humour . On many occasions when she criticised Lennon , he would respond with a joke , and the two of them would be " rolling around , laughing together " . 
 Mimi bought volumes of short stories for Lennon , and her husband taught Lennon to read at the age of five by reading aloud the headlines of the Liverpool Echo . Every summer , from the age of nine until he was fifteen , she sent Lennon alone on a ten @-@ hour bus journey to visit his Aunt Mater and cousin Stanley Parkes at their home near Loch <unk> in Durness , Scotland . Mimi also took her charge to a garden party in <unk> Park every year , where a Salvation Army band played . She remembered Lennon pulling her by the hand to get there , saying , " Hurry up Mimi – we ’ re going to be late " . Strawberry Field , in Beaconsfield Road , was the name of a Salvation Army house that Lennon would later immortalise in the Beatles ' song , " Strawberry Fields Forever " . She would later say : " John loved his uncle George [ Smith ] . I felt quite left out of that . They 'd go off together , just leaving me a bar of chocolate and a note saying , ' Have a happy day ' " . 
 Smith died of a liver haemorrhage in June 1953 , at the age of fifty , leaving £ 2000 in his will . The Smiths had rented their two first @-@ floor bedrooms to students for extra income since 1947 , while the Smiths slept in the former dining room ; on the ground floor , at the back of the house . Some of the students who lodged there included John Cavill ( from September 1949 until June 1950 ) . Cavill played piano , but as the house had none he bought a guitar ; admitting he knew almost nothing about chords : " My father had a violin and I had learned to play pizzicato on it , so when I got the guitar I played tunes on the strings , and John [ Lennon ] did the same " . Michael Fishwick also lodged there ( from October 1951 until December 1958 ) , as did Keith Capron ( September 1956 to July 1959 ) . Both Capron and Cavill were studying veterinary science at the University of Liverpool , with Fishwick studying biochemistry . 
 Five years after Smith 's death , Lennon 's mother was killed on Menlove Avenue — shortly after a visit to Mendips — when she was knocked down by a car driven by a drunk , off @-@ duty police officer ; PC Eric Clague . Mimi did not witness the accident , but shortly after was seen crying hysterically over Julia 's body until the ambulance arrived . Clague was acquitted of all charges , given a reprimand , and a short suspension from duty . When Mimi heard the verdict she shouted " Murderer ! " at Clague . 
 After Lennon became famous , she berated him for speaking in a Liverpudlian accent , but Lennon replied : " That 's showbusiness , they want me to speak more Liverpool " . Despite the talk of Lennon being working class — as were Paul McCartney , George Harrison and Ringo Starr — he later refuted the idea by saying , " I was a nice clean @-@ cut suburban boy , and in the class system I was about a half an inch in a higher class than Paul , George and Ringo , who lived in subsidised government houses . We owned our own house , had our own garden . They didn 't have anything like that " . 
 = = = Lennon and music = = = 
 Although Mimi later claimed that she had bought Lennon 's first guitar , it was actually his mother , after Lennon had pestered her incessantly for weeks . Julia insisted that the £ 5 instrument had to be delivered to her house and not to her sister 's . The two sisters first saw Lennon perform with the Quarrymen at the Woolton St. Peter 's Church fête on the afternoon of 6 July 1957 . Julia ( who knew that her son would be performing ) heard music coming from the field behind the church ( now the site of the Bishop Martin School ) , and pulled Mimi along with her to listen . Lennon saw his aunt coming through the crowd and comically changed the words of a song to feature her name : " Oh @-@ oh , here comes Mimi down the aisle now ... " Mimi related two versions of what she thought that day after seeing Lennon on stage : " I was horrified to behold John in front of a microphone " , and " as pleased as Punch to see him up there " . 
 With help from Mimi and Lennon 's headmaster , Lennon was accepted into the Liverpool College of Art because his aunt insisted that he should have some sort of academic qualifications , even though Lennon was beginning to show an interest in music . She opposed the idea of him forming a band and disapproved of McCartney because he was , " working class " , calling him " John 's little friend " . When she later met Harrison , she " hated him " because of his thick Liverpudlian accent and Teddy Boy clothes . Lennon and McCartney often met at Mendips to write songs , and rehearsed in the glass @-@ panelled porch at the front of the house , which was the only place they were allowed to play . She once asked Parkes to take her to The Cavern to see Lennon and the Beatles play , but when she descended into the damp , dark cellar ; full of screaming teenagers , she shouted to Parkes , " Get him [ Lennon ] out , get him out ! Tell him to come off the stage ! He can 't stay here .... We 'll have to stop this ! " The band 's first residency in Hamburg exasperated her because she wanted Lennon to continue his studies , but he placated her by greatly exaggerating the sum of money he would earn . 
 She hoped Lennon would become bored with music ; often saying , " The guitar 's all right John , but you 'll never make a living out of it " . In later years , Lennon would jokingly remind her of the comment , and later had a silver plaque made engraved with her words . When later asked about the plaque , she would say that Lennon had it made for her husband , and not her . 
 = = Lennon 's relationships = = 
 Mimi 's attitude to Lennon 's partners was often frosty , disdainful , or sarcastic . She constantly criticised Lennon about his relationships . Mimi once referred to Cynthia , Lennon 's first wife , as " a gangster 's moll " , and was particularly unpleasant or cold towards her . In the summer of 1962 , Cynthia discovered that she was pregnant with Lennon 's child , so Lennon proposed marriage . When he told his aunt , she threatened never to speak to him again to stop him from going through with it . Lennon and Cynthia were married on 23 August , at the Mount Pleasant Register office in Liverpool , although Mimi did not attend . Lennon had wanted his half @-@ sisters , cousins , and aunts to be there , but Mimi had contacted them beforehand and advised them against attending . After the Lennons had been living at Brian Epstein 's flat for a few months ( and after hearing about Cynthia 's near @-@ miscarriage ) , she offered to rent her downstairs back room to them . 
 Before Christmas in 1972 , she met the then @-@ divorced Cynthia at the funeral of Mimi 's sister , Harriet , in Liverpool . Mimi sternly criticised Cynthia for divorcing Lennon — and letting him start a relationship with Yoko Ono — by saying she should have stopped him from making " an idiot of himself " . Even though Mimi was described as domineering , Ono later compared herself to her when describing her own relationship with Lennon . She later admitted that Ono was a good wife and mother . After Lennon 's death , Ono and Sean Lennon visited Mimi in Liverpool , where she was staying at her sister Anne 's house because of a heart condition . She said , " Sean is like John in every way — looks and manner — and he has got John 's sense of humour . As long as he keeps away from music , he will be all right " . 
 Ono later bought ' Mendips ' and donated it to The National Trust . It was renovated to make it look as it was in the 1950s when Lennon lived there , and Ono paid a visit before it was opened to the public . Lennon 's cousin , Michael Cadwallader , had advised the National Trust on how the house looked when the Smiths lived there . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Mimi had relatives in <unk> , New Zealand because her maternal aunt , Harriet Millward , had married and moved there . Mimi had exchanged letters with her relatives over the years , so Lennon arranged for a tour of New Zealand in 1964 . The success of The Beatles caused problems for her and she was constantly pestered by fans at ' Mendips ' , so she sold the house for £ 6 @,@ 000 in 1965 ; Lennon bought her a £ 25 @,@ 000 bungalow by the beach called Harbour 's Edge in Sandbanks , at 126 Panorama Road , Poole , Dorset , which was her home for the rest of her life . The Lennons and their son visited her there in the summer of 1965 , which was the last time all three of them visited the house together . Lennon later gave his aunt his MBE medal , but later asked for it back so that he could return it in protest . 
 Lennon gave Mimi an allowance of £ 30 per week , but when she found out that his wife 's mother was being given the same amount , she phoned the Lennons ' house and said , " What has she [ Cynthia 's mother ] done to deserve anything ? Tell John , when you speak to him , that I am very , very annoyed " , before slamming down the phone . Lennon moved to New York in 1971 , and never returned to England again . Despite losing touch with several family members , he kept in close contact with her and telephoned her every week . On 5 December 1980 , three days before Lennon was murdered , he called her to say he was homesick and was planning a trip back to England . After Lennon 's death , Mimi was furious to find out that he had never transferred the ownership of the house over to her , which meant that Ono owned the house , and could sell it at any time . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Mimi died on 6 December 1991 , at the age of 85 , while being cared for at home by Lynne Varcoe , an auxiliary nurse . During the night , other carers were present . On the day of her death , Mimi collapsed in the bathroom , so Varcoe helped her to the bed , where Mimi started Cheyne @-@ <unk> . According to Varcoe , her last words were , " Hello , John " . 
 Although the oldest of the Stanley girls , Mimi was the last of them to die . Cynthia , Sean and Ono attended her funeral on 12 December 1991 : McCartney , Harrison , and Starr all sent floral arrangements . Despite the animosity between Cynthia and Mimi , Varcoe remembered Cynthia crying throughout the whole funeral , and said that Mimi had always spoken positively about her . Mimi was cremated at the Poole Crematorium and the reception was at the Harbour Heights Hotel . The whereabouts of her ashes is unknown . Ono put Mimi 's house up for sale on the same day as the cremation , but it was demolished in 1994 , so a four @-@ bedroomed house could be built on the site . 
 = = Portrayals on film = = 
 Mimi was portrayed on film in Birth of The Beatles ( 1979 ) , John and Yoko : A Love Story ( 1985 ) , In His Life : The John Lennon Story ( 2000 ) , and by actress Kristin Scott Thomas in Nowhere Boy ( 2010 ) . McCartney disagreed with the director of Nowhere Boy , Sam Taylor @-@ Wood , about the original script portrayal of Mimi , saying : " Aunt Mimi was not cruel . She was mock strict , but she was a good heart who loved John madly . " Taking McCartney 's advice , Taylor @-@ Wood agreed to change the script . 
 = War film = 
 War film is a film genre concerned with warfare , typically about naval , air , or land battles in the twentieth century , with combat scenes central to the drama . The fateful nature of battle scenes means that war films often end with them . Themes explored include combat , survival and escape , sacrifice , the futility and inhumanity of battle , the effects of war on society , and the moral and human issues raised by war . War films are often categorized by their milieu , such as the Korean War ; the most popular subject is the Second World War . The stories told may be fiction , historical drama , or biographical . Critics have noted similarities between the Western and the war film . 
 Nations such as China , Indonesia , Russia and Japan have their own traditions of war film , centred on their own revolutionary wars but taking varied forms , from action and historical drama to wartime romance . 
 Subgenres , not necessarily distinct , include anti @-@ war , comedy , animated , propaganda and documentary . There are similarly subgenres of the war film in specific theatres such as the western desert ( North Africa ) and the Pacific in the Second World War , or films about Vietnam ; and films set in specific domains of war , such as the infantry , the air , at sea , in submarines or prisoner of war camps . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The war film genre is not necessarily tightly defined : the American Film Institute , for example , speaks of " films to grapple with the Great War " without attempting to classify these . However , some directors and critics have offered at least tentative definitions . The director Sam Fuller defined the genre by saying that " a war film ’ s objective , no matter how personal or emotional , is to make a viewer feel war . " John Belton identified four narrative elements of the war film within the context of Hollywood production : a ) the suspension of civilian morality during times of war , b ) primacy of collective goals over individual motivations , c ) rivalry between men in predominantly male groups as well as marginalization and objectification of women , and d ) depiction of the reintegration of veterans . 
 The film critic Stephen Neale suggests that the genre is for the most part well defined and uncontentious , since war films are simply those about war being waged in the 20th century , with combat scenes central to the drama . However , Neale notes , films set in the American Civil War or the American Indian Wars of the 19th century were called war films in the time before the First World War . The critic Julian Smith argues , on the contrary , that the war film lacks the formal boundaries of a genre like the Western , but that in practice , " successful and influential " war films are about modern wars , in particular World War II , with the combination of mobile forces and mass killing . The film scholar Kathryn Kane points out some similarities between the war film genre and the Western . Both genres use opposing concepts like war and peace , civilization and savagery . War films usually frame World War II as a conflict between " good " and " evil " as represented by the Allied forces and Nazi Germany whereas the Western portrays the conflict between civilized settlers and the savage indigenous peoples . James Clarke notes the similarity between a Western like Sam Peckinpah 's The Wild Bunch and " war @-@ movie escapades " like The Dirty Dozen . 
 Film historian Jeanine Basinger states that she began with a preconception of what the war film genre would be , namely that 
 What I knew in advance was what presumably every member of our culture would know about World War II combat films — that they contained a hero , a group of mixed types [ of people ] , and a military objective of some sort . They take place in the actual combat zones of World War II , against the established enemies , on the ground , the sea , or in the air . They contain many repeated events , such as mail call , all presented visually with appropriate uniforms , equipment , and iconography of battle . 
 Further , Basinger considers Bataan to provide a definition @-@ by @-@ example of " the World War II combat film " , in which a diverse and apparently unsuited group of " hastily assembled volunteers " hold off a much larger group of the enemy through their " bravery and tenacity " . She argues that the combat film is not a subgenre but the only genuine kind of war film . Since she notes that there were in fact only five true combat films made during the Second World War , in her view these few films , central to the genre , are outweighed by the many other films that lie on the margins of being war films . However , other critics such as Russell Earl Shain propose a far broader definition of war film , to include films that deal " with the roles of civilians , espionage agents , and soldiers in any of the aspects of war ( i.e. preparation , cause , prevention , conduct , daily life , and consequences or aftermath . ) " Neale points out that genres overlap , with combat scenes for different purposes in other types of film , and suggests that war films are characterised by combat which " determines the fate of the principal characters " . This in turn pushes combat scenes to the climactic ends of war films . Not all critics agree , either , that war films must be about 20th century wars . James Clarke includes Edward Zwick 's Oscar @-@ winning Glory ( 1990 ) among the war films he discusses in detail ; it is set in the American Civil War , and he lists six other films about that war which he considers " notable " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The American Civil War = = = 
 The costliest war in U.S. history in terms of American life , this war has been the subject of , or the backdrop to , numerous films , documentaries and mini @-@ series . One of the earliest films using the Civil War as its subject was D.W. Griffith 's 1910 silent picture , The Fugitive . Films that have the war as its main subject , or about a certain aspect of the war include the 1989 film , Glory , about the first formal unit of the Union Army during the American Civil War to be made up entirely of black men . Some films such as Gettysburg focused on a single battle during the war , or even on a single incident , like the French short film , La Rivière du <unk> ( An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge ) . Others like the 1993 miniseries North and South spanned the entire breadth of the war . Some films deal with the human aspects of the war , such as The Red Badge of Courage ( 1951 ) , or Shenandoah ( 1965 ) , on the tragedy that the war inflicted on the civilian population . Ken Burns 's The Civil War is the most watched documentary in the history of PBS . 
 = = = The Spanish – American War = = = 
 The first war films come from the Spanish – American War of 1898 . Short " actualities " – documentary film @-@ clips – included Burial of the Maine Victims , Blanket @-@ <unk> of a New Recruit , and Soldiers Washing Dishes . These non @-@ combat films were accompanied by " reenactments " of fighting , such as of Theodore Roosevelt 's " Rough Riders " in action against the Spanish , staged in the United States . 
 = = = The First World War = = = 
 During the First World War , many films were made about life in the war . Topics included prisoners of war , covert operations , and military training . Both the Central Powers and the Allies produced war documentaries . The films were also used as propaganda in neutral countries like the United States . Among these was a film shot on the Eastern Front by official war photographer to the Central Powers , Albert K. Dawson : The Battle and Fall of <unk> ( 1915 ) , depicting the Siege of Przemyśl , disastrous for the Austrians , with incidents reenacted using soldiers as extras . The 1915 Australian film Within Our Gates ( also known as Deeds that Won Gallipoli ) by Frank Harvey was described by the Motion Picture News as " a really good war story , which is exceptional " . 
 The 1916 British film The Battle of the Somme , by two official cinematographers , Geoffrey Malins and John McDowell , combined documentary and propaganda , seeking to give the public an impression of what trench warfare was like . Much of the film was shot on location at the Western Front in France ; it had a powerful emotional impact . It was watched by some 20 million people in Britain in its six weeks of exhibition , making it what the critic Francine Stock called " one of the most successful films of all time " . 
 William A. Wellman 's Wings ( 1927 ) , about the First World War , was the first film ( in any genre ) , and the only silent film , to win an Oscar for best picture . Later films of varied genres that deal with the First World War include David Lean 's " colossal epic " , both war film and biopic Lawrence of Arabia ( 1962 ) , shot in the then unfamiliar and exciting 70mm Technicolor , and described by Steven Spielberg as " maybe the greatest screenplay ever written for the motion @-@ picture medium " ; Richard Attenborough 's satirical anti @-@ war musical comedy based on Joan Littlewood 's play of the same name , Oh ! What a Lovely War ( 1969 ) ; and Spielberg 's war drama War Horse ( 2011 ) based on Michael Morpurgo 's children 's novel of the same name . 
 = = = The Spanish Civil War = = = 
 The Spanish Civil War has attracted directors from different countries . Sam Wood 's For Whom the Bell Tolls ( 1943 ) , based on Ernest Hemingway 's book of the same name , portrays the fated romance between an American played by Gary Cooper and a partisan played by Ingrid Bergman against the backdrop of the civil war . The epic 168 minute film with its landscapes shot in Technicolor and a " beautiful " orchestral score was a success both with audiences and with critics . Alain Resnais 's Guernica ( 1950 ) uses Picasso 's painting to protest against war . Carlos Saura 's La Caza ( The Hunt , 1966 ) uses the metaphor of hunting to criticise the aggressiveness of Spanish fascism . It won the Silver Bear for Best Director at the 16th Berlin International Film Festival in 1966 . Ken Loach 's Land and Freedom ( Tierra y Libertad , 1995 ) , loosely based on George Orwell 's Homage to Catalonia , follows a British communist through the war to reveal the painful contradictions within the anti @-@ fascist Republican side . 
 = = = The Korean War = = = 
 See also Korean War films 
 Samuel Fuller ’ s The Steel Helmet ( 1951 ) was made during the Korean War ( 1950 – 1953 ) . The critic Guy Westwell notes that it questioned the conduct of the war , as did later films like The Bridges at Toko @-@ Ri ( 1954 ) and Pork Chop Hill ( 1959 ) . Fuller agreed that all his films were anti @-@ war . No Hollywood films about the Korean War did well at the box office ; the historian Lary May suggested that they reminded American viewers of " the only war we have lost " . 
 In 1955 , after the fighting , the successful South Korean action film <unk> about leftist guerrilla atrocities encouraged other film @-@ makers . The 1960s military government punished pro @-@ communist film @-@ makers and gave Grand Bell Awards to films with the strongest anti @-@ communist message . Censorship loosened in the 1980s . The Taebaek Mountains ( 1994 ) dealt with leftists from the south who fought for the communists , while Silver Stallion ( 1991 ) and Spring in My Hometown ( 1998 ) showed the destructive impact of American military presence on village life . The violent action films Shiri ( 1999 ) and Joint Security Area ( 2000 ) presented North Korea in a favourable light . 
 Films in North Korea were made by government film studios and had clear political messages . The first was My Home Village ( 1949 ) , on the liberation of Korea from the Japanese , presented as the work of Kim Il Sung without help from the Americans . Similarly , the country 's films about the Korean War show victory without help from the Chinese . The film scholar Johannes <unk> concludes that the purpose of these films is " to portray North Korea as a country under siege " , and that since the U.S. and its " puppet " South Korea invaded the North once , they would do so again . 
 = = = The Algerian War = = = 
 Gillo Pontecorvo 's dramatic The Battle of Algiers ( ( Italian : La battaglia di Algeri ; Arabic : معركة <unk> ; French : La Bataille d <unk> ) , 1966 ) portrayed events in the Algerian War ( 1954 – 1956 ) . It was shot on location as an Italo @-@ Algerian co @-@ production . It had the black and white newsreel style of Italian neorealism , and even @-@ handedly depicts violence on both sides . It won various awards including Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival . It was attacked by French critics and was for five years banned in France . 
 = = = The Vietnam War = = = 
 Few films before the late 1970s about the Vietnam War actually depicted combat . The exceptions included The Green Berets ( 1968 ) . Critics such as Basinger explain that Hollywood avoided the subject because of opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War , making the subject divisive ; in addition , the film industry was in crisis , and the army did not wish to assist in making anti @-@ war films . 
 From the late 1970s , independently financed and produced films showed Hollywood that Vietnam could be treated in film . Successful but very different portrayals of the war in which America had been defeated included Michael Cimino 's The Deer Hunter ( 1978 ) , and Francis Ford Coppola 's Apocalypse Now ( 1979 ) . With the shift in American politics to the right in the 1980s , military success could again be shown in films such as Oliver Stone 's Platoon ( 1986 ) , Stanley Kubrick 's Full Metal Jacket ( 1987 ) and John Irvin 's Hamburger Hill ( 1987 ) . 
 The Vietnamese director Nguyen Hong Sen 's The Abandoned Field : Free Fire Zone ( <unk> dong <unk> , 1979 ) gives an " unnerving and compelling .. subjective @-@ camera @-@ eye @-@ view " of life under helicopter fire in the Mekong Delta during the Vietnam War . The film cuts to an ( American ) " helicopter @-@ eye view " , contrasting painfully with the human tenderness seen earlier . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Films made by the Western Allies = = = 
 The first popular Allied war films made during the Second World War came from Britain and combined the functions documentary and propaganda . Films such as The Lion Has Wings and Target for Tonight were made under the control of the Films Division of the Ministry of Information . The British film industry began to combine documentary techniques with fictional stories in films like Noël Coward and David Lean 's In Which We Serve ( 1942 ) – " the most successful British film of the war years " , Millions Like Us ( 1943 ) , and The Way Ahead ( 1944 ) . 
 In America , documentaries were produced in various ways : General Marshall commissioned the Why We Fight propaganda series from Frank Capra ; the War Department 's Information @-@ Education Division started out making training films for the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy ; the Army made its own through the U.S. Signal Corps , including John Huston 's The Battle of San Pietro . Hollywood made films with propaganda messages about America 's allies , such as Mrs. Miniver ( 1942 ) , which portrayed a British family on the home front ; Edge of Darkness ( 1943 ) showed Norwegian resistance fighters , and The North Star ( 1943 ) showed the Soviet Union and its Communist Party . Towards the end of the war popular books provided higher quality and more serious stories for films such as Guadalcanal Diary ( film ) ( 1943 ) , Mervyn LeRoy 's Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo ( 1944 ) , and John Ford 's They Were Expendable ( 1945 ) . 
 The Russians , too , appreciated the propaganda value of film , to publicise both victories and German atrocities . Ilya <unk> 's documentary Moscow Strikes Back ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> под <unk> , literally " The rout of the German troops near Moscow " ) , was made during the Battle of Moscow between October 1941 and January 1942 . It depicted civilians helping to defend the city , the parade in Red Square and Stalin 's speech rousing the Russian people to battle , actual fighting , Germans surrendering and dead , and atrocities including murdered children and hanged civilians . It won an Academy Award in 1943 for best documentary . Newsreel cameras were similarly rushed to Stalingrad early in 1943 to record " the spectacle which greeted the Russian soldiers " – the starvation of Russian prisoners of war in the <unk> camp by the German Sixth Army , defeated in the Battle of Stalingrad . 
 Feature films made in the west during the war were subject to censorship and were not always realistic . One of the first to attempt to represent violence , and which was praised at the time for " gritty realism " , was Tay Garnett 's Bataan ( 1943 ) . The depiction actually remained stylised : Jeanine Basinger gives as an example the " worst image for stark violence " when a Japanese soldier beheads an American : the victim shows pain and his lips freeze in a scream , yet no blood spurts and his head does not fall off . Basinger points out that while this is physically unrealistic , psychologically it may not have been . The wartime audience was , she points out , well aware of friends and relatives who had been killed or who had come home wounded . 
 = = = Films made by the Axis powers = = = 
 The Axis powers similarly made films during the Second World War , for propaganda and other purposes . In Germany , the army high command brought out Sieg im Westen ( " Victory in the West " , 1941 ) . Other Nazi propaganda films had varied subjects , as with Kolberg ( 1945 ) , which depicts stubborn Prussian resistance in the Siege of Kolberg ( 1807 ) to the invading French troops under Napoleon . The propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels chose the historical subject as suitable for the worsening situation facing Nazi Germany when it was filmed from October 1943 to August 1944 . At over eight million marks , using thousands of soldiers as extras and 100 railway wagonloads of salt to simulate snow , it was the most costly German film made during the war . The actual siege ended with the surrender of the town ; in the film , the French generals abandon the siege . 
 For Japan , the war began with the undeclared war and invasion of China in 1937 , which the Japanese authorities called " The China Incident " . The government dispatched a " pen brigade " to write and film the action in China with " humanist values " . <unk> <unk> 's Mud and Soldiers ( 1939 ) for instance , shot on location in China , <unk> Yoshimura 's Legend of Tank Commander <unk> , and Sato Takeshi 's Chocolate and Soldiers ( 1938 ) show the common Japanese soldier as an individual and as a family man , and even enemy Chinese soldiers are presented as individuals , sometimes fighting bravely . Once war with the United States was declared , the Japanese conflict became known as the Pacific War . Japanese film critics worried that even with Western film techniques , their film output failed to represent native Japanese values . The historian John Dower found that Japanese wartime films had been largely forgotten , as " losers do not get reruns " , yet they were so subtle and skilful that Frank Capra thought Chocolate and Soldiers unbeatable . Heroes were typically low @-@ ranking officers , not samurai , calmly devoted to his men and his country . These films did not <unk> the enemy and therefore lacked hatred , though Great Britain could figure as the " cultural enemy " . For Japanese film @-@ makers , war was not a cause but more like a natural disaster , and " what mattered was not whom one fought but how well " . Asian enemies , especially the Chinese , were often portrayed as redeemable and even possible marriage partners . Japanese wartime films do not glorify war , but present the Japanese state as one great family and the Japanese people as an " innocent , suffering , self @-@ sacrificing people " . Dower comments that the perversity of this image " is obvious : it is devoid of any recognition that , at every level , the Japanese also victimized others . " 
 = = = Films made after the war = = = 
 According to Andrew Pulver of The Guardian , the public fascination with war films became an " obsession " , with over 200 war films produced in each decade of the 1950s and 1960s . War film production in the United Kingdom and United States reached its zenith in the mid 1950s . Its popularity in the United Kingdom was brought on by the critical and commercial success of Charles Frend 's The Cruel Sea ( 1953 ) . Like others of the period , The Cruel Sea was based on a bestselling novel , in this case the former naval commander Nicholas <unk> 's story of the battle of the Atlantic . Others , like The Dam Busters ( 1954 ) , with its exciting tale of the inventor Barnes Wallis 's unorthodox bouncing bomb and its distinctive theme music , were true stories . The Dam Busters became the most popular film in Britain in 1955 , and remained a favourite as of 2015 with a 100 % score on Rotten Tomatoes , though , partly because it celebrated an " exclusively British [ victory ] " , it failed to break into the American market . A large number of war films were made in the 1955 @-@ 58 period in particular . In 1957 alone , Bitter Victory , Count Five and Die , The Enemy Below , Ill Met by Moonlight , Jet Pilot , Men in War , The One That Got Away and Seven Thunders , and the highly successful , critically acclaimed pictures The Bridge on the River Kwai , which won the Academy Award for Best Picture that year , and Paths of Glory were released . Some , such as Bitter Victory , focused more on the psychological battle between officers and egotism rather than events during the war . The Bridge on the River Kwai brought a new complexity to the war picture , with a sense of moral uncertainty surrounding war . By the end of the decade the " sense of shared achievement " which had been common in war films " began to evaporate " , according to Pulver . 
 Hollywood films in the 1950s and 1960s could display spectacular heroics or self @-@ sacrifice , as in the popular Sands of Iwo Jima ( 1949 ) starring John Wayne . U.S. Marines considered Sands of Iwo Jima visually authentic , but found Lewis Milestone 's Battle Cry ( 1955 ) , with its attention to the lives of the men , the more realistic film . The formula for a successful war film consisted , according to Lawrence Suid , of a small group of ethnically diverse men ; an unreasonable senior officer ; cowards became heroic , or died . Jeanine Basinger suggests that a traditional war film should have a hero , a group , and an objective , and that the group should contain " an Italian , a Jew , a cynical <unk> from Brooklyn , a sharpshooter from the mountains , a <unk> ( nicknamed by his state , " Iowa " or " Dakota " ) , and a character who must be initiated in some way " . Films based on real commando missions , like The Gift Horse ( 1952 ) based on the St. Nazaire Raid , and Ill Met by Moonlight ( 1956 ) based on the capture of the German commander of Crete , inspired fictional adventure films such as The Guns of Navarone ( 1961 ) , The Train ( 1964 ) and Where Eagles Dare ( 1968 ) . These used the war as a backdrop for spectacular action . 
 Darryl F. Zanuck produced the 178 minute documentary drama The Longest Day ( 1962 ) , based on the first day of the D @-@ Day landings , achieving commercial success and Oscars . It was followed by large @-@ scale but thoughtful films like Andrei Tarkovsky 's Ivan 's Childhood ( 1962 ) , and quasi @-@ documentary all @-@ star epics filmed in Europe such as Battle of the Bulge ( 1965 ) , Battle of Britain ( 1969 ) , The Battle of Neretva ( 1969 ) , Midway ( 1976 ) and A Bridge Too Far ( 1977 ) . In Lawrence Suid 's view , The Longest Day " served as the model for all subsequent combat spectaculars " . However , its cost also made it the last of the traditional war films , while the controversy around the help given by the U.S. Army and Zanuck 's " disregard for Pentagon relations " changed the way that Hollywood and the Army collaborated . 
 Zanuck , by then an executive at 20th Century Fox , set up an American @-@ Japanese co @-@ production for Richard Fleischer 's Tora ! Tora ! Tora ! ( 1970 ) to depict what " really happened on December 7 , 1941 " in the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor . The film , panned by Roger Ebert and the New York Times , was a major success in Japan . Its realistic @-@ looking attack footage was reused in later films such as Midway ( 1976 ) , The Final Countdown ( 1980 ) , and Australia ( 2008 ) . The story was revisited in Pearl Harbor ( 2001 ) , described by the New York Times as a " noisy , expensive and very long new blockbuster " , with the comment that " for all its epic pretensions ( as if epic were a matter of running time , <unk> music and earnest voice @-@ over pronouncements ) , the movie works best as a bang @-@ and @-@ boom action picture " . 
 Steven Spielberg 's Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) uses hand @-@ held camera , sound design , staging and increased audio @-@ visual detail to <unk> viewers accustomed to conventional combat films , so as to create what film historian Stuart Bender calls " reported realism " , whether or not the portrayal is genuinely more realistic . Jeanine Basinger notes that critics experienced it as " groundbreaking and anti @-@ generic " , with , in James Wolcott 's words , a " desire to bury the cornball , recruiting poster legend of John Wayne : to get it right this time " ; and that combat films have always been " grounded in the need to help an audience understand and accept war " . Its success revived interest in World War II films . Others tried to portray the reality of the war , as in Joseph <unk> 's Stalingrad ( 1993 ) , which the New York Times said " goes about as far as a movie can go in depicting modern warfare as a stomach @-@ turning form of mass slaughter . " 
 = = = Military – film industry relations = = = 
 Many war films have been produced with the cooperation of a nation 's military forces . After the Second World War , the United States Navy provided ships and technical guidance for films such as Top Gun . The U.S. Air Force assisted with The Big Lift , Strategic Air Command and A Gathering of Eagles , which were filmed on Air Force bases ; Air Force personnel appeared in many roles . Critics point out that the film Pearl Harbor 's US @-@ biased portrayal of events is a compensation for technical assistance received by the US armed forces ; the premiere was actually held on board a U.S. Navy carrier . In another case , the U.S. Navy objected to elements of Crimson Tide , especially mutiny on board an American naval vessel , so the film was produced without their assistance . Film historian Jonathan Rayner observes that such films " have also clearly been intended to serve vital propagandist , recruitment and public relations functions " . 
 = = National traditions = = 
 = = = Chinese = = = 
 The first Chinese war films were newsreels like Battle of Wuhan ( 1911 ) and Battle of Shanghai ( 1913 ) . Still in films such as Xu <unk> 's Battle Exploits ( 1925 ) , war featured mainly as background . Only with the Second Sino – Japanese War from 1937 onwards did war film become a serious genre in China , with nationalistic films such as Shi Dongshan 's Protect Our Land ( 1938 ) The Chinese Civil War , too , attracted films such as Cheng Yin 's From Victory to Victory ( 1952 ) . A more humanistic film set in the same period is Xie Jin 's The Cradle ( 1979 ) , while more recent large @-@ scale commercial films include Lu Chuan 's City of Life and Death ( 2009 ) . Chinese directors have repeatedly attempted to cover the atrocities committed by the Japanese during the Nanking massacre ( 1937 – 1938 ) , with films such as the political melodrama Massacre in Nanjing , Mou Tun Fei 's docudrama Black Sun : The Nanking Massacre , and the " contrived Sino – Japanese romance " Don 't Cry , Nanking . Zhang Yimou 's epic Chinese film Flowers of War ( 2011 ) , based on <unk> Yan 's novel , portrays the violent events through the eyes of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl . 
 = = = Indonesian = = = 
 Many Indonesian films deal with the occupation of the archipelago by the Japanese during the Second World War . Teguh Karya 's <unk> Tanda Mata ( <unk> , literally " Two Eye Marks " , 1985 ) covers the limited nationalist resistance to Dutch colonial rule in the 1930s . A third group of films such as Enam Djam di Jogja ( Six Hours in Yogyakarta , 1951 ) and Serangan Fajar ( Attack at Dawn , 1983 ) covers the Indonesian war of independence ( 1945 – 1949 ) . Two other films about the same period portray the Indonesian equivalent of the Chinese Long March : Usmar Ismail 's Darah dan Doa ( The Long March , literally " Blood and Prayer " , 1950 ) and Mereka Kembali ( They Return , 1975 ) . Each of these films interprets the past from the perspective of its own time . 
 The more recent Merdeka ( Freedom ) trilogy ( 2009 – 2011 ) , starting with Merah Putih ( " Red and White " , the colours of the flag of the new Indonesia ) , revisits the campaign for independence through the lives of a diverse group of cadets who become guerillas . 
 Karya 's November 1828 ( 1979 ) looks at Indonesia 's struggle for independence through historical drama about the Java or Diponegoro War ( 1825 – 1830 ) , though the colonial enemy was the same , the Dutch . <unk> Schultz considered it " a valuable interpretation " of Indonesian history that " embodies the best of popular Indonesian cinema . " It was the first Indonesian film to become well @-@ known internationally . 
 = = = Russian = = = 
 War has been Russian cinema 's major genre , becoming known indeed as the " cinema front " , and its war films ranged from grim portrayals of atrocities to sentimental and even quietly subversive accounts . Leonid <unk> 's popular and " beautiful " Two Warriors ( 1943 ) depicted two stereotypical Soviet soldiers , a quiet Russian and an extrovert southerner from Odessa , singing in his dugout . 
 The many Russian films about the Second World War include both large @-@ scale epics such as Yury Ozerov 's Battle of Moscow ( 1985 ) and Mikhail Kalatozov 's more psychological The Cranes are Flying ( 1957 ) on the cruel effects of war ; it won the 1958 Palme d 'Or at Cannes . 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 See also Japanese war films , and the section on animated films 
 Japanese directors have made popular films such as Submarine I @-@ 57 Will Not Surrender ( 1959 ) , Battle of Okinawa ( 1971 ) and Japan 's Longest Day ( 1967 ) from a Japanese perspective . These " generally fail to explain the cause of the war " . In the decades immediately after the Second World War , Japanese films often focused on human tragedy rather than combat . From the late 1990s , films started to take a positive view of the war and of Japanese actions . These nationalistic films , including Pride ( 1998 ) , Merdeka <unk> ( 2001 ) , and The Truth about Nanjing ( 2007 ) , have emphasized positive traits of the Japanese military and contended that the Japanese were victims of post @-@ war vindictiveness and viciousness . Such films have , however , drawn protest for revisionism . The Eternal Zero ( 2013 ) narrates the tale of a Zero fighter pilot who is considered a coward by his comrades , as he returns alive from his missions . It broke the record takings for a Japanese live action film , and won the Golden Mulberry at the Udine Far East Film Festival , but was criticised for its nationalistic sympathy with kamikaze pilots . 
 = = Subgenres = = 
 = = = Documentary = = = 
 The wartime authorities in both Britain and America produced a wide variety of documentary films . Their purposes included military training , advice to civilians , and encouragement to maintain security . Since these films often carried messages , they grade into propaganda . Similarly , commercially produced films often combined information , support for the war effort , and a degree of propaganda . Newsreels , ostensibly simply for information , were made in both Allied and Axis countries , and were often dramatised . More recently , in the Iran @-@ Iraq War , <unk> <unk> 's <unk> @-@ e Fath ( Chronicles of Victory ) television series combined front @-@ line footage with commentary . 
 = = = Propaganda = = = 
 Sergei Eisenstein 's 1938 historical drama Alexander Nevsky depicts Prince Alexander 's defeat of the attempted invasion of the Russian city of Novgorod by the Teutonic Knights . By April 1939 the film had been seen by 23 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 people . In 1941 the director and three others were awarded the Stalin Prize for their contributions . The film features a musical score by the classical composer Sergei Prokofiev , described as " the best ever composed for the cinema " . Russell Merritt , writing in Film Quarterly , describes it as a " war propaganda film " . A 1978 Mondadori poll placed Alexander Nevsky among the world 's 100 best motion pictures . 
 During the Second World War , film propaganda was widely used . Kenneth Clark advised the British government that " If we renounced interest in entertainment as such , we might be deprived of a valuable weapon for getting across our propaganda " ; he suggested using documentaries about the war and the war effort ; celebrations of Britishness ; and films about British life and character . Michael Powell and Clark agreed on a story about survivors of a U @-@ boat crew , imbued with brutal Nazi ideology , travelling across Canada and meeting various kind , tolerant and intelligent Canadians , to encourage America into the war . The resulting film , 49th Parallel ( 1941 ) , became the top film at British offices that year . Entertaining films could carry messages about the need for vigilance , too , as in Went the Day Well ? ( 1942 ) or the avoidance of " careless talk " , as in The Next of Kin ( 1942 ) . 
 In America , Charlie Chaplin 's The Great Dictator ( 1940 ) clearly satirised fascism . Michael Curtiz 's Casablanca ( 1943 ) was not simply a romance between the characters played by Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman , but vilified the Nazis and glorified resistance to them . Frank Capra 's Why We Fight series ( 1942 – 1945 ) won the 1942 Academy Award for best documentary , though it was designed to " influence opinion in the U.S. military " . 
 During the Cold War , " propaganda played as much of a role in the United States ' struggle with the Soviet Union as did the billions of dollars spent on weaponry . " Face to Face with Communism ( 1951 ) dramatised an imagined invasion of the United States ; other films portrayed threats such as communist indoctrination . 
 = = = Submarine = = = 
 Submarine films have their own particular meanings and conventions , concerned specifically with giving the effect of submarine warfare . A distinctive element in this subgenre is the soundtrack , which attempts to bring home the emotional and dramatic nature of conflict under the sea . For example , in Wolfgang Petersen 's 1981 Das Boot , the sound design works together with the hours @-@ long film format to depict lengthy pursuit with depth charges , the ping of sonar , and threatening sounds such as of the <unk> of enemy destroyers and torpedoes . Classic films in the genre include The Enemy Below ( 1957 ) and Run Silent , Run Deep ( 1958 ) , both based on novels by naval commanders . Run Silent , Run Deep is a movie full of tension , both with the enemy and between the contrasting personalities of the submarine Commander and his Lieutenant , played by Clark Gable and Burt Lancaster . 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 A popular subgenre of war films in the 1950s and 1960s was the prisoner of war film . The genre was popularised in Britain with major films like Guy Hamilton 's The Colditz Story ( 1955 ) and John Sturges 's The Great Escape ( 1963 ) . They told stories of real escapes from German prisoner of war camps such as Stalag Luft III in the Second World War . Despite episodes of danger and human tragedy , these films delight in a continual boyish game of escape and ingenuity , celebrating the courage and the defiant spirit of the prisoners of war , and treating war as fun . David Lean 's Bridge on the River Kwai ( 1957 ) was judged best picture at the Oscars ; it took the genre from chilly German prisons to the heat of a camp in Thailand . It was the first , too , to use lush colour to bring out the British stiff upper lip of the colonel , played by Alec Guinness in an Oscar @-@ winning performance . The " definitive " Oscar @-@ winning Hollywood prisoner of war film was Billy Wilder 's Stalag 17 ( 1953 ) , while the brief but powerful prison camp scenes of The Deer Hunter ( 1977 ) lend an air of tragedy to the whole of that film . 
 = = = Comedy = = = 
 Charlie Chaplin 's Shoulder Arms ( 1918 ) set a style for war films to come , and was the first comedy about war in film history . British cinema in the Second World War marked the evacuation of children from London with social comedies such as Those Kids from Town ( 1942 ) where the evacuees go to stay with an earl ( a country nobleman ) , while in Cottage to Let ( 1941 ) and Went the Day Well ? ( 1942 ) the English countryside is thick with spies . <unk> ( 1941 ) offered " zany , irreverent , knockabout " comedy making fun of everything from barrage balloons to concentration camps . Abbott and Costello 's Buck Privates was successful in America , leading to many further wartime comedies . 
 = = = Animated = = = 
 Winsor McCay 's The Sinking of the Lusitania ( 1918 ) was a silent First World War film . At 12 minutes long , it was the longest animated film made at that time . It was probably the first animated propaganda film to be made ; it remains the earliest serious animated drama that has survived . Through World War II , animated propaganda shorts remained influential in American cinema . The Walt Disney Company , working with the American armed forces , produced 400 @,@ 000 feet of war propaganda films between 1942 and 1945 , including Der Fuehrer 's Face ( 1943 ) and Education for Death ( 1943 ) . 
 Japanese anime films from the 1960s onwards addressed national memories of war . Akira ( 1988 ) moves from the atomic destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to apocalyptic visions of global conflict ; Grave of the Fireflies ( 1988 ) is elegiac on the effect of war on children . Barefoot Gen ( 1983 ) portrays the bombing of Hiroshima through the eyes of a child , but reviewers consider it a less well made film than Grave of the Fireflies with " stomach @-@ churning detail " bizarrely paired with crude artwork , giving it the look of a " Saturday morning Warner Brothers cartoon " . 
 = = = Anti @-@ war = = = 
 The anti @-@ war genre began with films about the First World War . Films in the genre are typically revisionist , reflecting on past events and often generically blended . Lewis Milestone 's All Quiet on the Western Front ( 1930 ) was unquestionably powerful , and an early anti @-@ war film , portraying a German point of view ; it was the first film ( in any genre ) to win two Oscars , best picture and best director . Andrew Kelly , analysing All Quiet on the Western Front , defined the genre as showing : the brutality of war ; the amount of human suffering ; the betrayal of men 's trust by incompetent officers . War and anti @-@ war films often prove difficult to categorize as they contain many generic ambiguities . While many anti @-@ war films criticize war directly through depictions of grisly combat in past wars , some films such as Penn 's Alice 's Restaurant criticized war obliquely by poking fun at such things as the draft board . The number of anti @-@ war films produced in America dipped sharply during the 1950s because of McCarthyism and the Hollywood Blacklist . The end of the Hollywood Blacklist and the introduction of the MPAA rating system marked a time of resurgence for films of all type including anti @-@ war films in the States . Robert <unk> names two films as anti @-@ war classics : Jean Renoir 's prisoner of war masterpiece La Grande Illusion ( The Grand Illusion , 1937 ) , and Stanley Kubrick 's Paths of Glory ( 1957 ) . The critic David Ehrenstein notes that Paths of Glory established Kubrick as the " leading commercial filmmaker of his generation " and a world @-@ class talent . Ehrenstein describes the film as an " outwardly cool / inwardly passionate protest drama about a disastrous French army maneuver and the <unk> held in its wake " , contrasting it with the " classic " All Quiet on the Western Front 's story of an innocent " unstrung by the horrors of war " . 
 = = = Mixed genres = = = 
 Some later war films combined black comedy and anti @-@ war sentiment , as in the anti @-@ war farces of Mike Nichols 's Catch @-@ 22 ( 1970 ) , based on Joseph Heller 's satirical novel about the Second World War , and Robert Altman 's MASH ( 1970 ) , set in Korea , reflecting the attitudes of an increasingly sceptical public . 
 Other genres were combined in Franklin J. Schaffner 's Patton ( 1970 ) , about real life General George S. Patton , where combat scenes were interleaved with commentary about how he waged war , showing good and bad sides to a command . It and MASH became the two most profitable war / anti @-@ war films made up to that time ; and Patton won seven Academy Awards . 
 = Sarah Kerrigan = 
 Sarah Louise Kerrigan , the self @-@ styled Queen of Blades , is a fictional character in Blizzard Entertainment 's StarCraft franchise . The character was created by Chris Metzen and James Phinney , and her appearance was originally designed by Metzen . Sarah Kerrigan is voiced by Glynnis Talken Campbell in StarCraft and Brood War , and by Tricia Helfer in StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty , StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm and StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void . 
 Kerrigan first appears in StarCraft as a twenty @-@ six @-@ year @-@ old female Terran Ghost , a psychic trained both physically and mentally as an expert espionage agent and assassin . Initially the second @-@ in @-@ command of Sons of Korhal , a revolutionary movement against the oppressive Confederacy of Man , she is captured by the insectoid Zerg and infested , turning her into a human / Zerg hybrid completely under the control of the Zerg Overmind . She becomes one of the Zerg 's most powerful agents , but during the Brood Wars , she replaces the Overmind following its destruction at the end of the great war , and gains control of the Zerg to seek dominance over the galaxy . Kerrigan 's life before her infestation is further explored in the Starcraft novels Uprising and Liberty 's Crusade , while Queen of Blades elaborates on her infested character . 
 As one of the major characters of the series , Kerrigan has been critically praised for her believability and character depth . Kerrigan is frequently featured in lists of both the top computer gaming enemies and top female characters ; a survey by GameSpot in 2010 declared her to be the greatest gaming villain , and Complex ranked her as the most evil woman in gaming in 2012 . 
 = = Character design = = 
 The character of Kerrigan was created by Blizzard Entertainment 's Chris Metzen and James Phinney , with her physical appearance designed by Metzen . Kerrigan was not originally intended to be a major character , and was only meant to appear on a single level . Initially based around the character Tanya Adams in the Command & Conquer : Red Alert series , Kerrigan was named after Nancy Kerrigan , who at the time was involved in a feud with Tonya Harding . However , Kerrigan 's character grew on the developers , who decided to give a far greater role to the throw @-@ away character . Kerrigan 's self @-@ proclaimed title is the " Queen of Blades " , which is gradually introduced to other characters to the point where it is synonymous with her . Chris Metzen has explained that it was meant to be an honorific title ; a blade is a weapon designed to rip enemies to pieces , making the title fitting for Kerrigan , who evolved to be the greatest agent of the Zerg Overmind . 
 In an interview Glynnis Talken Campbell , Kerrigan 's voice actress from Starcraft and StarCraft : Brood War , described Kerrigan 's change in personality during her infestation as " going from good girl to bad girl " , and has said it was more of a change in personality than voice when providing her voice work . Kerrigan 's voice also consisted of many grunts , growls and screams , and her unique infested voice was provided by doubling up Campbell 's voice . She has also claimed that , were she to pen a StarCraft film or novel , she would rather have Kerrigan 's relationship with Jim Raynor — the series ' primary male protagonist — portrayed as one of admiration , sacrifice , and " them saving each other 's butts " than actual romance due to StarCraft 's action @-@ oriented nature . Whilst Campbell had confirmed that she would return to voice the character in StarCraft II , and had voiced the character in several promotional trailers , it was later reported that a new voice actress had been hired for Kerrigan and that Campbell was no longer involved with the project . Tricia Helfer was soon revealed to be the actress in question , voicing Kerrigan in StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty and StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Having been conscripted into the Confederate Ghost program as a child due to her psychic potential , Kerrigan is described in the manual for StarCraft as never having been given the chance for a normal life . Her rigorous training and the use of neural implants to control her mental abilities leave her withdrawn and introverted . Despite this , Kerrigan exhibits qualities of courage and daring , and is an effective tactician . She is also described as a moral character , exemplified in her opposition to Arcturus Mengsk using the Zerg against the Confederacy . However , after her transformation by the Zerg , Kerrigan is freed from her inhibitions — as well as her neural conditioning — and indulges her darker traits ( though Heart of the Swarm implies that at least part of her villainy was due to the influence of a fallen Xel 'naga named Amon ) . Her attitude , combined with her natural intelligence , makes her extremely calculating and manipulative . A hint of her former moral sensitivity is to be noted when towards the end of the Zerg campaign of Brood War , she states how she feels weary of slaughter for the first time since her transformation . Kerrigan has also become far more physically aggressive , relishing close quarters combat so much that at one point in the novel Queen of Blades , she begins absent @-@ mindedly licking the blood of her victims from her fingers . 
 One of the core elements of Kerrigan 's personality is that of her manipulation by others , and her lack of identity . Her reversion to human form by Raynor allowed her to finally develop an identity for herself , though found her emotions torn between a man that she loved ( Raynor ) and a man that she despised ( Mengsk ) . 
 = = Depiction = = 
 As a character with different incarnations , special powers , transformations , three unique personas , and <unk> <unk> of 4 separate alien species , Kerrigan gains multiple aspects and aliases as the series progresses . 
 = = = Ghost Operative = = = 
 Prior to her infestation , Kerrigan is described as being a graceful and deadly woman , exceedingly agile and athletic , possessing jade @-@ green eyes and brilliant red hair usually worn as a ponytail . The novel Queen of Blades describes her facial features as being too strong to be classified as beautiful , but instead as striking and completely fitting for her personality . Kerrigan is rarely seen out of her armor , a form @-@ fitting hostile environment suit specifically designed for Ghost operatives and equipped with a personal cloaking device , but when off @-@ duty , she is described as wearing a soft work shirt , worn cotton pants with a dusty leather jacket , and high leather boots . Even then , it is uncommon for Kerrigan to be unarmed : she is always equipped with at least a combat knife . 
 = = = Queen of Blades = = = 
