 Kerrigan 's infestation by the Zerg signaled a major overhaul for her appearance . Despite maintaining her stature , build , and facial features , she is described in Queen of Blades as having mottled green skin , covered in a glossy protective carapace . Kerrigan 's eyes are bright yellow as opposed to her natural green , and her hair has transformed into stalks , described as being segmented like an insect 's legs . Kerrigan 's fingers are stated to now contain extendible claws . A pair of skeletal wings has also grown from her back , consisting of elongated segmented spikes that reach down to the level of her knees . Kerrigan is seen using these wings as a melee weapon , tearing opponents apart . 
 = = = Agent of Prophecy = = = 
 Kerrigan ascended into Xel 'naga form by merging her essence with Ouros , <unk> a final overhaul for her appearance . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In StarCraft : The Great War = = = 
 Sarah Kerrigan appears in StarCraft : The Great War halfway through the first chapter of the game . She and Confederate officer Jim Raynor are tasked by Arcturus Mengsk , the leader of the militant rebel group Sons of Korhal , with starting a revolution on the fringe colony world of Antiga Prime by assassinating the presiding officers of the ruling Confederacy of Man . In response , the Confederacy blockades the planet as the insectoid Zerg Swarm begin to invade the surface , and Mengsk orders a skeptical Kerrigan to plant a psi emitter — stolen Confederate technology that attracts Zerg to it — to lure the Zerg into breaking the blockade , allowing the Sons of Korhal to escape . The Sons of Korhal then directly attack the Confederate capital world Tarsonis . During the attack , Mengsk , without consulting his officers , uses the psi emitters to ensure the complete destruction of the planet by the Zerg . The Zerg are subsequently attacked by the Protoss , a race of psionic aliens who attempt to stop further Zerg advancement and conquest . Kerrigan is sent with a detachment of troops to stop the Protoss from interfering with the Zerg rampage , but her position is overrun by the Zerg and she is abandoned by Mengsk . She was eventually captured for infestation after she ran out of ammo . As Raynor deserts Mengsk in disgust , Kerrigan is presumed dead . 
 However , Kerrigan does not perish , and as the second chapter begins , the player is charged by the Zerg hive mind , the Overmind , to protect a chrysalis it claims will be its greatest creation . The chrysalis eventually hatches on the Zerg world Char to reveal Kerrigan having been infested with Zerg DNA , making her a powerful hybrid of both Zerg and Terran genetics . Raynor , drawn to Char by psychic dreams cast by Kerrigan during her incubation , fails in an attempt to rescue her , but is spared as Kerrigan does not see him as a threat , and possibly due to any lingering affection she had for him . After breaking into a Terran science vessel and reversing the neural conditioning from her training as a psionic agent , Kerrigan is able to sense the presence of the Protoss fleet commander Tassadar on Char . Tassadar diverts Kerrigan 's attention long enough for his companion Zeratul to assassinate Zasz , one of the Zerg commanders , with psionic energies the Zerg are unfamiliar with . This causes a temporary mental link between Zeratul and the Overmind , who uses this momentary contact with Zeratul 's memories to locate the Protoss homeworld Aiur . The Overmind immediately launches the bulk of the Zerg Swarm in an invasion , although Kerrigan remains behind on Char to hunt down Tassadar and Zeratul . 
 = = = In StarCraft : Brood War = = = 
 Kerrigan 's character is more central to StarCraft : Brood War ( 1998 ) , as in the wake of the Overmind 's death at the hands of Tassadar in the conclusion of StarCraft , Kerrigan regains her independence from the Zerg hive mind and dedicates her efforts to becoming the sole leader of the Zerg Swarm . She presents herself on the Protoss colony world Shakuras , where she informs Zeratul and the Protoss of a new Overmind growing on Char , manipulating them into destroying Zerg forces running rival to her goals . She also gains an ally in an apparently infested Samir Duran , who infiltrates the newly arrived forces of the United Earth Directorate ( UED ) and attempts to sabotage their mission to enslave the Zerg and seize control of the sector of the galaxy . However , the UED is successful in capturing the new Overmind , and Kerrigan exploits the threat of the UED to forge an alliance with Mengsk , Raynor and his new Protoss allies , turning around the war against the UED . However , Kerrigan quickly betrays this alliance and strikes at the armies of Raynor and Mengsk , heavily damaging both groups . Accompanied by Duran , Kerrigan returns to Shakuras to abduct the Protoss leader Raszagal , using her to blackmail Zeratul into killing the new Overmind on Char , after which all Zerg fall under Kerrigan 's control — around this time , she begins her self @-@ proclamation as the Queen of Blades . Zeratul attempts to rescue Raszagal , but kills her when he realizes her mind has been destroyed by Kerrigan 's brainwashing . Kerrigan , surprised by his actions , allows him to live . Soon after , Kerrigan 's position on Char is attacked by a vengeful Protoss fleet , the remnants of the UED 's invasion force and a mercenary fleet commanded by Mengsk . Despite being outnumbered , Kerrigan 's forces prevail , crippling her enemies and eradicating the UED fleet , thereby securing a dominant position in the sector . 
 = = = In StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty = = = 
 Kerrigan returns in StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty ( 2010 ) . At BlizzCon 2007 , Chris Metzen explained that in the years after Brood War , Kerrigan relocated to Char , pulling back most of the Zerg , and has since been quiet . She has the power to wipe out all her enemies but has not , creating a tense state of peace in the sector . Metzen also indicated an interest in exploring if there was any humanity left in Kerrigan or if she is beyond redemption in her current state . He revealed that Kerrigan 's withdrawal has little to do with any suspicion she has of Duran , who is revealed towards the end of Brood War to be conducting secret experiments on creating a Protoss / Zerg hybrid ; she does not know much about him , but in the time after Brood War , she is beginning to piece together the puzzle surrounding his motives . At BlizzCon 2008 , Kerrigan made two brief appearances in cinematic trailers , one during an attack on a Terran city that was captured on video , and again in a series of caverns where Zeratul was studying ancient runes ; in the latter , Kerrigan implies she has been waiting for his arrival . 
 In StarCraft II , Kerrigan launches an attack on the Terran Dominion colonies . At first , her motives seem to be revenge - however , later it is discovered that she is pursuing various pieces of a Xel 'naga artifact of great power . Coincidentally , these are the same artifacts that Jim Raynor is pursuing at the request of his recently freed friend Tychus Findlay and his benefactor , the Moebius Foundation . Raynor 's forces and Kerrigan constantly bump heads throughout this pursuit , with Kerrigan displaying her now trademark character traits of arrogance and a hunger for power . Raynor soon learns from Valerian Mengsk , son of Arcturus Mengsk and the real face behind the Moebius Foundation , that the Xel 'naga artifacts he has been pursuing , when pieced together , have the power to return Kerrigan to her human form . At one point , Zeratul suddenly appears on board Raynor 's ship and hands to him a crystal containing memories from his recent ventures . The memories on the crystal chronicle Zeratul 's campaign to discover the truth behind an ancient Xel 'naga prophecy , a quest which leads him to run into Kerrigan many times in the process . It is through these memories that Raynor learns just how important it is to ensure that Kerrigan does not perish , for she is the chosen person to help win the coming battle against the Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids . Through Zeratul 's crystal , Raynor is also granted the vision of a possible future , one without Kerrigan , where the Protoss are rendered extinct shortly after the Terrans are annihilated . After seeing this vision , Raynor mounts an invasion on Char in collaboration with Dominion forces to eliminate the Zerg forces on the planet . The Xel 'naga artifact releases an energy blast that wipes the Zerg infection clean off the planet . When Raynor and Findlay seek Kerrigan in the ruins , she is found to have mostly returned to her human form , with only her hair remaining Zerg @-@ like . However , Raynor is forced to kill Findlay when he attempts to assassinate Kerrigan , under orders from his " benefactor " , who is revealed to be Arcturus Mengsk . Raynor then carries the weakened Kerrigan over the ruined battlefield to safety . 
 = = = In StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm = = = 
 Her next appearance was in StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm , where she is the central character , and it tells the story of her further fate , and of the Zerg Swarm as well . Once again a human , Kerrigan is brought by Raynor to a secret research facility run by Valerian Mengsk to determine how much of her skill at controlling Zerg remains from her time as the Queen of Blades . However , the facility is attacked by Dominion forces and while Kerrigan and Valerian manage to escape , Raynor becomes trapped . After returning to look for him , Kerrigan hears Mengsk 's announcement that he was captured and executed . To enact revenge against Mengsk , Kerrigan , while traveling through the sector to reunite the Zerg Swarm under her control , is approached by Zeratul . Zeratul tells her to travel to Zerus , the original homeworld of the Zerg , where the primal Zerg are in a constantly evolving state . Kerrigan , initially reluctant , is convinced after Zeratul tells her there she can obtain enough power to move on with her vengeance plans . On Zerus , Kerrigan learns that Amon stole a large portion of the Zerg from Zerus and bound them to a single overriding will , making them Amon 's slaves as part of his plot to destroy both the Zerg and Protoss and remake life in his own image . Kerrigan enters a chrysalis in the first Zerg spawning pool and emerges , transforming again into the primal Queen of Blades . She also realizes that Amon 's lingering taint was partially responsible for the crimes she committed during the Brood War . Mengsk contacts Kerrigan and reveals that Raynor was not killed , but is held as a hostage instead , threatening to kill him should she wage war against the Dominion . With help from Valerian and Raynor 's Raiders , Kerrigan manages to rescue Raynor , but is rejected by him for renouncing the human self that he worked so hard to restore . Now in full control of the Zerg Swarm once again , Kerrigan launches an attack on the <unk> 's main world , Korhal , to defeat Mengsk . She is assisted by Valerian , who convinces her to give an opening for the civilians to escape , and is later assisted by Raynor 's forces as well . Confronting Mengsk face to face , Kerrigan is almost defeated when he uses the Xel 'naga artifact to attack her , but Raynor stops him , allowing her to kill Mengsk with her own hands . Kerrigan and Raynor make their peace and it is shown that they will always look out for each other , hinting an everlasting affection between the two . With the Dominion 's leader destroyed , Kerrigan bids Raynor and Valerian farewell and starts to prepare herself and her swarm for " the greatest battle they 'll ever face " . 
 = = = In StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void = = = 
 During the events of Legacy of the Void , Kerrigan enters into an alliance with Artanis while investigating the Xel 'Naga " homeworld " Ulnar , which the pair discover is in fact a colossal space station . Some time after Artanis 's reclamation of the Protoss homeworld , Aiur , Kerrigan sends a psionic call to Raynor and Artanis : she proposes an alliance to permanently defeat Amon , since he will only arise again in a few thousand years if he is not dealt with . During the assault of the Void by the joint forces of the Terran Dominion , Zerg Swarm and Protoss Dae <unk> , the full context of Zeratul 's prophecy about Kerrigan is made clear : only a fellow Xel 'Naga is capable of killing Amon , and Kerrigan is the only one who can ascend to that status currently . With the remainder of the joint armada , Kerrigan is successful in killing Amon during her psychic backlash in the void . Two years later , Kerrigan in her human form ( or what appears to be such ) , returns to Raynor and disappears with him at her side . 
 = = = In novels = = = 
 Kerrigan appears in several StarCraft novels that greatly expand her backstory before the first StarCraft game . The novel Uprising portrays Kerrigan 's training as a Ghost assassin from an early age , where she is subjected to intense psychological abuse from her Confederate trainer , Lieutenant <unk> . When she was a young girl , an accident , most likely involving her powers , kills her mother and puts her father in a vegetative state . Consequently , Kerrigan is terrified to use her psionic abilities , and refuses <unk> 's demands to show her power , even when he threatens to kill her father . Kerrigan is eventually subdued with mental implants and used as a top Confederate assassin until she is rescued by Arcturus Mengsk . The novels Liberty 's Crusade and Queen of Blades provide novelisations for Kerrigan 's actions in Episodes I and II of StarCraft respectively . Liberty 's Crusade develops the implied relationship between Jim Raynor and Kerrigan , while Queen of Blades serves to demonstrate Kerrigan 's complete transformation by the Zerg , her removal of her inhibitions and morality , and its effect on her former love , Raynor . 
 In addition , Kerrigan briefly appears in Gabriel Mesta 's Shadow of the Xel 'naga , set between StarCraft and Brood War , in which she attempts to secure a Xel 'naga artifact on the independent colony world Bhekar Ro , but fails when it eradicates her forces . Kerrigan is also observed in Shadow Hunters , the second novel in The Dark Templar Saga , a trilogy that acts as a precursor to StarCraft II . After sensing a nexus of joined human minds caused by protagonist Jake Ramsey at the end of the first novel , Kerrigan sends Zerg forces to its location , infesting the half @-@ dead body of a Dominion @-@ funded black marketeer , Ethan Stewart . As the attack is the first Zerg activity for years , it inadvertently raises the suspicions of Arcturus Mengsk , who wonders what could have motivated it . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Dwight Schrute dresses as Kerrigan for a <unk> party on a season 8 episode of The Office . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kerrigan has been received positively by critics . IGN 's review of StarCraft drew note to the evolution of Kerrigan 's character through the story , labelling it as unforgettable and describing her transformation as " chilling " . In 2006 , IGN ranked Kerrigan the fifth most memorable villain in gaming , listing the various exploits she committed after becoming infested , including conquering the Zerg race , infesting many worlds , and betraying her allies . Kerrigan was included among the 50 greatest female characters in the history of video games by Tom 's Games in 2007 , which described her " sexy , sinister and sympathetic " personality as amounting to one of the " most fascinatingly complex and memorable characters of all time . " A 2010 GameSpot poll ranked Kerrigan as the number one video game villain . At the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , Tricia Helfer won " Best Performance by a Human Female " for her voicing of Kerrigan in StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty . In 2012 , she was ranked as 23rd " hottest " fictional woman of the year by UGO Entertainment , and as the most evil woman in video gaming by Complex ( up from second place in 2011 ) ; Complex also included her among " coolest " video game villains overall , where she placed 16th . That same year , Cheat Code Central featured the relationship between Kerrigan and Raynor among the " kickass gaming couples " and stated the relationship as one of the <unk> in video games , also including Kerrigan on the list of top ten " badass " women of video games . GamesRadar similarly praised Kerrigan 's role as an antagonist , putting her in their 2013 list of the best villains in video game history at number 20 , stating " She is every kind of badass . " In 2013 , Liz Lanier of Game Informer included Kerrigan among top ten female villains in video games , stating that " Kerrigan is as brutal as she is misunderstood . While once a skilled psychic terran , her captures by Zerg leads to her transformation into the Queen of Blades . With the rare ability to be both merciless and sympathetic , the leader of the swarm is an unforgettable <unk> . " 
 = SMS Prinz Adalbert ( 1901 ) = 
 For other ships of the same name , see SMS Prinz Adalbert 
 SMS Prinz Adalbert ( " His Majesty 's Ship Prince Adalbert " ) was an armored cruiser built in the early 1900s for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , named after Prince Adalbert of Prussia , former Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Prussian Navy . She was the lead ship of her class , which included a second ship , Friedrich Carl . Prinz Adalbert was built at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . Her keel was laid in April 1900 , and she was launched in June 1901 . Her completion in January 1904 had been delayed by a surplus of construction projects at the Imperial Dockyard . She was armed with a main battery of four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns , a significant improvement over the previous armored cruiser , Prinz Heinrich , which carried only two such guns . The ship was capable of a top speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 Upon commissioning , Prinz Adalbert served as a gunnery training ship , a role she held for the majority of her career . She trained with the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) , later renamed the Hochseeflotte ( High Seas Fleet ) , throughout the early 1900s , and she made several visits to foreign countries . After the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , she was assigned to the reconnaissance forces in the Baltic and was tasked with protecting the German coast from Russian attacks . After her sister ship was sunk in November 1914 , she became the flagship of the cruiser squadron in the Baltic . She conducted operations against Russian forces , including bombarding the port of Libau in support of the German Army . She was torpedoed by a British submarine in July 1915 , but was able to return to port and was repaired . She was torpedoed a second time on 23 October 1915 ; the torpedo detonated her ammunition magazines and destroyed the ship . She sank quickly with heavy loss of life ; only three men were rescued from a crew of 675 . This proved to be the worst German naval disaster in the Baltic during the war . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Prinz Adalbert displaced 9 @,@ 087 t ( 8 @,@ 943 long tons ) as built and 9 @,@ 875 t ( 9 @,@ 719 long tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 126 @.@ 5 m ( 415 ft 0 in ) , a beam of 19 @.@ 6 m ( 64 ft 4 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 43 m ( 24 ft 5 in ) forward . She was powered by three vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , with steam provided by fourteen coal @-@ fired boilers . The engines developed 17 @,@ 272 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 880 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 20 @.@ 4 knots ( 38 km / h ; 23 mph ) on trials . She carried up to 1 @,@ 630 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of up to 5 @,@ 080 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 410 km ; 5 @,@ 850 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 35 officers and 551 enlisted men . 
 She was armed with four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns arranged in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one on either end of the superstructure , a significant improvement over the preceding design , Prinz Heinrich , which carried only two guns in single turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of ten 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns and four 45 cm ( 18 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow , one in the stern , and one on each beam . The ship was protected by a 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) armored belt consisting of Krupp cemented armor , along with an armored deck that was 40 to 80 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . Her main battery turrets had faces 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Prinz Adalbert was ordered under the provisional name " B " and built at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel under construction number 27 . Her keel was laid in April 1900 and she was launched on 22 June 1901 . The launching ceremony was attended by the Kaiser , Wilhelm II , his wife Kaiserin Augusta Victoria , his brother Admiral Prince Heinrich and Wilhem 's son , Prince Adalbert of Prussia . The ceremony of christening the ship was performed by Princess Irene of Prussia , wife of Prince Heinrich , who then delivered a speech . Fitting @-@ out work proceeded slowly , in large part the result of the Imperial Dockyard attempting to build too many ships at once , but the work was eventually completed by 12 January 1904 . Prinz Adalbert was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy the same day for sea trials , with Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Hermann Jacobsen in command ; the ship was slated for service as a gunnery training ship . She had cost the Imperial German Government 16 @,@ 371 @,@ 000 Goldmarks . Sea trials were completed by 30 May , after which Prinz Adalbert began her duties as a gunnery training ship . 
 In September , the ship took part in the annual autumn maneuvers with the rest of the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) . A special training unit consisting of reserve ships , training ships like Prinz Adalbert , and a flotilla of torpedo boats was created in early 1905 ; Prinz Adalbert was the flagship of the unit from 1905 to 1907 , flying the flag of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Hugo Zeye . Prinz Adalbert and the light cruiser Berlin escorted Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern to Sweden for a visit to King Oscar II in July 1905 . The following month , she joined the light cruisers Undine and Nymphe for training maneuvers off Swinemünde ; the exercises were to test the ships against a simulated night attack by torpedo boats . The tests were observed by Konteradmiral Ludwig Schröder , the Inspector of Naval Weapons , aboard Prinz Adalbert . Wilhelm II boarded Prinz Adalbert for the conclusion of the exercises , in which the ship towed an old torpedo boat filled with cork while the light cruisers and torpedo boats fired on it with live shells . Prinz Adalbert did not participate in the 1905 autumn maneuvers , though she was present for the naval review at the end of the exercises on 13 September . In February 1906 , the tender Fuchs was assigned to support Prinz Adalbert . From 17 to 28 June , the cruiser served as the flagship of Prince Heinrich , then the commander of the Baltic Sea Naval Station . During this period the ship traveled to Norway to take part in the coronation festivities for King Haakon VII . 
 The cruiser again took part in the autumn maneuvers in 1907 and 1909 . During the latter maneuvers , Prinz Adalbert took part in the Reserve Division , commanded again by Zeye , who had now been promoted to Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) . The ship served as the flagship of the III Scouting Group , under Konteradmiral Johannes Merten , who would go on to command the Ottoman fortifications at the Dardanelles during World War I. In March 1910 and March 1911 , Prinz Adalbert conducted gunnery tests in the northern North Sea and visited Tórshavn and Vestmanna in the Faeroe Islands . She visited Ålesund in Norway in July and August that year . The ship 's first period in service came to an end in September , following a large naval review in the Kiel roadstead for Wilhelm II and Archduke Franz Ferdinand , the heir to the Austro @-@ Hungarian throne , which began on 5 September . Prinz Adalbert was then decommissioned in Kiel on the 29th , with the armored cruiser Blücher taking her place as the fleet 's gunnery training ship . After a lengthy overhaul , Prinz Adalbert returned to service on 1 November 1912 , again with the artillery school . She was based in Sonderburg , where she replaced the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , Prinz Adalbert was brought into front @-@ line service with the fleet , and Kapitän zur See Andreas Michelsen took command of the ship . She was assigned to the IV Scouting Group , under the command of Konteradmiral Hubert von Rebeur @-@ Paschwitz . On 26 August , she was sent to rescue the light cruiser Magdeburg , which had run aground earlier that day , though she was recalled after the Germans received word that Magdeburg 's crew had been forced to scuttle the ship . Prinz Adalbert was transferred to the North Sea on 7 September and was tasked two days later with protecting the minelaying cruisers Nautilus and Albatross and the auxiliary minelayer Kaiser while they laid a minefield to protect the southern entrance to the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . The ship was briefly detached to guard the Great Belt after the Germans received false intelligence suggesting that British warships would try to penetrate the Baltic . She then joined the High Seas Fleet for a sortie into the North Sea on 2 – 4 November . 
 After her sister ship Friedrich Carl was sunk in November 1914 , Prinz Adalbert was detached from the III Scouting Group to replace her in the Coastal Defense Division in the Baltic on 29 November . She became the flagship for Admiral <unk> Behring , the commander of the cruiser detachment in the Baltic , on 7 December . On the 15th , she sortied with the light cruisers Augsburg , Lübeck , Amazone , and Thetis and several torpedo boats for a reconnaissance sweep toward the Åland Islands ; the ships returned to port on 18 December without having engaged Russian forces . Another sweep followed on 27 – 29 December , this time to cover a sortie by the Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class battleship of the V Battle Squadron toward Gotland . On 6 January 1915 , Prinz Adalbert , Thetis , Augsburg , Lübeck , and several torpedo boats and U @-@ boats went on a patrol toward Utö , where they discovered a Russian base for submarines . The Germans planned to attack the base with the torpedo boats and Thetis , since she had the shallowest draft , but due to a miscommunication , the attack was not carried out . 
 On 22 January 1915 , Prinz Adalbert , in company with Augsburg and several torpedo boats , conducted another reconnaissance sweep toward the Åland Islands . While on the return voyage , she bombarded Russian positions at Libau . She ran aground off <unk> during the operation , and Augsburg struck a mine off Bornholm . After being freed from her grounding , the ship was repaired ; Michelsen temporarily served as the detachment commander in place of Behring from 13 February to 9 March , when the ship was ready to return to service . Behring returned to Prinz Adalbert on 20 March . In the meantime , the Russians had briefly captured Memel . The Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) detached the II Battle Squadron , II Scouting Group , and two flotillas of torpedo boats from the High Seas Fleet to reinforce the forces in the Baltic . The ships began to make diversionary attacks to support the German Army 's campaign to retake Memel ; Prinz Adalbert supported one such operation , a raid of the II Scouting Group into the Bothnian Sea to attack Russian merchant shipping on 23 March . The following day , the ships from the High Seas Fleet were recalled to the North Sea , leaving Behring 's cruisers alone once again . 
 Behring conducted one last operation from 13 to 17 April , with Prinz Adalbert , Thetis , and Lübeck , to support the minelayer Deutschland , which laid a minefield off Dagö . On the 20th , the Admiralstab instituted a reorganization of the Baltic Sea forces , and Behring was replaced with Konteradmiral Albert Hopman . At the same time , Michelsen was promoted to Hopman 's chief of staff , with his place as Prinz Adalbert 's commanding officer being taken by Kapitän zur See Wilhelm Bunnemann . The ship remained the flagship of the unit , and Hopman made his first cruise aboard the vessel from Kiel to Danzig on 27 April . At this time , Generalfeldmarschall ( General Field Marshal ) Paul von Hindenburg , the commander in chief of German forces on the Eastern Front , ordered a major assault on Libau . Hopman ordered his forces to support an attempt by the German Army to seize the city . The pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the IV Battle Squadron and the IV Scouting Group were allocated to Hopman 's command to provide additional support to the operation . The attack took place on 7 May , and consisted of Prinz Adalbert and the armored cruisers Roon and Prinz Heinrich , the elderly coast defense ship Beowulf , and the cruisers Augsburg , Thetis , and Lübeck . They were escorted by a number of destroyers , torpedo boats , and minesweepers . The bombardment went as planned , though the destroyer V107 struck a mine in Libau 's harbor , which blew off her bow and destroyed the ship . German ground forces were successful in their assault and they took the city . 
 On 1 July , the minelayer SMS Albatross , escorted by the cruisers Roon , Augsburg , and Lübeck and seven destroyers , laid a minefield north of Bogskär . While returning to port , the flotilla separated into two sections ; Augsburg , Albatross , and three destroyers made for Rixhöft while the remainder of the unit went to Libau . Augsburg and Albatross were intercepted by a powerful Russian squadron commanded by Rear Admiral Bakhirev , consisting of three armored and two light cruisers . Commodore Johannes von Karpf , the flotilla commander , ordered the slower Albatross to steam for neutral Swedish waters and recalled Roon and Lübeck . Albatross was grounded off Gotland and Augsburg escaped , and the Russian squadron briefly engaged Roon before both sides broke contact . Upon being informed of the situation , Hopman sortied with Prinz Adalbert and Prinz Heinrich to support von Karpf . While en route , the cruisers encountered the British submarine E9 , which scored a hit on Prinz Adalbert . The torpedo hit below the conning tower , caused severe damage , and killed ten men . Hopman transferred to the torpedo boat V99 while Michelsen remained aboard Prinz Adalbert to oversee the return to port . The ship took on some 2 @,@ 000 t ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ; 2 @,@ 200 short tons ) of water ; her draft increased significantly , which prevented her from being able to put in to Danzig . She instead had to make the journey back to Kiel for repairs , which she reached on 4 July . 
 Repairs were finally completed by September 1915 . On 21 September , Prinz Adalbert joined a sortie to the Gulf of Finland with the battleships Braunschweig , Elsass , Mecklenburg , Schwaben , and Zähringen and the light cruiser Bremen . They encountered no Russian forces and returned to port on the 23rd . Another operation followed on 5 October ; this was in company with Prinz Heinrich and Bremen , and was to cover a minelayer as it laid a field to the northwest of <unk> . The ships completed their mission the next day and returned to port without incident . On 19 October , Hopman transferred his flag to Roon and ordered Prinz Adalbert to take up a patrol between Fårö and Dagerort . The ship was steaming some 20 miles west of Libau , en route to her patrol area , in company with a pair of destroyers on 23 October when she was intercepted by the submarine E8 . E8 fired a spread of torpedoes at a range of approximately 1 @,@ 200 m ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) , detonating the ship 's ammunition magazine . The massive explosion destroyed the ship , which sank immediately with the loss of 672 crew . There were only three survivors . The sinking was the greatest single loss of life for the German Baltic forces during the war . 
 = Marita Covarrubias = 
 Marita Covarrubias is a fictional character on the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . She was initially introduced as an informant , leaking diplomatic information to FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder to aid his investigation of paranormal cases , dubbed X @-@ Files . However , she was revealed to be an agent of the secretive Syndicate , although ultimately betraying that organization on several occasions . Introduced in the fourth season opener " Herrenvolk " , the character remained a recurring presence until the series ' finale , " The Truth " . 
 The character of Marita Covarrubias was portrayed by Laurie Holden in all her appearances . She was introduced as a replacement for Steven Williams ' character X , after the latter was killed by a Syndicate assassin . The character has received mixed criticism , being compared unfavorably to similar characters from the series . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 The X @-@ Files ' creator Chris Carter felt it would be " more interesting for Mulder 's next contact to be a woman " , noting that he " wanted there to be some suspicion about whether Mulder would become involved with her romantically . X , the character who had previously filled Covarrubias ' role as an informant in the series , had originally been cast as a female character . However Natalija Nogulich , the actress cast in that role , was replaced by Steven Williams after shooting her first scene . 
 When auditioning for the role of Marita Covarrubias , Laurie Holden was not allowed access to an episode script , instead simply being told that her character worked for the United Nations and had an air of " intelligent seriousness " . The actress had never seen the series before she auditioned for the part , and was required to audition using only three pages of scripted material from what would be her debut episode . Holden was required to learn Russian for the episode " Patient X " , and commented that roughly fifteen seconds of screen @-@ time took hours to rehearse . The voice coach responsible for instructing Holden and Nicholas Lea in their Russian dialogue tested their proficiency by asking them to speak to Russian @-@ speaking friends of his over the telephone . Holden felt that the two @-@ part episode " Two Fathers " and " One Son " offered her " cold , emotionless , private " character a chance to come across as " vulnerable , exposed and raw " . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Marita Covarrubias is introduced as an informant to Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) after the death of his former source , X ( Steven Williams ) . X scrawls the letters " SRSG " in his own blood as he dies , leading Mulder to the Special Representative to the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations . Covarrubias uses her diplomatic connections to help Mulder infiltrate the Russian province of Krasnoyarsk , allowing him to reach the site of the Tunguska event . However , it is later seen that Covarrubias is working for The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) and the Syndicate . 
 During the fifth season , the Syndicate discovered that Covarrubias had betrayed them and was providing information to Mulder . As a result , Syndicate scientists infect her with black oil in order to test a vaccine they had been working to create . In the following season , Covarrubias is discovered by FBI agent Jeffrey Spender ( Chris Owens ) at a decontamination chamber . She begs him to help her escape the facility , addressing him by name as well as giving him information about the whereabouts of his mother , Cassandra . Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , a former Syndicate agent now acting alone , is also present at the facility . He declines to help the pair , and leaves Covarrubias for dead . 
 Covarrubias returns in the seventh season episode " Requiem " , restored to health . She makes contact with Krycek at the behest of The Smoking Man , who wishes to resume the work of the now @-@ eradicated Syndicate . Having been given the location of a downed UFO , she and Krycek betray The Smoking Man , instead going to FBI assistant director Walter Skinner and Mulder to inform them about the craft . They later turn on The Smoking Man , pushing him down a flight of stairs and leaving him for dead . 
 In the series finale " The Truth " , Skinner seeks Covarrubias as a witness in Mulder 's trial for murder . After Skinner fails to track her down , the ghost of X hands Mulder a scrap of paper with her new address on it . She is called upon to testify , and speaks about her involvement with the Syndicate to some extent . However , when pressed for further information about the continuation of the conspiracy she clams up , and at Mulder 's request is dismissed from the stand for fear that if she divulges certain knowledge , she would be killed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Marita Covarrubias has been met with generally negative criticism . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , felt that the character was " used so perfunctorily since her introduction " that her appearances added little to the episodes she featured in , describing her as a " bad parody " of the earlier characters Deep Throat and X. Debra <unk> , writing for Cinefantastique , felt that Holden 's acting in " One Son " was " heart breaking [ sic ] " , but found that she had " unfortunately " been used simply to convey a plot point to other characters . Also writing for Cinefantastique , Paula Vitaris noted that Covarrubias " is a problematic character " , adding that " she never breaks out of her function as a plot device " . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , felt that Covarrubias ' introduction in " Herrenvolk " was ill @-@ timed , noting that it " deflates the importance " of X 's death in the episode . 
 Writer Frank Spotnitz has described Covarrubias , along with Alex Krycek , as " young , attractive , vital [ and ] dangerous " compared to the other , older , characters working for the Syndicate . Holden has compared the character to Mata Hari , adding that " you can 't really read what she 's saying or what her intentions are " . During the series ' initial broadcast run , fans referred to Covarrubias as " <unk> " , a reference to her United Nations posting and her dyed hair . 
 = 2005 – 06 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 2005 – 06 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was the fifth least @-@ active on record . The Météo @-@ France office on the island of Réunion tracked 13 tropical disturbances , of which six intensified into a moderate tropical storm . Three of these systems proceeded to attain tropical cyclone status – reaching 10 minute maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center also tracked eight storms in the basin . Activity was below normal due to a powerful Walker circulation , which increased convection over the neighboring Australian basin , but suppressed activity in the western Indian Ocean . As a result , most of the storms developed near or entered from the Australian basin , crossing 90 ° E to enter the South @-@ West Indian Ocean . 
 A series of four short @-@ lived systems occurred from September to November in the northeastern portion of the basin . These were followed by the first named storm – Alvin – which was renamed after it crossed from the Australian region as Tropical Cyclone Bertie in late November . After another short @-@ lived disturbance in late December , there was a tropical disturbance in the Mozambique Channel in January that killed 26 people when it brought heavy rainfall to Mozambique . Later in the month , Tropical Cyclone Boloetse took an erratic track across Madagascar , killing six people when it brushed the island 's southwest coast . In February , there was a small , short @-@ lived unnamed tropical storm that presented difficulties to warning agencies in determining its structure . Intense Tropical Cyclone Carina was the strongest system of the season , attaining peak 10 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) in the open waters of the eastern portion of the basin . <unk> Tropical Storm Diwa brought six months ' worth of rainfall to the drought @-@ ridden island of Réunion , reaching 2 @,@ 943 mm ( 115 @.@ 9 in ) in the mountainous peaks . The rains led to flooding and landslides that killed 10 people directly or indirectly . Two of the deaths occurred when a saturated cliff collapsed onto a coastal road . The final storm , Elia , dissipated on April 17 after previously entering from the Australian basin . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 Météo @-@ France 's meteorological office in Réunion ( MFR ) – the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the South @-@ West Indian Ocean – tracked and named all tropical cyclones from the east coast of Africa to 90 ° E , and south of the equator . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force that issues tropical cyclone warnings for the region , also issued advisories for storms during the season . 
 There were 13 tropical disturbances in the season that were monitored by the MFR . Since the agency began operations in the early 1990s , this season had the second @-@ least number of disturbances that received warning , only behind the 2000 – 01 season . Since the advent of satellite imagery in 1967 , this season was the fifth least @-@ active in terms of storm days and the number of cyclones . There were six systems that attained the intensity of a moderate tropical storm , which has 10 minute sustained winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , below the average of nine . There were 30 days in which a moderate tropical storm was active , less than the average of 48 . Three tropical storms attained tropical cyclone status , or 10 minute winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , and there were 10 days in which these systems were active ; this is half the average of 20 days , continuing the trend since the 2000 – 01 season of fewer stronger systems . The season was very similar to the 1998 – 99 season ; both had late starts for the first named storm , drought conditions over much of the basin , and low activity . The third named storm , Carina , did not occur until late February , which at the time was the latest such date since naming began in 1960 . 
 In general , storms in the season formed in the basin 's periphery or north of the Mascarene Islands . No systems developed in the Mozambique Channel , an unusual occurrence . The overall lack of activity was due to a strong Walker circulation over Indonesia , which increased convection over the Australian region , but suppressed convection over the Indian Ocean . The Intertropical Convergence Zone – typically a major contributor to tropical cyclogenesis – was rarely active . Conditions became generally more favorable in February and March , when four of the six tropical storms occurred . The general lack of thunderstorms over the basin caused drought @-@ like conditions . Pierrefonds Airport on Réunion recorded just 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 in ) of rainfall from November to January , a record minimum . The island also recorded its third @-@ highest average atmospheric pressure from November to April . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Bertie @-@ Alvin = = = 
 In the middle of November , a westerly wind burst produced an area of convection southwest of Sumatra , which spawned a circulation at 2º S on November 16 . Two days later , the BoM classified the system as a tropical low to the north of the Cocos Islands . The low moved southwestward , quickly intensifying , prompting the BoM to name it Bertie . The storm moved southwestward and intensified due to favorable water temperatures and atmospheric conditions , reaching winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) on November 22 while just east of 90º E. The track shifted nearly due south , and the eye moved along the dividing line between the Australian and south @-@ west Indian Ocean basins . Early on November 24 , the cyclone crossed 90º E and was renamed Alvin ; at the time , the system was beginning to weaken due to cooler waters from upwelling and increased wind shear . 
 The MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) within the basin , making it an intense tropical cyclone ; it was the third consecutive year in which there was a November storm of such intensity . The JTWC , which designated Alvin as Tropical Cyclone 03S , estimated 1 minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . A building ridge to the south turned the storm to the west @-@ northwest . By November 25 , the increased wind shear had exposed the circulation from the convection , indicative of rapid weakening , and on that day Alvin was downgraded below tropical cyclone status . On the next day , the storm weakened to tropical depression status after nearly all of the convection was gone , prompting the JTWC to cease issuing advisories . The residual circulation remained well @-@ defined with only temporary increases in convection . The MFR stopped issuing warnings on December 3 , after Alvin had passed south of Diego Garcia , although the circulation continued westward and was still visible north of Madagascar on December 10 . 
 = = = Tropical Disturbance 07 = = = 
 The Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) produced an area of convection northeast of Madagascar on December 29 , which had an association circulation . On January 1 , the system moved across northern Madagascar and subsequently entered the Mozambique Channel . It continued quickly to the southwest , passing north of Europa Island , and was classified as Tropical Disturbance 7 late on January 3 . It continued intensifying and organizing until moving ashore Mozambique near Vilankulo , and the system nearly attained tropical depression stage . The system followed the country 's coastline , bending southward toward the capital Maputo . On January 7 , the disturbance moved offshore , but the system soon moved back overland and dissipated later that day over Swaziland . The system brought heavy rainfall to Inhambane Province , reaching 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) in Inhambane . The rains resulted in flooding but also alleviated drought conditions in Mozambique . The rains also caused the <unk> River to exceed its banks in Inhambane , flooding roads up to a meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) deep and halting traffic . Across Mozambique , 26 people died due to the floods . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Boloetse = = = 
 A pulse in the monsoon spawned an area of convection from the Seychelles westward . A circulation was evident by January 20 , signalling its formation as a tropical disturbance . Poor inflow from the trade winds prevented any initial organization as the system tracked southeastward . A ridge steered the disturbance to the southwest on January 23 , bringing it just southeast of Tromelin Island . With light wind shear , the system developed a small area of convection over a well @-@ defined circulation . Early on January 25 , the MFR upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression , and the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 09S . Later that day , the MFR upgraded it to a moderate tropical storm , giving it the name Boloetse . After a brief period of strengthening , the storm weakened due to increased shear and diurnal cooling . The track shifted to the south @-@ southwest , paralleling Madagascar to the east . Steered between ridges to the east and west , Boloetse stalled and turned to the west @-@ northwest . Late on January 27 , the MFR downgraded the storm to a tropical depression , and late the next day , the circulation struck eastern Madagascar just north of Mananjary . The circulation had been weak during the approach to land , although there was a large increase in convection at the time of landfall . 
 The circulation became difficult to locate over land , and the JTWC briefly halted issuing advisories on January 29 . On the next day , the circulation emerged westward into the Mozambique Channel , where low wind shear and good outflow allowed for restrengthening . By late on January 31 , the system had reorganized into a moderate tropical storm . On the next day , the JTWC reissued advisories on Boloetse as the storm was just 170 km ( 105 mi ) east of the Mozambique coast . Weak steering from the ridge to the southeast caused the storm to meander in the area of favorable conditions . By late on February 2 , Boloetse attain tropical cyclone status , developing an eye in the center of the organizing convection . An approaching trough caused the storm to accelerate southeastward , bringing it northeast of Europa Island . Late on February 3 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , while the MFR estimated 10 minute winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . An eyewall replacement cycle and increased wind shear caused Boloetse to weaken , and on February 4 , the cyclone passed within 20 km ( 12 mi ) of southwestern Madagascar . The storm accelerated and weakened , transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on February 5 . The remnant system was absorbed by the approaching trough two days later . 
 Along much of its path , the storm dropped heavy rainfall . The formative stages of Boloetse spread rainfall to Mauritius , where Vacoas recorded 175 mm ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall over 24 hours . In eastern Madagascar , the storm dropped 133 mm ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) in Mahanoro over 18 hours . The storm deluged coastal Mozambique with over 100 mm ( 4 in ) of rainfall , causing river levels to increase in Inhambane Province . Europa Island recorded 136 mm ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) of rainfall over just six hours . The cyclone still maintained much of its intensity during its final approach to southwestern Madagascar , bringing estimated wind gusts of 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) to the coast . Toliara recorded wind gusts of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) . In addition , heavy rainfall flooded two villages . Boloetse killed six people across southern Madagascar , while leaving 6 @,@ 500 people homeless . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm 09 = = = 
 On February 15 , a broad low pressure area developed east of Madagascar . Over the next few days , the system dropped heavy rainfall to the Mascarene Islands . St. Brandon recorded 229 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) of rainfall over 24 hours , and Plaisance Airport on Mauritius recorded 177 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) of rainfall in 48 hours . The heaviest precipitation occurred on Réunion in a short amount of time , with 1 @-@ in @-@ 50 year rainfall rates . A station in the capital Saint @-@ Denis recorded 376 mm ( 14 @.@ 8 in ) in just three hours , and over 48 hours , Le Brûlé recorded 1 @,@ 274 mm ( 50 @.@ 2 in ) of precipitation . A weak low pressure area began organizing within the trough on February 17 , organizing enough to be classified as Tropical Disturbance 09 the next day just off the eastern coast of Madagascar . A small system , it developed a concentrated area of convection just 200 km ( 125 mi ) in diameter , which followed a powerful hot tower that spurred development . The structure rapidly organized , and by February 19 , there was an eye @-@ like feature in the center of the thunderstorms . At 18 : 00 UTC that day , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 12S , and the MFR upgraded it to a moderate tropical storm . Forecasters initially assessed the structure as akin to a mesoscale convective vortex , which is a small and short @-@ lived system , and there was also uncertainty whether the winds were at the surface . As a result , there was a disagreement between the MFR , which estimated peak 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , and the Meteorological Service of Mauritius , which assessed a much weaker storm . The latter agency is responsible for officially naming systems , and as a result , the severe tropical storm was unnamed . 
 Moving southeastward in the flow of the trough , the small storm began weakening on February 20 due to strong northwesterly wind shear , which caused the convection to dwindle over the circulation . That day , the storm passed just 80 km ( 50 mi ) north of Mauritius , by which time the center was exposed and the intensity had dropped to tropical depression status . It turned back to the northwest , steered by the low @-@ level trade winds and following its previous path . Late on February 20 , the JTWC discontinued advisories , and three days later , the circulation dissipated off the east coast of Madagascar . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Carina = = = 
 An active phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation increased convection across the northeastern periphery of the basin , and the ITCZ produced a distinct low pressure area on February 21 to the east of Diego Garcia . The convective structure organized , aided by good outflow and moderate but lessening wind shear . A ridge to its southeast steered the nascent system slowly to the southwest into an area of increasingly favorable conditions . On February 22 , the system was classified as Tropical Disturbance 10 . The next day , the Mauritius Meteorological Service named the disturbance Carina while it was still an intensifying system . Also on February 23 , the JTWC initiated warnings on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 14S . On the next day , the MFR upgraded Carina to a moderate tropical storm . The storm stalled on February 25 due to weakness in the ridge , and on the same day , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of hurricane status with 1 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . By that time , an eye had developed within the center of increasingly organized convection , and the MFR upgraded Carina to tropical cyclone status on February 26 . 
 Continued favorable conditions , including minimal wind shear and powerful outflow , allowed Carina to intensify further while progressing slowly southwestward . Late on February 27 , the MFR upgraded the storm to an intense tropical cyclone , and the eye reached a diameter of 70 km ( 45 mi ) . Based on the storm 's presentation on satellite imagery , the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) on February 28 . On the same day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Unfavorable conditions – cooler waters and stronger wind shear – caused Carina 's structure to rapidly degrade after the peak intensity . By March 2 , the storm weakened below tropical cyclone status , and soon after the circulation became exposed from the convection , prompting the JTWC to discontinue advisories . Carina stalled that day when it reached a reached a col between two ridges ; as a result , the track shifted to the northeast and later northwest due to the building influence of the ridge to the southeast . Environmental conditions prevented significant convection to regenerate , and the circulation of Carina turned westward across the Indian Ocean without redevelopment . It turned back to the southwest , passing near St. Brandon on March 10 . The MFR stopped tracking Carina on the next day , and the circulation dissipated on March 13 to the southeast of Madagascar . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Diwa = = = 
 In the beginning of March , the monsoon was active to the northeast of Madagascar , the first time during the season that such active convection persisted northeast of the island . The broad system had two foci of low pressure ; one was located northeast of Madagascar near St. Brandon , and the other was to its south closer to Réunion . The structure resembled a monsoon depression , but as the two low pressure areas consolidated , they became more distinct . On March 2 , the system that would become Diwa originated out of the southern low , and both systems continued to interact until Diwa absorbed the other disturbance . The wind field was large and asymmetrical , ranging 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 245 mi ) in diameter , and there was little convection near the centers . Despite the lack of organization , the Meteorological Service of Mauritius named the system Tropical Storm Diwa on March 3 due to the threat to the Mascarene Islands , as well as the presence of gale @-@ force winds . The structure slowly evolved into that of a tropical cyclone as the convection concentrated . On March 4 , Diwa passed northwest of Réunion , still disorganized with much of the convection to the south . That day , the JTWC initiated advisories on the system as Tropical Cyclone 16S . The storm continued slowly to the southwest at first , until it turned to the southeast on March 6 while rounding the ridge . Despite accelerating into an area of cooler waters , Diwa 's structure became much more like a tropical cyclone on March 8 . The MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , making it a severe tropical storm , and the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Diwa quickly transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it interacted with a cold front to the south , completing the transition by March 9 . The circulation gradually lost its definition , dissipating on March 11 . 
 The formative stages of Diwa brought heavy rainfall , reaching 193 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) over 48 hours , to St. Brandon , as well as gale @-@ force winds , with gusts to 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Along Mauritius , winds reached 126 km / h ( 78 mph ) , along with 495 mm ( 19 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall at a station in the southeastern portion of the island . Gale @-@ force winds affected Réunion for nearly three days , due to the storm 's lopsided structure , and gusts peaked at 194 km / h ( 121 mph ) along the coast . Diwa dropped the equivalent of six months ' worth of rainfall , peaking at 2 @,@ 943 mm ( 115 @.@ 9 in ) at Grand @-@ <unk> over four days , which approached the record totals set by Cyclone Hyacinthe in 1980 . The volcanic peak Commerson 's Crater recorded 1 @,@ 474 mm ( 58 @.@ 0 in ) over 24 hours , while coastal areas just 15 km ( 9 mi ) away recorded 188 mm ( 7 @.@ 4 in ) of rainfall over the same time . The storm caused power outages on the island , and three people died due to using a generator inside their home during the storm . One person drowned during the floods , and four people drowned in residual flooding accidents on the island in the weeks after the storm . The floods wrecked several homes during river flooding and caused several landslides , some of which occurred two weeks after the storm due to saturated grounds . On March 24 , a cliff collapsed onto a coastal road , killing two people and severely injuring two others ; the road was reopened three months later . In addition to the damaging effects , the rainfall also alleviated drought conditions . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Elia = = = 
 At the end of March , an active phase of the Madden @-@ Julian oscillation caused an increase in convection over the northeastern portion of the basin . A low pressure area formed on April 1 in the neighboring Australian basin , although the system soon after moved northwestward to cross 90º E. The low meandered for several days , unable to intensify much due to insufficient moisture in the region . On April 6 , the MFR designated the system as Tropical Disturbance 13 , although the agency discontinued advisories on the next day . On April 7 , the low crossed back into the Australian basin , only to turn to the southwest on April 10 , steered by a ridge to the southeast . During this time , the system passed about 185 km ( 115 mi ) northwest of the Cocos Islands . On April 12 , the JTWC designated the system as Tropical Cyclone 12S . On the same day , the system intensified into a tropical depression , after the convective structure improved amid favoring conditions . 
 Early on April 13 , the depression crossed 90º E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . By that time , the system had good outflow to the south , although lack of moisture prevented significant development . Late on April 13 , the MFR upgraded the system to Moderate Tropical Storm Elia , assessing peak 10 minute winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . The JTWC meanwhile estimated 1 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 55 mph ) . Increasing wind shear and cooler waters resulted in diminished intensity of the convection , causing Elia to weaken . The MFR downgraded the storm to tropical depression status on April 15 after the circulation became exposed . On the same day , the JTWC discontinued advisories . The circulation dissipated on April 17 , signaling the end of the season . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 The first four disturbances in the season developed in the northeastern portion of the basin in association with a near @-@ equatorial trough , but failed to develop due to wind shear . 
 At the beginning of September 2005 , the ITCZ was active in the northeastern portion of the basin , accompanied by a small circulation and scattered convection . Located in the presence of strong wind shear , the circulation was exposed from the convection , a sign of unfavorable conditions . However , warm waters fueled an increase in convection , and the MFR classified the system as Tropical Disturbance 1 on September 5 . That day , the JTWC issued a TCFA , but continued shear caused weakening as the disturbance tracked southeastward . By September 8 , the MFR had discontinued advisories on the system , after the circulation had become exposed . After turning to the west @-@ northwest , the circulation began dissipating on September 12 . 
 The second disturbance was first classified by the MFR on October 12 about 1 @,@ 575 km ( 980 mi ) east of Diego Garcia . The system had enough of a circulation and associated convection , and proceeded southwestward for its duration . After the convection consolidated more and developed curved rainbands , the MFR upgraded the system to a 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) tropical depression on October 14 . This period of organization occurred during a brief decrease in wind shear . At 12 : 00 UTC on October 14 , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 01S , estimating peak 1 minute winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Increasingly unfavorable conditions caused the convection to diminish . Late on October 15 , both the JTWC and MFR discontinued advisories due to the increasing disorganization of the disturbance . The circulation remained well @-@ organized but devoid of convection , and the MFR last monitored the center on October 21 . 
 Tropical Depression Three formed on November 6 while east @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia ; it moved generally southward , reaching peak winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) before dissipating on November 8 . Simultaneous to the depression was Tropical Depression Four , which entered the basin on November 7 from the Australian region , and was also classified by the JTWC as Tropical Cyclone 02S with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . The depression was weakening at the time , and both the JTWC and MFR discontinued advisories on November 8 . 
 On December 21 , the BoM began monitoring a tropical low in the western portion of the Australian basin , which had moved eastward from the south @-@ west Indian Ocean basin . The system moved southwestward and later to the southwest , once again crossing 90º E and causing the MFR to designate it Tropical Depression 6 . At the time , the circulation was partially exposed from the convection , although it organized over the next day . This spurred the JTWC to designate it as Tropical Cyclone 04S on December 24 with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . As with other systems in the season , strong shear caused the system to weaken ; the JTWC discontinued advisories on December 25 , and the MFR followed suit the next day . However , the system continued to the southwest , reorganizing enough on December 27 for the MFR to reissue advisories . Shear again weakened the convection , and the MFR discontinued advisories again on December 29 while the system was a short distance west @-@ northwest of Rodrigues . 
 Tropical Disturbance 12 briefly was classified by the MFR on March 4 , located 620 km ( 385 mi ) north of the developing Tropical Storm Diwa . The disturbance moved quickly to the southeast around Diwa 's circulation , and was ultimately absorbed by the larger storm . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 A tropical disturbance is named when it reaches moderate tropical storm strength . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status west of 55 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Madagascar assigns the appropriate name to the storm . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status between 55 ° E and 90 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Mauritius assigns the appropriate name to the storm . A new annual list is used every year so no names are retired . 
 = Seili ( album ) = 
 Seili is the second studio album by Finnish pop singer Jenni Vartiainen . It was released by Warner Music Finland digitally on 31 March 2010 , with the official physical release following on 14 April . From 31 March to the official physical release date , the album was sold at € 19 in conjunction with <unk> @-@ Sanomat . The album was re @-@ released on 14 January 2011 , in a limited vinyl edition . The Finnish @-@ language album , incorporating electro and synthpop elements along with melancholic piano ballads , is named after the island Seili ( <unk> in Swedish ) , located off the south @-@ west coast of Finland . The album was produced and co @-@ written by Jukka Immonen with Vartiainen writing also two of the songs . The main lyricists were Teemu Brunila and Mariska who contributed to the thematical dualism of the album — Brunila wrote the happier songs about publicity and finding love while Mariska wrote the lyrics for the songs that deal with darker and more serious themes , such as death . Another lyricist was Paula Vesala ( from the pop rock duo <unk> ) . Vartiainen participated more in the production than with her debut album Ihmisten edessä , by playing for example piano and kantele . 
 Critically acclaimed for its vocals and successful combination of ballads and pop , though criticized for lack of peculiarity and a somewhat inconsistent song selection , Seili spent 62 non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Finnish Albums Chart since its release — with 15 weeks atop the chart — and sold over 95 @,@ 000 copies in 2010 , becoming the best @-@ selling album of 2010 in Finland . Altogether , Seili has sold over 150 @,@ 000 copies since its release and currently ranks 14th in the list of the best @-@ selling albums of all time in Finland . The album received three Emma Awards in February 2011 : for Album of the Year , Pop / Rock Album of the Year and Best @-@ Selling Album of the Year . The album included also two Emma @-@ winning songs , the gold @-@ selling singles " En haluu kuolla tänä yönä " and " Missä muruseni on " , winning in the categories Song of the Year and Music Video of the Year , respectively . " Nettiin " was released as the third single and the album spawned two promotional singles , " Duran Duran " , which sold also gold , and " Eikö kukaan voi meitä pelastaa ? " . " Missä muruseni on " was the major chart hit , dominating the top @-@ three spots of the Finnish Singles Chart from August 2010 to January 2011 and becoming the third @-@ best @-@ selling single of 2011 in Finland . To promote the album , Vartiainen embarked on a concert tour titled Seili , spanning from April 2010 to August 2011 and consisting of 170 shows . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Thematically more polarized than its predecessor Ihmisten edessä , Seili has been described as being based on contrasts as it deals with both darker and happier themes and combines elements of classical music with pop and schlager melodies with rock . Vartiainen has said the overall inspiration for the album came from the imagery of the movie Blade Runner and songs from the 1980s she used in her programs during her figure skating career . The name of the album symbolizes " a trip to an unknown island , an escape from normal life to the world of music " and the content of the album places " during the dramatical moments between 3 am and 5 am " when a day ends a new one begins and people are , as Vartiainen has put it , " sensitive to new ideas " , due to either fatigue or intoxication . Vartiainen attributes the dualistic nature of the album to her professional relation with the lyricists Mariska and Teemu Brunila , who Vartiainen is also friends with , saying " Mariska knows well Vartiainen 's darker , more philosophical side " . In an interview with <unk> in March 2010 , Vartiainen said that while Mariska represents the dark and serious themes such as death , Brunila with his lyrical products " goes towards the light " and that the point in the album is " to reflect on life and death " . Along with the two thematical polarities , the album deals also with tricky relationships and hunger for fame , as showcased by the Western @-@ sounding " Nettiin " , which starts with a banjo and a bass and is literally about naked pictures , taken and publicized by an ex @-@ boyfriend , and <unk> about the line between privacy and publicity . 
 The album introduces also more instruments than Ihmisten edessä ; Vartiainen starts the album by playing piano in the dark <unk> " Koti " ( Home ) . The second song " Seili " is also dark @-@ themed — the song is about the namesake island located in the archipelago off the coast of Turku where <unk> and mentally ill patients were sent from 17th century onwards , along with boards they could build their own coffins with . The third song and the lead single " En haluu kuolla tänä yönä " — in English , I Don 't Wanna Die Tonight — goes on with the theme , though with an electronic dance beat that " emphasizes the will to live " . The fifth song and the third single " Missä muruseni on " ( Where My Sweetheart Is ) was written by Mariska who got the inspiration for the song while reading Indian erotic literature on her balcony on a hot summer 's day . The song is a ballad where the singer talks about being far away from her loved one and asks the wind to blow to the place " where [ one 's ] sweetheart is " — by November 2010 , the lyrics had even found their way to Finnish obituaries and gravestones . The sixth , dance @-@ influenced song and first promotional single " Duran Duran " is about discovering one 's soulmate as the lyrics wonder whether " this is how it feels like when you find the right one " along with saying " Jenni can 't escape this new feeling " . Vartiainen entered new musical territories also by playing piano and kantele in the song " <unk> " ( Ungrateful ) , which is written by Vartiainen and Paula Vesala and deals with agony Vartiainen suffered from while growing up during high school . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Seili has received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Most of the reviewers have been appreciative of the vocals and the successful combination of synthpop and darker ballads , but more or less critical with the notable contrast between the thumping pop song " Nettiin " and the rest of the album and Vartiainen 's lack of peculiarity . Teemu <unk> of the magazine Rumba gave Seili three out of five stars , saying that " Seili follows pretty much the schlager @-@ ish pattern of a poet girl 's inflated electro @-@ pop " . He complimented " En haluu kuolla tänä yönä " as " a brilliant pop song , suitable to be sung by a [ then ] 27 @-@ year @-@ old Jenni Vartiainen who is enjoying her life " . Due to the accompaniment of the more poetical , dramatical and mature songs written by Mariska , <unk> considered " Nettiin " " a really epic fail " that " would be a lot of fun if performed by Tea <unk> on Kids Top 20 " . He thought " Duran Duran " is also brilliant , but considered Vartiainen to be more talented with faster songs , because she , when singing melancholic songs , " lags kilometers behind [ singer ] <unk> " . The pop rock magazine Stara said the album is not as good at first hearing as Vartiainen 's debut Ihmisten edessä , but it gave the album four out five stars . The magazine complimented the aggregate of " En haluu kuolla tänä yönä " and the beauty and elegance of " Duran Duran " . Stara was less harsh on reviewing the inclusion of " Nettiin " , saying the Western @-@ themed sounds seem a bit odd , but that the song is good in its entirety . 
 Helsingin Sanomat gave the song three out of five stars , saying the album is suitable but that " Vartiainen does not stand out at all with the song selections and singing voice , as <unk> does " . MTV3 gave the song four and a half stars out of five , criticizing the inclusion of " Nettiin " for the sake of consistency and saying none of the songs are particularly catchy . However , MTV3 complimented " <unk> " , " Duran Duran " and " Eikö kukaan voi meitä pelastaa ? " for their massive sounds and considered Seili a brilliant summer album . Writing for the rock magazine Soundi , Antti <unk> gave Seili three out of five stars , saying songwriters Teemu Brunila and Mariska and producer Jukka Immonen " gain credibility for putting the dark piano ballads and the thumping pop songs into balance , creating a coherent and compact entirety " . The magazine said Vartiainen 's singing voice " saves the album " , though it regarded many of the songs as " hypocritical " or even " tasteless " ( such as " Nettiin " ) . Keskisuomalainen deemed the album 's rating as four stars out of five . The newspaper considered Seili " a splendid entirety that , however , lacks that one , ingenious song that stands out from the others " , saying also that the record — the name of which comes from the island where <unk> patients and the mentally ill were sent from the 17th century onwards — is " elaborate pop that deals with the most fundamental questions " . In conclusion , Keskisuomalainen said that the album is " a successful combination of introverted ethereality , light @-@ hearted pop and dramatical thunder " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon its digital release in April 2010 , Seili debuted at number one on the Finnish Albums Chart . The album went gradually down to number seven in early August , after which it vacillated between seven and four . Seili rose back to number one in October , holding the top spot for 12 consecutive weeks and charted in the top three until early March 2011 . Altogether , the album spent 15 weeks atop the chart , 58 weeks in the top ten and it charted for a total of 62 non @-@ consecutive weeks , over a year , becoming the 11th @-@ longest @-@ charting of all time . Seili took a second jump in July 2011 , as it leaped from number 17 to number two , after which it dropped out of the chart . With sales surpassing 150 @,@ 000 copies ( from which 95 @,@ 000 in 2010 , 42 @,@ 000 in 2011 and 14 @,@ 000 in 2012 ) , Seili was the best @-@ selling album in Finland in 2010 and the sixth @-@ best @-@ selling in 2011 , receiving the septuple @-@ platinum certification . The album was re @-@ released by Finnish music retailers in a limited vinyl edition on 14 January 2011 , as part of their joint <unk> campaign . The edition was sold out in five days . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote her album , Vartiainen embarked on her concert tour titled Seili on April 2010 . The tour , which consisted of 170 shows and lasted all the way to August 2011 , included performances for example at the <unk> festival in the summer of 2010 and 2011 . Amid the tour in the spring of 2011 , she denied some tabloid rumors that she would have canceled interviews due to stress and exhaustion . In July 2011 , Vartiainen and her band met with some misfortune as the tour bus broke down while on its way from Oulu to Vaasa . The last concert of the tour took place on the Main Stage at the Finnish National Theatre in Helsinki on 28 August 2011 , with the specialty that the concert was broadcast live at <unk> film theaters in 11 other localities around Finland , for the first time in the history of the theater . The tickets to the concert were sold out within a couple of hours . At the National Theatre , Vartiainen sang the album 's song " <unk> " as a duet with Vesa @-@ Matti Loiri , which she said was her long @-@ time " dream come true " . Due to technical difficulties , the concert could not be broadcast in Lahti and Kuopio . In August 2011 , Vartiainen released a DVD of the Seili tour , as well as a photo @-@ book , consisting of photographs from the tour , taken by Kalle <unk> . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The lead single from Seili , " En haluu kuolla tänä yönä " , was released on 1 February 2010 . Peaking at number one the second week on the Finnish Singles Chart and charting for 21 weeks , the single sold gold with over 11 @,@ 000 copies , won the Emma Award for Song of the Year and was the most @-@ played song on commercial Finnish radio stations in 2010 with over 5 @,@ 200 plays . Vartiainen was less successful with the second single " Nettiin " , following suit on 17 July and peaking at number 12 in its 11 chart weeks . The third single " Missä muruseni on " , released on 23 August , was the major chart hit from the album , spending 32 weeks on the chart until early 2011 , including 11 weeks on the top . The single sold gold with over 18 @,@ 000 copies and was the third @-@ best @-@ selling single of 2011 in Finland and its music video , depicting a woman looking to the sea and singing about her yearning for her loved one , won the 2011 Emma Award for the Music Video of the Year . In 2010 , the song was also the second @-@ most @-@ played song on the radio stations of the Finnish Broadcasting Company , the fifth @-@ most @-@ played on commercial radio stations and it was chosen the Finnish schlager of 2010 in a contest held by the radio station <unk> . On 13 December the first promotional single " Duran Duran " was released . Similar to " Nettiin " in its chart success , the song charted for 11 weeks , peaking at number 10 in February 2011 , but sold gold with 5 @,@ 400 copies . The song " Eikö kukaan voi meitä pelastaa ? " was released as the second promotional single in the spring of 2011 and its music video was released on 14 June . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 Notes 
 A ^ The song is instrumental , played with piano . 
 B ^ <unk> , a music database maintained by the Finnish Broadcasting Company , provides ambiguous credits ; the lyrics are either by Immonen , Mariska , Vartiainen and Vesala or solely by Mariska . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The credits for Seili are adapted from Allrovi . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = HMS Woolwich ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Woolwich was a depot ship and destroyer tender built for the Royal Navy during the 1930s . The ship was initially deployed to support destroyers of the Mediterranean Fleet . During World War II , she was assigned to the Home , Mediterranean and Eastern Fleets . She briefly returned home in 1946 , but rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet the following year . Woolwich permanently returned to the United Kingdom in 1948 where she became a maintenance and accommodation ship . The ship was sold for scrap in 1962 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Woolwich had an overall length of 610 feet 3 inches ( 186 @.@ 0 m ) , a beam of 64 feet ( 19 @.@ 5 m ) , and a draught of 23 feet 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . She normally displaced 8 @,@ 750 long tons ( 8 @,@ 890 t ) and 15 @,@ 575 long tons ( 15 @,@ 825 t ) at ( full load ) . Each of the ship 's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one propeller shaft . Steam was supplied by four Admiralty three @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines were rated at 6 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 4 @,@ 800 kW ) and gave Woolwich a speed of 15 @.@ 25 knots ( 28 @.@ 24 km / h ; 17 @.@ 55 mph ) . The ship carried 1 @,@ 112 long tons ( 1 @,@ 130 t ) of fuel oil , which gave her a range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew numbered 666 officers and enlisted men . 
 She was initially armed with four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) four @-@ inch Mk V gun on single high @-@ angle mounts amidships . The four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) gun mount had a maximum elevation of + 80 degrees , and the gun could fire a 31 lb ( 14 kg ) projectile with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 387 ft / s ( 728 m / s ) to a maximum height of 31 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 448 @.@ 8 m ) or a range of 16 @,@ 430 yards ( 15 @,@ 020 m ) . They had a rate of fire of about 15 rounds per minute . The guns were controlled by a High Angle Control System ( HACS ) fire @-@ control director mounted above the bridge . To resupply her destroyers , the ship carried seventy @-@ two 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes and 200 depth charges . 
 During World War II , Woolwich 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced by two QF two @-@ pounder light anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts on the forecastle . The gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 2 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 91 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 730 m / s ) to a distance of 6 @,@ 800 yards ( 6 @,@ 200 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . Four Oerlikon 20 mm guns in single mounts were also fitted as well as two quadruple Vickers .50 machine gun mounts . 
 Several radars were added during the war . A Type 285 gunnery radar was mounted on top of the HACS director and a Type 271 / 73 surface search radar was installed abaft the two @-@ pounder guns on the forecastle . 
 Woolwich 's main deck consisted of one @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) armour plate over the machinery spaces and her platform deck was two inches ( 51 mm ) thick over the magazines . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 The ship was ordered on 4 April 1933 as part of the 1932 Naval Construction Programme . She was laid down by Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company in Govan on the River Clyde on 24 May 1933 . Woolwich was launched on 20 September 1934 and completed on 28 June 1935 . She was deployed to the Mediterranean after completion and was in Alexandria at the beginning of World War II in September 1939 . The ship returned home and was based at Scapa Flow supporting destroyers of the Home Fleet by mid @-@ 1940 . Woolwich sailed again for the Mediterranean in September ; while circumnavigating Africa , she had to put into Mombasa , Kenya for repairs to her boilers before she arrived in Alexandria in November . 
 In mid @-@ June 1942 , Vice @-@ Admiral Henry Harwood , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean Fleet , ordered all non @-@ essential ships to leave Alexandria as he was preparing to demolish the port facilities there to prevent their capture by the advancing Panzer Army Africa . Woolwich and the repair ship HMS Resource , escorted by six destroyers , were transferred south of the Suez Canal until the victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein in October allowed them to return to Alexandria . She remained there until late 1943 when she was assigned to the Eastern Fleet and based at Trincomalee for the rest of the war . 
 Woolwich sailed back to England in 1946 , but rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet the following year where she served as flagship for the Flag Officer , Mediterranean Fleet Destroyers . The ship sailed from Valletta , Malta on 7 February 1948 for Harwich where she served as a maintenance and accommodation ship for reserve ships based there . Woolwich was refitted in Rosyth in 1952 and then transferred to Gare Loch to perform similar duties there . She was refitted again in Rosyth five years later and served as an accommodation ship in Devonport from 1958 – 1962 . Woolwich was sold to Arnott Young in 1962 for scrap and arrived at Dalmuir , Scotland , on 18 October to be broken up . 
 = Soviet cruiser Krasnyi Krym = 
 Krasnyi Krym ( Russian : Красный <unk> - Red Crimea ) was a light cruiser of the Soviet Navy . She was laid down in 1913 as Svetlana for the Imperial Russian Navy , the lead ship of the Svetlana class . She was built by the Russo @-@ Baltic Yard in Tallinn , Estonia and launched in 1915 . Her hull was evacuated to Petrograd when the Germans approached the port in late 1917 and laid up incomplete during the Russian Revolution . The ship was completed by the Soviets in 1926 . During World War II she supported Soviet troops during the Siege of Odessa , Siege of Sevastopol , and the Kerch @-@ Feodosiya Operation in the winter of 1941 — 42 . Krasnyi Krym was awarded the Guards title on 18 June 1942 . The ship was reclassified as a training ship in November 1954 before being scrapped in July 1959 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 When Svetlana was towed from Tallinn to St. Petersburg in November 1917 she was about 90 % complete and the Soviets expected to commission her in 1919 , but she was laid up incomplete due to the disruptions of the Russian Civil War . It wasn 't until November 1924 that work recommenced on her and she was renamed Profintern ( Russian : <unk> ) on 5 February 1925 . She was completed in October 1926 , but she had to return to the dockyard to remedy numerous problems and wasn 't commissioned until 1 July 1928 . 
 Profintern was completed to nearly her original design , but was modified to handle aircraft by adding cranes on either side of the middle funnel and a parking area was built for them between the central and rear funnels , although no catapult was ever fitted . Her original internal torpedo tubes were replaced by two triple 450 @-@ millimetre ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes mounted on the deck abaft the rear funnel . And her original four 38 @-@ caliber 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by nine 30 @-@ caliber 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) Lender AA guns . 
 Initially based in the Baltic she was transferred to the Black Sea Fleet in 1929 , arriving on 18 January 1930 , together with the battleship Parizhskaya Kommuna . She was extensively overhauled in the late 1930s where her aircraft equipment was removed and she was fitted with new fire control equipment . The ship was given three Italian Minizini twin @-@ gun 50 @-@ caliber 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) anti @-@ aircraft mounts , one was placed on the forecastle , in front of the forward 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) / 55 B7 Pattern 1913 gun and the other two on each side of the quarterdeck . Four single mounts for the semi @-@ automatic 45 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K gun were fitted as well as seven 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) AA machine guns . At some point she exchanged her 21 @-@ K AA guns for ten single mounts for the naval version of the 37 mm automatic air defense gun <unk> ( 61 @-@ K ) . Profintern was renamed Krasnyi Krym on 31 October 1939 
 = = World War II = = 
 Krasnyi Krym provided gunfire support to Soviet forces defending Odessa and escorted convoys bringing the 157th Rifle Division into Odessa during the month of September 1941 . She also transported two battalions of the 3rd Marine Regiment from Sevastopol in a successful amphibious assault behind Romanian lines to destroy Romanian coastal batteries near Fontanka and Dofinovka . She escorted convoys from 3 — 6 October that evacuated the 157th Rifle Division from Odessa to Sevastopol . During the Siege of Sevastopol , the ship provided gunfire support and evacuated cut @-@ off troops from elsewhere in the Crimea into Sevastopol and brought in reinforcements from Caucasian ports . She helped to transport the 388th Rifle Division from Novorossisk and Tuapse to Sevastopol between 7 and 13 December and the 354th Rifle Division between 21 and 22 December , bombarding German position in the interim . 
 During the Kerch @-@ Feodosiya Operation , Krasnyi Krym sailed into the harbor of Feodosiya on 29 December 1941 and disembarked reinforcements and provided gunfire support for Soviet troops already ashore . She was hit eleven times by Axis artillery and mortar fire in retaliation . Between 15 and 21 January 1942 she landed the bulk of the 266th Mountain Regiment at <unk> and reinforced them with 1576 troops of the <unk> Rifle Regiment between 23 and 26 January . During the following months Krasnyi Krym brought in reinforcements for the garrison of Sevastopol and evacuated the wounded , sometimes bombarding German positions en route , her last such mission being on 3 June 1942 , after the Germans had already launched the attack that would force the city to surrender in July . She was awarded the Guards title on 18 June in recognition of her performance . 
 Krasnyi Krym and the destroyer <unk> evacuated 2000 men from Novorossisk to Batumi between 9 — 12 August , a regiment of the 32nd Guards Rifle Division on 12 — 13 August and a further 1850 men and 60 tons of supplies on 16 — 17 August 1942 . Between 8 — 11 September Krasnyi Krym and several destroyers ferried the 137th and 145th Rifle Regiments along with the 3rd Naval Rifle Brigade from Poti to Tuapse and Gelendzhik . Between 20 and 23 October Krasnyi Krym , her half @-@ sister Krasny Kavkaz , and three destroyers ferried 12 @,@ 600 men of the 8th , 9th and 10th Guards Infantry Brigades from Poti to Tuapse to reinforce the defenses there . Krasnyi Krym , two destroyers and a number of minesweepers transported the 9th Mountain Rifle Division from Batumi to Tuapse from 1 — 10 December 1942 . On the night of 4 February 1943 the Soviets made a series of amphibious landings to the west of Novorossisk , behind German lines . Krasnyi Krym , Krasny Kavkaz , and three destroyers provided fire support for the main landing , but the Soviet troops there were wiped out by 6 February , although one secondary landing was successful . The loss of three destroyers attempting to interdict the German evacuation of the Taman Bridgehead on 6 October 1943 caused Stalin to forbid the deployment of large naval units without his express permission and this meant the end of Krasnyi Krym 's active participation in the war . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 The ship was reclassified as a training ship in 1954 . On 7 May 1957 she was redesignated as Experimental Ship OS @-@ 20 and then reclassified on 18 March 1959 as Floating Barracks PKZ @-@ 144 before being scrapped in July 1959 . 
 = Requiem for a Species = 
 Requiem for a Species : Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change is a 2010 non @-@ fiction book by Australian academic Clive Hamilton which explores climate change denial and its implications . It argues that climate change will bring about large @-@ scale , harmful consequences for habitability for life on Earth including humans , which it is too late to prevent . Hamilton explores why politicians , corporations and the public deny or refuse to act on this reality . He invokes a variety of explanations , including wishful thinking , ideology , consumer culture and active lobbying by the fossil fuel industry . The book builds on the author 's fifteen @-@ year prior history of writing about these subjects , with previous books including Growth Fetish and Scorcher : The Dirty Politics of Climate Change . 
 Requiem for a Species has been reviewed in Resurgence magazine , Socialist Review , Sydney Morning Herald , The Age , The Common Review , and Times Higher Education , which named it " Book of the Week " . Extracts of the book have appeared in The Guardian and Geographical magazine . The book won a 2010 Queensland Premier 's Literary Award . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Hamilton points out that there have been many reports and books over the years explaining the climate change problem and just how ominous the future looks for humanity . He says Requiem for a Species is primarily about why those warnings have been ignored . 
 Hamilton considers that sometimes an inconvenient truth may be too difficult to bear : 
 Sometimes facing up to the truth is just too hard . When the facts are distressing it is easier to reframe or ignore them . Around the world only a few have truly faced up to the facts about global warming ... It 's the same with our own deaths ; we all " accept " that we will die , but it is only when our death is imminent that we confront the true meaning of our mortality . 
 The most immediate reason for the failure to act on global warming is seen to be the " sustained and often ruthless exercise of political power by the corporations who stand to lose from a shift to low- and zero @-@ carbon energy systems " . Hamilton cites numerous journalists and authors who have documented the influence of large companies such as ExxonMobil , Rio Tinto Group and General Motors . Hamilton makes his argument in three stages : 
 Firstly , he reviews the evidence about how serious the situation is already and how much worse it will get . Secondly , he examines the roots of denial , both in terms of resistance to the evidence and in relation to the actors and agencies motivated to deny climate change . Lastly , he looks at some future scenarios and explains what people should do . 
 Hamilton suggests that the foundations of climate change denial lie in the reaction of American conservatism to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . He argues that as the " red menace " receded , conservatives who had put energy into opposing communism sought other outlets . Hamilton contends that the conservative backlash against climate science was led by three prominent physicists -- Frederick Seitz , Robert Jastrow , and William Nierenberg . In 1984 Seitz , Jastrow and Nierenberg founded the George C. Marshall Institute , and in the 1990s the Marshall Institute 's main activity was attacking climate science . 
 When describing climate science , Hamilton says that official numbers published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) are highly cautious , and so the real effects of climate change will likely be even more severe . His conclusion is that it will not be possible to stabilise emissions : 
 ... even with the most optimistic set of assumptions -- the ending of deforestation , a halving of emissions associated with food production , global emissions peaking in 2020 and then falling by 3 per cent a year for a few decades -- we have no chance of preventing emissions rising well above a number of critical tipping points that will spark uncontrollable climate change . The Earth 's climate would enter a chaotic era lasting thousands of years before natural processes eventually establish some sort of equilibrium . Whether human beings would still be a force on the planet , or even survive , is a moot point . One thing seems certain : there will be far fewer of us . 
 In terms of Australia , Hamilton says that " Australians in 2050 will be living in a nation transformed by a changing climate , with widespread doubt over whether we will make it to the end of the century in a land that is recognisably Australian " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Michael Lynn in The Common Review says that Requiem for a Species explores the gulf between acknowledgment and acceptance of climate change . Lynn explains that the gulf has two main origins and no easy solution : 
 Hamilton ... argues that the gulf has two primary origins : the enormity of its consequences and the way it challenges how we as individuals and as societies have constructed our identities over the past three centuries . In doing so , he suggests that meeting the challenge of climate change requires far more than implementing the right policies and making minor adjustments in our lifestyles . Instead , it implies remaking our psyches and societies on a scale unseen since the dawn of the modern age . 
 The Times Higher Education listed Requiem for a Species as " Book of the week " for 3 June 2010 . Steven Yearley 's review calls it a " provocative and sobering book " . He says the heart of the book are the many explanations that Hamilton puts forward for the everyday , regular denial of the danger of changing climate . Yearley says this is also the most frustrating aspect of Requiem for a Species , because Hamilton proposes so many different explanations but does not make their relative significance clear . 
 David Shearman , in a review for Doctors for the Environment Australia , says that " Clive Hamilton is one of Australia 's most notable public intellectuals , his work is careful and balanced , he presents the facts as they are and has written a book which is uncomfortable for all " . According to Shearman , Hamilton 's treatment of the topic of denial is one of the best available . 
 Mike Hulme , in Resurgence magazine , agrees with the " consumption fetish " and " spiritual malaise " of humanity that Hamilton describes . But , according to Hulme , Hamilton has underestimated the " innovative and creative potential of collective humanity " and he has put too much faith in the infallibility of science 's predictions about future climate risks . Hulme believes that Hamilton " is placing too much weight on the foresight of science to provide his desired revolution , rather than calling for it more honestly and directly through political , psychological or spiritual engagement " . 
 Kelsey Munro reviewed the book in the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age , suggesting that it is pessimistic and does not present any false hope . But he says pessimism is not the same thing as fatalism , and Hamilton believes there is still an urgent need for government intervention to avoid worst @-@ case scenarios by reducing emissions . Munro also points out that some eminent climate scientists , like Princeton University 's Michael Oppenheimer , remain optimistic that humanity will act before it is too late . 
 Camilla Royle reviewed Requiem for a Species in Socialist Review and recommends it for those who want to get a clearer idea of climate change science . She says that Hamilton is understandably angry at the corporate lobbyists who have encouraged climate change denial . Royle suggests that Hamilton accepts that " we should at least try to do something about climate change " , but he " doesn 't give much idea of what that something is " . 
 There was a book launch for Requiem for a Species on 24 March 2010 at The University of Queensland and another on 29 March 2010 at the Australian National University ( ANU ) . An extract of the book appeared in The Guardian on 16 April 2010 . Geographical magazine published another extract in August 2010 . The book won the 2010 " Queensland Premier 's Literary Award for a work Advancing Public Debate " . 
 = = Author = = 
 At the time of publication , Clive Hamilton was Professor of Public Ethics at the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics ( CAPPE ) at Australia . Before taking up his position at CAPPE , he was executive director and founder of The Australia Institute , a forward @-@ looking think tank . 
 = = Publishing information = = 
 Hamilton , Clive ( 2010 ) . Requiem for a Species : Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change . Earthscan . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84971 @-@ 081 @-@ 7 . 
 The book is available as an eBook document as well as a paper publication . 
 = Mobius Final Fantasy = 
 Mobius Final Fantasy ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> Fainaru Fantajī ) is an episodic role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for iOS and Android devices . It was released in Japan in June 2015 , and will release internationally in August 2016 . The player controls Wol , a man who wakes with amnesia in the world of Palamecia , and must help conquer the dark forces attacking its people . The game features gameplay elements from previous Final Fantasy titles , including leveling , exploration via standard navigation and fast @-@ travel systems , and turn @-@ based combat tied to a job system . Common themes were also drawn from the original Final Fantasy title , such as " warriors of light " and their fight against chaos and darkness . 
 The game , which began development in 2013 , was developed around the concept of a mobile game on a similar level to a home console game : this goal promoted skepticism from both in @-@ house staff and external sources . While some assets were outsourced , most of the development was done by Square Enix . Multiple staff from previous Final Fantasy titles were involved in development , including producer Yoshinori Kitase , writer Kazushige Nojima , artists Toshitaka Matsuda and Toshiyuki Itahana , and composer Mitsuto Suzuki . 
 The game registered over two million players within the first few weeks of release . Square Enix cited Mobius Final Fantasy as one of the most successful titles they released on mobile in 2015 . The graphics and gameplay were praised by reviewers , although some called the overall combat experience " simple " . The game received several awards , including being named one of Japan 's " iTunes Best of 2015 " by Apple Inc .. An English localization is currently in development . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mobius Final Fantasy is a role @-@ playing game designed for mobile phones . The player controls the game 's protagonist Wol while navigating <unk> . Players can customize settings , graphical quality , and adjust controls for their dominant hand . During local navigation on the field map , the player taps a location on a map and the character travels to that location . In some self @-@ contained areas , the player can directly control the character . Along with standard navigation , the player can navigate the game world using a fast @-@ travel system , progressively unlocked as the player progresses through the story . Many of the features in the game , such as the leveling system and exploration , are similar to those from previous home console Final Fantasy games . 
 Mobius features a tactics @-@ focused , turn @-@ based battle system , with players able to activate attacks by tapping enemies on screen . Players can use standard melee attacks with close @-@ range weapons such as swords , and magical attacks . During combat the player accumulates Elements , which are necessary to activate Abilities , the game 's form of summoned monsters . When ready for activation , a tile appears on @-@ screen that the player touches to activate the Ability . Abilities have different attributes : the Shiva Ability unleashes an ice attack , while the Fat Chocobo Ability raises defense for eight turns while automatically healing the player . Elements can also be used by the player to strengthen their resistance to elemental attacks . If an enemy 's weakness is struck enough times , their " break gauge " meter will be drained and they will be left weakened , allowing the player to attack freely . A job system and character abilities related to them form a key part of the system . 
 The player starts off with the Onion Swordsman job . Each job can be leveled up using special " seed " items collected in battle to fill in a skill panel . Once the panel is complete , the job will evolve , such as the Onion Warrior evolving into the pure Warrior class . As jobs change or evolve , the character 's appearance will be altered to a degree . In the Chapter Two content update , Samurai , Assassin , and Red Mage jobs were added . In February 2016 , multiplayer functionality was added , enabling up to four players to take on bosses . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Wol , the main protagonist , awakes stricken with amnesia in the foreign world of Palamecia . He is one of multiple " <unk> " , people brought to Palamecia from other worlds and suffering from amnesia . Palamecia is under attack from the armies of " Chaos " , and Wol must fulfill a prophecy in Palamecia that one of the <unk> is a " Warrior of Light " who will free the world from its darkness . Wol is aided on his journey by Princess Sarah Lotte Cornelia , the princess of a kingdom of Palamecia , and Mog , a moogle who volunteers to help in Wol 's quest . 
 Chapter 2 , entitled " Prediction and Hope " , includes Wol and Mog adventuring through the Ishtar desert and Rune Temple . A side quest was also included , entitled " El Dorado of the Oblivion " , which is set in the ruins of " Gold Volost of El Dorado " . In chapter 3 , Wol is traveling to see Princess Sarah , who is waiting at her castle when she is attacked and held captive by the armies of chaos . Wol is then tasked with saving the princess and fighting against the overwhelming power of the Chaos giants . 
 In the chapter 4 prologue , Wol and Sarah begin an adventure to find the " Rune of Earth " to keep it out of the hands of chaos , and later in chapter 4 the story continues through new lands . In chapter 5 , Wol journeys to find the source of the light that may give him the strength to conquer chaos . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept behind Mobius was for a mobile experience comparable with console games . Though it was possible to make a smartphone game equivalent to console games , it had yet to be done , so game producer Yoshinori Kitase sought to fill this perceived gap in the market . It was called the first Final Fantasy mobile game of this scale . While creation of some artwork and graphics was outsourced , most of the concept work and development was done in @-@ house by Square Enix . Instead of a new development team dedicated to mobiles , the production team was largely made up of veterans from the console Final Fantasy titles . The staff included scenario writer Kazushige Nojima and producer Yoshinori Kitase . The story is connected to the original Final Fantasy only thematically through its focus on " warriors of light " fighting against chaos and darkness : it is not a remake or directly related to the plot of the original . It is also considered by the team behind the game as a full entry in the series rather than a spin @-@ off . Speaking after the game 's initial release , Nojima stated that he felt his scenario was too bulky for a mobile experience . 
 Development began in 2013 , and prompted skepticism from both Square Enix staff and its prospective platform managers , who were more used to the dominant 2D @-@ based mobile games . One of the problems cited by director Naoki Hamaguchi was creating realistic facial expressions equivalent to those used in the 2013 film Frozen . For development , the team used the Unity game engine . After Unity Technologies updated the engine in 2015 to the Unity 5 version , the game was also updated to run on the improved software . The team needed to take differences between different phone models into account to allow high performance . To help with development and overcome potential difficulties handling the Unity engine , a special development environment and structure was created . The team used physically based rendering to create realistic lighting and environmental effects . The budget was far lower than graphically equivalent console titles , so the team were reluctant to buy in helping tools and had restrictions on staff numbers : one person was working on all the game 's backgrounds , while three were in charge of character designs . Using experience from the development of Final Fantasy XIII , the team were able to create high @-@ end graphics within mobile restrictions . After its reveal , some changes were made to the character 's initial costume : due to negative player feedback about the amount of skin shown , the Onion Swordsman outfit was adjusted to be more covering . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Mobius Final Fantasy was composed by Mitsuto Suzuki , whose previous work includes The 3rd Birthday , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII . When he was first asked to compose for the title , his impression was of a whole new setting that retained nostalgic elements from earlier games in the series , which he sought to incorporate into the score : a piece that encompassed this was his <unk> of " Prelude " . As part of writing for the game , he needed to create new tracks for game updates , which put added pressure on him to create music that would appeal to players . A concept present from an early stage was changing the battle music depending on what job was equipped by the player : Suzuki created an initial battle theme that acted as a base for other themes , then added elements like electronic elements and vocal work to give derivative tracks variety . The majority of the game 's choral work , such as with the game 's main theme , was done using synthesizers . Suzuki also needed to do remixes of earlier Final Fantasy music , such as the " Chocobo " theme , and pieces from other Final Fantasy games that would appear in special in @-@ game events . Suzuki estimated that he created between 40 @-@ 50 songs for the game . The music was recorded at the Red Bull Studios in Tokyo . 
 An official 2 @-@ CD soundtrack album for the game , Mobius Final Fantasy Original Soundtrack , was released through Square Enix 's music label on February 26 , 2015 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . The music on the album covers Chapters 1 to 3 . According to Suzuki , this was due to the music feeling like it had reached a natural transition point by that stage of the game . 
 = = Release = = 
 A trademark for its original title , " <unk> Final Fantasy " , was filed by Square Enix in October 2014 . The game was officially announced in Famitsu two months later under the same name . Two days later , a teaser site was opened in both English and Japanese with a message from Kitase about the team 's vision for the game . Its final name was announced during a livestream by the company dedicated to the game . Both titles , along with the logo artwork , took inspiration from the concept of the Möbius strip . Because of its origin , the title was changed from <unk> to Mobius . It was also apparently done in preparation for an international release . Pre @-@ registration for Mobius opened on April 27 , 2015 , with a special weapon and item available to those who registered . In late 2015 , no localization had been officially announced , though Kitase revealed through the dedicated Final Fantasy mobile app that it was under consideration . In a later post on the app during first anniversary celebrations for the game , Kitase confirmed that a localized version was in development . Its international release was confirmed in July for August 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its pre @-@ registration period , the game received 200 @,@ 000 registered users . By July 12 , just over a week after release , the game had one million registered players in Japan . This number had expanded to over two million by the following month . Speaking after release , Kitase said that Square Enix considered the game a success as it introduced the mobile community to AAA @-@ style graphics . In Square Enix 's 2015 annual report , Mobius was noted as one of their successful mobile titles for the year , stating that the higher production values when compared to other mobile games on the market had contributed to its popularity . In addition , Mobius was among the finalists for the 2015 Unity Awards for mobile games in the " Best 3D Visual Experience " category , and was named among Japan 's " <unk> 's Best of 2015 " by Apple Inc .. 
 Dengeki Mobile , in a pre @-@ release review , praised the gameplay and strategy present in early random encounters and boss battles , although the reviewer had minor reservations about the quality of the entire game as they were not able to play through all of it . They also stated that players might encounter difficulties during some boss battles . The reviewer summed up the experience as " simple , yet engaging " . Famitsu , in a similar feature , praised the gameplay and presentation , echoing many of Dengeki 's compliments . One thing they noted was that the performance needed to be adjusted for different mobiles as running the game rapidly drained the phones batteries when on its highest settings . The reviewer also recommended tablets over mobile phones as a means of playing the game . Western reviews were similarly mixed , with Touch Arcade praising the games visuals but calling the user interface an " overly busy nightmare " . Kotaku examined the game in July 2015 and called the gameplay " monotonous " and lacking in plot , though it noted that many chapters were still to be released . 
 For the Western release of Mobius , the pre @-@ registration exceeded 125 @,@ 000 registered users . 
 = Félix Trinidad = 
 Juan Félix " Tito " Trinidad García ( born January 10 , 1973 ) , best known as Félix Trinidad , is a Puerto Rican former professional boxer , considered one of the best in Puerto Rico 's history . After winning five national amateur championships in Puerto Rico , Trinidad debuted as a professional in 1990 , when he was seventeen . He would go on to become a three @-@ weight world champion , first by defeating Maurice Blocker to win the IBF welterweight title in 1993 . Trinidad holds the record for the second most welterweight title defenses , with fifteen , and also holds the record for longest reign as welterweight champion , at six years , eight months and fourteen days . 
 As his career continued , he defeated Oscar De La Hoya to win the WBC and lineal welterweight titles in 1999 ; Fernando Vargas to win the unified WBA and IBF light middleweight titles in 2000 ; and William Joppy to win the WBA middleweight title in 2001 . Trinidad 's first professional loss was against Bernard Hopkins later in 2001 , who scored a technical knockout . Following this , Trinidad retired from boxing for the first time . He returned to action by defeating Ricardo Mayorga in 2004 and , after a losing effort against Winky Wright in 2005 , retired for a second time . In 2008 , he returned to the ring to fight Roy Jones Jr . , losing by unanimous decision . Subsequently , Trinidad entered a five @-@ year hiatus without clarifying the status of his career . 
 Trinidad is frequently mentioned among the best Puerto Rican boxers of all time by sports journalists and analysts , along with Juan Laporte , Esteban De Jesús , Miguel Cotto , Wilfred Benítez , Wilfredo Gómez , Héctor Camacho , and Carlos Ortíz . 
 On June 4 , 2014 , Trinidad was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame , thus becoming the tenth Puerto Rican to receive such an honor . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Welterweight = = = 
 Trinidad debuted as a professional on March 10 , 1990 , when he was 17 years old . The fight was against Angel Romero , another debuting boxer , in a contest that Trinidad won by knockout in the second round . In the beginning of his career he knocked out nine of his first 10 opponents . He then competed against more experienced boxers like Jake Rodriguez , whom he fought on December 6 , 1991 . Trinidad won the fight by unanimous decision but suffered an injury on his right hand . He was then inactive for five months while recovering from the injury . 
 Raul Gonzalez fought Felix Trinidad on May 3 , 1992 in Cayey , Puerto Rico . This fight was the main event of the night . Both Gonzalez and Trinidad weighed in at 142 pounds . Gonzalez had a record of 8 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 with 5 KOs , while Trinidad had a record of 13 @-@ 0 with 10 KOs . Gonzalez went down three times , and Trinidad took the victory in round four by TKO . Trinidad would add another victory by KO to his record and would now make it 14 @-@ 0 with 11 KOs . 
 = = = = Welterweight title = = = = 
 Trinidad traveled to San Diego , California and defeated the IBF welterweight champion Maurice Blocker in two rounds , in a fight card that took place on June 19 , 1993 , televised by Showtime . Trinidad spent the first two minutes of the fight analyzing Blocker 's style . With 11 seconds left in the first round , one of Trinidad 's punches injured Blocker , who barely survived the round . In the second round , the champion 's condition appeared to improve , but after the first 30 seconds , another Trinidad punch injured him . Trinidad followed with a combination , scoring a knockout at 1 : 49 in the round when the referee stopped the fight . Afterwards , tournament organizer Don King 's exclusive relationship to stage fights for the cable channel Showtime meant that Trinidad would be showcased regularly on Showtime Championship Boxing . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Camacho = = = = 
 Trinidad defended his title for the next three years against several opponents . Trinidad 's first fight in Las Vegas was against Héctor Camacho on January 29 , 1994 . He was cautious during the first rounds and received a cut over his left eye . In the third round he connected a solid combination that made Camacho change to a defensive stance . Throughout the fight Trinidad was on the offensive and won the fight by unanimous decision , in what was his first decision since he won the world championship . The scores awarded by the judges were 117 – 109 , 116 – 110 , and 119 – 106 . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Campas = = = = 
 On September 17 , 1994 , Trinidad traveled to the MGM Grand for a second straight fight to compete in a title defense against Yori Boy Campas , who had a record of 56 @-@ 0 . In the second round Campas scored a knockdown , the second knockdown in Trinidad 's career . Following this Trinidad exchanged several combinations , injuring Campas ' face and breaking his nose . In the fourth round , the referee stopped the fight , the first defeat in Campas ' career . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Carr = = = = 
 Trinidad 's fourth fight outside Puerto Rico or the United States took place on Estadio de <unk> in Monterey , Mexico . Trinidad was scheduled to defend his title against the undefeated Oba Carr . In the second round , Carr scored a knockdown , which was the product of a quick right hand punch . Trinidad continued the fight and pursued the challenger , who displayed a quick pace throughout the fight . In the fourth round Trinidad connected a solid punch that injured Carr , and in the eighth he scored three consecutive knockdowns before the referee stopped the fight by technical knockout . 
 Trinidad spent the next four years defending his title against numerous fighters in bouts televised on Showtime . Among these fights was a defense against <unk> Zulu , the number two challenger for Trinidad 's championship . This fight was part of a card that took place on April 3 , 1998 in Bayamón , Puerto Rico and marked the first time that Trinidad had performed in the island in five years . Trinidad began the first round by cautiously analyzing the challenger 's style , but the round ended with quick exchanges after Zulu took the initiative in the offensive . In the second round Zulu was actively pursuing the champion , but retreated when he received a solid jab sequence . Early in the third round a series of jabs opened a wound on Zulu 's mouth , while the challenger 's punches were not reaching their target . Trinidad began the fourth round heavily on in the offensive connecting several combinations which hurt the challenger , using this to land more punches in Zulu 's head and body . One punch hit Zulu in the jaw , he fell to the floor and tried to rise , but the referee stopped the fight before he could do so . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Whitaker = = = = 
 On February 20 , 1999 , Trinidad defended the welterweight championship against Pernell Whitaker , winning the fight by unanimous decision in a contest that marked his thirteenth successful defense . The fight began with both boxers displaying aggressive styles , which included excessive pushing . In the following rounds both boxers used their jabs most of the time with Trinidad gaining an advantage when Whitaker attempted to attack inside , eventually scoring a knockdown in round two . In the fourth , fifth and sixth rounds the fighters exchanged combinations . Later in the fight both boxers fell to the floor in what were ruled as " accidental slips . " On the seventh round Whitaker displayed more offense , trading power punches with Trinidad , but the champion retained control in the fight 's tempo during the eight , ninth , and tenth rounds . In the last round Whitaker , with a badly swollen right eye , displayed a purely defensive stance , avoiding his opponent throughout the round while Trinidad continued on the offensive until the fight concluded . The judges gave the champion scores of 117 – 111 , 118 – 109 and 118 – 109 . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. De La Hoya = = = = 
 In the spring of 1999 , Don King and Oscar De la Hoya 's promoter , Bob Arum , agreed to co @-@ promote a mega @-@ fight for the Lineal , World Boxing Council and International Boxing Federation welterweight championships on September 18 , 1999 at the Mandalay Bay Hotel in Las Vegas . Early in the fight De la Hoya employed boxing to connect combinations while avoiding Trinidad 's attacks . The second round began with both boxers trading punches but De la Hoya quickly returned to his previous tactic , which he employed in the third round . In the fourth round Trinidad pressured the offense while De la Hoya tried to avoid his punches by moving , both boxers eventually exchanged punches . In the fifth round Trinidad continued in the offensive while De la Hoya attempted to remain on the outside corners of the ring , Trinidad 's eye was swollen following a trade of punches , and his nose was also bleeding . Trinidad was having a lot of problems finding De La Hoya and couldn 't connect as flush as usual with his punches , although he scored at times , Oscar 's movement was not letting him land in combination and it was proclaimed by many to have been a lackluster fight . In the eighth round the swelling on Trinidad 's eye was worsening . Oscar was scoring on Trinidad but half way through the tenth , De La Hoya stopped sticking and basically disengaged . De La Hoya gassed out and had remained on his toes for the remainder of the bout , and Trinidad won all the final <unk> judges gave Trinidad a very controversial majority decision , with scores of 115 – 113 , 115 – 114 and 114 – 114 . 
 = = = Light Middleweight = = = 
 = = = = Light Middleweight title = = = = 
 In 2000 , Trinidad vacated the welterweight championships and moved to the junior middleweight division , in order to challenge the World Boxing Association 's champion David Reid . Early in the fight Trinidad concentrated his punches on Reid 's body , connecting hard punches to his ribs and belly . In the second round Reid connected a solid punch to his opponent 's jaw , and in the third round scored a knockdown . In the fourth and fifth rounds Trinidad used his jab consistently , gaining control of the fight 's tempo in the sixth round . The fight 's score was close at the beginning of the seventh round but Trinidad opened the second half of the contest in the offensive , scoring the fight 's second knockdown . Controlling the fight in the eighth , ninth and tenth rounds , and opening a cut over Reid 's eye . Trinidad dominated the eleventh round , scoring three consecutive knockdowns . Reid tried to close the fight on the offensive but his opponent boxed and countered his attacks . The judges gave scores of 114 – 107 , 114 – 106 and 115 – 106 , all in favor of Trinidad . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Vargas = = = = 
 On December 2 , 2000 , he was scheduled to fight in a unification card against Fernando Vargas , the International Boxing Federation 's junior middleweight champion . The fight began in a fast pace with Trinidad connecting a solid combination that led to his opponent being knocked down . Vargas was able to stand up , but another combination injured him a second time and led to another knockdown . Early in the second round Trinidad was in the offensive but Vargas connected a solid combination at the round 's closing moments which opened a cut over Trinidad 's right eye . In the fourth round 's opening seconds one of Vargas ' punches connected on Trinidad 's jaw and he fell , marking the eighth knockdown in his career . In the fifth round Vargas was in control of the fight 's offensive , connecting combinations to <unk> ' body . In the sixth round Trinidad regained control of the fight 's tempo that lasted throughout the contest , connecting punches on Vargas ' head and left jabs to the ribs . In the eighth , Vargas displayed signs of exhaustion which slowed his offensive while Trinidad then pursued the offense with combinations to the body . This pattern continued throughout the ninth , tenth and eleventh rounds . Opening the final round Vargas was on the offensive , connecting a solid left hook . Trinidad countered the attack with a left hook that made Vargas collapse ; Vargas was able to stand up , but was subsequently knocked down for a second time . With Vargas injured , Trinidad continued connecting combinations , until the referee stopped the fight by technical knockout . 
 = = = Middleweight = = = 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Joppy = = = = 
 Following his fight with Vargas , Trinidad moved up in weight – this time to participate in Don King 's middleweight unification tournament featuring IBF champion Bernard Hopkins , WBA champion William Joppy , and WBC champion Keith Holmes . Trinidad was matched with Joppy , whom he defeated by technical knockout in the fifth round of a contest that took place on May 12 , 2001 . Joppy opened the first round on the offensive , but late in the round Trinidad scored a knockdown with a combination of punches that came close to throwing Joppy underneath the ropes . Trinidad subsequently scored a knockdown in the fourth round , during this stage of the competition he was using combinations of left hooks and right punches to the head . In the fifth round Trinidad scored another knockdown , Joppy attempted to continue the fight , but while he was using the ropes to help him stand , the referee stopped the fight . When the contest was over , Trinidad explained his strategy by stating : " I knew he wanted to impose his will , his weight , and I wouldn 't let him do it " . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Hopkins = = = = 
 The middleweight unification fight between Hopkins and Trinidad was originally scheduled for September 15 , 2001 , at the Madison Square Garden . On the morning of September 11 , terrorists attacked the World Trade Center . Following this incident , the fight was postponed indefinitely . After receiving assurances from Madison Square Garden officials and the City of New York , Don King rescheduled the fight for September 29 . The pace of the fight in the early rounds was slow , with each boxer studying his opponent . In the second round Hopkins connected some combinations while Trinidad pursued the offensive in the fourth round and both boxers traded sequences of punches . This pattern continued in the fifth round with Trinidad showing an aggressive style while Hopkins relied on jabs . In the sixth Trinidad continued an offensive stance and won the round after trading several combinations . Both fighters continued to exchange punches in the eighth and ninth round with Hopkins connecting three consecutive solid punches . In the twelfth round Hopkins ' scored a knockdown , but before the contest could continue Trinidad 's father entered the ring , which led to the referee stopping the fight by technical knockout . 
 = = Next fight = = 
 Trinidad was subsequently scheduled to fight against <unk> Cherifi in a contest that he won by technical knockout in the fourth round . The event was part of a card that took place on May 11 , 2002 , and was organized in San Juan , Puerto Rico . Early in the first round Trinidad 's strategy consisted of using his jab while Cherifi did not try to directly engage in the offensive . In the last minute of the round a punch by Trinidad hit Cherifi 's chin leaving him disoriented , he followed this with a combination and scored a knockdown . In the second round , Trinidad displayed more boxing and was on the offensive by using combinations to the head and ribs . In the third Cherifi landed more punches than in the previous two , but Trinidad relied on throwing left jabs . One of his punches hit Cherifi 's liver , followed by a punch to the jaw , making Cherifi fall to the floor . In the fourth , a series of combinations injured Cherifi , who collapsed to the floor twice , forfeiting the fight on the second occasion . Following this contest Trinidad announced his retirement , at the moment leaving the sport with a record of 41 wins , one defeat , and 34 wins by knockout . 
 = = = Comeback = = = 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Mayorga = = = = 
 Trinidad announced a comeback on March 2 , 2004 . On October 2 , 2004 he fought against Ricardo Mayorga , in Madison Square Garden . Early in the first round Mayorga was on the offensive connecting several combinations , later in the round Trinidad connected some punches to his opponent 's face . Mayorga reacted defiantly while lowering his defense , which Trinidad used to continue the offensive during the closing seconds . In the second round he continued connecting with combinations to Mayorga 's face which caused him to bleed from his nose ; the round concluded with both fighters exchanging punches . In the third round Mayorga attempted to counter with punches to the body but did not do significant damage to his opponent , however later in the round one of these punches made Trinidad lose his balance and touch the floor with one glove which the referee counted as a knockdown . In the fourth round both boxers traded hard combinations . In the fifth Trinidad displayed control of the offense 's tempo injuring Mayorga and opening a cut under one of his eyes . This pattern continued in the sixth and seventh round , and the cut on Mayorga 's face began to swell . In the eight round Trinidad scored several knockdowns , Mayorga continued after two knockdowns , but lost by technical knockout following a third knockdown . 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Wright = = = = 
 On May 14 , 2005 , Trinidad competed against Winky Wright , in a fight where the winner would become the World Boxing Council 's number one challenger in the Middleweight division . Wright won the fight by decision , receiving scores of 120 – 107 and 119 – 108 twice by the judges . Trinidad 's fighting style appeared to be out of rhythm in the first round , while Wright presented a defensive stance and relied on jabs . During the first three rounds Wright was in the offensive scoring with jabs . On the fourth round Trinidad connected a solid combination . In the sixth , Wright continued the strategy used in the previous rounds while Trinidad employed a strategy where he tried to neutralize his opponent 's punches by standing in front of him . In the later rounds Trinidad tried to take the contest 's offensive but his adversary managed to block most of his punches while continuing his previous tactic . In the twelfth round Trinidad pursued Wright while trying to score a knockout , but his opponent boxed away from him until the round ended . Following this fight , Trinidad retired temporarily , after his father informed him that he would not continue in his corner . 
 = = = Second comeback = = = 
 = = = = Trinidad vs. Jones = = = = 
 Trinidad came out of his second retirement for the fight against Roy Jones , a former four @-@ division champion on January 19 , 2008 . According to the contract , it was to be at a catch weight of 170 lbs ; and was broadcast live on HBO Pay @-@ Per @-@ View . The card took place at Madison Square Garden in New York city . Trinidad began the fight on the offensive and won the first two rounds . The third and fourth rounds were won by Jones who relied on the velocity of his punches . This pattern continued in the fifth and sixth rounds . In the seventh round , Jones scored a knockdown following a right hand . Following this Jones continued to use his speed while Trinidad pursued the offensive , in the tenth round Jones scored a second knockdown after landing a combination . The judges declared the fight a unanimous decision in favor of Jones with scores of 117 – 109 and 116 – 110 twice . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After this fight , Trinidad was inactive for almost two years , before announcing on October 14 , 2009 , that he was " between 95 and 98 percent sure ( that he would ) not do anything more within boxing " . During this timeframe , he made sporadic public appearances , attending boxing cards and participating in public activities , including a ceremony where Juan Manuel López and Iván Calderón received rings for five successful defenses of their world championships . Beginning in July 2009 , Trinidad became involved with the World Wrestling Council , participating as a guest referee at their anniversary show . Three months later , he was included in a storyline that also included Orlando Colón . In 2010 , Trinidad expressed interest in purchasing the <unk> de Naranjito . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 According to an interview with Bernard 's trainer <unk> Fisher , prior to the fight members of Hopkins ' team visited the Trinidad dressing room in what is considered a normal boxing custom to watch the taping of Trinidad 's hands before his gloves were placed on . The Hopkins camp claimed that Trinidad 's hands were wrapped in an incorrect fashion , and threatened to cancel the fight unless they were wrapped correctly . Fisher also stated that the Chief Inspector of the NYSAC insisted to Trinidad 's camp that they needed to re @-@ wrap his hands in a correct fashion . Additionally , according to the New York State Athletic Commission , <unk> ( which is layers of gauze , then layers of tape , then more gauze and tape ) is illegal . 
 = = International Boxing Hall of Fame = = 
 In 2013 , Trinidad became eligible and was voted into the 2014 Class of the International Boxing Hall of Fame . He was officially inducted into the hall during a ceremony held on June 4 , 2014 , becoming the tenth Puerto Rican to receive such an honor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Félix Trinidad was born in Fajardo , Puerto Rico , to a Puerto Rican family . During his childhood the family moved to <unk> Alto , a subdivision of San Juan , Puerto Rico , where he grew up . His future wife , Sharon Santiago , lived in <unk> and first met Trinidad in the home of her neighborhood friend , a classmate of Trinidad 's . Trinidad pursued a relationship with Santiago , including an attempt to impress her with his red Ford Mustang . He continued to press for her affection and , with the help of Santiago 's neighbor , Trinidad was able to win her over . Early on , Santiago 's mother thought that Trinidad was related to her daughter 's friend , but she realized the true situation when she visited the friend 's house and he acted nervous in her presence . Santiago 's father objected to the relationship because Trinidad was an athlete ; at the time many athletes had a negative public image . Santiago became rebellious , but Trinidad eventually won her family 's trust . The couple was married four years after they began dating and have had four daughters . Trinidad has a fifth daughter , named Alondra Nicole , from another relationship . 
 = = Professional record = = 
 = Indicates the person is no longer alive 
 = Costello Music = 
 Costello Music is the debut album by Scottish rock band The Fratellis . It was released on 30 October 2006 on Fallout Records and Drop the Gun Recordings and on 13 March 2007 on Cherrytree Records in the U.S. and was a success , peaking at # 2 in the UK Albums Chart and spent 83 weeks in the Top 100 . It debuted behind FutureSex / LoveSounds by Justin Timberlake and stayed in the # 2 position for two more weeks , this time behind Ta @-@ Dah by Scissor Sisters . The album had five single releases , as well as the download @-@ only EP Flathead . " Chelsea Dagger " was the most successful single , peaking at # 5 in the UK and # 4 in the Netherlands , but the other singles failed to chart in most countries . 
 Its success resulted in the band touring internationally , playing shows in Europe , the United States and Japan . The band ’ s ensuing popularity saw them win the 2007 BRIT Award for Best British Breakthrough Act . The album has sold 1 @,@ 121 @,@ 251 copies as of August 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The band ’ s first gig was in a basement in Glasgow in February 2005 and the band were spotted by a record company talent scout shortly after . Music Week 's Stuart Clarke said , " A month after the scout discovered them , labels were flying up to Scotland to see them . Most , if not all , the major labels and a handful of indies showed a lot of interest in the band . " The band was eventually signed to Island Records and the album was released under its UK subsidiary , Fallout Records . The band were flown to LA to record the album in the Sunset Sound recording studio , which was previously used by Bob Dylan and the Beach Boys . The choice to record in Sunset Studios rather than the UK was due to Jon ’ s desire to create an old @-@ fashioned , analogue sound . They were in Studio 3 , which contains vintage equipment . Jon said , " It makes you feel a bit more like you ’ re part of something you were interested in " . Producer Tony Hoffer was flown in to help complete the album . The album was named " Costello Music " after a studio they used to rent in <unk> , Glasgow . 
 = = Lyrics and composition = = 
 Critics likened the album to the works of The Libertines , Babyshambles and Arctic Monkeys , all bands known for their British rock roots . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that ‘ they sound like songs by about 15 other Britpop acts ’ but went on to say ‘ it ’ s one thing to copy a look , a sound , or a formula , it 's another to do it so utterly convincingly and with such infectious raucousness ’ . 
 Paul McNamee of NME noted that most tracks on the album told a story ; " Henrietta " , tells the story of an older woman who stalks the song 's narrators ; " Vince the Lovable Stoner " is about a man with a drug addiction , and " Chelsea Dagger " is said by Jon Fratelli to be about a showgirl . 
 = = Release = = 
 Costello Music was released on vinyl and CD on 11 September 2006 in the UK . Five songs were released as singles ; " Henrietta " , " Chelsea Dagger " , " Whistle for the Choir " , " Baby Fratelli " and " Ole Black ‘ n ’ Blue Eyes " . " Flathead " was used in an iPod commercial , which led to it being released as a download only single via iTunes and later as an EP . The album was then released on 13 March 2007 in the US . The cover art for the album and its singles was created by Sam Hadley . 
 The album did best in the UK , peaking at number two on the charts there . It reached forty @-@ two on the US Billboard 200 , and managed to chart in Switzerland , Austria , the Netherlands , France and New Zealand . " Chelsea Dagger " was the most successful single , peaking at five in the UK and four in the Netherlands . The other singles with the exception of " Flathead " only managed to chart in the UK , where they were moderately popular . 
 A Japanese version of Costello Music was released on 21 February 2007 containing two tracks unavailable on other versions : " Dirty Barry Stole the Bluebird " – a B @-@ side of the " Chelsea Dagger " single , and " <unk> " from the Flathead EP . This version of the album also contained the videos for " Flathead " , " Chelsea Dagger " , and " Henrietta " , which could be viewed directly from the disc using an Adobe Flash program . 
 The album 's success led to the band winning the BRIT award for Best British Breakthrough Act in 2007 . The album also won an <unk> award in January 2008 . In total , the band sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies of Costello Music worldwide and over 900 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Costello Music received generally favourable reviews . Pitchfork Media ’ s Stuart <unk> called The Fratellis ‘ artless but amiable ’ , ‘ predictable ’ , and ‘ intermittently rewarding ’ . Elizabeth Goodman of Rolling Stone called the single Flathead ‘ preternaturally catchy ’ and stated that ‘ it makes you elated in the moment ’ . Helen Phares of Allmusic called it ‘ high energy ’ and ‘ fun in the moment ’ . Stylus Magazine 's Ryan Foley shared similar views , describing it as ‘ beyond infectious ’ and claiming that they fill ‘ their three @-@ minute , pop @-@ punk ditties with melodic snarl , flouncing sass , and enough lusty sing @-@ along parts to keep the punters busy ’ . IGN ’ s Chad Grischow gave the album an Outstanding rating in his review of the album saying it was ‘ not the most refined album you will buy this year , but surely one you will not regret ’ . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine was the most negative , calling it ‘ tediously misogynistic ’ and ‘ instantly memorable but thankfully wordless ’ . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Following the release of the album , The Fratellis embarked on a tour of the UK festival circuit , headlining at popular festivals such as NME 's Rock ‘ n ’ Riot tour and T in the Park 2007 , amongst others . They opened for The Who at the BBC Electric Proms in October 2006 , and in December they supported Kasabian on their UK tour before playing 10 dates by themselves in February and March 2007 . The locations included Nottingham , Manchester , Glasgow , Birmingham and London . 
 They then set out on a worldwide tour to play dates in Japan , Europe and the US . They cut short the US leg of their tour , canceling nine dates , citing fatigue from their many months of touring as the cause . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by The Fratellis . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 " The <unk> ? " – 2 : 28 ( <unk> " <unk> Boys & City Girls " on US version as Track # 5 , moving " Whistle for the Choir " to Track # 3 and " Chelsea Dagger " to Track # 4 ) 
 " Ole Black ‘ n ’ Blue Eyes " is a hidden track on the US version . 
 " Dirty Barry Stole The Bluebird " – 4 : 04 ( Bonus track on Japanese version ) 
 " <unk> " – 3 : 06 ( Bonus track on Japanese version ) 
 Some versions of the CD have the track " <unk> Boys & City Girls " moved to a hidden track , Track # 14 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jon Fratelli – lead vocals , guitar 
 Barry Fratelli – bass guitar , shouting 
 Mince Fratelli – drums , backup vocals , banjo 
 Tony Hoffer – production , mixing 
 Todd Burke and Tony Hoffer – engineering 
 Shane Watson – horn 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Chart archives = = = 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 4 ) = 
 The fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on the Fox network in the United States on October 4 , 1996 , concluding on the same channel on May 18 , 1997 , and contained 24 episodes . Following the filming and airing of the season , production began on The X @-@ Files feature film , which was released in 1998 following the show 's fifth season . 
 The fourth season of the series focuses heavily on FBI federal agents Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) and his partner Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) investigation of an alien conspiracy , which is protected by the mysterious Syndicate . Midway through the season , Scully is diagnosed with terminal cancer , a result of her previous abduction , and Mulder begins to lose his faith in the idea of extraterrestrials . Debuting with high viewing figures and ranking as the twentieth most watched television series during the 1996 – 97 television year in the United States , the season was a success , with figures averaging around 20 million viewers an episode . This made it , at the time , the highest rated season of The X @-@ Files to air . The season 's twelfth episode , " Leonard Betts " was chosen as the Fox lead @-@ out program following Super Bowl XXXI , and was viewed by 29 @.@ 1 million viewers , making it the highest @-@ rated episode in the series ' run . Critical reception from television critics was mostly positive . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When the Syndicate suspect that one of their members is passing information to Mulder and Scully , they organize a canary trap to find the leak , using information about the safety of Mulder 's mother as bait . X 's ( Steven Williams ) role as an informant is discovered , and he is shot dead , although he is able to pass along the name of another informant who can be of use to Mulder — Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) , the Special Representative to the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations . Covarrubias ' aid is sought when Mulder attempts to reach Tunguska in Russia to investigate the source of a further black oil contamination . Whilst there , Mulder is held in a gulag and used as a successful test subject for a black oil vaccine . He escapes and is able to return to America , having found that Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) is working with the Russians . 
 Having been diagnosed with cancer , Scully is unsure of her future with the FBI . Mulder is convinced that her condition is a result of her earlier abduction ( " Ascension " ) , and is prepared to make a deal with the Syndicate to find a cure . He is dissuaded by Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who secretly makes such a deal instead . While being pursued by an assassin responsible for a hoax alien corpse discovered on a mountaintop , Mulder fakes his own suicide , mutilating the assassin 's face to provide a decoy body . He uses the distraction this offers to infiltrate The Pentagon to find a cure for Scully 's cancer , while Scully is able to uncover and reveal a Syndicate connection within the FBI . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The season saw drastic changes to the series ' alien mythology . In the premiere episode , " Herrenvolk " , Williams — the actor who played Mulder 's informant X — was written out of the show . He said that , " Carter called me up personally [ and said ] ' Got good news , got bad news . The good news is we 're gonna bring you up for another episode this week . The bad news is you 're gonna take a bullet . " The writers created a new character , Marita Covarrubias , to function as Mulder 's informant . Carter felt it would be " more interesting for Mulder 's next contact to be a woman " , noting that he " wanted there to be some suspicion about whether Mulder would become involved with her romantically . " Herrenvolk " also introduced the killer bees , who would go on to play a larger part in the 1998 film . Carter described the fourth season as " maybe the most intense and difficult season of the show . " 
 The season is notable in that it introduced a story arc about Scully developing terminal cancer , which would not be resolved until the beginning of the fifth season . The show 's producers decided to give Gillian Anderson 's character Dana Scully cancer early in the season . Carter initially discussed giving Scully 's mother cancer but decided to have Scully suffer from it instead . Carter felt the move would give the show an interesting platform on which to discuss things such as faith , science , health care and a certain element of the paranormal . Some of the writing staff felt that the decision was a poor one to make , citing it as " a cheap TV thing " . However , Frank Spotnitz felt that , given the appearances of cancer @-@ stricken abductees in previous episodes , it was an " obligatory " move to have Scully follow suit . 
 Following the cancellation of the Fox television series Space : Above and Beyond , Carter called the series ' creators Glen Morgan and Wong — who had previously been writers for the first two seasons of The X @-@ Files — and asked if they wanted to rejoin the series . Morgan told Carter that the two of them would rejoin , but only for four episodes , and only if they could use members from the cast of Space : Above and Beyond , so that " the world can finally see them " . Carter accepted this condition , and the two dutifully provided four of the seasons episodes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The season finale , " Gethsemane " , was notable in that an entire set created to emulated icy caverns was constructed inside a warehouse which had previously been used for cold storage ; and required the use of truckloads of lumber and 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) of Styrofoam . The set would become one of the most expensive and elaborate built during the series ' history . The set required a constant temperature of − 21 ° F ( − 29 ° C ) in order to maintain the real snow and ice used to decorate it . This refrigeration allowed the actors ' breath to visibly fog up , and allowed the cast to " have a place that feels real " to aid their acting . The outdoor scenes for the episode were filmed around Vancouver 's Mount Seymour , with weather conditions making shooting difficult enough to require an extra day of work . 
 Although the series ' 1998 movie would take place after the events of the fifth season , the movie was actually filmed in the hiatus between the show 's fourth and fifth season and re @-@ shoots were conducted during the filming of the show 's fifth season . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote eight episodes . Howard Gordon continued as executive producer and wrote five episodes for his final season on the series . Spotnitz was promoted to co @-@ producer and wrote seven episodes . Vince Gilligan was promoted to co @-@ producer and wrote five episodes . Former X @-@ Files writers Glen Morgan and James Wong returned after a one season absence from the series as consulting producers and wrote three episodes together , with Morgan writing an additional episode solo that Wong directed . John Shiban was promoted to story editor and wrote four episodes . David Greenwalt joined mid @-@ season as co @-@ executive producer and wrote one episode for his only season on the series . Writing team Valerie and Vivian Mayhew wrote one freelance episode . Executive producer and frequent series director R. W. Goodwin wrote his first and only episode for the series . Other producers included producer Joseph Patrick Finn , co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin , and consulting producer Ken Horton , who joined the series with this season . 
 Producing @-@ directors for the show included Rob Bowman and Kim Manners , who directed the bulk of the episodes for the season . Manners directed eight episodes , while Bowman directed seven . Executive producer R. W. Goodwin again directed the season premiere and finale . James Charleston directed three episodes , while Tucker Gates , Michael Lange , Cliff Bole , and series writer James Wong each directed one episode . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 24 episodes ) 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 23 episodes ) a 
 a ^ She does not appear in " Zero Sum " . 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Mitch Pileggi as Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( 12 episodes ) 
 William B. Davis as Cigarette Smoking Man ( 6 episodes ) 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the Mythology of The X @-@ Files Alien story arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The fourth season of The X @-@ Files debuted with " Herrenvolk " on October 4 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 2 , with a 23 share , meaning that roughly 13 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 23 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was viewed by 21 @.@ 11 million people , a marked increase from the third season 's finale , " Talitha Cumi " , which was viewed by 17 @.@ 86 million viewers . " Herrenvolk " was , at the time , the highest @-@ rated episode of The X @-@ Files to air , as well as the first episode of the series to be watched by over 20 million viewers . As the season continued , however , ratings began to drop slightly , stabilizing around approximately less than 20 million viewers @-@ per @-@ episode . The season hit a high with its twelfth episode , " Leonard Betts " , which had been chosen as the Fox lead @-@ out program following Super Bowl XXXI . The episode was viewed by 29 @.@ 1 million viewers , making it the highest @-@ rated episode in the series ' run . The season hit a low with the fifteenth and sixteenth episodes , " Kaddish " and " Unrequited " , respectively , which were both viewed by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers . The season finale , " Gethsemane " , earned a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 2 , with a 19 share , and was viewed by 19 @.@ 85 viewers , marking a 5 @.@ 9 percent drop in viewers when compared to the season premiere , but a 10 percent increase in viewers when compared to the previous season finale . The season ranked as the twelfth most watched television series during the 1996 – 97 year , with an average of 19 @.@ 2 million viewers , making it , at the time , the highest @-@ rated season of The X @-@ Files to air . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The fourth season of The X @-@ Files received largely positive reviews from television critics , although several critics noted that the season was not as good as its predecessors . The Contra Costa Times noted that The X @-@ Files during its fourth year was creatively good and " always fascinating even when it 's frustrating . " Rick <unk> Bee of the Sacramento Bee wrote that Fox ' Sunday block of The Simpsons , King of the Hill and The X @-@ Files was televisions " real ' Must See TV ' " . Matt Roush of USA Today wrote that the fourth season was not the series ' best year , but " when good , [ The X @-@ Files is ] still shockingly great " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave an overall positive review of the season and wrote that many of the episodes dabbled in existentialism . However , he also contended that many of the mythology episodes — especially the season finale — began to have " a ring of familiarity to " them and that " the repetition is getting old " . 
 Episodic reviews were diverse . Some episodes were praised . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episodes " Home " , " Unruhe " , " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , " Paper Hearts " , and " Small Potatoes " five stars out of five . Paula Vitaris of Cinefantastique also awarded " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , " Paper Hearts " , and " Small Potatoes " perfect scores of four out of four . Tom Kessenich named " Memento Mori " the fourth best episode of the series , writing that it was the definitive example of Mulder and Scully 's devotion for each other . " . He also wrote highly of " Home " , " Paper Hearts " , Small Potatoes " , and " Never Again " , ranking them as the fifth , eleventh , sixteenth , and twenty @-@ fourth best episodes of The X @-@ Files , respectively . Other episodes were derided . Shearman and Pearson called " El Mundo Gira " an " aching unambitious take on Latin American culture " and " rubbish " . Vitaris <unk> " Unrequited " as a " slight story that collapses under the weight of its message " . 
 " Gethsemane " created intense media speculation about whether or not Mulder was actually dead . An article in the Wall Street Journal discussed fan theories behind Mulder 's madness while a cartoon ran in The New Yorker a few weeks later surrounding Mulder 's " death " . Series creator Chris Carter noted that " the whole plot line of ' Gethsemane ' revolved around a hoax , but there are actually huge revelations in this show . And it 's an amazing thing that we could get people to believe that Mulder could actually kill himself because his belief system was stolen from him " . UGO Networks listed the episode at number 21 in a countdown of " TV 's Best Season Finales " , noting that it " rocked the core of the series ' entire mythology " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The fourth season earned the series twelve Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with three wins . Anderson won for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series , after being nominated the previous year . The episodes " Memento Mori " and " Tempus Fugit " won for Outstanding Art Direction for a Series and Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series , respectively . Notable nominations included its third consecutive nomination for Outstanding Drama Series , Duchovny 's first nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series , James Wong nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , and Carter , Gilligan , Shiban , and Spotnitz being nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for " Memento Mori " . Other nominations were Jim Gross and Heather MacDougall each being nominated for Outstanding Editing for a Series – Single Camera Production for the episodes " Tempus Fugit " and " Terma " , respectively ; Outstanding Makeup for a Series for " Leonard Betts " ; Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series for " Tempus Fugit " ; and Mark Snow being nominated for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) for " Paper Hearts " . The series also won its second Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama , while Gillian Anderson and David Duchovny won in the television series drama acting categories . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Marmes Rockshelter = 
 The Marmes Rockshelter ( also known as ( 45 @-@ FR @-@ 50 ) ) is an archaeological site first excavated in 1962 , near the confluence of the Snake and Palouse Rivers , in Franklin County , southeastern Washington . This rockshelter is remarkable in the level of preservation of organic materials , the depth of stratified deposits , and the apparent age of the associated Native American human remains . The site was discovered on the property of Roland Marmes , and was the site of the oldest human remains in North America at that time . In 1966 , the site became , along with Chinook Point and the American and English Camps on San Juan Island , the first National Historic Landmarks listed in Washington . In 1969 , the site was submerged in water when a levee protecting it from waters rising behind the then newly constructed Lower Monumental Dam , which was 20 miles ( 32 km ) down the Snake River , failed to hold back water that leaked into the protected area through gravel under the soil , creating Lake Herbert G. West . 
 = = The excavation = = 
 The existence of the site was first brought to the attention of Professor Richard Daugherty in 1952 by a rancher named John McGregor . Excavations at the site were started by Daugherty and Roald Fryxell , a geologist , under the auspices of Washington State University ( WSU ) and the National Park Service in 1962 , and continued until 1964 . In 1965 , Fryxell returned to the site along with Professor Carl Gustafson and students from WSU , and had Roland Marmes dig a trench in front of the rockshelter with his bulldozer , which turned up human and elk bones . Radiocarbon dating indicated that the human remains were about 10 @,@ 000 years old . In 1968 , Fryxell returned , this time with several WSU professors ( including a visiting professor from Poland ) and members of the United States Geological Survey , and found more human and animal remains , along with bone tools . April 29 of that year , Washington Senator Warren Magnuson made a public announcement of the finds . 
 = = Inundation of the site = = 
 After a bill that would have provided funds to protect the site failed , then @-@ President Lyndon B. Johnson signed an Executive Order that authorized funding for the Army Corps of Engineers to build a levee around the site to protect it from the imminent flooding caused by construction of the Lower Monumental Dam . Late that year , Daugherty left the dig , leaving Fryxell to lead the project . Once the Lower Monumental Dam was closed in February 1969 , within three days , the site was completely underwater , due to the seepage of thick layers of gravel that had not been accounted for . However , as the site was being flooded , the excavation team laid down plastic sheeting topped with gravel in the hopes of being able to return to the dig in the future . 
 The location of the site is still known today , and has come under some threat of erosion from the wakes of motorized vehicles on the lake . The Army Corps of Engineers considers the site to be in stable condition with a " Satisfactory " threat rating since 2004 . 
 = = Findings at the site = = 
 The excavations at the site revealed evidence of human occupation from a period that lasted 8 @,@ 000 years , and that the area was home to humans as long ago as 11 @,@ 230 years ago . The people living at the site hunted game such as elk and deer using atlatls , and also hunted smaller mammals such as beavers , while they gathered mussels from the river . The excavation turned up graves , which included beads carved from shells and spear points . One grave , that of a child , held five matching knives made of stone . The excavation also turned up <unk> and chert arrowheads . Those in the upper layers were made of agate , which is not found in the area . Stone tools were found as well , such as scrapers for use in tanning hides , and mortars and pestles . In layers dated to 7 @,@ 000 years ago , large amounts of shells belonging to a snail of the genus <unk> were found , which would have been imported from the West Coast of the United States , 200 miles ( 322 km ) away . The majority of the shells had holes drilled through them , indicating that they had adorned necklaces . 
 In addition , one of the five known Jefferson Peace Medals was found associated with the most recent human remains at the site , evidently having been given to a local Native American leader ( presumably of the Nez Perce ) during the Lewis and Clark Expedition . This medal has since been returned to the Nez Perce and reburied , as per Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act regulations . 
 Analyzing the pollen sequences at the site showed a steppe ecosystem immediately following the retreat of glaciers 13 @,@ 000 years ago , which gave way to a mixed forest of pine and spruce , which led into the current sagebrush prairie ecosystem . 
 = = Implications of the findings = = 
 Unlike many archaeological finds , the human remains at the site were able to be dated with environmental , geological , and archaeological methods . Human remains at the site are the oldest that have been found in Washington , and at the time were the oldest set of remains found in North America . Later radiocarbon work has confirmed the original dating of this site , indicating that these human remains , albeit very fragmentary , are still some of the oldest ever excavated in the New World . This finding was useful in confirming the early chronology of the region and confirming the antiquity of the styles of associated bone tools . 
 = Harris 's List of Covent Garden Ladies = 
 Harris 's List of Covent Garden Ladies , published from 1757 to 1795 , was an annual directory of prostitutes then working in Georgian London . A small , attractive pocketbook , it was printed and published in Covent Garden , and sold for two shillings and sixpence . A contemporary report of 1791 estimates its circulation at about 8 @,@ 000 copies annually . 
 Each edition contains entries describing the physical appearance and sexual specialities of about 120 – 190 prostitutes who worked in and around Covent Garden . Through their erotic prose , the lists ' entries review some of these women in lurid detail . While most compliment their subjects , some are critical of bad habits , and a few women are even treated as pariahs , perhaps having fallen out of favour with the lists ' authors , who are never revealed . 
 Samuel Derrick is the man normally credited for the design of Harris 's List , possibly having been inspired by the activities of a Covent Garden pimp , Jack Harris . A Grub Street hack , Derrick may have written the lists from 1757 until his death in 1769 ; thereafter , the annual 's authors are unknown . Throughout its print run it was published pseudonymously by H. Ranger , although from the late 1780s it was printed by three men : John and James Roach , and John Aitkin . 
 As the public 's opinion began to turn against London 's sex trade , and with reformers petitioning the authorities to take action , those involved in the release of Harris 's List were in 1795 fined and imprisoned . That year 's edition was the last to be published ; by then its content was cruder , lacking the originality of earlier editions . Modern writers tend to view Harris 's List as erotica ; in the words of one author , it was designed for " solitary sexual enjoyment " . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 The earliest printed editions of Harris 's List of Covent Garden Ladies appeared after Christmas 1756 . Published by " H. Ranger " , the annual was advertised on the front pages of newspapers , and sold in Covent Garden and at booksellers ' stalls . Each edition comprises an attractive pocketbook , " beautifully packaged ... in the modish style of the twelves " . They usually contain no more than 150 pages of relatively thin paper , on which are printed the details of between 120 and 190 prostitutes then working in Covent Garden . Priced in 1788 at two shillings and sixpence , Harris 's List was affordable for the middle classes but expensive for a working class man . 
 It was not the first directory of prostitutes to be circulated in London . The Wandering Whore ran for five issues between 1660 and 1661 , in the early ( and newly liberal ) years of the Restoration . Allegedly an exposé of the capital 's sex trade and usually attributed to John Garfield , it lists streets in which prostitutes might have been found , and the locations of brothels in areas like Fleet Lane , Long Acre and Lincoln 's Inn Fields . The Wandering Whore incorporates dialogue between " Magdalena , a Crafty Whore , <unk> , an Exquisite Whore , <unk> , a <unk> Gallant , and Gusman , a Pimping Hector " , with the caveat that it was disseminated only so that law @-@ abiding folk might avoid such people . Another publication was A Catalogue of <unk> , Cracks & Prostitutes , <unk> , Whores , She @-@ friends , Kind Women and other of the <unk> @-@ lifting Tribe , printed in 1691 . This catalogues the physical attributes of 21 women who could be found about St Bartholomew @-@ the @-@ Great Church during Bartholomew Fair , in Smithfield . Mary Holland was apparently " tall , graceful and comely , shy of her favours " , but could be mollified " at a cost of £ 20 " . Her sister Elizabeth was less expensive , being " indifferent to Money but a Supper and Two Guineas will tempt her " . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 Each edition of Harris 's List opens with a frontispiece showing a mildly erotic stock image opposite the title page , which , from the 1760s to 1780s , is followed by a lengthy commentary on prostitution . This preamble argues that the prostitute is of benefit to the public , able to relieve man 's natural inclination towards violence . It describes the customer as a patron supportive of a good cause : " be your purse strings never closed ; nor let the name of prostitute deter you from your pious resolve ! " Prostitutes were generally scorned by 18th @-@ century society , and the 1789 edition 's preface complains " Why should the victims of this natural propensity ... be hunted like outcasts from society , perpetually gripped by the hand of petty tyranny " , continuing : " Is not the minister of state who sacrifices his country 's honour to his private interest ... more guilty than her ? " 
 At a basic level , the entries in Harris 's List detail each woman 's age , her physical appearance ( including the size of her breasts ) , her sexual specialities , and sometimes a description of her genitals . Additional information such as how long she had been active as a prostitute , or if she sang , danced or conversed well , is also included . Addresses and prices , which range from five shillings to five pounds , are provided . The types of prostitute the lists present vary from " low @-@ born errant drabs " , to prominent courtesans like Kitty Fisher and Fanny Murray ; later editions contain only " genteel mannered prostitutes worthy of praise " . The charms of a Mrs Dodd , who lived at number six Hind Court in Fleet Street , were listed in 1788 as " reared on two pillars of monumental alabaster " , continuing : " the symmetry of its parts , its borders enriched with wavering tendrils , its ruby portals , and the tufted grove , that crowns the summit of the mount , all join to invite the guest to enter . " In the same edition , a similarly lurid description precedes the latter part of Miss Davenport 's entry , which concludes : " Her teeth are remarkably fine ; she is tall , and so well proportioned ( when you examine her whole naked figure , which she will permit you to do , if you perform the <unk> Rites like an able priest ) that she might be taken for a fourth Grace , or a breathing animated Venus de Medicis ... she has a keeper ( a Mr. Hannah ) both kind and liberal ; notwithstanding which , she has no objection to two supernumerary guineas . " Miss <unk> , of number two York Street near Middlesex Hospital , is described as " one of the finest , fattest figures as fully finished for fun and <unk> as fertile fancy ever formed ... fortunate for the true lovers of fat , should fate throw them into the possession of such full grown beauties . " More characteristic of Harris 's List though , is the 1764 entry for Miss Wilmot , which tells of an amorous encounter with King George III 's brother , the Duke of York : 
 He gazed on her a while with eyes of transport and fondness , and gave her a world of kisses ; at the close of which , in a pretended struggle , she contrived matters so artfully , that the bed @-@ <unk> having fallen off , her naked beauties lay exposed at full length . The snowy orbs on her breast , by their frequent rising and failing , beat Cupid 's alarm @-@ drum to storm instantly , in case an immediate surrender should be refused . The coral @-@ lipped mouth of love seemed with kind movements to invite , nay , to provoke an attack ; while her sighs , and eyes half @-@ closed , denoted that no farther resistance was intended . What followed , may be better imagined than described ; but if we may credit Miss W @-@ lm @-@ t 's account , she never experienced a more extensive protrusion in any amorous conflict either before or since . 
 The Duke of York was only one of many famous men to have been mentioned in the lists ; others included James Boswell , Ernest Augustus I of Hanover , the clergyman William Dodd , Charles James Fox , George IV , William Hickey , Francis Needham , 1st Earl of Kilmorey , Robert Walpole and many others . 
 = = = Commentary = = = 
 The women 's route into the sex trade , as described by the lists , is usually ascribed to youthful innocence , with tales of young girls leaving their homes for the promises of men , only to be abandoned once in London . Some entries mention rape , euphemistically described as women being " seduced against their will " . Lenora Norton was apparently " seduced " in such fashion , her entry elucidating on her experience , which occurred while she was still a child . The " old urban legend " of young girls being apprehended from the crowd by devious bawds is illustrated by William Hogarth 's A Harlot 's Progress , but although in reality such stories were not unheard of , women entered into prostitution for a variety of reasons , often mundane . Rural immigrants in search of work could sometimes find themselves at the mercy of unscrupulous employers , or manipulated into the sex trade by underhand means . Some entries in Harris 's List illustrate how some women managed to lift themselves out of penury . Becky LeFevre , once a streetwalker , used her business sense to amass considerable wealth , as did a Miss Marshall and Miss Becky Child , who are each mentioned in several editions . Many of these women had rich keepers , and some married wealthy aristocrats ; Harriet Powell married Kenneth Mackenzie , 1st Earl of Seaforth , and Elizabeth Armistead married Charles James Fox . 
 Elements of politicisation appear in some entries . The famed prostitute Betsy Cox 's 1773 listing describes how , when refused entry to a gathering of polite society at the newly opened Pantheon , she was helped by , among others , the Duke of Fife , who drew his sword to enforce her entry . Some lists also contain defences of prostitution ; earlier editions claim that the trade guarded against the seduction of young women , provided an outlet for frustrated married men , and kept other young men from " le <unk> [ sic ] que la Nature <unk> [ the sin that Nature repudiates ] " , or sodomy . However , no such views were expressed with regard to lesbianism , which in England , unlike sexual acts between men , has never been illegal . Miss Wilson of Cavendish Square thought that " a female bed @-@ fellow can give more real joys than ever she experienced with the male part of the sex " , and Anne and <unk> <unk> provided a discreet service in Tavistock Street , catering for " Ladies in the Highest Keeping " and other women who preferred to keep their activities private . 
 A common complaint regarding street prostitution was the foul language used , and while generally most entries in the lists look favourably on those women who refrained from swearing , the views expressed in the 1793 edition of Harris 's List tend towards equivocation . Mrs Cornish 's genteel nature was , on occasion , interrupted by " a volley of small shot " , and Miss Johnson 's proclivity towards " vulgarity of expression and a coarseness of manner " apparently suffered no shortage of admirers . Mrs Russell , attractive to " a number of clients among the youth , who are fond of beholding that mouth of the devil from whence all corruption <unk> " , was admired for her " vulgarity more than any thing else , she being extremely expert at uncommon oaths " . Drinking , intrinsically linked with prostitution , was also frowned on . Mrs William 's entry of 1773 is full of remorse , her having returned home " so intoxicated so as not to be able to stand , to the no small amusement of her neighbors " , and Miss Jenny <unk> had , in 1788 , a " violent attachment to drinking " . Not all entries were disapproving though ; Mrs Harvey would , in 1793 , " often toss off a sparkling bumper , " while remaining " a lady of great sensibility ... not a little clever in the performance of the act of friction . " More generally , most entries are flattering , although some are less than complimentary ; the 1773 listing for Miss Berry denounces her as " almost rotten , and her breath cadaverous " . Prostitutes may have paid money to appear in the lists , and in Denlinger 's view such commentary may indicate a degree of annoyance on the writer 's part , the women concerned perhaps having refused to pay . Some listings also imply a degree of dissatisfaction on the part of the customer ; in the 1773 edition , Miss Dean exhibited " great indifference " while entertaining her client , busying herself by cracking nuts while he was " acting his joys " . Others are scorned for wearing too much makeup , and some for being " lazy bedfellows " . A popular view that prostitutes were licentious , hot @-@ blooded and hungry for sex was incompatible with the knowledge that most worked for money , and the lists therefore criticise women whose demands for payment appeared a little too mercenary . 
 = = = Possible authors = = = 
 The identity of the lists ' authors is uncertain . Some editions may have been written by Samuel Derrick , a Grub Street hack born in 1724 in Dublin , who had moved to London to become an actor . With little success there , he had turned instead to writing , publishing works including The dramatic censor ; being remarks upon the conduct , characters , and catastrophe of our most celebrated plays ( 1752 ) , A Voyage to the Moon ( 1753 ) ( a translation of Cyrano de Bergerac 's L <unk> Monde : ou les États et Empires de la Lune ) , and The Battle of Lora ( 1762 ) . Derrick , who lived with the actress Jane <unk> , was an acquaintance of Samuel Johnson and James Boswell . The latter viewed him as " but a poor writer " , while Johnson admitted that " if Derrick 's letters had been written by one of a more established name , they would have been thought very pretty letters . " 
 Hallie Rubenhold 's 2005 book The Covent Garden Ladies sets out her interpretation of the story behind Harris 's List . She claims that John Harrison — otherwise known as Jack Harris , a savvy businessman and pimp who worked at the Shakespear 's Head Tavern in Covent Garden — was the list 's originator . Born perhaps around 1720 – 1730 , Harris apparently had expert knowledge of prostitutes working in Covent Garden and beyond , as well as access to rented rooms and premises for his clients ' use . He kept a record of the women he pimped and the properties he had access to , possibly in the form of a small ledger or notebook . Derrick , having previously authored The Memoirs of the Shakespear 's Head , and possibly also its companion piece , The Memoirs of the Bedford Coffee House , was probably familiar with the Shakespear 's Head . The former book details " Jack , a waiter ... who presides over the <unk> Pleasures of this Dome " , and its author likely studied Harris as he went about his business . Which of the two men first thought to produce Harris 's List is unknown , but probably for a one @-@ off payment Harris allowed his name to be attached to it . With his detailed knowledge of Covent Garden , and with help from various associates , Derrick was therefore able to write the first edition of Harris 's List in 1757 . As an aspiring author and social climber he preferred not to associate himself publicly with such questionable material , and his name therefore does not appear on any editions . 
 Printed and published by the pseudonymous H. Ranger , responsible for such works as Love Feasts ; or the different methods of courtship in every country , throughout the known world , the proceeds from the hugely successful first edition enabled Derrick to repay his debts , thereby freeing himself from a <unk> house . His fortunes changed for the better when he became master of ceremonies at Bath and Tunbridge Wells in 1763 . His death on 28 March 1769 followed a protracted illness , but despite a significant income , he died penniless . He left no official will , but on his deathbed he bequeathed the 1769 edition of Harris 's List to Charlotte Hayes , his former friend and mistress , and a madam in her own right . Hayes died in 1813 . 
 As the self @-@ declared " Pimp General of All England " , the swaggering Harris amassed a considerable fortune , but his indiscretion proved to be his undoing . Prompted by reformers , in April 1758 the authorities began to hunt down and close " houses of ill fame " . Covent Garden was not spared , and the Shakespear 's Head Tavern was raided . Harris was caught , locked up in the local <unk> , and then imprisoned in Newgate . He was released in 1761 and had some interests in publishing from 1765 to 1766 , printing Edward Thompson 's The Courtesan , and later The Fruit @-@ Shop and Kitty 's Atlantis , but he seems to have given this up late in 1766 . He became the proprietor of the Rose Tavern , not far from the Shakespear 's Head , but by the 1780s had delegated its running to an employee . The Rose was demolished about 1790 , and for a few years Harris ran another tavern , the Bedford Head , with his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law . He died sometime in 1792 . The Shakespear 's Head closed for business in 1804 , and four years later the empty premises were badly damaged in the same fire that consumed the Covent Garden Theatre . What remained was subsumed by the neighbouring Bedford Coffee House . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Johann Wilhelm von <unk> claimed in 1791 that the lists were published by " a tavern @-@ keeper , in Drury lane " , and that " eight thousand copies are sold annually . " There is nothing to suggest that Hayes had any involvement with any edition other than that of 1769 , and the list 's authors following Derrick 's death have not been identified . From the 1770s Harris 's List changes focus , moving away from the women of Covent Garden , to their stories . Its prose becomes more genteel , lacking the euphemisms which had helped make it so popular . These changes are echoed by the front cover , whose frontispiece becomes more gentrified . Material from earlier editions is recycled , and little attention is paid to accuracy . The responsibility for some of these changes can be attributed to John and James Roach , and John Aitkin , who from the late 1780s were the lists ' publishers . 
 In 1795 the Proclamation Society , created several years earlier to help enforce King George III 's proclamation against " loose and licentious Prints , Books , and Publications , dispersing Poison to the minds of the Young and <unk> " , and " to Punish the Publishers and Vendors thereof " , brought Roach up on libel charges . In court he highlighted the list 's longevity , and claimed that " nobody had ever been prosecuted for publishing it ; and , therefore , he was ignorant it was a libel . " When Lord Chief Justice Kenyon mentioned that a John Roach had previously been convicted for selling Harris 's List , Roach " assured his Lordship , that he had never been indicted before for this offence . " He was nevertheless sentenced to one year in Newgate Prison , with sureties of £ 150 for three years , to ensure his good behaviour . Lord Justice Ashurst called the List " a most indecent and immoral publication " , and of Roach 's crime said " an offence of greater enormity could hardly be committed . " Aitkin , indicted as John Aitken , may have been fined £ 200 for selling the same edition , although Rubenhold contends that by then he had died . After these trials , the list was no longer published . Only nine editions are extant : those for 1761 , 1764 , 1773 , 1774 , 1779 , 1788 , 1789 , 1790 and 1793 . 
 = = Modern view = = 
 Harris 's List was published for a city rife with prostitution . London 's bawdy houses had , by the 1770s , disappeared from the poorer areas outside the city wall , and in the West End were found in four areas : St Margaret 's in Westminster ; St Anne 's in Soho and St James 's ; and most especially , with more than two thirds of London 's " Disorderly Houses " , around Covent Garden and the Strand . The area was noted for its " great numbers of female votaries to Venus of all ranks and conditions " , while another author distinguished Covent Garden as " the chief scene of action for promiscuous amours . " The Scottish statistician Patrick Colquhoun estimated in 1806 that of Greater London 's approximately 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 citizens , perhaps 50 @,@ 000 women , across all walks of life , were engaged in some form of prostitution . 
 Whether any of these women could confirm their addresses for publication in Harris 's List is something that author Sophie Carter doubts . She views the annual as " primarily a work of erotica " , calling it " nothing so much as a shopping list ... textually arrayed for the <unk> of the male consumer " , continuing " they [ the women ] await his intervention to institute an exchange " , epitomising the traditional male role in pornography . Elizabeth Denlinger includes a similar sentiment in her essay , " The Garment and the Man " : " This varied display of women to satisfy the ' great itch ' ... is a fundamental aspect of the sphere to which Harris 's List offered British men a carte d <unk> " . Rubenhold writes that the variability in the descriptions of prostitutes over the years the list was published defy " all attempts to categorise it as either exclusively up @-@ market or simply middle of the road . " She suggests that the annual 's purpose was to " conduct the desirous to the embrace of a prostitute " , and that its prose was designed for " solitary sexual enjoyment " ( H. Ranger also sold back @-@ issues of Harris 's List ) . Sold to a London public which was mostly patriarchal , its listings reflect the prejudices of the men who authored them . They were therefore not representative of women generally , and as she concludes , " it is likely that their stories would have differed quite significantly from those recounted by their customers for the benefit of the List 's publishers . " 
 Not every commentator agreed with Colquhoun 's estimate , which became " the most widely quoted sum " , but in the opinion of Cindy McCreery the fact that most people agreed there were far too many prostitutes in London is indicative of widespread concern about the trade . Attitudes towards prostitution hardened at the end of the 18th century , with many viewing prostitutes as indecent and immoral , and it was in this atmosphere that Harris 's List met its demise . Books such as the Wandering Whore and Edmund Curll 's Venus in the <unk> ( 1728 ) are often mentioned alongside Harris 's as examples of erotic literature . Along with the anonymously written Fifteen Plagues of a Maidenhead ( 1707 ) , Garfield and Curll 's works were involved in cases that helped form the 18th @-@ century legal concept of " obscene libel " — which was a marked change from the previous emphasis on controlling sedition , blasphemy and heresy , traditionally the ecclesiastical courts ' province . No laws existed to forbid the publication of pornography ; therefore , when Curll was arrested and imprisoned in 1725 ( the first such prosecution in nearly 20 years ) , it was under threat of a libel charge . He was released a few months later , only to be locked up again for publishing other materials deemed offensive by the authorities . Curll 's experience with the censors was uncommon , though , and prosecutions based on obscene publications remained a rarity . Although their court action spelled the end for Harris 's List , despite the best efforts of the Proclamation Society ( later the Society for the Suppression of Vice ) , the publication of pornography continued apace ; more pornographic material was published during the Victorian era than at any time previously . 
 = Watson 's Hotel = 
 Watson 's Hotel , now known as the Esplanade Mansion , is India 's oldest surviving cast iron building . It is located in the Kala <unk> area of Mumbai ( Bombay ) . Named after its original owner , John Watson , the building was fabricated in England and constructed on site between 1860 and 1863 . 
 The hotel was leased on 26 August 1867 for the terms of 999 years at yearly rent of Rupees 92 and 12 annas to Abdul Haq . It was closed in the 1960s and was later subdivided and partitioned into smaller cubicles that were let out on rent as homes and offices . Neglect of the building has resulted in decay and , despite its listing as a Grade II – A heritage structure , the building is now in a dilapidated state . 
 = = Design = = 
 Watson 's hotel was designed by the civil engineer Rowland Mason Ordish , who was also associated with the St Pancras Station in London . The building was fabricated in England from cast iron components and was assembled and constructed on site . The external cast @-@ iron frame closely resembles other high @-@ profile 19th century buildings such as London 's Crystal Palace . The main façade of the hotel is distinguished by building wide open balconies on each floor that connected the guest rooms , which were built around the atrium in a courtyard arrangement . 
 = = History = = 
 John Watson opened the hotel as an exclusive whites @-@ only hotel , and it one of the most renowned hotels in the city in those days . Then it was handed over to Hannah Maria Watson , by then the Secretary of State for India , wherein she entered into a lease deed with Sardar Abdul Haq , Diler ul Mulk , Diler ul Daula , for a term of nine hundred and ninety nine years on 26 August 1867 . Later on , another indenture was made on the date 22 @-@ 12 @-@ 1885 , between the trustees of Port Trust of Bombay and Sardar Diler ul Mulk in which land on the Wellington Reclamation Estate in island of Bombay <unk> of 8129 <unk> was leased by the Sardar Abdul Haq for a term of fifty years from 01 @-@ 01 @-@ 1880 . The five @-@ storied structure housed 130 guest rooms , as well as a lobby , restaurant and a bar at the ground level . The hotel also had a 30 by 9 metres ( 98 ft × 30 ft ) atrium , originally used as a ballroom , with a glass skylight . At its peak , Watson 's hotel employed English waitresses in its restaurant and ballroom , inspiring a common joke at the time : " If only Watson had imported the English weather as well . " 
 After Watson 's death , the hotel lost its popularity to the rival Taj Hotel . In the 1960s the hotel was closed . Sometime after this , it was subdivided and partitioned into small cubicles with independent access and let out on rent . Over the years , apathy toward the building by the residents has resulted the building decaying , and it is now in a dilapidated state . The atrium was subsequently used as a dumping ground and has several illegal constructions . As of 2005 , building had 53 families and 97 commercial establishments . Most of the commercial establishments are chambers of lawyers attached to the adjacent Bombay Civil & Session Courts and the nearby Bombay High Court . 
 = = Notable guests = = 
 Among the hotel 's notable guests was Mark Twain , who wrote about the city 's crows he saw outside his balcony in Following the Equator . It was also the first place in India to screen the Lumière Brothers ' <unk> invention in 1896 . 
 Muhammad Ali Jinnah used to play pool in the hotel , to make a little extra money for himself . 
 A popular myth surround the hotel was that the staff at Watson 's Hotel denied Indian industrialist <unk> Tata access to the hotel . In retaliation he built the Taj Hotel , a hotel that stands near the Gateway of India , in 1903 . However , author and historian Sharada Dwivedi <unk> this legend . She points out a lack of evidence to prove that Tata was a man of vengeance . 
 = = Current state = = 
 The building 's poor state of affairs has been commonly remarked , and efforts by heritage activists to persuade its present owner to invest in restoration have been unsuccessful . One of the possible reasons proffered for apathy is the fact that the rent collected is low as it has been frozen by government legislation . The condition of the building was publicized by Italian architect Renzo Piano , and as a result of his efforts , the building was listed in June 2005 on the list of " 100 World Endangered Monuments " by the World Monuments Fund , a New York @-@ based NGO . Just a few days after its nomination , part of the building 's western façade , originally balconies developed into small offices , collapsed , killing one person and crushing several cars and motorcycles parked in the street below . The building is listed as a Grade II – A heritage structure . On 13 June 2010 , the Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee ( <unk> ) gave its approval for the 130 @-@ year @-@ old structure to be restored . The restoration work will be carried out by the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority ( <unk> ) . 
 = Zack Fair = 
 Zack Fair ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Fea ) is a fictional character first introduced as a non @-@ player character in the 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII by Square ( now Square Enix ) , and subsequently expanded upon in the metaseries Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . 
 In the original game , Zack is a late member of the paramilitary organization SOLDIER , the military wing of the megacorporation Shinra . During the game , Zack is revealed to have been Aerith Gainsborough 's first boyfriend , as well as a friend of Cloud Strife , the game 's protagonist . Zack ultimately died in the weeks leading up to the opening of the game protecting Cloud from Shinra 's army after they had escaped from imprisonment and being the subjects of genetic experimentation . He is the second owner of the Buster Sword ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , and wielded it before Cloud , giving it to him as he died . Zack also appears in the Compilation titles Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , Last Order : Final Fantasy VII , Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children and , most significantly , Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , a prequel in which he is the protagonist . 
 Zack Fair was originally not a part of Final Fantasy VII . However , scenario writer Kazushige Nojima wanted to bring a sense of mystery to the title , and created the character to help complicate Cloud 's backstory . He was designed by Tetsuya Nomura , and his name derived from " fair weather , " to contrast with Cloud Strife 's name . With Zack 's conceptual backstory in place for Final Fantasy VII , the staff decided to use Compilation of Final Fantasy VII to expand upon his character . Zack is voiced by Kenichi Suzumura in Japanese and Rick Gomez in English . Suzumura was chosen specifically by Nomura for his voice , and was given the role without an audition . Western critics have praised Zack 's character , commenting on his development since Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Zack did not exist in the original scenario of Final Fantasy VII , but was created only when scenario writer Kazushige Nojima decided to add some mystery to the plot , most notably in relation to Cloud Strife 's background . Nojima had always planned for Cloud Strife 's memories of his life to be proven false as the game went on , but he had not decided on how to implement this until he hit on the character of Zack . Nojima also used Zack to link Cloud and Aerith Gainsborough , as Aerith had seen something of Zack in Cloud . Zack was Aerith 's first boyfriend , thus creating an emotional connection between herself and Cloud , because he reminds her of him . Originally , the role of her first boyfriend was to have been fulfilled by the game 's antagonist Sephiroth . As the game continued in its development , Nojima worked out the mysteries regarding Zack and Cloud , which led to some of the scenes in the game needing revision . Director Yoshinori Kitase was surprised by the revelation of Cloud 's and Zack 's connection , as until the later stages of development , even he did not know about Zack . Character designer Tetsuya Nomura got the request to design Zack when Final Fantasy VII was reaching the end of development . Prior to the late addition of Zack , Nojima had asked the staff to add details to some scenes so as to give clues about him , despite the fact that he did not reveal to the staff Zack 's existence until later . 
 Zack appears as a young man with spiky black hair , standing 6 feet 3 inches ( 191 cm ) tall . He wears the SOLDIER 1st class uniform , consisting of a black , sleeveless turtleneck , black boots , and armor . In Crisis Core , Zack has two attires ; his Final Fantasy VII outfit and a different outfit worn during the start of the game , which he changes after fighting Angeal Hewley . Zack 's full name was first revealed in an article in Dengeki PlayStation . Nomura stated that Zack 's name was derived from ' fair weather ' and specifically chosen because it contrasted with Cloud Strife 's name . 
 For Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , Zack made only a couple of brief appearances , and as such , was not difficult to animate ; the team had also acquired his design early in production , allowing modeling of his character to be taken care of . Nomura had wanted Zack to have a " nice , upbeat voice , " which influenced his decision to cast Kenichi Suzumura . Beforehand , Nomura had had dinner with Suzumura , where he had decided that " at that point [ Nomura ] wanted him to be in one of his projects if the opportunity ever presented itself . " Suzumura was offered the role without an audition . Nomura explained that , because Zack had been chosen to be the lead in Last Order : Final Fantasy VII , he needed " someone who could handle [ the ] role well . " The staff used Last Order as an opportunity to portray Zack " properly " as a " handsome , light @-@ hearted man [ who ] was in everyone 's memory . " In English , Zack is voiced by Rick Gomez . 
 In an interview with IGN whilst promoting Crisis Core , Yoshinori Kitase explained that when the original game was created , " Zack was a rather minor character , " although Nomura had created art design , and Nojima had created a " basic concept of [ Zack 's ] story . " Kitase further explained that " you could say that the idea [ for the storyline of Crisis Core ] has been cooking for 10 years . " Before Crisis Core began development , the staff had planned to create a PlayStation Portable port of Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , but soon changed their minds to create a game that focused on Zack , whose fate was already predetermined ; fans knew how the game was going to end . Throughout the game , the staff decided to use a blue sky in cutscenes to represent Zack , while other features in such scenes are meant to symbolize his connections . A number of Zack 's actions from the game were also designed so as to augment the similarities that Aerith finds between him and Cloud in Final Fantasy VII . Zack and Cloud 's connection was also meant to be expanded upon near the game 's ending , with both of them planning to flee to Midgar . However , due to limitations in the console 's hardware , these scenes could not be implemented , and instead , they decided to focus on Zack 's role as a warrior . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Zack had only a small role in the original Final Fantasy VII . He is first mentioned by name in Gongaga , his hometown , where his parents are oblivious as to what became of him after he left to join SOLDIER , and are worried for his safety after not hearing from him for years . It is at this point that Aerith explains Zack was her first love . Cloud later realizes that some of his memories and even aspects of his personality were actually Zack 's , and not his own . Flashbacks reveal that both Zack and Cloud battled Sephiroth after he burned the town of Nibelheim upon discovering he was the result of a scientific experiment . After Cloud defeated Sephiroth , both Zack and Cloud were taken to be used in experiments by Shinra . Eventually , Zack woke up and was able to escape with a semi @-@ conscious Cloud to the city Midgar , but on the edge of the city , he was gunned down by Shinra troops . While Zack 's and Cloud 's flashback escape is optional in the North American and European releases of Final Fantasy VII and the Japanese International version , it was originally planned to be shown once Cloud discovered the results of Shinra 's experiments . 
 Zack 's character and backstory is expanded upon throughout the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . In the prequel game Before Crisis , Zack supports Shinra in their fight against the eco @-@ terrorist group AVALANCHE . During the game , two of his SOLDIER acquaintances are captured and experimented upon , and though Zack is able to bring them back to their senses , he is unable to save them . Zack also makes an appearance during the chapter covering the Nibelheim incident , and later as a boss character when he and Cloud are fugitives from Shinra and are being pursued by the Turks . The OVA Last Order : Final Fantasy VII follows Zack and Cloud 's journey to Midgar with flashbacks of the Nibelheim incident . Zack also has a small role in the film sequel Advent Children , where most of his appearances are flashbacks from Cloud 's point of view . He also appears at the end of the film , where he and the now deceased Aerith speak to Cloud . In the director 's cut version , Advent Children Complete , his role is expanded , and he makes an appearance during Cloud 's battle with Sephiroth . His death is also shown in the film , where he gives Cloud the Buster Sword and tells him to become his " living legacy " . 
 Zack is the protagonist of Crisis Core , a prequel to Final Fantasy VII , which deals primarily with Zack 's backstory . In the game , Zack is trained as a SOLDIER by his close friend , Angeal Hewley , and hopes to become a hero while working for Shinra . When Angeal , and another SOLDIER , Genesis Rhapsodos , betray Shinra , Zack and Sephiroth are dispatched to kill them , but they decide to avoid doing that if possible . He and Sephiroth learn that both Angeal and Genesis were the result of a Shinra experiment called " Project G " , where they were injected with Jenova cells prior to being born in an effort to create perfect SOLDIERs . However , both Angeal and Genesis are suffering from secondary effects which led them to antagonize Shinra in the hopes of finding a cure . In the course of the game , Zack befriends Cloud and begins dating Aerith . During a mission to find Angeal and Genesis , Angeal forces Zack to kill him , as he wants to stop hurting people because of his mutations . Before dying , Angeal thanks Zack for stopping him and gives him his Buster Sword . Later , while Zack and Sephiroth search for Genesis and the former Shinra scientist Dr. Hollander , they go to Nibelheim where Sephiroth learns that he too was the result of genetic experimentation involving Jenova . The game then depicts the Nibelheim incident , leading to Zack and Cloud being taken captive and subjected to experiments themselves . Four years pass , Zack and Cloud are able to escape , and Zack learns that Genesis has come to believe the only way he can be cured is by being injected with Sephiroth 's cells . As Sephiroth is thought dead , the only source of these cells is now Cloud , and Zack realises that Genesis plans to kill Cloud . Zack decides to stop Genesis , and after defeating him , he and Cloud head to Midgar , where he hopes to be reunited with Aerith . However , Zack and Cloud are intercepted by Shinra infantry , and Zack is killed . In his dying breath , Zack gives the Buster Sword to Cloud , telling him to be his living legacy . As Cloud stumbles off towards Midgar , Zack is pulled into the sky by Angeal , and wonders if he has become a hero . 
 Zack has served as the basis for several forms of merchandise , such as being pictured on the Final Fantasy VII 10th Anniversary Potion soft drink cans . Outside the Final Fantasy VII series , Zack is an unlockable character in the PlayStation version of the fighting game Ehrgeiz , where is playable in arcade , versus , and minigame events . He made his debut appearance in the Kingdom Hearts series in the prequel Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep for the PlayStation Portable , where he has a more youthful appearance than in his Final Fantasy incarnation . He is featured prominently in the Olympus Coliseum , commonly participating in tournaments in order to achieve his dream of becoming a hero . As the game is a prequel to the other Kingdom Hearts titles , the staff chose him as they wanted a character from a Final Fantasy prequel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical response to Zack 's character has generally been positive . In IGN 's 2008 list of Final Fantasy VII top ten characters list , Zack made sixth place , with IGN 's Dave Smith noting that " his check @-@ out scene in Crisis Core is just about as epic as it gets in videogames . " In 2010 , Famitsu readers voted Zack as the 37th most popular video game character in Japan . GamesRadar 's Jim Sterling found Zack to be one of video game 's most sexually appealing male characters due to his personality and look . In 2013 , Complex ranked Zack as the 18th greatest Final Fantasy character of all time , as well as the sixth greatest soldier in video games . 
 Zack 's role in Crisis Core has received a mainly positive reaction . IGN 's Ryan Clements particularly praised Zack 's relationships with the other main characters . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish agreed with Clements , arguing that Zack 's story contrasted with other RPG plots , calling it " the heart of the game . " Kevin VanOrd from GameSpot labelled Zack a " likable and complex hero , " arguing that he " transcends the usual spiky @-@ haired heroism and teenage angst with an uncommon maturity that develops as the game continues . " GameSpy 's Gerald Villoria described Zack as " King of the Nice Guys , " noting that even though he can be a " pretty hate @-@ worthy character if you 're the jaded type who mocks the typical Final Fantasy storyline , " players who dislike him could come to appreciate him . Zack was also called an " endearing main character " by Game Revolution who stated that despite what the character goes through during the game , he still retains his friendly attitude . Like other reviewers , RPGamer viewed him to have the " full , soulful carriage of a Final Fantasy hero " due to his personal conflicts , despite his " artfully teased hair and devil @-@ may @-@ care grin . " Although Eurogamer 's Simon Parkin found Zack 's physical appearance to be highly similar to Cloud 's , he added that " this fan service doesn 't put a foot wrong until he reaches into his [ Zack 's ] pocket , pulls out a mobile phone and speaks . " He also praised Zack 's English voice actor for doing a good job , noting " his character 's maturing and developing over the 15 @-@ hour storyline . " IGN AU 's Patrick Kolan agreed , calling Rick Gomez 's work as " pretty likeable . " GamesRadar 's AJ Glasser commented that the way Zack obtains the Buster Sword and the way he gives it to Cloud is the " ultimate payoff " of Crisis Core , stating that the fact gamers know how the game will end is a serious detraction . When Ayaka finished the song " Why " for Crisis Core , she mentioned that she wanted to deliver it alongside Zack 's fate " to the hearts of many people . " IGN UK 's Dave McCarthy noted how Zack 's role in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII evolved as the series developed , to the point of him getting his own game . 
 On the other hand , PSXextreme 's Ben <unk> , felt that Zack was not worthy of his own game , believing that only players with " halfway decent memories " and a " hardcore <unk> mentality " will be able to remember Zack 's appearances in the original Final Fantasy VII . IGN UK expressed a mixed opinion about the character , feeling his personality was sometimes annoying , although it served to contrast with the serious attitudes of the other main characters . Similarly , VideoGamer.com 's Wesley Yin @-@ Poole called Zack Cloud 's " identical twin in all but hair colour , " and complained about his personality being " annoying " during the first half of the game . Destructoid agreed , telling players not to expect to enjoy Zack if they do not like " cocky teenagers , " and even labelling him an " annoying <unk> . " Gameplanet criticized Rick Gomez ' acting , finding it more immature than they expected . PALGN called Zack an unfamiliar character in the series since his only appearances were in backstories . 
 = Mercury ( planet ) = 
 Mercury is the smallest and innermost planet in the Solar System . Its orbital period ( about 88 Earth days ) is less than any other planet in the Solar System . Seen from Earth , it appears to move around its orbit in about 116 days . It has no known natural satellites . It is named after the Roman deity Mercury , the messenger to the gods . 
 Partly because it has almost no atmosphere to retain heat , Mercury 's surface temperature varies diurnally more than any other planet in the Solar System , ranging from 100 K ( − 173 ° C ; − 280 ° F ) at night to 700 K ( 427 ° C ; 800 ° F ) during the day in some equatorial regions . The poles are constantly below 180 K ( − 93 ° C ; − 136 ° F ) . Mercury 's axis has the smallest tilt of any of the Solar System 's planets ( about 1 ⁄ 30 of a degree ) , and its orbital eccentricity is the largest of all known planets in the Solar System . At aphelion , Mercury is about 1 @.@ 5 times as far from the Sun as it is at perihelion . Mercury 's surface is heavily cratered and similar in appearance to the Moon , indicating that it has been geologically inactive for billions of years . 
 Mercury is tidally or gravitationally locked with the Sun in a 3 : 2 resonance , and rotates in a way that is unique in the Solar System . As seen relative to the fixed stars , it rotates on its axis exactly three times for every two revolutions it makes around the Sun . As seen from the Sun , in a frame of reference that rotates with the orbital motion , it appears to rotate only once every two Mercurian years . An observer on Mercury would therefore see only one day every two years . 
 Because Mercury orbits the Sun within Earth 's orbit ( as does Venus ) , it can appear in Earth 's sky in the morning or the evening , but not in the middle of the night . Also , like Venus and the Moon , it displays a complete range of phases as it moves around its orbit relative to Earth . Although Mercury can appear as a bright object when viewed from Earth , its proximity to the Sun makes it more difficult to see than Venus . Two spacecraft have visited Mercury : Mariner 10 flew by in the 1970s ; and MESSENGER , launched in 2004 , orbited Mercury over 4 @,@ 000 times in four years , before exhausting its fuel and crashing into the planet 's surface on April 30 , 2015 . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Mercury is one of four terrestrial planets in the Solar System , and is a rocky body like Earth . It is the smallest planet in the Solar System , with an equatorial radius of 2 @,@ 439 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 516 @.@ 0 mi ) . Mercury is also smaller — albeit more massive — than the largest natural satellites in the Solar System , Ganymede and Titan . Mercury consists of approximately 70 % metallic and 30 % silicate material . Mercury 's density is the second highest in the Solar System at 5 @.@ 427 g / cm3 , only slightly less than Earth 's density of 5 @.@ 515 g / cm3 . If the effect of gravitational compression were to be factored out , the materials of which Mercury is made would be denser , with an uncompressed density of 5 @.@ 3 g / cm3 versus Earth 's 4 @.@ 4 g / cm3 . 
 Mercury 's density can be used to infer details of its inner structure . Although Earth 's high density results appreciably from gravitational compression , particularly at the core , Mercury is much smaller and its inner regions are not as compressed . Therefore , for it to have such a high density , its core must be large and rich in iron . 
 Geologists estimate that Mercury 's core occupies about 42 % of its volume ; for Earth this proportion is 17 % . Research published in 2007 suggests that Mercury has a molten core . Surrounding the core is a 500 – 700 km mantle consisting of silicates . Based on data from the Mariner 10 mission and Earth @-@ based observation , Mercury 's crust is estimated to be 100 – 300 km thick . One distinctive feature of Mercury 's surface is the presence of numerous narrow ridges , extending up to several hundred kilometers in length . It is thought that these were formed as Mercury 's core and mantle cooled and contracted at a time when the crust had already solidified . 
 Mercury 's core has a higher iron content than that of any other major planet in the Solar System , and several theories have been proposed to explain this . The most widely accepted theory is that Mercury originally had a metal – silicate ratio similar to common chondrite meteorites , thought to be typical of the Solar System 's rocky matter , and a mass approximately 2 @.@ 25 times its current mass . Early in the Solar System 's history , Mercury may have been struck by a planetesimal of approximately 1 / 6 that mass and several thousand kilometers across . The impact would have stripped away much of the original crust and mantle , leaving the core behind as a relatively major component . A similar process , known as the giant impact hypothesis , has been proposed to explain the formation of the Moon . 
 Alternatively , Mercury may have formed from the solar nebula before the Sun 's energy output had stabilized . It would initially have had twice its present mass , but as the <unk> contracted , temperatures near Mercury could have been between 2 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 500 K and possibly even as high as 10 @,@ 000 K. Much of Mercury 's surface rock could have been vaporized at such temperatures , forming an atmosphere of " rock vapor " that could have been carried away by the solar wind . 
 A third hypothesis proposes that the solar nebula caused drag on the particles from which Mercury was accreting , which meant that lighter particles were lost from the accreting material and not gathered by Mercury . Each hypothesis predicts a different surface composition , and two space missions , MESSENGER and BepiColombo , will make observations to test them . MESSENGER has found higher @-@ than @-@ expected potassium and sulfur levels on the surface , suggesting that the giant impact hypothesis and vaporization of the crust and mantle did not occur because potassium and sulfur would have been driven off by the extreme heat of these events . The findings would seem to favor the third hypothesis ; however , further analysis of the data is needed . 
 = = = Surface geology = = = 
 Mercury 's surface is similar in appearance to that of the Moon , showing extensive mare @-@ like plains and heavy cratering , indicating that it has been geologically inactive for billions of years . Because knowledge of Mercury 's geology has been based only on the 1975 Mariner 10 flyby and terrestrial observations , it is the least understood of the terrestrial planets . As data from MESSENGER orbiter are processed , this knowledge will increase . For example , an unusual crater with radiating troughs has been discovered that scientists called " the spider " . It was later named Apollodorus . 
 Albedo features are areas of markedly different reflectivity , as seen by telescopic observation . Mercury has dorsa ( also called " wrinkle @-@ ridges " ) , Moon @-@ like highlands , montes ( mountains ) , <unk> ( plains ) , rupes ( escarpments ) , and valles ( valleys ) . 
 Names for features on Mercury come from a variety of sources . Names coming from people are limited to the deceased . Craters are named for artists , musicians , painters , and authors who have made outstanding or fundamental contributions to their field . Ridges , or dorsa , are named for scientists who have contributed to the study of Mercury . Depressions or fossae are named for works of architecture . Montes are named for the word " hot " in a variety of languages . Plains or <unk> are named for Mercury in various languages . <unk> or <unk> are named for ships of scientific expeditions . Valleys or valles are named for radio telescope facilities . 
 Mercury was heavily bombarded by comets and asteroids during and shortly following its formation 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago , as well as during a possibly separate subsequent episode called the Late Heavy Bombardment that ended 3 @.@ 8 billion years ago . During this period of intense crater formation , Mercury received impacts over its entire surface , facilitated by the lack of any atmosphere to slow impactors down . During this time Mercury was volcanically active ; basins such as the Caloris Basin were filled by magma , producing smooth plains similar to the maria found on the Moon . 
 Data from the October 2008 flyby of MESSENGER gave researchers a greater appreciation for the jumbled nature of Mercury 's surface . Mercury 's surface is more heterogeneous than either Mars 's or the Moon 's , both of which contain significant stretches of similar geology , such as maria and plateaus . 
 = = = = Impact basins and craters = = = = 
 Craters on Mercury range in diameter from small bowl @-@ shaped cavities to multi @-@ ringed impact basins hundreds of kilometers across . They appear in all states of degradation , from relatively fresh rayed craters to highly degraded crater remnants . Mercurian craters differ subtly from lunar craters in that the area blanketed by their ejecta is much smaller , a consequence of Mercury 's stronger surface gravity . According to IAU rules , each new crater must be named after an artist that was famous for more than fifty years , and dead for more than three years , before the date the crater is named . 
 The largest known crater is Caloris Basin , with a diameter of 1 @,@ 550 km . The impact that created the Caloris Basin was so powerful that it caused lava eruptions and left a concentric ring over 2 km tall surrounding the impact crater . At the antipode of the Caloris Basin is a large region of unusual , hilly terrain known as the " Weird Terrain " . One hypothesis for its origin is that shock waves generated during the Caloris impact traveled around Mercury , converging at the basin 's antipode ( 180 degrees away ) . The resulting high stresses fractured the surface . Alternatively , it has been suggested that this terrain formed as a result of the convergence of ejecta at this basin 's antipode . 
 Overall , about 15 impact basins have been identified on the imaged part of Mercury . A notable basin is the 400 km wide , multi @-@ ring <unk> Basin that has an ejecta blanket extending up to 500 km from its rim and a floor that has been filled by smooth plains materials . Beethoven Basin has a similar @-@ sized ejecta blanket and a 625 km diameter rim . Like the Moon , the surface of Mercury has likely incurred the effects of space weathering processes , including Solar wind and micrometeorite impacts . 
 = = = = Plains = = = = 
 There are two geologically distinct plains regions on Mercury . Gently rolling , hilly plains in the regions between craters are Mercury 's oldest visible surfaces , predating the heavily cratered terrain . These inter @-@ crater plains appear to have obliterated many earlier craters , and show a general paucity of smaller craters below about 30 km in diameter . 
 Smooth plains are widespread flat areas that fill depressions of various sizes and bear a strong resemblance to the lunar maria . Notably , they fill a wide ring surrounding the Caloris Basin . Unlike lunar maria , the smooth plains of Mercury have the same albedo as the older inter @-@ crater plains . Despite a lack of unequivocally volcanic characteristics , the localisation and rounded , lobate shape of these plains strongly support volcanic origins . All the smooth plains of Mercury formed significantly later than the Caloris basin , as evidenced by appreciably smaller crater densities than on the Caloris ejecta blanket . The floor of the Caloris Basin is filled by a geologically distinct flat plain , broken up by ridges and fractures in a roughly polygonal pattern . It is not clear whether they are volcanic lavas induced by the impact , or a large sheet of impact melt . 
 One unusual feature of Mercury 's surface is the numerous compression folds , or rupes , that crisscross the plains . As Mercury 's interior cooled , it may have contracted and its surface began to deform , creating these features . The folds can be seen on top of other features , such as craters and smoother plains , indicating that the folds are more recent . Mercury 's surface is flexed by significant tidal bulges raised by the Sun — the Sun 's tides on Mercury are about 17 times stronger than the Moon 's on Earth . 
 = = = = Volcanology = = = = 
 Images obtained by MESSENGER have revealed evidence for pyroclastic flows on Mercury from low @-@ profile shield volcanoes . MESSENGER data has helped identify 51 pyroclastic deposits on the surface , where 90 % of them are found within impact craters . A study of the degradation state of the impact craters that host pyroclastic deposits suggests that pyroclastic activity occurred on Mercury over a prolonged interval . 
 A ' <unk> depression ' inside the southwest rim of the Caloris Basin consists of at least nine overlapping volcanic vents , each individually up to 8 km in diameter . It is thus a ' compound volcano ' . The vent floors are at a least 1 km below their <unk> and they bear a closer resemblance to volcanic craters sculpted by explosive eruptions or modified by collapse into void spaces created by magma withdrawal back down into a conduit . The scientists could not quantify the age of the volcanic complex system , but reported that it could be of the order of a billion years . 
 = = = Surface conditions and exosphere = = = 
 The surface temperature of Mercury ranges from 100 K to 700 K at the most extreme places : 0 ° N , 0 ° W , or 180 ° W. It never rises above 180 K at the poles , due to the absence of an atmosphere and a steep temperature gradient between the equator and the poles . The subsolar point reaches about 700 K during perihelion ( 0 ° W or 180 ° W ) , but only 550 K at aphelion ( 90 ° or 270 ° W ) . On the dark side of the planet , temperatures average 110 K. The intensity of sunlight on Mercury 's surface ranges between 4 @.@ 59 and 10 @.@ 61 times the solar constant ( 1 @,@ 370 W · m − 2 ) . 
 Although the daylight temperature at the surface of Mercury is generally extremely high , observations strongly suggest that ice ( frozen water ) exists on Mercury . The floors of deep craters at the poles are never exposed to direct sunlight , and temperatures there remain below 102 K ; far lower than the global average . Water ice strongly reflects radar , and observations by the 70 @-@ meter Goldstone Solar System Radar and the VLA in the early 1990s revealed that there are patches of high radar reflection near the poles . Although ice was not the only possible cause of these reflective regions , astronomers think it was the most likely . 
 The icy regions are estimated to contain about 1014 – 1015 kg of ice , and may be covered by a layer of regolith that inhibits sublimation . By comparison , the Antarctic ice sheet on Earth has a mass of about 4 × 1018 kg , and Mars 's south polar cap contains about 1016 kg of water . The origin of the ice on Mercury is not yet known , but the two most likely sources are from outgassing of water from the planet 's interior or deposition by impacts of comets . 
 Mercury is too small and hot for its gravity to retain any significant atmosphere over long periods of time ; it does have a tenuous surface @-@ bounded exosphere containing hydrogen , helium , oxygen , sodium , calcium , potassium and others at a surface pressure of less than approximately 0 @.@ 005 <unk> . This exosphere is not stable — atoms are continuously lost and replenished from a variety of sources . Hydrogen atoms and helium atoms probably come from the solar wind , diffusing into Mercury 's magnetosphere before later escaping back into space . Radioactive decay of elements within Mercury 's crust is another source of helium , as well as sodium and potassium . MESSENGER found high proportions of calcium , helium , hydroxide , magnesium , oxygen , potassium , silicon and sodium . Water vapor is present , released by a combination of processes such as : comets striking its surface , sputtering creating water out of hydrogen from the solar wind and oxygen from rock , and sublimation from reservoirs of water ice in the permanently shadowed polar craters . The detection of high amounts of water @-@ related ions like O + , OH − , and H2O + was a surprise . Because of the quantities of these ions that were detected in Mercury 's space environment , scientists surmise that these molecules were blasted from the surface or exosphere by the solar wind . 
 Sodium , potassium and calcium were discovered in the atmosphere during the 1980 – 1990s , and are thought to result primarily from the vaporization of surface rock struck by micrometeorite impacts including presently from Comet Encke . In 2008 , magnesium was discovered by MESSENGER . Studies indicate that , at times , sodium emissions are localized at points that correspond to the planet 's magnetic poles . This would indicate an interaction between the magnetosphere and the planet 's surface . 
 On November 29 , 2012 , NASA confirmed that images from MESSENGER had detected that craters at the north pole contained water ice . MESSENGER 's principal investigator Sean Solomon is quoted in the New York Times estimating the volume of the ice to be large enough to " encase Washington , D.C. , in a frozen block two and a half miles deep " . 
 = = = Magnetic field and magnetosphere = = = 
 Despite its small size and slow 59 @-@ day @-@ long rotation , Mercury has a significant , and apparently global , magnetic field . According to measurements taken by Mariner 10 , it is about 1 @.@ 1 % the strength of Earth 's . The magnetic @-@ field strength at Mercury 's equator is about 300 nT . Like that of Earth , Mercury 's magnetic field is dipolar . Unlike Earth , Mercury 's poles are nearly aligned with the planet 's spin axis . Measurements from both the Mariner 10 and MESSENGER space probes have indicated that the strength and shape of the magnetic field are stable . 
 It is likely that this magnetic field is generated by a dynamo effect , in a manner similar to the magnetic field of Earth . This dynamo effect would result from the circulation of the planet 's iron @-@ rich liquid core . Particularly strong tidal effects caused by the planet 's high orbital eccentricity would serve to keep the core in the liquid state necessary for this dynamo effect . 
 Mercury 's magnetic field is strong enough to deflect the solar wind around the planet , creating a magnetosphere . The planet 's magnetosphere , though small enough to fit within Earth , is strong enough to trap solar wind plasma . This contributes to the space weathering of the planet 's surface . Observations taken by the Mariner 10 spacecraft detected this low energy plasma in the magnetosphere of the planet 's nightside . Bursts of energetic particles in the planet 's magnetotail indicate a dynamic quality to the planet 's magnetosphere . 
 During its second flyby of the planet on October 6 , 2008 , MESSENGER discovered that Mercury 's magnetic field can be extremely " leaky " . The spacecraft encountered magnetic " tornadoes " – twisted bundles of magnetic fields connecting the planetary magnetic field to interplanetary space – that were up to 800 km wide or a third of the radius of the planet . These twisted magnetic flux tubes , technically known as flux transfer events , form open windows in the planet 's magnetic shield through which the solar wind may enter and directly impact Mercury 's surface . 
 The process of linking interplanetary and planetary magnetic fields , called magnetic reconnection , is common throughout the cosmos . It occurs in Earth 's magnetic field , where it generates magnetic tornadoes as well . The MESSENGER observations show the reconnection rate is ten times higher at Mercury . Mercury 's proximity to the Sun only accounts for about a third of the reconnection rate observed by MESSENGER . 
 = = Orbit , rotation , and longitude = = 
 Mercury has the most eccentric orbit of all the planets ; its eccentricity is 0 @.@ 21 with its distance from the Sun ranging from 46 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ( 29 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to 43 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 mi ) . It takes 87 @.@ 969 Earth days to complete an orbit . The diagram on the right illustrates the effects of the eccentricity , showing Mercury 's orbit overlaid with a circular orbit having the same semi @-@ major axis . Mercury 's higher velocity when it is near perihelion is clear from the greater distance it covers in each 5 @-@ day interval . In the diagram the varying distance of Mercury to the Sun is represented by the size of the planet , which is inversely proportional to Mercury 's distance from the Sun . This varying distance to the Sun , combined with a 3 : 2 spin – orbit resonance of the planet 's rotation around its axis , result in complex variations of the surface temperature . This resonance makes a single solar day on Mercury last exactly two Mercury years , or about 176 Earth days . 
 Mercury 's orbit is inclined by 7 degrees to the plane of Earth 's orbit ( the ecliptic ) , as shown in the diagram on the right . As a result , transits of Mercury across the face of the Sun can only occur when the planet is crossing the plane of the ecliptic at the time it lies between Earth and the Sun . This occurs about every seven years on average . 
 Mercury 's axial tilt is almost zero , with the best measured value as low as 0 @.@ 027 degrees . This is significantly smaller than that of Jupiter , which has the second smallest axial tilt of all planets at 3 @.@ 1 degrees . This means that to an observer at Mercury 's poles , the center of the Sun never rises more than 2 @.@ 1 arcminutes above the horizon . 
 At certain points on Mercury 's surface , an observer would be able to see the Sun rise about halfway , then reverse and set before rising again , all within the same Mercurian day . This is because approximately four Earth days before perihelion , Mercury 's angular orbital velocity equals its angular rotational velocity so that the Sun 's apparent motion ceases ; closer to perihelion , Mercury 's angular orbital velocity then exceeds the angular rotational velocity . Thus , to a hypothetical observer on Mercury , the Sun appears to move in a retrograde direction . Four Earth days after perihelion , the Sun 's normal apparent motion resumes . 
 For the same reason , there are two points on Mercury 's equator , 180 degrees apart in longitude , at either of which , around perihelion in alternate Mercurian years ( once a Mercurian day ) , the Sun passes overhead , then reverses its apparent motion and passes overhead again , then reverses a second time and passes overhead a third time , taking a total of about 16 Earth @-@ days for this entire process . In the other alternate Mercurian years , the same thing happens at the other of these two points . The amplitude of the retrograde motion is small , so the overall effect is that , for two or three weeks , the Sun is almost stationary overhead , and is at its most brilliant because Mercury is at perihelion , its closest to the Sun . This prolonged exposure to the Sun at its brightest makes these two points the hottest places on Mercury . Conversely , there are two other points on the equator , 90 degrees of longitude apart from the first ones , where the Sun passes overhead only when the planet is at aphelion in alternate years , when the apparent motion of the Sun in Mercury 's sky is relatively rapid . These points , which are the ones on the equator where the apparent retrograde motion of the Sun happens when it is crossing the horizon as described in the preceding paragraph , receive much less solar heat than the first ones described above . 
 Mercury attains inferior conjunction ( nearest approach to Earth ) every 116 Earth days on average , but this interval can range from 105 days to 129 days due to the planet 's eccentric orbit . Mercury can come as near as 82 @.@ 2 <unk> ( 0 @.@ 549 astronomical units ; 51 @.@ 1 million miles ) to Earth , and that is slowly declining : The next approach to within 82 @.@ 1 Gm ( 51 @.@ 0 million miles ) is in <unk> , and to within 82 @.@ 0 Gm ( 51 @.@ 0 million miles ) in <unk> , but it will not be closer to Earth than 80 Gm ( 50 million miles ) until AD 28 @,@ 622 . Its period of retrograde motion as seen from Earth can vary from 8 to 15 days on either side of inferior conjunction . This large range arises from the planet 's high orbital eccentricity . 
 = = = Longitude convention = = = 
 The longitude convention for Mercury puts the zero of longitude at one of the two hottest points on the surface , as described above . However , when this area was first visited , by Mariner 10 , this zero meridian was in darkness , so it was impossible to select a feature on the surface to define the exact position of the meridian . Therefore , a small crater further west was chosen , called Hun Kal , which provides the exact reference point for measuring longitude . The center of Hun Kal defines the 20 ° West meridian . A 1970 International Astronomical Union resolution suggests that longitudes be measured positively in the westerly direction on Mercury . The two hottest places on the equator are therefore at longitudes 0 ° W and 180 ° W , and the coolest points on the equator are at longitudes 90 ° W and 270 ° W. However , the MESSENGER project uses an east @-@ positive convention . 
 = = = Spin – orbit resonance = = = 
 For many years it was thought that Mercury was synchronously tidally locked with the Sun , rotating once for each orbit and always keeping the same face directed towards the Sun , in the same way that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth . Radar observations in 1965 proved that the planet has a 3 : 2 spin – orbit resonance , rotating three times for every two revolutions around the Sun ; the eccentricity of Mercury 's orbit makes this resonance stable — at perihelion , when the solar tide is strongest , the Sun is nearly still in Mercury 's sky . 
 The original reason astronomers thought it was synchronously locked was that , whenever Mercury was best placed for observation , it was always nearly at the same point in its 3 : 2 resonance , hence showing the same face . This is because , coincidentally , Mercury 's rotation period is almost exactly half of its synodic period with respect to Earth . Due to Mercury 's 3 : 2 spin – orbit resonance , a solar day ( the length between two meridian transits of the Sun ) lasts about 176 Earth days . A sidereal day ( the period of rotation ) lasts about 58 @.@ 7 Earth days . 
 Simulations indicate that the orbital eccentricity of Mercury varies chaotically from nearly zero ( circular ) to more than 0 @.@ 45 over millions of years due to perturbations from the other planets . This was thought to explain Mercury 's 3 : 2 spin – orbit resonance ( rather than the more usual 1 : 1 ) , because this state is more likely to arise during a period of high eccentricity . However , accurate modeling based on a realistic model of tidal response has demonstrated that Mercury was captured into the 3 : 2 spin – orbit state at a very early stage of its history , within 20 ( more likely , 10 ) million years after its formation . 
 Numerical simulations show that a future secular orbital resonant perihelion interaction with Jupiter may cause the eccentricity of Mercury 's orbit to increase to the point where there is a 1 % chance that the planet may collide with Venus within the next five billion years . 
 = = = Advance of perihelion = = = 
 In 1859 , the French mathematician and astronomer Urbain Le Verrier reported that the slow precession of Mercury 's orbit around the Sun could not be completely explained by Newtonian mechanics and perturbations by the known planets . He suggested , among possible explanations , that another planet ( or perhaps instead a series of smaller ' <unk> ' ) might exist in an orbit even closer to the Sun than that of Mercury , to account for this perturbation . ( Other explanations considered included a slight oblateness of the Sun . ) The success of the search for Neptune based on its perturbations of the orbit of Uranus led astronomers to place faith in this possible explanation , and the hypothetical planet was named Vulcan , but no such planet was ever found . 
 The perihelion precession of Mercury is 5 @,@ 600 arcseconds ( 1 @.@ <unk> ° ) per century relative to Earth , or 574 @.@ 10 ± 0 @.@ 65 arcseconds per century relative to the inertial <unk> . Newtonian mechanics , taking into account all the effects from the other planets , predicts a precession of 5 @,@ 557 arcseconds ( 1 @.@ <unk> ° ) per century . In the early 20th century , Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity provided the explanation for the observed precession . The effect is small : just 42 @.@ 98 arcseconds per century for Mercury ; it therefore requires a little over twelve million orbits for a full excess turn . Similar , but much smaller , effects exist for other Solar System bodies : 8 @.@ 62 arcseconds per century for Venus , 3 @.@ 84 for Earth , 1 @.@ 35 for Mars , and 10 @.@ 05 for 1566 Icarus . 
 Albert Einstein 's formula for the perihelion shift is <formula> , 
 where e is the orbital eccentricity , a the semi @-@ major axis , and T the orbital period . 
 = = Observation = = 
 Mercury 's apparent magnitude varies between − 2 @.@ 6 ( brighter than the brightest star Sirius ) and about + 5 @.@ 7 ( approximating the theoretical limit of naked @-@ eye visibility ) . The extremes occur when Mercury is close to the Sun in the sky . Observation of Mercury is complicated by its proximity to the Sun , as it is lost in the Sun 's glare for much of the time . Mercury can be observed for only a brief period during either morning or evening twilight . 
 Mercury can , like several other planets and the brightest stars , be seen during a total solar eclipse . 
 Like the Moon and Venus , Mercury exhibits phases as seen from Earth . It is " new " at inferior conjunction and " full " at superior conjunction . The planet is rendered invisible from Earth on both of these occasions because of its being obscured by the Sun 's disk . 
 Mercury is technically brightest as seen from Earth when it is at a full phase . Although Mercury is farthest from Earth when it is full , the greater illuminated area that is visible and the opposition brightness surge more than compensates for the distance . The opposite is true for Venus , which appears brightest when it is a crescent , because it is much closer to Earth than when gibbous . 
 Nonetheless , the brightest ( full phase ) appearance of Mercury is an essentially impossible time for practical observation , because of the extreme proximity of the Sun . Mercury is best observed at the first and last quarter , although they are phases of lesser brightness . The first and last quarter phases occur at greatest elongation east and west , respectively . At both of these times Mercury 's separation from the Sun ranges anywhere from 17 @.@ 9 ° at perihelion to 27 @.@ 8 ° at aphelion . At greatest elongation west , Mercury rises at its earliest before the Sun , and at greatest elongation east , it sets at its latest after the Sun . 
 At tropical and subtropical latitudes , Mercury is more easily seen than at higher latitudes . In low latitudes and at the right times of year , the ecliptic intersects the horizon at a steep angle . When Mercury is vertically above the Sun in the sky and is at maximum elongation from the Sun ( 28 degrees ) , and when the Sun is 18 degrees below the horizon , so the sky is just completely dark , Mercury is 10 degrees above the horizon . This is the greatest angle of elevation at which Mercury can be seen in a completely dark sky . 
 At temperate latitudes , Mercury is more often easily visible from Earth 's Southern Hemisphere than from its Northern Hemisphere . This is because Mercury 's maximum possible elongations west of the Sun always occur when it is early autumn in the Southern Hemisphere , whereas its maximum possible eastern elongations happen during late winter in the Southern Hemisphere . In both of these cases , the angle Mercury strikes with the ecliptic is maximized , allowing it to rise several hours before the Sun in the former instance and not set until several hours after sundown in the latter in countries located at southern temperate zone latitudes , such as Argentina and South Africa . 
 An alternate method for viewing Mercury involves observing the planet during daylight hours when conditions are clear , ideally when it is at its point of greatest elongation . This allows the planet to be found easily , even when using telescopes with 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) apertures . Care must be taken to ensure the instrument isn 't pointed directly towards the Sun because of the risk for eye damage . This method bypasses the limitation of twilight observing when the ecliptic is located at a low elevation ( e.g. on autumn evenings ) . 
 Ground @-@ based telescope observations of Mercury reveal only an illuminated partial disk with limited detail . The first of two spacecraft to visit the planet was Mariner 10 , which mapped about 45 % of its surface from 1974 to 1975 . The second is the MESSENGER spacecraft , which after three Mercury flybys between 2008 and 2009 , attained orbit around Mercury on March 17 , 2011 , to study and map the rest of the planet . 
 The Hubble Space Telescope cannot observe Mercury at all , due to safety procedures that prevent its pointing too close to the Sun . 
 Because the shift of 0 @.@ 15 revolutions in a year makes up a seven @-@ year cycle ( 0 @.@ 15 × 7 ≈ 1 @.@ 0 ) , in the seventh year Mercury follows almost exactly ( earlier by 7 days ) the sequence of phenomena it showed seven years before . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 = = = Ancient astronomers = = = 
 The earliest known recorded observations of Mercury are from the <unk> tablets . These observations were most likely made by an Assyrian astronomer around the 14th century BC . The cuneiform name used to designate Mercury on the <unk> tablets is transcribed as <unk> \ <unk> ( " the jumping planet " ) . Babylonian records of Mercury date back to the 1st millennium BC . The Babylonians called the planet Nabu after the messenger to the gods in their mythology . 
 The ancient Greeks knew the planet as <unk> ( Stilbon ) , meaning " the gleaming " , <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( Hermes ) , a planetary name that is retained in modern Greek ( <unk> : Ermis ) . The Romans named the planet after the swift @-@ footed Roman messenger god , Mercury ( Latin Mercurius ) , which they equated with the Greek Hermes , because it moves across the sky faster than any other planet . The astronomical symbol for Mercury is a stylized version of Hermes ' caduceus . 
 The Roman @-@ Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy wrote about the possibility of planetary transits across the face of the Sun in his work Planetary Hypotheses . He suggested that no transits had been observed either because planets such as Mercury were too small to see , or because the transits were too infrequent . 
 In ancient China , Mercury was known as " the Hour Star " ( Chen @-@ xing <unk> ) . It was associated with the direction north and the phase of water in the Five Phases system of metaphysics . Modern Chinese , Korean , Japanese and Vietnamese cultures refer to the planet literally as the " water star " ( <unk> ) , based on the Five elements . Hindu mythology used the name Budha for Mercury , and this god was thought to preside over Wednesday . The god Odin ( or Woden ) of Germanic paganism was associated with the planet Mercury and Wednesday . The Maya may have represented Mercury as an owl ( or possibly four owls ; two for the morning aspect and two for the evening ) that served as a messenger to the underworld . 
 In medieval Islamic astronomy , the Andalusian astronomer Abū <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> in the 11th century described the deferent of Mercury 's geocentric orbit as being oval , like an egg or a <unk> , although this insight did not influence his astronomical theory or his astronomical calculations . In the 12th century , Ibn Bajjah observed " two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun " , which was later suggested as the transit of Mercury and / or Venus by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al @-@ Din Shirazi in the 13th century . ( Note that most such medieval reports of transits were later taken as observations of sunspots . ) 
 In India , the Kerala school astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji in the 15th century developed a partially heliocentric planetary model in which Mercury orbits the Sun , which in turn orbits Earth , similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century . 
 = = = Ground @-@ based telescopic research = = = 
 The first telescopic observations of Mercury were made by Galileo in the early 17th century . Although he observed phases when he looked at Venus , his telescope was not powerful enough to see the phases of Mercury . In 1631 , Pierre Gassendi made the first telescopic observations of the transit of a planet across the Sun when he saw a transit of Mercury predicted by Johannes Kepler . In 1639 , Giovanni <unk> used a telescope to discover that the planet had orbital phases similar to Venus and the Moon . The observation demonstrated conclusively that Mercury orbited around the Sun . 
 A rare event in astronomy is the passage of one planet in front of another ( occultation ) , as seen from Earth . Mercury and Venus occult each other every few centuries , and the event of May 28 , 1737 is the only one historically observed , having been seen by John Bevis at the Royal Greenwich Observatory . The next occultation of Mercury by Venus will be on December 3 , <unk> . 
 The difficulties inherent in observing Mercury mean that it has been far less studied than the other planets . In 1800 , Johann Schröter made observations of surface features , claiming to have observed 20 @-@ kilometre @-@ high ( 12 mi ) mountains . Friedrich Bessel used Schröter 's drawings to erroneously estimate the rotation period as 24 hours and an axial tilt of 70 ° . In the 1880s , Giovanni Schiaparelli mapped the planet more accurately , and suggested that Mercury 's rotational period was 88 days , the same as its orbital period due to tidal locking . This phenomenon is known as synchronous rotation . The effort to map the surface of Mercury was continued by Eugenios Antoniadi , who published a book in 1934 that included both maps and his own observations . Many of the planet 's surface features , particularly the albedo features , take their names from Antoniadi 's map . 
 In June 1962 , Soviet scientists at the Institute of Radio @-@ engineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences , led by Vladimir <unk> , became the first to bounce a radar signal off Mercury and receive it , starting radar observations of the planet . Three years later , radar observations by Americans Gordon Pettengill and R. Dyce , using the 300 @-@ meter Arecibo Observatory radio telescope in Puerto Rico , showed conclusively that the planet 's rotational period was about 59 days . The theory that Mercury 's rotation was synchronous had become widely held , and it was a surprise to astronomers when these radio observations were announced . If Mercury were tidally locked , its dark face would be extremely cold , but measurements of radio emission revealed that it was much hotter than expected . Astronomers were reluctant to drop the synchronous rotation theory and proposed alternative mechanisms such as powerful heat @-@ distributing winds to explain the observations . 
 Italian astronomer Giuseppe Colombo noted that the rotation value was about two @-@ thirds of Mercury 's orbital period , and proposed that the planet 's orbital and rotational periods were locked into a 3 : 2 rather than a 1 : 1 resonance . Data from Mariner 10 subsequently confirmed this view . This means that Schiaparelli 's and Antoniadi 's maps were not " wrong " . Instead , the astronomers saw the same features during every second orbit and recorded them , but disregarded those seen in the meantime , when Mercury 's other face was toward the Sun , because the orbital geometry meant that these observations were made under poor viewing conditions . 
 Ground @-@ based optical observations did not shed much further light on Mercury , but radio astronomers using interferometry at microwave wavelengths , a technique that enables removal of the solar radiation , were able to discern physical and chemical characteristics of the subsurface layers to a depth of several meters . Not until the first space probe flew past Mercury did many of its most fundamental morphological properties become known . Moreover , recent technological advances have led to improved ground @-@ based observations . In 2000 , high @-@ resolution lucky imaging observations were conducted by the Mount Wilson Observatory 1 @.@ 5 meter Hale telescope . They provided the first views that resolved surface features on the parts of Mercury that were not imaged in the Mariner 10 mission . Most of the planet has been mapped by the Arecibo radar telescope , with 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) resolution , including polar deposits in shadowed craters of what may be water ice . 
 = = = Research with space probes = = = 
 Reaching Mercury from Earth poses significant technical challenges , because it orbits so much closer to the Sun than Earth . A Mercury @-@ bound spacecraft launched from Earth must travel over 91 million kilometres ( 57 million miles ) into the Sun 's gravitational potential well . Mercury has an orbital speed of 48 km / s ( 30 mi / s ) , whereas Earth 's orbital speed is 30 km / s ( 19 mi / s ) . Therefore , the spacecraft must make a large change in velocity ( delta @-@ v ) to enter a Hohmann transfer orbit that passes near Mercury , as compared to the delta @-@ v required for other planetary missions . 
 The potential energy liberated by moving down the Sun 's potential well becomes kinetic energy ; requiring another large delta @-@ v change to do anything other than rapidly pass by Mercury . To land safely or enter a stable orbit the spacecraft would rely entirely on rocket motors . <unk> is ruled out because Mercury has a negligible atmosphere . A trip to Mercury requires more rocket fuel than that required to escape the Solar System completely . As a result , only two space probes have visited it so far . A proposed alternative approach would use a solar sail to attain a Mercury @-@ synchronous orbit around the Sun . 
 = = = = Mariner 10 = = = = 
 The first spacecraft to visit Mercury was NASA 's Mariner 10 ( 1974 – 1975 ) . The spacecraft used the gravity of Venus to adjust its orbital velocity so that it could approach Mercury , making it both the first spacecraft to use this gravitational " slingshot " effect and the first NASA mission to visit multiple planets . Mariner 10 provided the first close @-@ up images of Mercury 's surface , which immediately showed its heavily cratered nature , and revealed many other types of geological features , such as the giant scarps that were later ascribed to the effect of the planet shrinking slightly as its iron core cools . Unfortunately , due to the length of Mariner 10 's orbital period , the same face of the planet was lit at each of Mariner 10 's close approaches . This made observation of both sides of the planet impossible , and resulted in the mapping of less than 45 % of the planet 's surface . 
 The spacecraft made three close approaches to Mercury , the closest of which took it to within 327 km ( 203 mi ) of the surface . At the first close approach , instruments detected a magnetic field , to the great surprise of planetary geologists — Mercury 's rotation was expected to be much too slow to generate a significant dynamo effect . The second close approach was primarily used for imaging , but at the third approach , extensive magnetic data were obtained . The data revealed that the planet 's magnetic field is much like Earth 's , which deflects the solar wind around the planet . The origin of Mercury 's magnetic field is still the subject of several competing theories . 
 On March 24 , 1975 , just eight days after its final close approach , Mariner 10 ran out of fuel . Because its orbit could no longer be accurately controlled , mission controllers instructed the probe to shut down . Mariner 10 is thought to be still orbiting the Sun , passing close to Mercury every few months . 
 = = = = MESSENGER = = = = 
 A second NASA mission to Mercury , named MESSENGER ( <unk> Surface , Space <unk> , <unk> , and Ranging ) , was launched on 3 August 2004 . It made a fly @-@ by of Earth in August 2005 , and of Venus in October 2006 and June 2007 to place it onto the correct trajectory to reach an orbit around Mercury . A first fly @-@ by of Mercury occurred on January 14 , 2008 , a second on October 6 , 2008 , and a third on September 29 , 2009 . Most of the hemisphere not imaged by Mariner 10 was mapped during these fly @-@ bys . The probe successfully entered an elliptical orbit around the planet on March 18 , 2011 . The first orbital image of Mercury was obtained on March 29 , 2011 . The probe finished a one @-@ year mapping mission , and then entered a one @-@ year extended mission into 2013 . In addition to continued observations and mapping of Mercury , MESSENGER observed the 2012 solar maximum . 
 The mission was designed to clear up six key issues : Mercury 's high density , its geological history , the nature of its magnetic field , the structure of its core , whether it has ice at its poles , and where its tenuous atmosphere comes from . To this end , the probe carried imaging devices that gathered much @-@ higher @-@ resolution images of much more of Mercury than Mariner 10 , assorted spectrometers to determine abundances of elements in the crust , and magnetometers and devices to measure velocities of charged particles . Measurements of changes in the probe 's orbital velocity were expected to be used to infer details of the planet 's interior structure . MESSENGER 's final maneuver was on April 24 , 2015 , and it crashed into Mercury 's surface on April 30 , 2015 . The spacecraft 's impact with Mercury occurred near 3 : 26 PM EDT on April 30 , 2015 , leaving a crater estimated to be 16 m ( 52 ft ) in diameter . 
 = = = = BepiColombo = = = = 
 The European Space Agency is planning a joint mission with Japan called BepiColombo , which will orbit Mercury with two probes : one to map the planet and the other to study its magnetosphere . Once launched in 2018 , BepiColombo is expected to reach Mercury in 2024 . It will release a magnetometer probe into an elliptical orbit , then chemical rockets will fire to deposit the mapper probe into a circular orbit . Both probes will operate for one terrestrial year . The mapper probe will carry an array of spectrometers similar to those on MESSENGER , and will study the planet at many different wavelengths including infrared , ultraviolet , X @-@ ray and gamma ray . 
 = = Comparison = = 
 = New York State Route 167 = 
 New York State Route 167 ( NY 167 ) is a north – south state highway in the Mohawk Valley region of New York in the United States . It extends for 26 @.@ 17 miles ( 42 @.@ 12 km ) from an intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in the Otsego County village of Richfield Springs to a junction with NY 29 in the Herkimer County village of Dolgeville . Midway between the two endpoints , NY 167 passes through the city of Little Falls , where it meets NY 5 and indirectly connects to the New York State Thruway by way of NY 169 . Most of NY 167 is a two @-@ lane rural highway ; however , in Little Falls , NY 167 ranges in width from two to four lanes as it serves commercial and industrial sections of the city . 
 The piece of NY 167 between Richfield Springs and Paines Hollow , a small hamlet southwest of Little Falls , was originally part of an unsigned legislative route in the early 20th century . Farther north , the segment between Little Falls and Dolgeville was added to the legislative route system in 1910 . In 1924 , the Richfield Springs – Paines Hollow route became part of NY 28 ; however , that route was altered as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to follow a new alignment to the west . NY 28 's former routing between Richfield Springs and Paines Hollow became part of the new NY 167 , which continued north through Little Falls to Dolgeville as it does today . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Richfield Springs to Little Falls = = = 
 NY 167 begins at an intersection with US 20 ( West Main Street ) near the northern tip of <unk> Lake in the village of Richfield Springs . The route proceeds north as a two @-@ lane highway along Church Street , passing through the village 's residential northern portion before leaving Richfield Springs and crossing the Otsego – Herkimer county line just a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) from the junction with US 20 . The residential surroundings follow NY 167 into the town of Warren ; however , they give way to more open , undeveloped areas as the route intersects Millstone Road ( County Route 78 or CR 78 , an unsigned number ) about a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) from the county line . From Millstone Road , the route winds northeast through Warren , traveling through increasingly rural areas as it serves the hamlet of Cullen and intersects Cullen and Hogsback roads ( CR 183 ) in the center of the small community . 
 Past Cullen , NY 167 makes a gradual bend to the northeast , passing by a series of farms on its way to the hamlet of Jordanville . Here , the highway intersects with Jordanville Road ( CR 18 ) , an east – west two @-@ lane road that NY 167 briefly follows as it runs through the community . A short distance east of Jordanville , NY 167 splits from Jordanville Road to head northeast as a two @-@ lane rural road . It intersects with country roads , such as Rock Hill Road ( CR 135 ) and Robinson Road ( CR 46 ) For the next 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , the route meanders across Warren , following an erratic northeasterly course across largely undeveloped areas to reach the rural hamlet of Paines Hollow , located at the junction of NY 167 and NY 168 . 
 After leaving Paines Hollow , NY 167 continues northeast into the town of Little Falls . The route remains rural through the town , intersecting with Johnny Cake and Oregon roads ( CR 136 and CR 120 , respectively ) as it winds to the northeast . Just under 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Paines Hollow , the highway briefly curves to the southeast ahead of a hairpin turn that leads northward to a junction with Newville Road ( CR 45 ) . 
 = = = Little Falls to Dolgeville = = = 
 NY 167 heads generally northward through Little Falls , veering to the east and west at various points as it traverses the town . About 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of the city of Little Falls , the highway passes under the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 or I @-@ 90 ) with no connection to the road . After the Thruway overpass , NY 167 heads into a residential area surrounding its junction with NY 5S . The two routes briefly overlap before NY 167 turns north into a less populated , mostly wooded area along the southern bank of the Mohawk River ( here part of the Erie Canal ) . NY 167 follows the river into an industrial section of the city of Little Falls , where it becomes Overhead Street and soon crosses the Mohawk via the Overhead Street Bridge . 
 North of the river , the highway passes over NY 5 before intersecting Albany Street just west of downtown Little Falls . Albany Street is the eastbound half of a one @-@ way couplet with nearby Main Street ; as a result , the two directions of NY 167 split to follow different alignments through western Little Falls . From Overhead Street , northbound NY 167 turns east to follow Albany Street for two blocks to Little Falls ' commercial center , where it intersects with southbound NY 169 at South Ann Street . NY 169 turns east here to follow Albany Street while NY 167 heads south along the two @-@ way South Ann Street for one block to reach NY 5 , a four @-@ lane divided highway on the north bank of the Mohawk River . At this point , NY 167 northbound reconnects to the southbound route , which follows NY 5 west from South Ann Street to NY 5 's junction with the west end of Albany Street . 
 East of South Ann Street , both directions of NY 167 overlap with NY 5 , following the four @-@ lane road along the southern edge of downtown to a junction with East Main Street on the city 's east side . NY 167 reconnects with NY 169 here , which leaves East Main Street to briefly follow NY 5 and NY 167 along the riverside arterial . The resulting overlap between NY 167 and NY 169 is a wrong @-@ way concurrency , with NY 169 southbound overlapping NY 167 northbound and vice versa . NY 169 splits from the highway after just one block to proceed south across the Mohawk River while NY 5 and NY 167 remain concurrent to the eastern edge of the city . Here , NY 167 forks from NY 5 , running east as a two @-@ lane street through the undeveloped eastern fringe of Little Falls . The highway rises in elevation as it heads out of the Mohawk River valley and passes into the adjacent town of Manheim . 
 Now known as Dolgeville Road , NY 167 heads northeastward through dense forests to the hamlet of Manheim Center , a small residential community 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Little Falls . Here , the route connects to <unk> Road ( CR 42 ) . After leaving Manheim Center , the route becomes rural again , heading northward for several miles past farms , power lines , and the terminus of <unk> Bush Road ( CR 23 ) . North of <unk> Bush Road , NY 167 trends to the northeast , loosely paralleling East Canada Creek as it heads toward the village of Dolgeville as South Main Street . The rural areas along the route gradually give way to homes , which in turn lead to Dolgeville 's central business district . In the center of Dolgeville , NY 167 runs alongside the creek for several blocks before ending at an intersection with NY 29 ( State Street ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Two sections of what is now NY 167 were included as part of legislative routes when the New York State Legislature created a statewide legislative route system in 1908 . From Richfield Springs to Paines Hollow , it was designated as part of Route 5 , which continued southeast to Kingston via Oneonta and northwest to Mohawk . The section of what is now NY 167 north of Little Falls became part of Route 26 , which ran from Little Falls to Remsen via Dolgeville . In 1910 , Route 26 was realigned to follow a more direct routing between Little Falls and Remsen via Middleville and Poland . The former alignment of Route 26 between Little Falls and Dolgeville went unnumbered until March 1 , 1921 , when it became part of Route 37 , which was extended southwestward from Dolgeville to Little Falls . 
 The alignment of NY 167 follows the Paine 's Hollow Road , constructed between Little Falls and Paines Hollow . This new road would shorten time between the two communities through Herkimer County . The Paine 's Hollow Road opened on October 4 , 1921 , opening a new road through the dairy country of the Mohawk Valley . The new road had branch alignments toward Oneonta , Cooperstown and Richfield Springs . At 1 p.m. ( 1800 UTC ) that day , a convoy of vehicles drove the route south from Little Falls , with a band on a large truck and a coach with six horses . When the group reached Paines Hollow , a ceremony was held , led by the president of the Little Falls Chamber of Commerce and H.P. Snyder , the local legislator for Herkimer County . The new section between Paines Hollow and Jordanville cost $ 123 @,@ 136 @.@ 25 ( 1921 USD ) and was designated as State Highway 1363 . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , most of legislative Route 5 north of Oneonta — including the section between Richfield Springs and Mohawk — became part of NY 28 , which originally began in Oneonta and headed north through Richfield Springs and Mohawk before ending in Utica . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the section of NY 28 between Richfield Springs and Mohawk was moved onto a new highway to the west that went directly between the two locations . The portion of its former routing between Richfield Springs and Paines Hollow became part of the new NY 167 , which continued north from Paines Hollow to Dolgeville via Little Falls and old legislative Route 37 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Bale Out = 
 " Bale Out : RevoLucian 's Christian Bale Remix ! " is a satirical dance remix by American composer Lucian Piane , also known as RevoLucian , released on February 2 , 2009 , to YouTube and Myspace . The piece parodies Christian Bale by utilizing audio from a July 2008 rant made by the actor on the set of Terminator Salvation . Various other elements are used in the remix , including pulsating dance track beats and clips of Barbra Streisand from a 2006 exchange with a supporter of then @-@ President George W. Bush , creating the impression of Streisand arguing with Bale . 
 The day after its release , the YouTube page for the song had been viewed over 200 @,@ 000 times , and over a million times by February 5 , 2009 . The Associated Press called it a " hypnotic dance track " , and United Press International noted it was " catchy " , characterizing it as a " YouTube sensation " . Gil Kaufman of MTV.com described the piece as " a techno @-@ ripping , demonic dance party " . Time magazine 's website called the track " hilarious " , and Nine News characterized it as a " raging online success " . The director of Terminator Salvation McG liked the remix and put a copy of it on his iPod , and Bale said he had heard the remix and thought " they did a good job " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In July 2008 , Christian Bale was filming a scene in New Mexico for the film Terminator Salvation with actress Bryce Dallas Howard . The film 's director of photography , Shane Hurlbut , walked into Bale 's line of sight , and the actor proceeded to yell obscenities at Hurlbut . Bale said he would quit the film if Hurlbut repeated the error and was not subsequently fired . Hurlbut responded calmly and apologized several times to Bale , and continued shooting for seven hours after the incident . 
 The website TMZ.com reported the occurrence soon after it happened , and posted an audio recording on February 2 , 2009 . The event did not become widely publicized until after TMZ.com had posted the audio of Bale 's outburst . TMZ.com reported that film executives for Terminator Salvation sent a copy of the audio recording to the film 's insurance company , in case Bale refused to continue filming . 
 Four days after the audio recording was posted to the Internet , Bale appeared as a guest on Los Angeles radio station KROQ @-@ FM , where he was asked about the altercation . He said he " acted like a punk " , and that he and Hurlbut talked after the conflict and " resolved this completely " . Bale acknowledged the two worked together for several hours after the episode , and " at least a month after that " , and noted , " I 've seen a rough cut of the movie and he has done a wonderful job . It looks fantastic . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Prior to the release of Bale Out , Lucian Piane was known for a variety of satirical remixes , including tracks featuring Alaska Governor Sarah Palin , political commentator Bill O 'Reilly during an on @-@ camera outburst in the 1980s , and Andrew Meyer , who received national media attention when he was tasered by police during a speech given by U.S. Senator John Kerry at the University of Florida . 
 The Associated Press reported that Piane was " drawn to the musicality of Bale 's rage @-@ filled voice " . Piane spent three hours working on the remix . " When I heard Christian Bale flip out I had to remix the track . ... It 's good to hear that clubs have already started playing it as it is very funny , " said Piane . In an interview with LA Weekly , Piane commented that he wants his remix remembered , instead of Bale 's outburst : " We 're all people in this world . So I figured , [ instead of ] remembering that one time Christian Bale went crazy on set , maybe people will remember the remix . " 
 The " Bale Out " mashup incorporates audio clips of Bale lashing out , and Hurlbut responding " I was looking at the lights . " The chorus includes a clip of Bale saying " it 's fucking distracting " , and " What don 't you fuckin ' understand ? " . The sound collage includes clips of Barbra Streisand from a 2006 exchange with a supporter of former @-@ President George W. Bush , making it sound as though Streisand is arguing with Bale . Piane told the Associated Press : " I don 't know if Christian Bale is enjoying it , but I hope he does . I think I 've taken something that maybe made him look really bad and turned it into something that all these people are enjoying . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Piane uploaded the piece to MySpace and YouTube on February 2 , 2009 , hours after the original clip of Bale appeared on the internet . Piane made an MP3 file of " Bale Out " available as a free download from his MySpace page . " Bale Out " had been viewed over 200 @,@ 000 times one day after it was uploaded to YouTube , and within two days it had received 700 @,@ 000 hits . Three days after its posting , " Bale Out " had been viewed over one million times on YouTube , and over 1 @.@ 5 million times after one week . 
 In a report on the remix for The Situation Room on CNN , correspondent Brooke Anderson noted " ... by the looks of this musical parody already posted on YouTube , this infamous rant will be talked about – for a long time to come . " Anderson Cooper of Anderson Cooper 360 ° described the RevoLucian remix as " the ballistic Bale boogie " . A piece in Vue Weekly posed the question " what does it all mean in the end when a remixed diatribe by a Hollywood star will get way more hits in a day than any film @-@ criticism site in a year ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 LA Weekly reported that McG , the director of Terminator Salvation , had a copy of " Bale Out " on his iPod . " And I have to admit , that dance remix [ on YouTube ] is pretty hot , " said McG in an interview with Fast Company . In an interview with E ! : Entertainment Television to discuss Terminator : Salvation , Christian Bale said he had heard the remix and commented : " It was a good remix ; they did a good job . " Bale said he had received a remix of his outburst from a friend : " They did a bloody good job ! I 've gotta say , what a great impulse , you know ? To take something ugly like that and make it into a dance ? That 's a wonderful thing . " 
 The Associated Press described the piece as a " hypnotic dance track " , " beat @-@ driven " , and a " pulsating tune " . The AP noted " Bale has become an unwitting music sensation because of the incident . " A Los Angeles Times blog described " Bale Out " as " a genius piece of mixing by L.A. ' s very own RevoLucian " , and called the piece a " brilliant " club remix . MTV.com called it " a techno @-@ ripping , demonic dance party in which Bale 's berating is repeated ad nauseam under pictures of the actor and random f @-@ bomb interjections from Barbra Streisand " . United Press International characterized the remix as a " YouTube sensation " , calling it " catchy " . 
 LA Weekly described the remix as " a mash @-@ up of Bale 's best quotes set to a synth @-@ heavy beat " , and noted " ' Bale Out ' turned ' What don 't you fuckin ' understand ? ' into one of the year 's most addictive choruses and spun a little art out of the debacle . " The Irish Independent called the piece a " painstakingly constructed dance track " , and described the chorus as " oddly catchy " . The Globe and Mail commented that the remix has " an imperilling beat , a genius comedic flair and more sheer scariness than American Psycho and Terminator combined " . The Wall Street Journal wrote that Piane combined Bale 's language with " a driving house music track " . 
 TIME magazine 's website described the piece as " a hilarious YouTube musical remix " . Nine News called RevoLucian 's piece a " cheeky remix " and a " raging online success " . The Daily Telegraph in London highlighted the RevoLucian piece among the " Best of the mash @-@ ups and spoofs " of the Bale outburst , noting he arranged the audio clips from Bale into a " potential dancefloor success " . Dose magazine commented " We 've been throwing light @-@ switch raves to the RevoLucian mix all week , " and BlackBook Magazine described it as " a brilliant club mix of Bale 's meltdown that 's bound to scream in your head all day " . The A.V. Club called the piece " a Hater @-@ worthy techno remix " , and The Celebrity Cafe commented " <unk> 's remix must have had techno artists everywhere sweating to come up with something half as good , and likely inspired a few outlandish requests by club goers . " 
 North Carolina State University doctoral student Matt Morain commented on the remixes spawned by Bale 's rant , in an April 2009 paper on Internet memes . Morain noted that remixes of Bale 's rant received more hits than the rant itself , " What is more surprising than the nearly two million views is that a number of remixes appeared , in response to the clip , which have substantially higher view @-@ counts than the original . In this process of remixing we can clearly see the elements of fantasy theme and rhetorical transmission . " Perez Hilton commented , " Once again , Lucian Piane has outdone himself ! You must listen to this . " Hilton posted a video to his blog of himself dancing to Piane 's remix . 
 On November 17 , 2009 , Piane 's remix received a nomination for " Best Remix of the Year " by the website Urlesque . The website 's staff noted the Piane remix " spread like wildfire " , and became an Internet phenomenon . Piane 's remix was one of five nominations ; it lost to the " Slap Chop Rap " parodying Vince Offer . " Bale Out " was a finalist in the category of " Latest Favorite Viral Video " , in the " 2009 Best of Clicker Awards " ; the winner was " David After Dentist " . " Bale Out " was nominated for a Webby Award in 2010 , in the category of " Best Video Remixes / <unk> " . The 2010 winner in the category for the Webby was " Auto @-@ Tune the News " . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Charles Heaphy = 
 Charles Heaphy VC ( 1820 – 3 August 1881 ) was an English @-@ born New Zealand explorer and recipient of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) , the highest military award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces . He was the first soldier of the New Zealand armed forces to be awarded the VC . He was also a noted artist and executed several works of early colonial life in New Zealand . 
 Born in England , Heaphy joined the New Zealand Company in 1839 . He arrived in New Zealand later that year and was commissioned to create art for advertising the country to potential English migrants . Much of the next two and half years was spent travelling and executing paintings of landscapes and life around the centre of the country . When his contract with the company ended in 1842 , he lived in Nelson for several years and explored large parts of the West Coast . He later moved north to Auckland to take up employment as a surveyor . 
 During the Invasion of the Waikato , his militia unit was mobilised and it was his conduct at Paterangi , where he rescued British soldiers under fire , that saw him awarded the VC . He was the first recipient of the VC to be a non @-@ regular soldier . After his military service ended , Heaphy served a term as Member of Parliament for Parnell . From 1870 to 1881 , he held a variety of civil service positions but his health declined and he moved to Queensland , in Australia , seeking a better climate in which to recover . He died a few months after his arrival . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Heaphy was born sometime in 1820 in London , England . He was the youngest child of Thomas Heaphy , who was a professional painter and three of his siblings also became noted painters . His grandfather John Gerrard Heaphy was a merchant from Ireland . The family lived in St John 's Wood in north @-@ west London and enjoyed a comfortable , middle @-@ class existence although his mother died sometime during his early childhood . Thomas earned painting commissions from high society and in 1812 accompanied Arthur Wellesley , who was later to become the Duke of Wellington , as staff artist during the Peninsular War . Thomas died in 1835 and left the entire estate to his second wife , who he had married in 1833 . Charles , who had obtained work as a draughtsman at the London & Birmingham Railway Company , moved out of the family home soon after . As a child , Charles was taught to paint by his father and in December 1837 , sponsored by a family friend , he entered the Royal Academy school of painting . He was the only child of the Heaphy family to receive this level of education . 
 In May 1839 , after 18 months at the Royal Academy , Heaphy joined the New Zealand Company as a draughtsman . The company was established by Edward Wakefield as a private venture , to organise colonies in New Zealand and sought well @-@ educated men as staff for planning and surveying new settlements in the country . Heaphy sailed with William Wakefield , Edward 's brother , aboard the Tory on an expedition to purchase land suitable for settlement . In late 1839 , the Tory arrived in what became known as Wellington . 
 = = Service with the New Zealand Company = = 
 Heaphy 's contract with the company was for three years , primarily to create art that could be used as advertising for the company . In doing so he travelled extensively around the country and occasionally participated in overland treks , living out of a tent or staying with local Māori . He also sailed around parts of the country aboard the Tory and learned surveying from its captain . Another employee of the company travelling on the Tory was Ernst <unk> , who taught Heaphy basic geology . 
 Heaphy painted a variety of subjects including landscapes , flora and fauna and notable Māori , including the chieftain Te Rauparaha . The success of the company depended on attracting emigrants to New Zealand so his work was almost always intended to present the country and its inhabitants in its best light . Heaphy was at times exposed to some danger ; on an expedition to the Chatham Islands , his party intervened in a skirmish between two warring tribes and he was wounded in the leg . It was unlikely to have been a serious wound for a few weeks later , he went on a trek back in New Zealand to the Taranaki Region , where he produced some of his more notable landscapes . 
 From October 1840 , Heaphy was based in Wellington and with a friend built a small cottage , that allowed him to execute several views of Wellington Harbour , which was much used in advertising for the New Zealand Company . A few months later , in early 1841 , he joined Arthur Wakefield on the expedition that led to the founding of Nelson . Heaphy was among several employees of the New Zealand Company to scout the area around Tasman Bay , before the location for Nelson was decided and executed several paintings highlighting the quality of the land intended for settlement . By late 1841 , Heaphy 's services as an artist were no longer required , given the number of works that he had produced and Wakefield decided to send him to London , to make a report to the company directors . He took nearly six months to reach London , by which time his three @-@ year contract had expired . The directors were impressed with his report and it was published as a book entitled Narrative of a Residence in Various Parts of New Zealand . 
 = = Life in Nelson = = 
 Although no longer employed by the New Zealand Company , Heaphy , emboldened by the success of his report and the public reception to his paintings , sought further opportunities for similar work . From London , he wrote to the company secretary seeking support for exploration of the area inland of Nelson . The response was unenthusiastic , the company was concentrating on developing its settlements , rather than undertaking in further exploration of the country . Despite this , Heaphy returned to New Zealand and arrived in Nelson on 22 December 1842 . 
 There was little in way of work opportunities for Heaphy in Nelson and he based himself in Motueka . Here he farmed land with a friend , Frederick Moore and this took much of what little funds he had . His farming venture was hard work and not particularly successful . By late 1843 , the New Zealand Company was in need of good pastoral land around Nelson . It had clashed with Māori in the Wairau Affray in the Wairau Valley , to the south @-@ east of Nelson and several company employees , including Arthur Wakefield , were killed . The company needed to scout the area to the south @-@ west and Heaphy finally got the chance to explore . 
 Wakefield 's replacement as resident agent in Nelson for the New Zealand Company , William Fox , was a keen advocate of expansion for settlement in the area around Nelson . Fox authorised Heaphy and a surveyor to scout south @-@ west to the Buller River in November 1843 . In December 1843 , Heaphy and two Māori trekked to what is now known as Golden Bay , and returned to Motueka via the coast , a journey which he regarded as the most difficult he had undertaken . Both expeditions failed to locate suitable land for settlement as did an expedition back to the Buller River in March 1845 . Heaphy was reasonably well compensated for his exploration efforts and for additional funds , he undertook art commissions for Nelson 's more wealthy residents . 
 In February 1846 , Heaphy , accompanied by Fox and Thomas Brunner , another employee of the New Zealand Company , as well as a Māori named Kehu , undertook another expedition to the south @-@ west . Difficult terrain faced them ; high mountain ranges topped with snow and ice , steep bush , numerous rivers and gorges . Food sources included roots and berries ; birds could be snared and eels caught from streams . Along the coast , shellfish and gull eggs added to the diet . The party , each carrying a load of 34 kilograms ( 75 lb ) , trekked to the Buller River and walked its banks as far as the <unk> River . Here , believing themselves to be only 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) from the coast , dwindling provisions prevented them proceeding to the mouth of the Buller River . Guided by Kehu , the party traversed the Hope Saddle on their way back to Nelson , which they reached on 1 March . 
 Heaphy and Brunner were keen for further exploration and with Kehu , left Nelson on 17 March 1846 , to scout along the West Coast to the mouth of the Buller . The expedition traced the western coast of South Island as far south as the Arahura River . Their journey began from Golden Bay and they made their way to West Wanganui where Etau , a local Māori , was hired as a porter . The local chief barred their journey south but Heaphy and Brunner mollified him with some tobacco . They continued along the coast , climbing sometimes steep cliffs and fording rivers as they went and their movements were held up at times , due to rain and high tides . At night , they sheltered in small caves , augmented with a screen of Nikau palm leaves . They crossed the <unk> River on 20 April and reached the Buller River ten days later . This had to be crossed using an old canoe that was repaired by Kehu and Etau and after crossing , they stayed at the local pā ( village ) . In early May , they sighted the Southern Alps and at the Arahura River ( a tributary of the Grey River ) , the southernmost point of the expedition , they were hosted by the local Ngāi Tahu tribe at Taramakau Pā . Poor weather plagued their return along the coast but they reached Nelson on 18 August . The harsh conditions that Heaphy had experienced during his travels , left him disillusioned with the potential prospects for settlements , along the West Coast region . 
 Life in Nelson remained difficult for Heaphy , who had by now lost his appetite for exploration . He eked out a living taking occasional jobs for the next six months . For much of 1847 , he undertook survey work around Tasman Bay and later in that year was the representative of the New Zealand Company , when the government investigated the amount of land set aside by the company for the local Māori . Work had dried up by early 1848 and when he was offered employment with the Auckland Survey Office in April 1848 , he accepted . 
 = = Life in Auckland = = 
 Moving north to Auckland , Heaphy 's new role as the chief draughtsman for the Auckland Survey Office , kept him occupied with the preparation of maps and plans . After a few years , he began to spend a greater amount of time in the field , where he carried out survey work . As he had done when living in Nelson , he supplemented his income with commissioned artworks . He began to build on his geological knowledge , taking a particular interest in <unk> and wrote an article on Auckland 's volcanoes for a geological journal in England . He completed several paintings of volcanoes as well as thermal attractions in the Bay of Plenty including the famous Pink and White Terraces . Hoping to raise his profile , he sent many of his works to London and some remain on display at the offices of the Geological Society . 
 When he was 30 , Heaphy met and began courting Kate Churton , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of a reverend . The couple were married on 30 October 1851 , at St Paul 's Church in Auckland . A year later , he was appointed " Commissioner of Gold Fields " at Coromandel , following the recent discovery of gold . His role required him to supervise claims made by miners and negotiate land sales with local Māori . The gold rush in Coromandel soon petered out and he returned to his work at the Auckland Survey Office by mid @-@ 1853 . 
 In November 1853 , Sir George Grey ended his first term as Governor of New Zealand and sailed to the islands around New Caledonia , to indulge his interest in languages . He also wanted to investigate French claims on the islands . Heaphy accompanied him as his private secretary and took the opportunity to execute artworks of the islands he visited and their inhabitants . He gave some of his works to Grey , who took them back to England in December 1853 and donated them to the British Museum . 
 Heaphy and his wife moved north of Auckland to what is now known as Warkworth in early 1854 , following his appointment as district surveyor for the <unk> Peninsula , which was being opened for settlement . For two years , Heaphy surveyed the plots of land that were to be sold to people moving to the area . In 1856 he became Auckland 's provincial surveyor following the retirement of his predecessor . He moved back to Auckland and took up residence in Parnell . Surveying kept him busy for the next few years but in early 1859 , he accompanied Ferdinand von Hochstetter , who had been invited by the government to make a report on a coalfield discovered south of Auckland . The two became friendly and Hochstetter was impressed with Heaphy 's bush skills , although privately did not accord him much respect for his scientific knowledge . When Hochstetter left for Europe later in the year , he took with him many examples of Heaphy 's artwork . The two later fell out , when Heaphy had an article published in a geological journal . Hochstetter felt usurped by someone he considered an inferior scholar and publicly questioned Heaphy 's credentials . He also made allegations that Heaphy had plagiarised portions of his work on the coalfields . Heaphy mounted a spirited defence and generally had the sympathy of the public . The dispute did not stop Hochstetter from using Heaphy 's artwork in a book he published on New Zealand 's geology . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Soon after returning to Auckland in 1856 , Heaphy joined a militia unit , the Auckland Rifle Volunteers , with the rank of private . In 1863 , his unit was mobilised and Heaphy commissioned as an officer . Later that year he was appointed captain of the Parnell Company . During the Invasion of the Waikato ( a campaign of the New Zealand Wars ) , he was sent to survey the military road being constructed into the Waikato as well as charting the river ways , as pilot of the gunboat Pioneer . He was present at the Battle of <unk> and later made a sketch of the action , which unusually for him , included representations of British casualties . He was later attached to the staff of Lieutenant Colonel Henry Havelock as the British advanced deeper into the Waikato . 
 The Waikato Māori had withdrawn to fortified positions at <unk> and Paterangi by early 1864 . While their positions were under siege , war parties would mount raids on small groups of British soldiers . On 11 February , soldiers of the 40th Regiment of Foot were bathing in the <unk> Stream near Paterangi and were ambushed by a raiding party . Heaphy , commanding some men of the 50th Regiment of Foot , came to the aid of the defenders and moved to cut off the Māori line of retreat . He then overcame the Māori reserve , before leading his men to the ambush site , to assist the British soldiers . Despite being outnumbered , the British repulsed the Māori and began to pursue them into the bush . A soldier was wounded and Heaphy and three others went to his aid but Heaphy and one of the others were wounded and a third was killed . Unable to extricate themselves , Heaphy and the remaining fit soldier provided cover to prevent the wounded men from being axed by the Māori . They were eventually relieved by reinforcements but the two wounded men that Heaphy and the soldier were trying to protect , died of their wounds . Despite injuries to his arm , hip and ribs , Heaphy remained in the field for much of the remainder of the day , until the ambushed party was relieved . Following the action at Paterangi , Heaphy was promoted to major ; a month later , with the end of the war in the Waikato , he ceased active duty and returned to civilian life . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 In late 1864 , Major General Thomas Galloway , the commander of the New Zealand colonial forces , recommended Heaphy for the Victoria Cross ( VC ) for his actions at <unk> . The recommendation was supported by Sir George Grey ( serving a second term as the Governor of New Zealand ) , despite knowing that Heaphy and another man recommended for the VC , for an action earlier in the campaign , was not in the British Army or Royal Navy . At the time , only personnel from the regular British military could be awarded the VC and thus Heaphy , as a militiaman , was not eligible . Grey argued that as Heaphy was under the effective command of British officers he should be made an exception . In London , the authorities disagreed and the recommendation was turned down . Heaphy refused to accept this and began to agitate , with support from Grey , Havelock , and General Duncan Cameron , commander of British forces in New Zealand , with the British government . He was eventually successful and on 8 February 1867 , Queen Victoria made a declaration that the local forces of New Zealand would be eligible for the VC . That day , the award of a VC to Heaphy , the first to a New Zealander and also to a non @-@ regular soldier , was gazetted . The citation read : 
 For his gallant conduct at the skirmish on the banks of the <unk> River , in New Zealand , on the 11th of February , 1864 , in assisting a wounded soldier of the 40th Regiment , who had fallen into a hollow among the thickest of the concealed <unk> . Whilst doing so , he became the target for a volley at a few feet distant . Five balls pierced his clothes and cap , and he was wounded in three places . Although hurt , he continued to aid the wounded until the end of the day . Major Heaphy was at the time in charge of a party of soldiers of the 40th and 50th Regiments , under the orders of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Sir Henry Marshman Havelock , Bart. , V.C. , <unk> , D.L. the Senior Officer on the spot , who had moved rapidly down to the place where the troops were hotly engaged and pressed . 
 Heaphy was presented with his VC at a parade at Albert Barracks in Auckland on 11 May 1867 . The medal is now on display at the Auckland War Memorial Museum . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the cessation of hostilities , Heaphy was contracted as the " Chief Surveyor to the General Government of New Zealand " and surveyed much of the land seized from the Waikato Māori by the British , which included that on which the towns of Hamilton and Cambridge were established . In Hamilton , Heaphy Terrace , a thoroughfare in the suburb of <unk> , is named after him . His contract ended in early 1866 and he was reinstated to his pre @-@ war position as Auckland 's provincial surveyor . 
 In April 1867 , Frederick Whitaker resigned his posts as Superintendent of the Auckland Province and Member of Parliament for the Parnell electorate in Auckland . Whitaker 's resignation became known soon after Heaphy 's award of the VC was announced and Heaphy declared his candidacy for the vacant seat . The publicity around his award of the VC helped raise his profile and when the nomination meeting for the 1867 by @-@ election was held at the Parnell Hall on 6 June , he was returned unopposed as the electorate 's representative in the New Zealand Parliament . Although he was a hard working representative for the people of the Parnell electorate , Heaphy 's time in parliament was undistinguished . A parliamentary colleague was William Fox , an old acquaintance from Heaphy 's days in Nelson . When Fox became Premier of New Zealand in June 1869 , Heaphy was a supporter . Offered the position of " Commissioner of Native Reserves " by the Fox administration , he resigned from parliament on 13 April 1870 . 
 As Commissioner , Heaphy 's role was to administer native reserves set aside by the government and to determine areas of land that could be opened to migrants . His work took him up and down the country , inspecting land and negotiating with Māori landowners , a process he did not always enjoy . He still advocated for aggrieved Māori , whose land had been stolen by colonials . An added stress in Heaphy 's first year as Commissioner , was an enquiry into his conduct during the period he was " Chief Surveyor to the General Government of New Zealand " and working in the Waikato . Allegations had been raised that he took bribes , for illegally adjusting land boundaries . The enquiry cleared Heaphy of corruption although he was criticised for taking payments from young trainee surveyors , in return for work . In 1872 , he and his wife moved to Wellington , which was more centrally located and thus convenient for his work , which now included an appointment as ' Trust Commissioner for the Wellington District ' , dealing with land fraud . 
 By 1875 , Heaphy , beginning to suffer from rheumatism , had reduced the amount of time he spent in the field for his work on native reserves and it ended altogether in 1880 . In the interim , he picked up more civil service work ; he became a justice of the peace and presided over cases of petty crime brought to the Resident Magistrates Court in Wellington . In April 1878 he was appointed " Government Insurance Commissioner " and later that year became a judge of the Native Land Court . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 By May 1881 , Heaphy 's health was in severe decline , still affected by his rheumatism , he caught tuberculosis . He resigned from all his civil service positions the following month and with his wife , moved to Brisbane , in Queensland , Australia . They hoped the warmer climate would help with Heaphy 's health but Heaphy died on 3 August 1881 . Survived by his wife ( the couple had no children ) , he was buried at Toowong Cemetery , formerly the Brisbane General Cemetery . His grave , located in Portion 1 of the cemetery , approximately 20 m ( 22 yd ) north @-@ east up the hill from the " 8th Avenue " roadway , was at first marked with a numbered plaque and became overgrown . A descendant of his wife discovered the burial site in 1960 and a headstone was erected by the New Zealand Government . The inscription reads : He served New Zealand in peace and war as artist , explorer and member of parliament . He was the first non @-@ regular soldier to be awarded the Victoria Cross . 
 As well as the first New Zealander to be awarded the Victoria Cross , Heaphy was an accomplished artist . His watercolours , mostly produced between 1841 and 1855 , are an important record of many scenes in the early days of European settlement in New Zealand . Many of his works have been published in histories of New Zealand but his name is best known now through the Heaphy Track in the north @-@ west corner of the South Island . He and Brunner were probably the first Europeans to walk through this area of the South Island and the Heaphy Track , though he never followed its route , is named in his honour . 
 = Solomon Islands skink = 
 The Solomon Islands skink ( Corucia zebrata ) , also known as prehensile @-@ tailed skink , monkey @-@ tailed skink , giant skink , zebra skink , and monkey skink , is an arboreal species of skink endemic to the Solomon Islands archipelago . It is the largest known extant species of skink . 
 The Solomon Islands skink is completely herbivorous , eating many different fruits and vegetables including the <unk> plant . It is one of the few species of reptile known to function within a social group or circulus . Both male and female specimens are known to be territorial and often hostile towards members not a part of their family group . 
 Corucia is a monotypic genus , containing a single species . However , in 1997 it was determined that there are two subspecies of the Solomon Islands skink : the common monkey @-@ tailed skink ( Corucia zebrata zebrata ) and the northern monkey @-@ tailed skink ( Corucia zebrata alfredschmidti ) . Among other variances , the northern skink is smaller and has darker eyes with a black sclera . 
 Extensive logging is a serious threat to the survival of this species . Consumption for food by indigenous Solomon Islanders and excessive pet trade exports have affected wild populations . Export of this species from the Solomon Islands is now restricted and the animal is protected under CITES appendix II . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The Solomon Islands skink was first described by John Edward Gray in 1856 as Corucia zebrata . The generic name Corucia derives from the Latin word <unk> meaning " shimmering " . This is in reference to Gray 's description of " a play of colors effect from the body scales " . Its specific name zebrata is a Latinized form of the word zebra , in reference to the animal 's zebra @-@ like stripes . Its common names ( prehensile @-@ tailed skink , monkey @-@ tailed skink or monkey skink ) refer to its fully prehensile tail which the species uses as a fifth limb for climbing . 
 Although appearances of skinks vary from island to island , a subspecies from the western islands of the Solomons Archipelago was described by Dr. Gunther Köhler in 1996 as C. z. alfredschmidti , its trinomial name was in honor of the German amateur herpetologist Alfred A. Schmidt . 
 The closest living relatives of C. zebrata are the Blue @-@ tongued skinks of the genus Tiliqua and skinks of the genus <unk> of Australia , New Guinea , and Indonesia ; all of which are found in the subfamily <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Solomon Islands skink is native to Solomon Islands archipelago , a group of islands in the south @-@ west Pacific Ocean . The common subspecies ( C. z. zebrata ) is found on the islands of Choiseul Island , New Georgia , Isabel , Guadalcanal , <unk> , Malaita , Makira ( Solomon Islands ) , <unk> and Santa Ana . The northern subspecies ( C. z. alfredschmidti ) is known from the islands of Bougainville and Buka and the Shortland Island Group . Bougainville and Buka are geographically part of the Solomons Archipelago , though politically part of Papua New Guinea . Both subspecies of the Solomon Islands skink are strictly arboreal , usually inhabiting the upper canopy of forested areas throughout its range . It commonly occurs in the strangler fig tree ( Ficus sp . ) , provided the epiphytic growth of its several food plants are present . It occurs in trees in semi @-@ cleared areas and cultivated food gardens , again provided its food plants occur there . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The Solomon Islands skink is the world 's largest species of extant skink ; adults can reach a length of 32 inches ( 81 cm ) from nose to the tip of their tail when fully grown , with the tail accounting for more than half this length . 
 The Solomon Islands skink has a long , slender body , strong , short legs , and a triangular shaped head with small round eyes . The skink has a strong crushing jaw but the teeth are small and used for eating plant material . Its prehensile tail helps it maneuver from branch to branch with ease and gives the skink its more common names : monkey @-@ tailed skink , prehensile @-@ tailed skink , or monkey skink . Male Solomon Islands skinks tend to have a broader head and a more slender body shape than do female skinks . Males have a " V " -shaped pattern of scales just aft of the cloacal opening , which is not present in female skinks . 
 The scales of Solomon Islands skinks are a dark green but are often speckled with light brown or black . The scales on the underside vary from light yellow to different shades of green . The toes on all four legs have thick , curved nails used for climbing and gripping tree limbs . 
 As a crepuscular animal , it is most active during the dusk and dawn hours , feeding primarily at <unk> it also is active and eats during the hours of dawn , though to a lesser <unk> it has quite good eyesight and relies upon it to identify threats , as well as potential food .. it relies heavily on its sense of smell , and uses it to identify its territory and other members of its group , called a circulus . Like snakes , the skink " smells " by flicking its tongue to gather scents and when the tongue is retracted it touches it to the opening of a Jacobson 's organ at the roof of its mouth . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 The common Solomon Islands skink ( C. z. zebrata ) has a white sclera with its eyes while the northern Solomon Islands skink ( C. z. alfredschmidti ) has a black sclera . The iris of the northern Solomon Islands skink is a mix of green and yellow whereas the iris of the common Solomon Islands skink can vary from several different shades of green to orange to a dark black . According to Dr. Gunther Köhler , who described the northern subspecies , this subspecies possesses " larger dorsal and ventral scales " and has " seven instead of usually five parietal scales " . 
 The northern Solomon Islands skink is the shorter of the two subspecies with males averaging 24 inches ( 61 cm ) and females averaging 22 inches ( 56 cm ) in length when measured from nose to tip of tail . The common Solomon Islands skinks are slightly longer with the males averaging 28 inches ( 71 cm ) and the females averaging 24 inches ( 61 cm ) when measured from nose to tip of tail . The common Solomon Islands skink , at 850 grams ( 1 @.@ 87 lb ) , weighs more than the northern Solomon Islands skink , which weighs closer to 500 grams ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Solomon Islands skinks are herbivores , feeding on the leaves , flowers , fruit , and growing shoots of several different species of plants . This includes the somewhat toxic ( due to high concentrations of calcium oxalate ) <unk> pinnatum ( <unk> aureum ) plant , a which the lizard eats without ill @-@ <unk> Juvenile skinks often eat feces from adults in order to acquire the essential microflora to digest their food . Newborn skinks have been observed consuming their placental sac after birth and will not feed on other food for the first 2 days . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The Solomon Islands skink is one of the few species of reptile that lives in a communal group known as a circulus . The Solomon Islands skink reproduces by viviparous <unk> : c the female provides a placenta for its young , which are born after a gestation period of six to eight months ; this is a rare trait among reptiles . The newborn skink is of a large size compared to its mother ; the northern Solomon Islands skinks are approximately 29 centimetres ( 11 in ) in length and weigh 80 grams ( 0 @.@ 18 lb ) , whereas the common Solomon Islands skinks are 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) and 175 grams ( 0 @.@ 386 lb ) when they are born . This reduced size disparity led the former curator of reptiles at the Philadelphia Zoo , Dr. Kevin Wright , to compare it to " a human mother giving birth to a six year – old " . Almost all births are single babies but occasionally twins will be born . At least one instance of triplets has occurred according to herpetologist Bert <unk> . 
 The newborn skink will stay within its circulus for six to twelve months during which time it will be protected by not only its parents but other unrelated adult skinks within the group . Around one year of age , sometimes earlier , the juvenile will move off to form a new family group . Individuals have been documented to stay within the group for several births without being expelled , however . Adult skinks have even been known to " adopt " orphaned young skinks into their groups . Females exhibit fierce protective behavior around the time of birth ; this protectiveness of young is a rare occurrence in reptiles but is shorter in duration when compared to the protective behavior exhibited by a typical mammal . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 Extensive logging is a serious ongoing threat to the survival of this species , as is consumption for food by native people , and export demand for the pet trade . Because of the large numbers of lizards that were being exported for the pet trade , the small region to which the skink is native , and its low reproductive rate , in 1992 Corucia zebrata was listed as a CITES Appendix II animal , which allows limits to be placed on the number of animals in commercial trade between countries . 
 Since there is no regulation on the rapid deforestation occurring in the Solomon Islands , limited export to recognized institutions may be needed to aid this species in genetic diversity for its survival via ex situ breeding programs . According to herpetologists who study the Solomon Islands skink , such as Dr. David Kirkpatrick and the late Dr. Kevin Wright , captive breeding alone is not practical as a sole method of species survival due to the limited number of offspring and long gestation periods . 
