 = = = In captivity = = = 
 The Solomon Islands skink is represented in both public and private collections . The Philadelphia Zoo has bred these skinks over multiple generations for the past 40 years . The keeping of the Solomon Islands skink in captivity is not without its challenges : as it is a large arboreal tropical animal . It requires a large arboreal enclosure , with a constant temperature between 75 @-@ 80 degrees Fahrenheit , with heat being provided from above as well as below , allowing the skink to bask in the heat from above as it would during dusk , while providing a radiant heat from below to aid digestion . The dynamics of the skink 's circulus means that not all groups do well when new animals are introduced . Despite successful breeding programs , their somewhat unique nature of single births and slow growth has made these programs challenging . A well @-@ cared for monkey @-@ tailed skink can live twenty @-@ five to thirty years . A well @-@ balanced diet consisting primarily of kale , green beans , and cooked sweet potato , supplemented with slices of peeled kiwi fruit , apple , and papaya , as well as access to a large shallow , clean water source aid in increasing longevity . Bathing them in shallow lukewarm water during the beginning of the monthly shed , greatly reduces the stress inherent in shedding , as well as speeds the process . 
 Biologist Michael <unk> of Temple University has noted a significant number of breedings between skinks from different islands has resulted in non @-@ productive unions . <unk> 's theory is that there are enough differences between animals from different islands that pairing of lizards from different locales will be unproductive , further frustrating many captive breeding attempts . 
 = 2015 Russian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Russian Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2015 Formula 1 Russian Grand Prix ; Russian : Гран @-@ при России 2015 года ) was a Formula One motor race that took place on 11 October 2015 . The fifty @-@ three lap race was held at the Sochi Autodrom . This was the fifteenth round of the 2015 season and marked the second time that the Russian Grand Prix was run as a round of the Formula One World Championship since its inception in 1950 . 
 Lewis Hamilton won the race for the second season in a row , extending his Drivers ' Championship lead to 66 points . With Nico Rosberg retiring early in the race , Sebastian Vettel reclaimed second place in the standings for the first time since his round two victory in Malaysia with a second @-@ place finish . Sergio Pérez completed the podium in third for Force India . 
 Mercedes secured their second consecutive Constructors ' Championship , having done so at the same event the previous season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After the previous year 's race showed lower @-@ than @-@ expected tyre degradation , Pirelli opted to supply the yellow @-@ banded soft compound as the prime selection and the red @-@ banded supersoft tyre as the option selection . The previous season 's event saw Nico Rosberg complete 52 of 53 laps on the white @-@ banded medium compound on his way to a second @-@ place finish . Even with the softer tyre choice , tyre degradation was not an issue at the event , with drivers able to record fast lap times all through the race on a one @-@ stop strategy . 
 Roberto Merhi replaced Alexander Rossi for Marussia , in accordance with Rossi 's five @-@ race contract that saw him sit out this race and the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix . Jolyon Palmer replaced Romain Grosjean for Lotus for Friday 's first free practice session for the tenth time this season . 
 Fernando Alonso began the weekend 's event knowing he would start from the back of the grid due to a number of penalties incurred for changing engine parts . Honda provided him with an upgraded internal combustion engine , which had been designed using the team 's last four in @-@ season development tokens . Alonso 's McLaren teammate Jenson Button had to continue using the old @-@ specification engine at this race as Honda only had one of the upgraded power units available . However , Alonso used the new power unit only in the first practice session before switching back to the older unit , albeit voicing satisfaction with the performance of the new specification . 
 Going into the weekend , Lewis Hamilton led the Drivers ' Championship with a 48 @-@ point advantage over teammate Rosberg , with Sebastian Vettel another eleven points behind in third . Mercedes led the Constructors ' Standings on 506 points , 169 points ahead of Ferrari . In third was Williams , another 129 points behind . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held , two 90 @-@ minute sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . However , all three sessions were disrupted and little running took place . During the first session on Friday morning , a spillage of diesel on track prevented the cars from going out on until very late in the session . Eventually , Nico Hülkenberg topped the session for Force India , ahead of his compatriots Nico Rosberg and Sebastian Vettel . Since water was used to clear the surface , the first laps were run on intermediate tyres by most drivers , with both Williams cars being equipped with full wet tyres , but Valtteri Bottas spun on them entering the pit lane . Later , the track dried enough to use slick tyres , Fernando Alonso being the first to do so . Due to the limited running , the last minutes were busy with most cars out on track . Marcus Ericsson however was confined to the sidelines as he stopped with an engine problem . As Lewis Hamilton spun on his last timed lap , he needed to settle for seventh fastest . 
 With a lot of rain falling , the second practice session saw only eight drivers set timed laps , with just 14 taking to the track . Felipe Massa set the fastest time with a lap of 2 ’ 00 @.@ 458 . Both Lotus and Manor Marussia did not run at all , while Fernando Alonso ran the most number of laps with twelve , following an engine change . 
 The third practice session on Saturday saw limited running as well , as training was halted due to a massive crash by Carlos Sainz , Jr .. The Spaniard lost control of his car going into turn 13 , hit a wall and went on to crash into the safety barriers , burying the nose of his car in the process . The session was stopped while Sainz was taken out of the car and transported to hospital , albeit uninjured . Practice was not resumed afterwards and the time of 1 ’ 38 @.@ 561 set by Nico Rosberg before the accident remained the fastest lap of the session . He was more than seven tenths of a second faster than Valtteri Bottas in second , with Lewis Hamilton another tenth behind . Sainz 's teammate Max Verstappen finished the session 17th fastest after spinning in the final corner . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Conditions were dry for qualifying on Saturday afternoon . Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . Only the two Mercedes drivers were capable of proceeding into the second part of qualifying ( Q2 ) without having to use the faster , soft tyres . Nico Rosberg was fastest , ahead of Williams ' Valtteri Bottas and Lewis Hamilton . As Carlos Sainz was unable to compete following his crash in practice , only four running drivers were eliminated . Those were both Manor Marussia drivers , the Sauber of Marcus Ericsson and Fernando Alonso for McLaren . 
 The two Mercedes exchanged new track record times as Rosberg , then Hamilton , and once again Rosberg set fast times during Q2 . Bottas was again the fastest non @-@ Mercedes runner , but teammate Felipe Massa was hindered by traffic and did not proceed into Q3 . Also eliminated were Pastor Maldonado , Jenson Button , Felipe Nasr , and Daniil Kvyat , the latter two being bettered by a late fast lap from Max Verstappen . 
 Nico Rosberg was again fastest in Q3 , denying teammate Hamilton his fiftieth career pole position in the process . His time of <unk> was more than three tenths of a second quicker than Hamilton 's , ensuring he started from the front of the grid for the second race running . Valtteri Bottas confirmed his strong pace and qualified third , marginally ahead of Sebastian Vettel . The second Ferrari of Kimi Räikkönen was almost half a second behind in fifth , having made a mistake at turn 13 , followed by the two Force India cars of Nico Hülkenberg and Sergio Pérez . Hamilton had also gone off at turn 13 on his second fast lap , preventing him from challenging Rosberg for pole position . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Carlos Sainz was cleared to race albeit not setting a time in qualifying , being allowed to start from the back of the grid . At the start , Nico Rosberg led away from Lewis Hamilton , while further back , Nico Hülkenberg spun into turn two , tagging Max Verstappen and Marcus Ericsson . Verstappen had a puncture while Hülkenberg and Ericsson retired on the spot , causing the safety car to be deployed . Meanwhile , Räikkönen and Kvyat experienced good starts , gaining two and four places respectively . Racing resumed on the end of lap 3 , with Rosberg retaining his race lead . However , further back Bottas overtook Räikkönen to take third . By lap 7 , Sainz had moved up into 14th place , while Felipe Massa was up into ninth place from 15th on the grid . Race leader Nico Rosberg needed to retire at the end of the seventh lap due to a locked throttle , handing the race lead to championship leader Lewis Hamilton . On lap 10 , Pastor Maldonado moved ahead of Jenson Button to take tenth , while Hamilton was extending his lead over second placed Bottas . A second safety car phase occurred on lap 12 , when Romain Grosjean lost the back of his Lotus in turn 3 and crashed into the barriers . While Grosjean escaped uninjured , his car was heavily damaged . With a lot of debris on track , the safety car stayed out until lap 17 . At the restart , Vettel attacked teammate Räikkönen for third . While the Finn was able to stay ahead by going wide into turn 2 , he subsequently gave up the place to Vettel . One lap later , Ricciardo and Sainz fought for tenth place , with Daniel Ricciardo coming out on top and retaining the position . 
 By lap 20 , Max Verstappen , impeded by his tyre failure at the start , had moved up into twelfth while at the front , Hamilton extended his advantage over Bottas to 7 @.@ 5 seconds on lap 24 with Vettel also moving closer to the Finn . After several drivers had opted to pit during the second safety car phase , most drivers at the front decided to come in for their regular pit stops starting on lap 25 . Carlos Sainz crossed the white line when exiting pit lane , receiving a five @-@ second penalty to be served at his second stop . Bottas was the first of the front runners to pit on lap 27 , emerging into traffic . This allowed Sebastian Vettel to make up time by staying out longer , eventually emerging from his pit stop ahead of Bottas on lap 31 . On lap later , Räikkönen pitted as well , coming out just behind Bottas . Race leader Hamilton came in another lap later , retaining his lead without incident . On lap 37 , Räikkönen used the Drag Reduction System ( DRS ) to move ahead of Bottas for fifth place , only for the Williams driver to retake the position in the next corner . 
 An early pit stop during the safety car phase had put Sergio Pérez up into third place , with Daniel Ricciardo behind in fourth . By lap 43 , Ricciardo , Bottas and Räikkönen had all moved into striking distance of Pérez , who was trying to keep his older tyres alive . On lap 45 , Bottas used DRS to move ahead of Ricciardo 's Red Bull . One lap later , Räikkönen tried to follow suit , only to run wide , having to concede the position back to Ricciardo . On lap 47 , Carlos Sainz retired after spinning off the track due to a brake failure , losing his rear wing . Retrieving the wing from the track under racing conditions , a track marshall was called " one very brave Russian " by the passing Sebastian Vettel , who barely avoided contact . Just after being passed by Räikkönen on lap 49 , Daniel Ricciardo had to retire with a suspension failure . The end of lap 52 saw Valtteri Bottas move ahead of Pérez into third place , with Räikkönen moving past the Force India as well . However , just some corners later on the last lap of the race , the two collided , forcing Bottas to retire and causing heavy damage to Räikkönen 's Ferrari . Pérez thereby reclaimed third place and achieved Force India 's first podium finish of the season . At the front , Vettel moved closer to Hamilton due to the latter suffering from a compromised rear wing , probably caused by rubber debris in the slot gap . However , Hamilton held on and took his ninth victory of the season , finishing ahead of Vettel , who was now his closest championship rival . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Räikkönen was demoted to from fifth to eighth place for causing the final lap collision with Bottas and scored only four points rather than ten , and this secured the constructors championship for Mercedes . McLaren driver Fernando Alonso was given a five @-@ second penalty for exceeding track limits , promoting Toro Rosso 's Max Verstappen to tenth . When asked about the collision with Bottas at the press conference for the following United States Grand Prix , Kimi Räikkönen remained unregenerate , saying : " [ My view ] hasn 't changed . There were some discussions . I would still do it tomorrow again , that doesn 't change the story . " Bottas took a different viewpoint , saying : " I don 't think it was a racing incident . I didn 't see anyone there and I was in front , and then suddenly someone hits me . I should be on the podium , but I 'm here with zero points instead . That 's just disappointing . " 
 Former Jordan team principal Eddie Jordan carried out the podium interviews . Hamilton expressed disappointment at not being able to battle his teammate to win the race , while he also stressed the title was " not done and dusted " . Sebastian Vettel expressed satisfaction with his car , saying that he had hoped to be able to catch Hamilton towards the end of the race . However , he was disappointed by not having both Ferrari cars on the podium . Sergio Pérez said that he had been " really unhappy " with himself until the last lap that handed him third place , calling the result " just amazing " . He would later go on to call the race " the best moment in my career " . 
 After the race , Sebastian Vettel criticised Lewis Hamilton for what he believed was excessive low speed at the restart after the safety car period , calling his behaviour " ridiculous " . He added : " There was no reason to go that slow . If you want to pack up the field you can do it earlier and not in the very last bit . " Following his 46G impact on Saturday , Carlos Sainz conceded that he felt " a bit of dizziness " in the early stages of the Grand Prix , though he added : " But after lap 10 it went off and I could push normally without problems . " After his accident on lap twelve , Romain Grosjean spoke of his " biggest impact for quite a while " . He also revealed that the seat of his car broke at impact , but also emphasised the fact that he was able to escape unharmed : " It 's a testament to all the safety inherent in the car and the other safety devices . " 
 As a result of the race , Mercedes extended their lead in the Constructors ' Championship to 172 points , enough to secure their second consecutive title . Williams was still in third on 220 points , 71 points ahead of Red Bull . In the Drivers ' Standings , Lewis Hamilton 's lead over second place grew to 66 points , with his closest challenger now being Sebastian Vettel . Nico Rosberg dropped to third , seven points behind Vettel on 229 points . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Fernando Alonso received a thirty @-@ five @-@ place grid penalty for a variety of changes made to his power unit . ^ 2 – Roberto Merhi received a twenty @-@ place grid penalty for a variety of changes made to his power unit . ^ 3 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. did not take part in qualifying after a heavy crash during <unk> ; he was later permitted to race by the stewards . ^ 4 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. received a twenty @-@ place grid penalty for a variety of changes made to his power unit and replacing his gearbox . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Kimi Räikkönen originally finished fifth but received a 30 @-@ second time penalty after the race following a collision with Valtteri Bottas . 
 ^ 2 – Fernando Alonso originally finished tenth but received a 5 @-@ second time penalty after the race for exceeding track limits . 
 ^ 3 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. received a 5 @-@ second penalty after the race for crossing the line at the pit entry . 
 ^ 4 – Valtteri Bottas and Daniel Ricciardo were classified as they completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a mathematical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = James Dean ( film ) = 
 James Dean is a 2001 biographical television film based on the life of the American actor James Dean . James Franco plays the title role under the direction of Mark Rydell , who chronicles Dean 's rise from a struggling actor to an A @-@ list movie star in 1950s Hollywood . The film 's supporting roles included director Rydell , Michael Moriarty , Valentina Cervi , Enrico Colantoni , and Amy Rydell . 
 The James Dean biopic began development at Warner Bros. in the early 1990s . At one point , Michael Mann was contracted to direct with Leonardo DiCaprio starring in the lead role . After Mann 's departure , Des McAnuff , Dennis Hopper and Milčo Mančevski were considered as directors . Rydell was hired as director in 1996 , but the film continued to languish in development hell . 
 Warner Bros. then decided to produce James Dean as a TV movie for Turner Network Television ( TNT ) ; both Warners and TNT are owned by Time Warner . Franco was cast as Dean in May 2000 after a search that resulted in 500 auditions . Franco researched his role to more closely portray Dean . James Dean was shown on TNT in the United States on August 5 , 2001 , receiving generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At eight years old , James Dean lives with his estranged father Winton and mother Mildred in 1939 Santa Monica , California . When Mildred dies of cancer in 1940 , Winton sends James on a train to Fairmount , Indiana , along with the coffin containing her body . Winton does not show up at the funeral , leaving James to be raised by his aunt and uncle on a farm in Fairmount . Over the years , he becomes more curious about his father 's decision to abandon him . He tries to impress him by sending him a package displaying his various athletic trophies in high school sports . 
 James moves back to Santa Monica in June 1949 , shortly after high school graduation , and finds that Winton has remarried . He decides to become an actor and takes classes under James Whitmore . Whitmore is impressed by his acting ability , which encourages him to move to New York City in September 1951 to pursue an acting career . Despite being a struggling actor , he enjoys the new lifestyle . He befriends fellow actor Martin Landau and has a romantic relationship with Christine White . Both are accepted into the prestigious Actors Studio . He receives critical acclaim in Broadway theatre productions and for a role in a television movie drama that is broadcast nationwide . He tries to tell Winton about his successful rise in acting , but his father still reacts with indifference , causing more emotional turmoil for him . 
 Film producer @-@ director Elia Kazan hires James for the leading role in East of Eden ( 1955 ) , marking his Hollywood debut . He moves to Hollywood in April 1954 to begin filming for Eden and is introduced to Jack L. Warner , the stern president of Warner Bros. Studios who is determined to transform him into a movie star . Warner becomes suspicious of his personal life ( such as his possible bisexuality and passions for auto racing and motorcycling ) . On the Warner Bros. backlot , he falls in love with actress Pier Angeli , who is working on the neighboring production of The Silver Chalice ( 1954 ) . 
 Despite concerns from Pier 's domineering mother , James and his girlfriend buy a beach house in which they live together . Meanwhile , eccentric director Nicholas Ray casts him in the lead role for Rebel Without a Cause ( 1955 ) . He once again hopes to impress his father with his rising movie star career in Hollywood , but Winton persists with his indifference . When East of Eden debuts , Warner is furious that he does not show up at the premiere . He considers shutting down production of Rebel Without a Cause , but he drops the idea due to James 's praised performance in Eden . Later , he finds out that Warner sided with Pier 's mother over his break up with her . She ends up marrying Vic Damone , while James then signs a one million dollar contract with Warner Bros. and is cast in Giant ( 1956 ) . His mental breakdowns become more apparent when he starts conflicting with director George Stevens . 
 Angered with his life , James decides to learn the truth about his father 's disinterest toward him since he was eight years old . Winton tells him that his real father was a man with whom his mother had an affair during the marriage and that he did not have the courage to raise him , not being his real father . With his inner demons resolved , he begins to enjoy life once more and adopts a friendly relationship with director Stevens . Shortly afterward , he dies in a car crash that shocks the film industry and the general public . En route on a train to Indiana , Winton sits next to his coffin in the storage room . 
 = = Cast = = 
 James Franco as James Dean : A movie star who has emotional struggles with his father , Hollywood policies , acting , and romantic relationships . 
 Kyle Chambers portrays young James Dean 
 Michael Moriarty as Winton " Winnie " Dean : James ' father who abandons him at a young age . 
 Valentina Cervi as Pier Angeli : Italian actress who James first meets on the Warner Bros. backlot . Under pressure from her domineering mother , Pier breaks off her relationship with James and marries Vic Damone . 
 Enrico Colantoni as Elia Kazan : Acclaimed Hollywood film director . Kazan casts James in East of Eden , using unconventional directing techniques that land James critical praise . 
 Amy Rydell as Christine White : James ' girlfriend in New York . The two successfully audition their way into the Actors Studio . 
 Director Mark Rydell as Jack L. Warner : President of Warner Bros. <unk> who signs James under contract . Mr. Warner acts as a strict father figure to James ' Hollywood lifestyle . 
 Samuel Gould as Martin Landau : Actor who befriends James in New York . 
 Wendy Benson as Julie Harris : East of Eden actress who expresses sympathy for James ' break @-@ up with Pier . 
 David Parker as James Whitmore : James ' acting teacher in Los Angeles . 
 Lisa Robins as Mildred Dean : James ' mother . Mildred dies of cancer when her son is just a child . 
 Karen <unk> as Mrs. <unk> : Pier 's strict religious mother who convinces her daughter to marry Vic Damone . 
 Barry Primus as Nicholas Ray : Eccentric director of Rebel Without a Cause who avoids pressure to cast Marlon Brando in the lead role . 
 Peggy McCay as Emma Dean : James Dean 's grandma . 
 Edward Herrmann as Raymond Massey : Distinguished actor who portrays Dean 's screen father on East of Eden . Massey is dubious over James ' method acting . 
 Craig Barnett as George Stevens : Director of Giant who , at first , has trouble accommodating James ' emotional and movie star status . 
 Joanne Linville as Hedda Hopper : Hollywood gossip columnist who praises James ' acting abilities in East of Eden . 
 Andrew Prine as Rogers Brackett : Homosexual New York theater director who meets James and Martin Landau ( then struggling actors ) in a diner . 
 Lisa Blake Richards as Ethel Dean : Winton 's wife after the death of Mildred . She is not satisfied over her husband 's fathering of James . 
 Holly Beavon as Marilyn Monroe ( uncredited ) 
 Elizabeth <unk> as Judy Garland ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 In the early 1990s , Warner Bros. planned to produce a feature biographical film about actor James Dean , and the studio hired Israel Horovitz to write the script . One of the working titles was James Dean : An Invented Life before it was finalized as James Dean . When Horovitz wrote the script , he explored the " psychological insight " of Dean by showcasing the abandonment of his father , which became the fulcrum of the storyline . Horovitz recalled , " Why would a father ship his wife 's body back on a train with an 8 @-@ year @-@ old son , never go to the funeral and never pick the son up again , never bring the son back out to him ? " The screenwriter felt it was best to portray Dean 's purported homosexuality by innuendo rather than explicitly . He wanted to focus on the romance between Dean and Pier Angeli and Dean 's growth as an actor , and believed that a homosexuality subplot would distract from the storyline . Producer Marvin Worth explained in July 1995 , " We 'll try to make a good movie ... not one of rumor and innuendo . " 
 Michael Mann was contracted to direct James Dean in September 1993 , and filming was scheduled to start in May 1994 . Johnny Depp and Brad Pitt were under serious consideration for the lead role , while both actors were also attached to the part . Mann approached Leonardo DiCaprio for the role of James Dean , feeling that DiCaprio was the best candidate . Gary Oldman was also discussed for a supporting role . In March 1994 , Mann decided not to direct James Dean due to scheduling conflicts with Heat ( 1995 ) . Mann also thought that DiCaprio was too young and wanted to wait another year . 
 Des McAnuff replaced Mann as director , and filming was rescheduled to December 1994 . Screenwriter Horovitz was busy <unk> in Europe , so McAnuff and producer Marvin Worth were constantly rewriting the script in July 1994 . The budget was estimated at $ 20 million . McAnuff stepped down as director and was replaced by Dennis Hopper . Hopper was a close friend with Dean and co @-@ starred with the actor in both Rebel Without a Cause and Giant . Hopper met with DiCaprio for the lead role , but the director eventually dropped out of the film . By May 1995 , DiCaprio was still the top candidate to portray Dean with Milčo Mančevski in discussions to direct the film . 
 After negotiations with Mančevski fell through , Mark Rydell was contracted to direct the biopic in February 1996 . Rydell was also close friends with Dean ; the two studied together at Actors Studio in Manhattan , New York during the early 1950s . DiCaprio dropped out of the lead role entirely when his asking price was determined to be too high after the actor 's success with Romeo + Juliet ( 1996 ) and Titanic ( 1997 ) . Meanwhile , Rydell worked with Horovitz on another rewrite , and Warner Bros. planned to fast track production . Don Was was hired to write and compose the film score , but he was later replaced by John Frizzell . Shortly after Rydell 's hiring , Stephen Dorff entered discussions to portray James Dean . Ethan Hawke would later turn down the role . 
 With the film languishing in development hell , producer Bill Gerber from Warner Bros. decided James Dean would work best as a television movie for Turner Network Television ( TNT ) ; both Warners and TNT are owned by Time Warner . Gerber explained the format choice , " It was just hard to find bankable names that the studio would finance a $ 20 million movie with . And there were marketing problems . He died in a highway accident in 1955 so almost everyone would know the outcome of the movie . James Dean also isn 't that well known by the general movie @-@ going public these days . " Actor James Franco was cast into the lead role , and principal photography for James Dean started in June 2000 . Filming took place around the Los Angeles area and at the Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Rydell and other filmmakers started a casting call in late March 2000 to find the most suitable actor for the lead role . The call encompassed New York , Los Angeles , Toronto , Vancouver , Atlanta , Chicago and the Midwestern United States . Casting director Nancy Foy commented that the search included " everyone from highly @-@ trained , experienced actors in their early and mid @-@ 20s , to people who had no training and had sent in self @-@ made tapes " . Five hundred actors auditioned , and James Franco was ultimately cast as James Dean in May 2000 . Franco acknowledged he was cautious of taking the role over fear of typecasting . 
 Franco did extensive research for his role . He went from being a non @-@ smoker to smoking two packs of cigarettes a day , but has since quit the habit . He learned how to ride a motorcycle , play guitar , as well as the conga and bongo drums . The actor also carefully studied Dean 's mannerisms by simultaneously watching his three films ( East of Eden , Rebel Without a Cause and Giant ) . Franco also read numerous biographies on Dean 's life . The actor also took advice from some of Dean 's closest friends , including Martin Landau , Dennis Hopper , Liz Sheridan ( Dean 's former girlfriend ) and Leonard Rosenman . " Martin was the most informative person that I spoke to . He helped me tremendously with James 's physical mannerisms , " Franco reflected . " I isolated myself a lot during the filming . I did this because I think he had a pervasive loneliness throughout his life and I wanted to feel what that felt like . Not talking to my family or loved ones had quite an emotional effect on me . " 
 = = Release = = 
 James Dean premiered at the 27th Deauville American Film Festival in July 2001 . Press conferences were held with the screening , and James Dean 's three feature films , East of Eden , Rebel Without a Cause and Giant , were also screened at the festival . Turner Network Television ( TNT ) originally intended to premiere the film on United States national television in June 2001 , but the release date for James Dean was pushed to August 5 , 2001 . The film attracted 3 @.@ 18 million viewers and received generally favorable reviews from critics . James Dean was released on DVD in January 2002 by Warner Home Video . David Thomson , reviewing in The New York Times , felt Franco 's performance as Dean gave Baby Boomer audiences a positive sense of nostalgia of the 1950s . James Poniewozik of Time magazine also highly praised Franco 's performance , but felt the script was overtly cliché . Ken Tucker wrote in Entertainment Weekly that James Dean , alongside Life with Judy Garland : Me and My Shadows ( 2001 ) , was a revolutionary force in the television movie genre . 
 Rydell received a Directors Guild of America Award nomination , while Franco was nominated for his performance at the 8th Screen Actors Guild Awards . In addition , Franco won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Miniseries or Television Film . The film also received multiple awards and nominations at the 54th Primetime Emmy Awards . Michael Moriarty won the Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or Movie for his portrayal of Winton Dean . The art department ( led by Robert Pearson , Marc <unk> and Leslie McCarthy @-@ Frankenheimer ) , also won an Emmy . Nominations included Outstanding Made for Television Movie , Lead actor ( James Franco ) , Direction ( Mark Rydell ) , Cinematography ( Robbie Greenberg ) , Casting ( Nancy Foy ) , Costume design ( Yvonne Blake and Randy Gardell ) , Film editing ( Antony Gibbs ) , Makeup ( John M. Elliot , Jr . ) and Hairstyling ( Carol A. O 'Connell ) . 
 = ( What Is ) Love ? = 
 " ( What Is ) Love ? " is a song recorded by American entertainer Jennifer Lopez . Originally entitled " What Is Love ? " , the song appeared on the soundtrack to The Back @-@ up Plan ( 2010 ) , a film in which Lopez stars . The song was later included on Lopez 's seventh studio album Love ? ( 2011 ) , as the album 's title track . " ( What Is ) Love ? " is a midtempo electropop song written by Diana " Wynter " Gordon , with the song 's producer Emile " D 'Mile " Dernst II . The song is about " not knowing what love is , " according to Gordon . A remix of " ( What Is ) Love ? " , entitled " What Is Love ? Part II " , was produced by Jean @-@ Baptiste . It was considered for inclusion on Love ? and was leaked onto the internet in April 2013 . 
 The song was due to be released as a promotional single from Love ? on April 26 , 2011 , but was " unlocked " and released on April 22 , 2011 by Island Records through a campaign on Lopez 's Facebook page . Upon its promotional release , the song debuted at number 97 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart and at 33 on the Productores de Música de España . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " ( What Is ) Love ? " written by Diana " Wynter " Gordon and Emile " D 'Mile " Dernst ; the latter who also produced the song . Lopez 's vocals for the song were recorded and produced by Kuk Harrell , with recording assistance from Jim Annunziato and Josh Gudwin at Conway Studios in Hollywood , California . Annunziato and Eric Eylands handled audio engineering of " ( What Is ) Love ? " , while the song was later mixed by Mike " Handz " Donaldson at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 " ( What Is ) Love ? " deals with the topic of " not knowing what love is " . The song 's co @-@ writer Gordon stated that : " I felt like so many woman have that same story . No fathers , families , abusive boyfriends and husbands .. no parental support , they feel alone .. I 've had my few relationships and have yet to feel love [ sic ] . " 
 = = Leak and release = = 
 " What Is Love ? " was leaked onto the internet in May 2009 . Wynter Gordon , the co @-@ writer of " What Is Love ? " , expressed her dismay at the " unfinished and unmastered " song 's leak in a post on her official MySpace blog . She stated : " I wrote this song from a deep place in my heart . If the world was gonna hear it , I wanted them to hear it right ... It 's as good as gone to me now ... The story was given a Lifetime TV special instead of a movie ... sad . " Gordon did note that she was dissatisfied with the circumstances , but was in " no way dissing Lopez . " 
 A mastered version of " What Is Love ? " was included on the soundtrack to The Back @-@ up Plan ( 2010 ) , a film in which Lopez stars . " What Is Love ? " was re @-@ titled as " ( What Is ) Love ? " and appeared on Love ? ( 2011 ) . " ( What Is ) Love ? " was due to be released as a promotional single from Love ? on April 26 , 2011 , but was " unlocked " and released four days earlier , on April 22 , 2011 by through a campaign on Lopez 's Facebook page . It was released in many European countries on April 25 . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The song received a positive review from Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey , who although stating that it isn 't any " we haven 't heard before , " Lopez carries " it off with her unrivalled glamour and effortless sophistication . " He concluded by stating that the song was worthy of a standalone release . Monica Herrera from Billboard commented that on the song , Lopez channels " J.Lo circa 2003 . " Herrera added the song would have been " slayed if the gender had been flipped " , and it had been sung by Justin Bieber . Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle said that Lopez uses " ( What Is ) Love ? " ( and the album cut " Starting Over " ) to play the jilted lover . Us Weekly noted the song 's lyrics to be pointing " a few fingers " at Lopez 's previous relationships , seen in the line dissing " blind dates " and the declaration of : " Musicians are the worst . " 
 = = " What Is Love ? ( Part II ) " = = 
 During the first album listening party for Love ? in 2009 , Rap @-@ Up magazine revealed that Jean @-@ Baptiste had produced a second version of the song called " What Is Love ? ( Part II ) " . It was considered for included on the album but ultimately did not make the final track listing . It samples the " club @-@ friendly " riff of Edwin Starr 's 1970 single " War " . " What Is Love ? Part II " was leaked onto the internet on April 20 , 2013 . According to Jessica Sager of PopCrush , it picks up where the original song left off . Sager wrote that the song " likely isn 't about [ Marc ] Anthony — but for those new to the song , it 's surely easy to interpret it as such . Lopez gets pretty revealing in the new song , addressing a divorce directly and explicitly " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love ? . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = William P. Halliday = 
 William Parker Halliday ( July 21 , 1827 – September 22 , 1899 ) was an American steamboat captain , banker , printer , hotel owner , vast land owner and businessman . Halliday began his professional career working on steamboats on the Mississippi and Ohio rivers and eventually became a captain of a steamboat based out of Louisville , Kentucky . A pioneer in the river and railroad transportation businesses , Halliday was responsible for the expansion of Cairo , Illinois , following the American Civil War . 
 Before the war , Halliday predicted that it would greatly impact river and railroad transportation and moved to Cairo , Illinois , a town at a critical position , at the confluence of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers . Soon after relocating , Halliday established many businesses that focused on river transportation and general merchandise . During the war , Halliday became good friends with General Ulysses S. Grant , and this relationship increased his personal fortune considerably through favorable military contracts . 
 After the Civil War , Halliday , his four brothers , and other family members rapidly expanded their business interests in the region . Halliday purchased real estate , businesses , hotels , mines , railroads , lumber yards , steamboats , and furniture companies , and took advantage of many other business opportunities . His business success led to the advancement of the region and specifically contributed to the development of Cairo , Illinois , and Hallidayboro , Illinois . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Halliday was born to Samuel Halliday and Eliza Parker in Ohio in 1827 , the eldest of seven children . His father , an immigrant from Scotland , had graduated from the University of Edinburgh at the age of 19 and immigrated to America in 1818 to receive a professorship at the University of Ohio . However , his travel was difficult , and he became stranded in the small village of Rutland , where he was convinced to stay and open a school . Eventually , Samuel surveyed and planned a town with William Parker , Halliday 's grandfather . Samuel held the position of county auditor in Meigs County , Ohio , for 25 years . 
 Halliday received a general education in Ohio and was first employed as a printer . His first job was as proprietor of Meigs County Gazette and later he worked at the Cincinnati Gazette . Sometime before 1857 Halliday became a surveyor working for the United States Department of the Interior under Marcus Baker and other surveyors . The purpose of the surveying group was to determine the northwestern most boundary of the United States . Halliday worked on the surveying teams that surveyed the Poteau Mountain Quadrangle ( Arkansas @-@ Indian Territory ) , <unk> Quadrangle , Antlers Quadrangle , Clarksville Quadrangle ( Indian Territory @-@ Texas ) , and other areas . 
 After a short time he switched careers and became a clerk on a steamboat , frequently working alongside Charles T. Hinde , who later married his sister . Halliday gradually advanced in the steamboat business until he was made a captain . In 1860 , he relocated with his family to Cairo and initially worked as a commission merchant . Later , he was a merchant , cotton planter , lumberman , banker , miller , coal mine operator , owned of vast tracts of coal and farm lands , owned salt mines in Illinois , and was a pioneer lumber dealer in Cairo . Halliday was a very successful businessman and by the end of his life was a multimillionaire . He owned steamboats , hotels , commercial shipping businesses , and other investments . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Before the Civil War , Halliday lived in <unk> , Kentucky , and owned a grain business . In 1860 , Halliday moved to Cairo , Illinois , predicting that war would come to Cairo thanks to its strategic location , and he set up businesses to benefit from the conflict . By February 1861 , Halliday had established Halliday , Graham , & Co. and moved his " mammoth wharfboat " from Mound City , Illinois , down river to Cairo . Once the wharfboat arrived , journalists predicted that Halliday 's company would be the most extensive <unk> in the Mississippi Valley , and Halliday organized a citywide celebration to mark the boat 's arrival . 
 Halliday and his partner , N. W. Graham , signed a contract with Ulysses S. Grant for the Union Army 's use of the wharfboat during the war . The contract compensated Halliday and Graham $ 1 @,@ 000 per month and did not have an expiration date . Some commentators have suggested that the contract was a result of the close personal friendship of General Grant and Halliday , instead of sound military strategy . For a short time , General Grant made his military headquarters in the Halliday hotel in Cairo , Illinois . 
 During the war , Halliday and Grant became close friends . Grant commandeered one of Halliday 's wharfboats for use in the Union Commissary Department , and soon after the boat was commandeered Halliday signed up to work as the commissary agent . Halliday gained the trust of Grant and , though he never enlisted in the army , Halliday accompanied General Grant to numerous battles and expeditions . In addition to the military uses Halliday 's wharfboats were also used to connect the Mobile and Ohio Railroad with the Illinois Central Railroad at Cairo . 
 = = Civil War ends = = 
 In 1865 , at the close of the Civil War , Halliday established several railroads with his close associates . On February 15 , 1865 , Halliday , Asa Eastman , S. Staats Taylor , N. R. Casey , Isham N. Haynie , Henry W. Webb , and John Q. Harman were granted a charter by the State of Illinois legislature to incorporate the Cairo and Mound City Railroad and were authorized to have $ 200 @,@ 000 in capital stock . The next day the Illinois legislature approved the railroad charter for the Cairo and St. Louis Railroad on February 16 , 1865 and Sharon Tyndale , Isham N. Haynie , Samuel Staats Taylor , John Thomas , William H. Logan , Halliday , and Tilman B. Cantrell were the original incorporators and were authorized to have $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in capital stock . Also in 1865 , Halliday and his brothers established the First Bank and Trust Company and bought the largest hotel in Cairo , renaming it after the family name . 
 = = Riverlore Mansion = = 
 Halliday built the Riverlore Mansion in 1865 in Cairo , Illinois , across the street from the Magnolia Manor . The brick mansion has 11 rooms , three floors , and a basement . When the mansion was completed in 1865 , it spanned the entire city block . 
 The first floor of the mansion has the front entry , sitting area , family room , parlor , kitchen , sunroom , dining room , hallway and powder room . An oval central stairway with a curved cherry balustrade winds more than three stories , encompassing some 38 feet to the slate mansard roof , which is capped by an ornamental iron railing . The second floor has three guest bedrooms , a guest bath , a sitting room , a master bedroom , and a luxurious bath complete with a sunken tub . The third floor has a sitting area , an office , a library , and a theater complete with a stage and 18 movie seats . 
 Part of the original design of the Riverlore is the distinctive river boat theme of the house . There is a glassed @-@ in pilothouse with a sliding hatch that serves as the entrance to the roof . The roof was designed to be flat and resemble the deck of a steamboat , so that Halliday could view the river and reminisce about his early days working as a steamboat captain while standing on his roof . Captain Halliday lived at the Riverlore for 34 years . 
 = = Business career following the Civil War = = 
 Halliday and his brothers achieved substantial business success following the Civil War through a variety of businesses and investments . One commentator has stated that by the 1880s the Halliday family was among the most powerful in the region , and Halliday was the significant figure in the family . W.P. Halliday the driving force behind the firm of Halliday Bros in Cairo had four brothers , the brothers together operated as members of the Firm Halliday Bros. The brother ’ s character in business and personal life has been noted in many writings , publications , and books , one such book A History of the City of Cairo Illinois by John M. <unk> speaks of the brothers : 
 There were five of them , a somewhat exceptional number : William P. Halliday , Samuel B. Halliday , Edwin W. Halliday , Henry L. Halliday , and Thomas W. Halliday . Of them all , I may be permitted to say that while they all differed from each other , they all exhibited features of character and conduct that would have given them prominence anywhere in the business world . No doubt in some one or two important respects , each one excelled the others . This was shown in those matters and things to which they gave their chief attention . Speaking of them and their families , so well represented here with us and elsewhere , it can be said that they have always stood for better things , not with assumption or <unk> , but openly and firmly . They pushed their business enterprises with diligence , and had there been more of such men it would have been better for the city and for them also , I have no doubt . 
 The Halliday business empire following the Civil War comprised numerous businesses in Cairo , cotton lands in Arkansas , a hotel in Memphis , Tennessee , furniture companies in Memphis and New Orleans , coal mines in southern Illinois , salt wells in southern Illinois and Indiana , numerous large farms , and many other investments . Halliday and his brothers dealt heavily in flour following the Civil War . 
 In order to keep updated on their daily business activities Halliday and his brothers installed private telegraph lines between their residences and their business offices . In the early 1870s Halliday held the public office of city councilman for the city of Cairo Illinois , for the city at large ward with Daniel Hurd . 
 On March 5 , 1867 , Halliday , David J. Baker , Jr . , Alfred B. Safford , Daniel Hurd , and George D. Williamson were granted permission by the Illinois legislature to incorporate The Valley Iron Company . 
 The capital stock of the company was $ 200 @,@ 000 and the company headquarters were in Cairo , Illinois . The company 's purpose was to mine and manufacture iron and other metals , with the stated purpose of supplying railroads . Also at this time , Halliday , Hurd , Safford , and others served on the transportation committee of the Illinois Central Railroad . 
 During the Civil War Halliday was associated with the Mobile and Ohio Railroad through the railroad 's use of his wharfboats . After the war , Halliday became a major investor in the railroad along with William Butler Duncan , Charles Walsh , and Charles Edward Tracy . Halliday 's investments centered around the railroad 's expansion to Cairo in the late 1870s . On April 22 , 1874 , the shareholders of the Mobile and Ohio Railroad elected Halliday to the board of directors . 
 As Halliday 's business interests grew , he began investing in businesses that supported his railroad and steamboat businesses , primarily coal mines . Halliday purchased his first coal mine in St. John , Illinois , to supply his steamships and coal depots . 
 Due to the success of the coal mines , Halliday began to purchase property in the area to search for oil . He was unsuccessful in locating oil deposits but did find one of the most productive salt mines in the region . <unk> 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Marion Wright , ran and oversaw the Halliday coal and salt mines . 
 Although Halliday had originally invested in the Cairo and Vincennes Railway in 1865 , it was not completed and incorporated until July 9 , 1880 . In the 15 years in between , Halliday was able to attract many influential and important investors to the project . Banking tycoon , J. P. Morgan served as president and as a director of the railroad with Halliday . In 1869 , Halliday spent eight weeks in New York City with co @-@ investors Burnside , Hurd , and Raum trying to get investment for the Cairo and <unk> Railway project . During the trip , Halliday was able to gain the support and investment of the United States railroad construction company . 
 = = William P. Halliday and the town of Hallidayboro Illinois = = 
 The town of Muddy Valley , Illinois , which was located in Jackson County , Illinois , was renamed Hallidayboro in 1894 in honor of Halliday . Halliday was a major investor and owner of the Muddy Valley Mining and Manufacturing Company located in the town . The company remained in Halliday 's estate for over 30 years after his death . When the company was sold , it consisted of 5 @,@ 700 acres of coal lands , numerous mine buildings and property , and several farms . The town was planned by Halliday based on his friend George Pullman 's ideas developed from a similar industrial mining town he had founded earlier . Halliday wanted to avoid the labor and capital disputes that plagued the era by creating a model town for his mine workers and their families . At the height of the mine 's production , Halliday employed over 500 men . White and black families lived and worked together , and it was one of the first towns in southern Illinois to have electricity . 
 William Parker Halliday became acquainted with George Pullman through his many business interests which took him to Chicago , Springfield , and Washington , D.C. Halliday owned his own Pullman Palace Car , a personal gift from George Pullman . 
 The town , originally named Muddy Valley , contrasted sharply with other southern Illinois coal towns , commonly referred to as " mining camps " . Some aspects of <unk> so closely resembled Pullman as to leave no doubt of William Halliday 's intention to pattern his community after the cook county town . <unk> showing a distinctive style of architecture set in the midst of well @-@ manicured trees and gardens caused journalists to designate the town a " Storybook Village " . 
 Employees at Hallidayboro commonly worked a ten @-@ hour day , but by 1898 William Halliday 's mines adopted an eight @-@ hour schedule on all shifts and agreed to pay union wage . 
 An interest in farming came naturally to William Halliday . Besides teaching , his father , Samuel , farmed successfully in Scotland and in the United States . Halliday owned a prosperous cotton plantation in Arkansas in addition to several thousand cultivated acres not connected with the model town . The 3500 cultivated acres surrounding the village provided important staples for the town . Forage for the mine mules as well as food for mining families came from company farms . In order to process its own meat , the company operated a slaughterhouse . By using this system the store was able to sell fresh meat at affordable prices . 
 George Pullman and William Halliday familiarized themselves with their industrial operations , giving attention to the minutest details . Their labor forces , tempered by the demands of industry in America , expected to work hard in exchange for the necessities of life . Cooperation between managers and workers created a higher standard of living , which in turn , encouraged better working <unk> housing also helped promote good work habits . 
 In the United States , unbearably inadequate housing and overcrowded neighborhoods pushed working men out of the home and into saloons where they congregated for drink and discussion . Wealthy capitalists wishing to strike a balance between the demands of labor and desires of capital looked to Robert Owen 's example . George Pullman and William Halliday implemented a policy of tolerance in their towns identical to that of Robert Owen . The peaceful atmosphere in Pullman and Hallidayboro can be attributed in part to the absence of alcohol . 
 That Hallidayboro was relatively peaceful is especially significant because most coal towns in the region were prone to " heinous crime " . Residents in other southern Illinois coal towns , containing no policy of temperance , often experienced murder and fatal injuries resulting from bar @-@ room brawls . Violence sometimes took the form of wife @-@ beating . Several southern Illinois miners lost their lives at the hands of a frustrated spouse . 
 Reformers reasoned that adequate housing could counter the drinking problems . George Pullman adhered to this idea . He believed that a good residential surrounding would benefit the workers and that beauty in the town would breed good character in the residents . Pullman hoped the comfortable , beautiful environment of his town would encourage cleanliness , industriousness and sobriety in the work force . Attractive housing with adequate living space did create good work habits in the towns . 
 William Halliday , like George Pullman , had cherished a desire to create a model company town . 
 Hallidayboro 's housing compared favorably to that in other model company towns during this period . Not until the turn of the century did comparable company houses appear in southern Illinois , when Joseph Leiter built the town of Zeigler . In contrast to Hallidayboro 's bustling , peaceful environment , coal miners never lived in the attractive houses provided by Joseph Leiter . 
 Until 1920 , electricity was rare in southern Illinois communities , except in Hallidayboro . 
 Raised by teachers , William Halliday also believed in the value of education . One of the original buildings in Hallidayboro , the schoolhouse followed the overall architecture scheme of the village . Nestled at the west end of Main Street , the frame schoolhouse accommodated forty students . Typical of the period , separated entrances for boys and girls appeared under the twin bell towers . It is also likely that Halliday maintained a book collection for the use of the residents of his company town . In his home city he served on the Cairo Library Board and he endowed the Cairo Library with $ 5 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 in his will . A high degree of literacy existed in Hallidayboro . 
 Towns such as Pullman and Hallidayboro supported Robert Owen 's original belief that owners could profit from helping their workers . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Towards the end of his life , Halliday was the president of the Illinois Bankers Association . In 1885 , Halliday was President of the City National Bank of Cairo and his brother , Thomas W. Halliday was listed as Cashier of the bank . At the time the bank had $ 772 @,@ 994 @.@ 34 of available funds . Based on inflation from 1885 to 2012 , $ 772 @,@ 994 @.@ 34 is the money equivalent to approx $ 19 @,@ 451 @,@ 163 today . 
 Ever since moving to Cairo in 1860 , Halliday was a huge force in the development of the city and region . One source describes his contributions in the following manner , " In life he was one of the city 's staunchest friends . No labor in her interests was too arduous for him to undertake , no expense for her welfare or promotion too great for him too assume . Numerous monuments to his far @-@ seeing sagacity exist to @-@ day and will exist for centuries to come . " Another source described Halliday by stating , " He is an effective worker , accomplishing more by action than a half dozen men might by talking . " 
 In addition to the town , Halliday also named one of his steamboats the William P. Halliday . It was under the command of Sobieski Jolly and was mentioned in Mark Twain 's papers . The boat was destroyed by fire on a Monday morning in February 1884 while it was next to the St. Louis City wharf . 
 In 1895 , Halliday and other leading men were appointed to the first set of officers to direct the Ohio Valley Improvement Association . The primary purpose of the organization was to be the collection , preparation , and presentation to the United States Congress statistics and other information relating to commerce and navigation on the Ohio River . Halliday served as one of six vice presidents , and the sitting governor of West Virginia , Mac <unk> was present . The following year in 1896 , Halliday was reelected as a vice president of the Ohio Valley Improvement Association at the second annual convention held in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . 
 In 1898 , about one year before Halliday died , he and other merchants and businessmen in Cairo sponsored a boat race from Mound City , Illinois to Cairo , Illinois . The race offered a cash prize to the winner and was widely reported in the newspapers of towns and villages along the Ohio River . Halliday stood next to the Halliday House and shot a gun when the first boat crossed the finish line to announce to the crowd of people the winning boat . 
 Halliday spent the last six months of his life residing in the Lexington Hotel in Chicago , Illinois . He had been battling an illness during his stay in Chicago and died from the condition . At his death he was reputed to be worth from $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Based on inflation from 1899 to 2012 , $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 is the money equivalent to approx $ 108 @,@ 649 @,@ 539 today . After Halliday 's death in 1899 , his estate left the Cairo Public Library $ 5 @,@ 000 , to be used to expand the collection of rare and fine edition books . Halliday had served as president of the library board . In 1906 , Halliday 's daughter Mary presented the Hewer to the city of Cairo in honor of her father . The Hewer is a historic bronze nude by George Grey Barnard that was exhibited at the St. Louis World 's Fair and was considered to be one of the two best nudes in the United States . 
 Halliday and his wife , Eliza W. Halliday , separated from each other and had a legally binding separation agreement in force at the time of his death . His wife dissented from the terms of his will and instead took her dower rights under Illinois law , which at that time amounted to one third of all property and <unk> in his estate . Soon after his wife was granted her dower rights , his wife and six children created the W. P. Halliday trust and funded it in 1900 with $ 1 @,@ 062 @,@ 921 @.@ 88 from Halliday 's estate . In 1939 the estate was held to be an association , and tax deficiencies were levied against the trust beneficiaries for unpaid taxes owed to the Internal Revenue Service . Over the course of time the trust was in existence the beneficiaries expanded the trust holdings through the purchase of stock , real estate , and businesses and the majority of these investments were very profitable . 
 = = Funeral and obituary = = 
 Obituaries and Death Notices The Cairo Citizen 5 Jan <unk> 28 Dec 1899 Cairo , Alexander County , Illinois Thursday , 28 Sep 1899 : 
 <unk> <unk> LOSS 
 In the Death of Capt. W. P. Halliday , Her Foremost Citizen . 
 He Passed Away at Chicago Last Friday Night . — Funeral from Halliday Hotel Tuesday Afternoon and Buried at Beech Grove Cemetery — Sketch of the Life of a Great Man . 
 Capt. William P. Halliday , Cairo ’ s most prominent citizen , died at the Lexington Hotel in Chicago at midnight Friday night . Capt. Halliday had been ill for about six weeks . He went to Chicago to receive treatment and change of air to ward off an attack of malaria . While feeling badly , he was able to be up and around until a few days before his death . His friends and family did not anticipate his demise would come so soon , but it appeared the captain himself did . He made his will while in Chicago and prepared for the end . A few days before his death , however , his condition grew so bad that his family were summoned to his bedside . Thursday morning about 3 o ’ clock he lost consciousness , and although life was kept up by artificial means for many hours , he slept away and Friday night at midnight the final dissolution came . 
 The remains were immediately prepared for burial and were brought down from Chicago on the train leaving there Saturday afternoon . The Illinois Central railroad very kindly furnished two private cars for the use of the family and friends . Arriving here the remains were taken to the Halliday Hotel and lay in state in parlor A until Tuesday . All that was earthly of Capt. Halliday lay in a handsome cloth covered metallic casket , and throngs of people passed through the rooms Sunday and Monday to gaze once more upon his features . His illness had left its traces on his face , which looked thin and haggard . <unk> floral pieces surrounded the casket , and the life @-@ size oil painting of the deceased , which hung at the head of the casket , was draped heavily in mourning . 
 The same evidences of mourning were seen along the levee . The Halliday Hotel the City National Bank and the gas office all bore crepe on their doors , while a number of buildings along the levee were draped in black and flags hung at half @-@ mast . 
 The funeral of the late Capt. Halliday was held at the Halliday Hotel Tuesday afternoon . Long before two o ’ clock the crowds commenced to gather and when the services began the parlors and halfway were crowded with people and numbers could not get upstairs but waited in the office or outside on the street . Rev. F. A. <unk> , rector of the Church of the Redeemer , conducted the last solemn rites and a quartette choir composed of Mr. Buchanan , Miss Lelia Miller , and Messrs. Buchanan and Tunnel sang several beautiful hymns . The funeral address was delivered by Rev. C. T. Phillips , of <unk> , Ill . , formerly pastor of the Presbyterian Church here . Mr. Phillips was a close friend of the deceased , and it was the wish of Capt. Halliday that he might assist in the service . Mr. Phillips spoke of the Captain ’ s kindness and generosity , how he rendered assistance to so many and did it in such a delicate way that no sensitive or proud natures were hurt . He spoke of the Captain ’ s loyalty to Cairo . How he aided the city in its struggle against the great floods ; how he instructed the bank to cash all paper issued by the city in those dark days ; how his fortune was ready to be used in protecting life and property here , and how his barges were always placed in readiness to be sunk opposite weak places in the levee . He told of a conversation the Captain had with him in the panic days of <unk> ’ 93 , when banks were failing everywhere , in which the deceased said his entire fortune was ready to preserve the integrity of the bank here and to protect the businessmen from loss . He told what a kind employer Capt. Halliday was , how a position with him was a life job if the employee did his work faithfully . Mr. Phillips said he had known men at <unk> 21 years ago that were still in the service of Capt. Halliday . He told how Capt. Halliday watched the careers of young men who were striving to get ahead in life , and how he helped them to get on by opening the way for them without ever letting them see his hand . All this he told and more of the man whom he termed the best friend Cairo ever had . 
 At the conclusion of the service , the remains were conveyed to Beech Grove Cemetery . A thousand people went out from Cairo in two long trains and several hundred from Mound City , Mounds , and surrounding towns were already gathered there . 
 The acting pallbearers were all heads of departments of the various institutions , which Capt. Halliday controlled , as follows : George F. Ort , C. B. S. Pennebaker , L. P. Parker , Wood Rittenhouse , R. L. Redman , Norton Renfro , John Forrester , of St. Johns , and James Forrester , of Hallidayboro . The honorary pallbearers were chosen as follows : R. H. Cunningham , R. Bross , Andrew Lohr , C. Pink , Judge William H. Green , J. M. <unk> , William B. Gilbert , P. G. <unk> , Judge J.P. Robarts , P. J. <unk> , Walter Warder , Charles <unk> , John Hodges , M. F. Gilbert , N. B. <unk> , C. O. <unk> , P. W. Barclay , M. J. Howley , Sol . A. Silver , Samuel Hastings , John A. Miller , F. Nordman , Sr. , J. B. Reed , Louis Herbert , F. D. Rexford , of Centralia . 
 As the service at the grave was concluded the freshly made mound was literally covered from sight by the beautiful floral offerings , which were sent in great profusion by friends of the deceased . Quite a number of men of prominence came here to pay their respects to the memory of the deceased . They came from Chicago , St. Louis , Memphis , Pittsburg , and New Orleans , as well as from smaller and less distant places . Among the number were Capts . Sam and Harry Brown , of Pittsburg ; Capts . Henry C. <unk> , and J. S. <unk> , of St. Louis , <unk> of prominence and associates of Capt. Halliday ; also John Markley and wife of Chicago ; Judge Youngblood and Barr , of Carbondale ; Judge Monroe C. Crawford , of Jonesboro ; Capt. William K. Murphy , of <unk> ; Senator Pleas T. Chapman , of Vienna ; Maj. Daniel Hogan and family of Mound City ; and numerous others . 
 Capt. Halliday was not a lodge man . His interest were far too numerous to allow him to devote any time to secret societies . Nevertheless , he found time to devote to Cairo ’ s interests . He was a member of the Cairo Board of Trade , and a member of the Board of Directors of the Cairo Public Library . In both of these organizations he rendered efficient aid and his counsel was always sought . The Board of Trade met and prepared a memorial , setting forth the value the deceased had been to the organization and to Cairo , which was adopted . The Library board met and Judge William H. Green addressed them in an appropriate manner , paying a just tribute to the worth of Capt. Halliday and his assistance to the educational life of the city . The city council also met and passed appropriate resolutions , and attended the funeral in a body . 
 <unk> WILL <unk> HIM 
 The death of Capt. William P. Halliday is a great loss to Cairo . It will take the people of this city a long time to appreciate how much of a friend he was . His resources were so great and his willingness to help was always to be relied upon . Cairo has won a great reputation as a host , but it was because she had a Capt. Halliday . When there was any entertainment of distinguished guests to be planned , it was done on a magnificent scale because Capt. Halliday ’ s purse was drawn upon for such a large part of the bill . In this way Cairo won fame as a hospitable city . She was able to outdo her rivals who had no Capt. <unk> . Now Cairo will have to fall back on a plane with the others . In a business way , he was a great help to the city . Everything he owned , he improved and beautified . He employed large numbers of men and always paid good wages . He was in every movement to advance the city ’ s interests and often it needed just his influence to carry the project through . But where he will be missed the most will be among those people who have been sharers of his bounty . Their name is legion . He gave quietly , but he gave liberally . It was true of him that he did not let his right hand know what his left hand did . Very frequently the recipient of his bounty could only guess from whence the gift came . He aided the needy in distress in thousands of ways . He seemed to have some occult way of finding out that people needed assistance at certain times , and then he knew how to come to their aid without offending . Hundreds whom the public would never dream had needed his assistance blessed his name as they gazed upon his features for the last time , because he came to them in a substantial way at a critical time . This is where and by whom he will be missed the most . Truly he was a great man . 
 = Hurricane Gabrielle ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Gabrielle was a deadly tropical cyclone that caused nine fatalities in the United States and Canada , despite remaining hundreds of miles offshore . The tenth tropical cyclone , seventh named storm , and third hurricane of the 1989 Atlantic hurricane season , Gabrielle developed on August 30 from a tropical wave near the west coast of Africa . Under favorable conditions , the depression intensified and became Tropical Storm Gabrielle early on the following day . Rapid strengthening occurred thereafter , with Gabrielle reaching hurricane intensity early on September 1 . After becoming a hurricane , further intensification was steady , though by September 5 , Gabrielle peaked as a moderate Category 4 hurricane . On the following day , Gabrielle began to slowly level @-@ off in intensity , while gradually curving northward . After weakening to a Category 2 hurricane , the storm passed east of Bermuda on September 8 . 
 Gabrielle eventually decelerated , and by early on September 10 , it curved westward and weakened to a tropical storm . Gabrielle re @-@ curved northeastward on September 11 and began paralleling Nova Scotia . It further weakened to a tropical depression on September 12 and was then absorbed by a developing storm near Newfoundland on September 13 . Due to its large size , Gabrielle produced swells and high tides in the Lesser Antilles , Bermuda , the East Coast of the United States , and Atlantic Canada . Rough seas along the East Coast of the United States caused one fatality in Maine , two in Massachusetts , one in New Jersey , and four in New York . In Nova Scotia , large waves swept one man to sea and eventually caused his drowning . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 28 and entered into the Atlantic Ocean . Initially , the wave had moderate amounts of deep convection and was already well organized , which allowed it to quickly become a tropical cyclone . Based on ship reports , the wave was classified as Tropical Depression Ten beginning at 1200 UTC on August 30 . Located 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 609 km ) southeast of Tropical Storm Felix , the depression tracked westward as a high pressure ridge formed between the two storms . Satellite imagery showed the depression developing a good outflow pattern . As a result , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Gabrielle on August 31 . It was noted that by as early as 1200 UTC later that day , Gabrielle was already rather large and well @-@ defined . Gabrielle continued to move westward at 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) , and by early on September 1 , the storm was upgraded to a hurricane . However , the storm was not operationally upgraded to a hurricane until late on September 2 ; Gabrielle was then located about 625 miles ( 1006 km ) west of Cape Verde . 
 After becoming a hurricane on September 1 , Gabrielle continued to intensify , but at a slower pace . By 1200 UTC on September 2 , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane while centered about halfway between the Leeward Islands and Cape Verde . Early on the following day , Gabrielle became a major hurricane when it reached Category 3 intensity . Later on September 3 , a ridge of high pressure formed a wedge between Gabrielle and Hurricane Felix . At 2046 UTC on September 3 , a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reconnaissance aircraft flight reported a pressure of 937 mbar ( 27 @.@ 7 inHg ) , which was the lowest barometric pressure recorded in association with Gabrielle . It was later noted that the aircraft may not have entered the area with the most intense winds . Although barometric pressures slowly increased , Gabrielle continued to intensify , and by September 4 , it became a Category 4 hurricane . Later that day , a trough extending from the Atlantic Canada southeastward to the Florida / Georgia border caused Gabrielle to recurve northwestward . 
 At 0000 UTC on September 5 , Gabrielle reached its maximum sustained wind speed of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) , though the barometric pressure was slightly higher than late on September 3 . A hurricane hunter aircraft flown into the storm on September 5 reported that hurricane force winds extended 100 miles ( 161 km ) from the center and tropical storm force winds 250 miles ( 402 km ) . At the time , Gabrielle was recurving west @-@ northwest at 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) . Hours later , another recon flight into Gabrielle revealed that the barometric pressure was slowly rising and the eye began to expand which is sign that the storm was slowly weakening . However , forecasters were unsure if the weakening was temporary or definite , prompting one meteorologist to say that " Gabrielle may have reached its peak intensity , but its too early to tell " , to explain the uncertainty of Gabrielle ’ s strength and if the storm will strengthen even further . The storm passed northeastward of the Leeward Islands and turned northward in response to a weakening in the ridge of high pressure caused by Hurricane Felix . Early on September 7 , Gabrielle was downgraded to a Category 3 hurricane . Only six hours later , the storm further weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . 
 While a Category 2 hurricane , Gabrielle passed east of Bermuda early on September 8 . Further weakening occurred and later that day , the storm was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . By early on September 9 , Gabrielle began decelerating as it interacted with a frontal trough extending north to south across the western Atlantic Ocean , before becoming stationary about 475 miles ( 764 km ) southeast of Cape Cod , Massachusetts on the following day . At 0600 UTC on September 10 , Gabrielle weakened to a tropical storm . While being downgraded to a tropical storm , Gabrielle began drifting slowly westward in an area of weak steering well south of the jet stream . The storm later turned back eastward , ahead of an approaching cold front . On September 12 , Gabrielle further weakened to a tropical depression , while being forced northeastward by a frontal trough . The depression lost most of its tropical characteristics , and by 1800 UTC on September 13 , it merged with a storm system developing near Newfoundland on September 13 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center stated in its forecast on September 3 that Gabrielle had a 10 percent chance of affecting the Leeward Islands in three days . On September 5 , meteorologists forecast the storm to bypass north of the Virgin Islands and told the press that it is too early to suggest that the storm might hit the United States four or five days ahead of its current position . As Hurricane Gabrielle moved west @-@ northwest , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center advised residents along the East Coast of the United States to monitor the storm because of its large size and strong swells it is producing . When Gabrielle , recurved northwestward , the National Hurricane Center forecast the outer edge of the hurricane to graze Bermuda , bringing tropical storm force winds and strong waves to the island . In Bermuda , cruise ships and other water craft were advised of rough seas and many residents rushed to stores to buy emergency supplies . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Although Gabrielle remained far from land throughout its duration , its large size caused swells in the Lesser Antilles , the East Coast of the United States , Bermuda , and Atlantic Canada . Minor to moderate coastal flooding damage occurred in the Leeward Islands and the British Virgin Islands . Along the East Coast of the United States , rough seas caused one fatality in Maine , two in Massachusetts , one in New Jersey , and four in New York . Additionally , swells in Atlantic Canada caused one drowning fatality in Nova Scotia . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles and Bermuda = = = 
 In Barbados , Gabrielle brought 10 feet ( 3 m ) waves and flooding to the island nation , causing minor damage . There were no fatalities or injuries . In Dominica and Guadeloupe , waves from Gabrielle caused severe beach erosion along the north and east coasts of the island but moderate damage was reported . However , the erosion brought by Gabrielle and later Hurricane Hugo resulted loss of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) of beach . The Caribbean islands of Nevis and British Virgin Islands also sustained minor to moderate beach erosion . In Bermuda , waves of 10 – 20 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 – 6 m ) were reported . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Waves between 5 and 13 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 – 4 meters ) were reported along the East Coast of the United States from Florida to Maryland . A weather buoy in Outer Banks , North Carolina reported swells up to 10 feet ( 3 meters ) . One death occurred by drowning in New Jersey . A 37 ‑ year ‑ old man was reported missing in New York City and presumed dead after his houseboat capsized in the heavy surf . Another houseboat also capsized , drowning a 58 ‑ year ‑ old woman . On shore , a large wave swept two fishermen into the sea , where they drowned . Overall , four fatalities occurred in the state of New York . In Rhode Island two teenagers were rescued by the United States Coast Guard after being swept into the water by the waves . 
 Near Boston , Massachusetts , a 25 ‑ year ‑ old man was reported missing in the Ipswich River north of Cape Ann after a motorboat capsized in the rough surf ; two other occupants including an infant were rescued . Elsewhere in the state , two deaths were reported , both of which were related to rough surf . The United States Coast Guard rescued two surfers in New Hampshire , while looking for a swimmer who was reported missing earlier . In Tenants Harbor , Maine , a 19 ‑ year ‑ old woman drowned after slipping off a rock shoreline . Two men who were with her tried to rescue the woman but to no avail as the rough seas overpowered them . The men themselves were later rescued by the crew of a fishing boat . Overall , Gabrielle caused eight fatalities along the East Coast of the United States . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 Just offshore of Nova Scotia , waves reached 40 feet ( 12 m ) in height ; a buoy near Shearwater measured swells up to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . Along the coastline , waves were about two stories high . In Gill Cove , two men walking near the shore were swept away by a large wave ; one made it safely back to the coastline , though the other was lost and subsequently drowned . Rough sea also lashed Newfoundland , which caused 20 ships to be sheltered in the St. John 's harbor . 
 = Galloway cattle = 
 The Galloway is one of the world 's longest established breeds of beef cattle , named after the Galloway region of Scotland , where it originated , during the 17th century . It is now found in many parts of the world , such as Canada , the USA and Australia . 
 It is now found in many parts of the world , being exported to Canada in 1853 , the US in 1882 and Australia in 1951 . The breed enjoyed success during the 1950s but this subsided during the foot and mouth crisis . Today , the breed is enjoying a revival , due to the demands of the beef market . The breed is considered average size and they have a thick coat , due to the climate of their native Scotland . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Galloway was an ancient region located in the south @-@ west of Scotland . The word ' Galloway ' is derived from the words <unk> , or Gaul . The Gauls were the south of Scotland . 
 = = History = = 
 The Galloway breed comes from the cattle native to the south @-@ west region of Scotland , first fully developed in the 17th century . Originally there was much variation within this breed , including many different colours and patterns . The original Galloway herd book only registered black cattle , but the recessive gene for red colour persisted in the population , and eventually dun Galloways were also allowed into the herd book . As a result , although black is still the most common colour for Galloways , they can also be red and several shades of dun . In 1877 the Galloway Cattle Society was formed . 
 The Galloway was introduced in Canada in 1853 , first registered in 1872 , and the first Galloway registry was introduced in the USA in 1882 . In 1911 , 35 @,@ 000 cattle were registered in the American Galloway Herd Book which was first created in 1882 . The British Galloway Society formed in 1908 . They did not recognise dun coloured Galloway cattle , which was met with outrage and this ban was later lifted . In 1951 , Galloway cattle were introduced to Australia . 
 In the 1950s the breed enjoyed much success because the beef market demanded low input ( feed ) cattle with high quality meat . However , the BSE crisis ( commonly referred to as mad cow disease ) caused an export ban in 1990 , although there were no cases of BSE found in Galloway cattle . This created a fear associated with cattle , so breed numbers declined . 
 Recent years have seen changes as bigger leaner carcasses were demanded . This issue of size featured in Galloway circles causes great debate . Some of the adjustments made was the adoption of AI and Embryo Transfer . Today the breed 's original characteristics are now back in demand . This is due to the demand of high quality meat that requires economical production . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The average Galloway cow will weigh 1000 to 1500 pounds and the average bull weighing 1700 to 2300 pounds . The healthy birth weight for a calf is 75 pounds . 
 Galloways have a thick double @-@ layered coat that is wavy or curly . This thick coat of hair insulates their bodies so well that they have a minimal outer layer of fat on their bodies , which would otherwise create waste at slaughter . This coat sheds out in the summer months and in warmer climates . Despite the animal 's usual use in beef production , there is evidence of Galloway herds being milked in Cumberland for cheese production . 
 The Galloway is naturally hornless , and instead of horns has a bone knob at the top of its skull called the poll . This breed 's shaggy coat has both a thick , woolly undercoat for warmth and stiffer guard hairs that help shed water , making them well adapted to harsher climates . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 It is thought that the breed number fewer than 10 @,@ 000 cattle in the world , most located in Northern Europe , specifically Scotland . The breed is ' rare ' in the United States and the Livestock Conservancy class it as a breed to ' watch ' . 
 = = Societies = = 
 Galloway Cattle Society of New Zealand 
 American Galloway Breeders Association 
 The Galloway Cattle Society of Great Britain and Ireland 
 Australian Galloway Association 
 = Steve Dahl = 
 Steven Robert Dahl ( born November 20 , 1954 in Pasadena , California ) is an American radio personality and humorist . He is the owner and operator of the Steve Dahl Network , a subscription @-@ based podcasting network as well as the host of The Steve Dahl Show which airs weekdays on WLS @-@ AM . 
 Originally , Dahl broadcast with Detroit stations WABX and WWWW and later with Chicago stations WCKG , WDAI , WLUP , <unk> and WLS . He also served as a columnist for the Chicago Tribune in their Live section as the resident " vice advisor " until November 2010 . Additionally , Dahl has served on the Board of Trustees at Columbia College Chicago . 
 Dahl 's radio show takes an " every guy " approach to life in Chicago and Dahl often tells bucolic stories about his life and family on the air . Dahl is also well known in Chicago for his song parodies and his impressions . He is considered a pioneer in talk radio and has been influential for many other radio personalities . He gained a measure of national attention after the Disco Demolition Night promotion at Comiskey Park , and he is also known in Chicago for his longstanding former role as one half of the " Steve and Garry " team ( with Garry Meier ) . 
 In addition to his radio career , Dahl is a singer , songwriter , and guitarist . His band , Teenage Radiation , recorded and performed a number of song parodies ( which he often played on his show throughout the 1980s ) and since 1990 he has performed and recorded as Steve Dahl and the <unk> . Dahl has also dabbled in acting , appearing in the 1984 cult classic , Grandview , U.S.A. with John and Joan Cusack . He also appeared in the 2004 film Outing Riley , and in the 2006 indie comedy I Want Someone to Eat Cheese With ( which was written and directed by Chicago native Jeff Garlin ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dahl grew up in La Cañada , California , a Los Angeles suburb northwest of Pasadena . He is the son of Roger and Carolyn Dahl , an electronics parts manufacturer 's representative and a homemaker . 
 = = Radio career = = 
 = = = Early radio career = = = 
 In the 9th grade , Dahl began hanging around a local underground radio station , <unk> @-@ FM , in his home state of California . At the age of sixteen , after he starting working at the radio station full @-@ time , he unofficially dropped out of high school . Dahl later explained , " I convinced my parents and the school that I would do an independent work @-@ study thing . I never got around to it . " At the age of eighteen , he obtained his GED and briefly married a woman he met after she called him on @-@ air to request Suzanne , a song by Leonard Cohen which told a tale of a troubled relationship . Dahl later explained his short @-@ lived marriage by commenting , " I should have paid more attention to that song . " 
 Dahl was told by radio executives that he 'd never make it in radio because his voice was too high . At one point , Dahl was so discouraged that he quit for about six months and attempted to pursue a career as a recording engineer . However , this never amounted to anything more than making mix tapes of popular songs for play on airplanes . Throughout this time period , he was making efforts to reconcile with his ex @-@ wife , who by then was dating the program director at the Los Angeles radio station where she worked . He later admitted to stalking her by sleeping in his Subaru outside her house . 
 In 1976 , Dahl 's ex @-@ wife told him about an opening for a morning show in Detroit , Michigan on WABX @-@ FM . He managed to secure the job , despite the fact that he did not think he was good enough for it ( he later learned that the station was owned by the same company his ex @-@ wife worked for ) . At WABX , Dahl learned as much as he could about what constituted " good radio " and also began experimenting with his content . His popularity increased to the point that he achieved a 7 @.@ 2 market share . 
 During his time at WABX , Dahl was introduced to Janet , a junior high school English and drama teacher in a Detroit suburb , who was casually dating a friend of his and was also a listener of his show . The two hit it off after Dahl invited her to a " hump day " broadcast he was doing from the camel area of the Detroit Zoo . 
 WDAI executives in Chicago , attracted by Dahl 's 7 @.@ 1 share , approached him and offered to double his salary to $ 50 @,@ 000 a year . However , Janet did not want to leave her family in Detroit and he did not want to leave her . This prompted Dahl to ask his bosses for $ 35 @,@ 000 a year to stay in Detroit . They flatly refused by telling him to " Go fuck yourself . Go to Chicago . Fall on your fat face . " In 1978 , after Janet accepted his marriage proposal , Dahl left Detroit for WDAI in Chicago . The pair eventually married in 1980 . 
 = = = Rude Awakening = = = 
 Dahl began at WDAI Chicago on February 23 , 1978 with his solo " Steve Dahl 's Rude Awakening " show , but it never achieved solid ratings despite media attention . Ten months later , on Christmas Eve , 1978 , WDAI changed formats from rock to disco and fired Dahl . 
 = = = Steve and Garry = = = 
 In March 1979 , after a few months without a job , Dahl was hired to do a morning show at WLUP where he met overnight DJ Garry Meier ( who was then broadcasting under the pseudonym of " Matthew Meier " ) . Shortly thereafter , the two began a cross talk that eventually led to Meier being teamed up with Dahl as both sidekick and newsman . Dahl effectively forced Meier to use his actual name by calling him " Garry " on @-@ air accidentally . After openly discussing the subject , again , on @-@ air , Meier officially dropped his pseudonym . 
 = = = = Disco Demolition Night = = = = 
 In response to Dahl 's firing from WDAI , Dahl and Meier mocked and heaped scorn on disco records and WDAI ( calling it " Disco @-@ <unk> " mocking the station 's slogan , " Disco @-@ <unk> " ) on the air . Dahl even recorded and started playing a parody of Rod Stewart 's " Da Ya Think I 'm Sexy ? " , which he called " Do You Think I 'm Disco ? " . The song managed to crack the national charts to peak at # 58 on the Billboard Hot 100 and received airplay across the country . 
 During this same time period , Dahl and Meier , along with Mike Veeck ( son of then Chicago White Sox owner Bill Veeck ) , Jeff Schwartz of WLUP Sales and Dave Logan , the WLUP Promotions Director , came up with a radio promotion and tie @-@ in to the White Sox called Disco Demolition Night which took place on Thursday , July 12 , 1979 . The concept was to create an event to " end disco once and for all " in the center field of Comiskey Park that night by allowing people to get tickets at the box office if they brought $ 0 @.@ 98 ( for WLUP @-@ FM 's 97 @.@ 9 location on the dial ) and at least one disco record . More than 50 @,@ 00 fans showed up , the records were collected , piled up on the field and blown up . Hundreds of rowdy fans stormed the field , refused to leave , and caused the second game of the doubleheader to be postponed . American League President Lee MacPhail later declared the second game of the doubleheader a forfeit victory for the visiting Detroit Tigers . Six people reported minor injuries , and thirty @-@ nine were arrested for disorderly conduct . 
 = = = = Height of collaboration = = = = 
 As a result of Disco Demolition Night , Dahl attained national recognition and his popularity increased significantly . He established a syndicate and the Steve and Garry show began airing in Detroit and Milwaukee , where it performed well . However , in February 1981 , WLUP fired Dahl , citing " continued assaults on community standards . " " It was going on in El Paso and Los Angeles , like , on Monday , and on Friday they fired me , " Dahl later said . Meier was offered the opportunity to continue the show by himself , but he refused . 
 During the Iranian Hostage Crisis , Dahl , along with his backing band Teenage Radiation , recorded and released a parody of The Knack 's song " My Sharona , " called " Ayatollah . " He also made on @-@ the @-@ air prank phone calls to the " Islamic Fried Chicken " ( a play on Kentucky Fried Chicken ) , ordering buckets of chicken for the hostages in the US embassy , for which the State Department later reprimanded him . Dahl also parodied the John Wayne Gacy murders with his song " Another Kid in the Crawl " ( to the tune of Pink Floyd 's " Another Brick in the Wall " ) . The playing of the song was stopped after parents of the murdered children called to complain . 
 Dahl and Meier won a local Emmy award for a television special they did in 1981 called , Greetings from Graceland , which was a comedy spoof on the tourist shrine and featured Elvis Presley 's " Uncle Vester " selling Elvis cookbooks from the guardhouse . They briefly had a morning television show , called It 's Too Early on local Chicago station , <unk> @-@ TV , which nationally syndicated columnist Bob Greene called " the best program on television " , " amazing " , and " hypnotic " in his June 20 , 1983 column . The show was canceled after four weeks on the air because it was deemed " unsuitable for general viewing ... in particular for young children " after Dahl was shown fully clothed sitting on a toilet seat reading a newspaper . 
 In 1982 , he stated on the air that motorists could allegedly substitute <unk> <unk> for coins in automatic toll booths on Chicago 's tollways . The Illinois Tollway System later said that approximately a dozen toll machines broke down due to people trying to use the candy to pay tolls . 
 Dahl decided to get a vasectomy in March 1989 , which was performed live on the air at a urologist 's office in Indiana . According to Arbitron ratings for that survey period , Dahl and Meier 's ratings jumped from a tie for seventh place in afternoons to a tie for third place . 
 According to Paul D. Colford , a former writer for Long Island Newsday , Howard Stern listened to tapes of Steve and Garry sent from Chicago by a friend of the chief engineer at <unk> Hartford . Colford claims Stern eventually developed his on @-@ air style as a result of these tapes . Later , Stern was hired at WWWW Detroit ( which Dahl had left when he moved to Chicago ) . 
 = = = = End of collaboration = = = = 
 Steve and Garry moved to WLS , but ultimately returned to WLUP where they stayed until their split in 1993 . The alleged reason for the break @-@ up was Dahl 's on @-@ the @-@ air comments about Meier ’ s new wife , commercial real @-@ estate broker Cynthia <unk> , while the new couple were on their honeymoon . Meier also blamed Dahl 's alcoholism and unpredictable behavior . Dahl , for his part , blamed <unk> for the split , once saying on air " When I met her , I knew the rules had just changed . " 
 In 2003 , Robert Feder , a columnist for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , said , " It 's the divorce that just keeps on giving : A decade after Steve Dahl and Garry Meier severed their legendary radio partnership , their breakup remains a source of bitterness and anger for them — and continuing fascination for their fans . " 
 After the team broke up , Dahl went to Sports Talk <unk> AM and teamed with Chicago sportscaster Bruce Wolf . 
 = = = WCKG years = = = 
 Dahl ended up on WCKG , broadcasting an afternoon show on that station . He eventually teamed up with Buzz <unk> , who was Dahl 's newsman starting in 1980 on WLUP , and the show was available as a podcast at Dahl 's website and streamed live on WCKG 's website . Dahl 's afternoon show was rated fifth ( 4 @.@ 1 ) among men 25 @-@ 54 in the winter 2006 @-@ 2007 ratings report . In 2007 , Dahl was named one of the ' 100 Most Important Radio Talk Show Hosts ' by Talkers Magazine . 
 On Friday , August 18 , 2006 , Dahl was doing a remote broadcast of his show at Oak Street <unk> , a restaurant on Chicago 's Oak Street Beach . Coincidentally , Garry Meier was eating lunch there with friends . After Dahl learned of Meier 's presence there , he invited Meier to appear on the air with him , which Meier accepted . Meier wound up staying for the remainder of the show . This event was covered widely throughout the Chicago media that evening . 
 On April 2 , 2007 , Meier returned to Chicago radio , doing the 8 AM @-@ 11 AM show on WCKG . He appeared briefly on Dahl 's show that same day . They occasionally contributed to each other 's shows , and Meier spent the first hour and a half in studio during Dahl 's show on the 28th year anniversary of Disco Demolition Night , recounting the events of that night . 
 = = = Jack FM = = = 
 Dahl announced on October 29 , 2007 that he would move to mornings at <unk> on November 5 , 2007 as WCKG changed formats . He was the only live personality at the Jack FM outlet as the rest of the station was pre @-@ programmed and run by computer . Dahl 's son Matt was part of the regular WCKG lineup and hosted the show immediately following his father 's . However , the WCKG format change , from an FM talk station to an adult contemporary station was the end of Matt 's show on WCKG . 
 On December 5 , 2008 , Dahl announced the end of his show on Jack FM due to low ratings . 
 " They were saying , ' Well , do a couple of weeks , a farewell . ' " Dahl said . " I said , ' It 's not a farewell . You guys are taking me off the air . I 'm not retiring . ' ... " I still have two and a half years left on my deal so , quite frankly , I 'm not letting them out of it . " Dahl also said he was prepared to stay off the air for the remainder of his contract , which was to end in mid @-@ 2011 and was said to be worth more than $ 1 million annually . 
 After the end of Dahl 's final broadcast , Howard Cogan , the normally sarcastic signature voice , Jack , heard on many Jack FM stations , delivered a sincere sendoff to Dahl followed by " Life 's Been Good " by Joe Walsh , a long @-@ time friend of Dahl . 
 = = = Back to WLS = = = 
 On October 7 , 2014 , media blogger Robert Feder reported that Dahl would be returning to terrestrial radio on WLS AM 890 . Feder wrote : " Dahl , 59 , will join the Cumulus Media news / talk station as afternoon personality , from 2 to 6 p.m. Monday though Friday . If all goes as planned , Dahl would start in early November . Sources familiar with the deal said Dahl will continue his subscription podcast venture , with Cumulus Media becoming a partner in the Steve Dahl Network . Under the agreement , Cumulus would provide financial , technical and marketing support , while Dahl would continue to host a separate , 90 @-@ minute daily podcast for his paid subscribers . " Dahl confirmed Feder 's report on October 8 saying " he 's eager to get back on the air to become ' part of the daily conversation in Chicago ' " . 
 Dahl 's first day back on WLS was November 3 , 2014 . His show included an appearance by Ron <unk> and a phone interview with Bob Odenkirk . Prior to the show , Dahl said in an email , " My plan for the show is to be funny and get good ratings . " Dahl also said that he sees his return as not only a good opportunity to try and re @-@ energize radio , but also as a way to turn people onto his podcast . 
 = = Podcasts = = 
 On September 8 , 2009 , Dahl began doing daily podcasts from a studio in the basement of his home . At the time , Dahl was still under contract with CBS , who had agreed in July 2009 to partner with him to produce a daily , hour long podcast complete with a few commercials . On August 1 , 2011 , Dahl , no longer under contract with CBS , began the Steve Dahl Network whose 11 unique weekly shows can be either downloaded or streamed via his official website and app or downloaded from iTunes . Originally , there was only just a daily podcast from Dahl ; the network , however , has expanded and now includes podcasts by friends Kevin Matthews and Daniel Van Kirk among others . 
 In addition to podcasting , Steve has maintained a presence with his fans through Facebook , Twitter , blogs , occasional newspaper articles ( he wrote a regular column for the Chicago Tribune up until 2011 ) as well as various television / radio appearances . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 In addition to recording parody songs for his radio show with his early band Teenage Radiation , Dahl began recording and playing live performance with a new band in 1990 , called Steve Dahl and the <unk> . This band has recorded and released several albums , including 1992 's " Tropical Tides " and 1997 's " Mai Tai Roa Ae " . In 2007 , backed by Des Moines , Iowa band The <unk> , Dahl embarked on a tour of Chicago @-@ area concert venues . In collaboration with record producer Joe Thomas , Dahl played a large role in the comeback of Beach Boy Brian Wilson . The three co @-@ wrote the song " Your Imagination " which appeared as a single and on Wilson 's 1998 album Imagination . Dahl provided backup vocals on the song as well . An alternate version of " Your Imagination " with slightly different lyrics and Steve Dahl singing lead is occasionally played on The Steve Dahl Show . 
 = = Honors = = 
 On November 9 , 2013 , Dahl and former partner Meier were both inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in recognition of their work together on the " Steve and Garry Show . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Currently , Dahl resides in the western suburbs of Chicago with his wife Janet , a non @-@ practicing lawyer , whom he married in 1978 . Before law school , she taught junior high for seven years in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan . Dahl has three sons and six grandchildren . 
 Dahl is an avid Chicago sports fan , and holds season tickets for the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 Dahl has battled alcoholism throughout his adult life , which he has alluded to a number of times . He has been sober since 1995 , the day after a drinking bout at the White Sox home opener , achieving it cold turkey . 
 It was sort of prompted by the fact that I realized that Patrick ( eldest of his three sons ) was 14 and I was rapidly approaching a ' Do as I say , not as I do ' situation . I didn 't think I had a right to comment on [ my sons ' ] behavior based on my behavior . Plus , once I turned 40 ( in November 1994 ) some metabolic thing happened to me and I guess I just got old . 
 In 1999 , his wife filed a multi – million dollar lawsuit against <unk> Muller over lewd comments Muller made about her on his show . In 2001 , the case was settled . Although the terms of the deal were not disclosed , it was reportedly seven figures . 
 Also in 1999 , Steve Dahl admitted secretly recording conversations among staffers at WCKG because he suspected they were talking about him behind his back . In snippets Dahl has played on his afternoon show , two station employees can be heard mocking him as " Steve Dull " and ridiculing his show . Dahl said , " I did it within my organization to confirm my suspicions . This was in a studio filled with microphones and cameras . Legally , I don 't feel they had any expectation of privacy in that case . " 
 Criminal suspect Drew Peterson and his lawyer , Joel Brodsky , called in to Dahl 's show on January 23 , 2008 . Dahl had been lampooning Peterson since the start of the former police officer 's notoriety . Brodsky suggested that Dahl host an on @-@ air " dating game " with Peterson the following day , but <unk> managers and Dahl later decided not to go through with it . " 
 = Song dynasty = 
 The Song dynasty ( Chinese : 宋朝 ; pinyin : Sòng cháo ; 960 – 1279 ) was an era of Chinese history that began in 960 and continued until 1279 . It succeeded the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period , and was followed by the Yuan dynasty . It was the first government in world history to issue banknotes or true paper money nationally and the first Chinese government to establish a permanent standing navy . This dynasty also saw the first known use of gunpowder , as well as the first discernment of true north using a compass . 
 The Song dynasty is divided into two distinct periods , Northern and Southern . During the Northern Song ( Chinese : <unk> ; 960 – 1127 ) , the Song capital was in the northern city of Bianjing ( now Kaifeng ) and the dynasty controlled most of what is now Eastern China . The Southern Song ( Chinese : <unk> ; 1127 – 1279 ) refers to the period after the Song lost control of its Northern half to the Jurchen Jin dynasty in the Jin – Song Wars . During this time , the Song court retreated south of the Yangtze and established its capital at Lin 'an ( now Hangzhou ) . Although the Song dynasty had lost control of the traditional " birthplace of Chinese civilization " along the Yellow River , the Song economy was still strong , as the Southern Song Empire contained a large population and productive agricultural land . The Southern Song dynasty considerably bolstered its naval strength to defend its waters and land borders and to conduct maritime missions abroad . 
 To repel the Jin , and later the Mongols , the Song developed revolutionary new military technology augmented by the use of gunpowder . In 1234 , the Jin dynasty was conquered by the Mongols , who took control of northern China , maintaining uneasy relations with the Southern Song . Möngke Khan , the fourth Great Khan of the Mongol Empire , died in 1259 while besieging the city of Chongqing . His younger brother Kublai Khan was proclaimed the new Great Khan , though his claim was only partially recognized by the Mongols in the west . In 1271 , Kublai Khan was proclaimed the Emperor of China . After two decades of sporadic warfare , Kublai Khan 's armies conquered the Song dynasty in 1279 . The Mongol invasion led to a reunification under the Yuan dynasty ( 1271 – 1368 ) . 
 The Song dynasty restored unity and made Song the richest , most skilled , and most populous country on earth . The population doubled in size during the 10th and 11th centuries . This growth was made possible by expanded rice cultivation in central and southern Song , the use of early @-@ ripening rice from south @-@ east and southern Asia , and the production of widespread food surpluses . The Northern Song census recorded a population of roughly 50 million , much like the Han and Tang dynasties . This data is found in the Standard Histories . However , it is estimated that the Northern Song had a population of some 100 million people , and 200 million by the time of the Ming dynasty . This dramatic increase of population fomented an economic revolution in pre @-@ modern China . The expansion of the population , growth of cities , and the emergence of a national economy led to the gradual withdrawal of the central government from direct involvement in economic affairs . The lower gentry assumed a larger role in grassroots administration and local affairs . Appointed officials in county and provincial centers relied upon the scholarly gentry for their services , sponsorship , and local supervision . 
 Social life during the Song was vibrant . Citizens gathered to view and trade precious artworks , the populace intermingled at public festivals and private clubs , and cities had lively entertainment quarters . The spread of literature and knowledge was enhanced by the rapid expansion of woodblock printing and the 11th @-@ century invention of movable @-@ type printing . Technology , science , philosophy , mathematics , and engineering flourished over the course of the Song . Philosophers such as Cheng Yi and Zhu Xi reinvigorated Confucianism with new commentary , infused with Buddhist ideals , and emphasized a new organization of classic texts that brought out the core doctrine of Neo @-@ Confucianism . Although the institution of the civil service examinations had existed since the Sui dynasty , it became much more prominent in the Song period . The officials who gained power by succeeding in the exams became a leading factor in the shift from a military @-@ aristocratic elite to a bureaucratic elite . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Northern Song , 959 – 1126 = = = 
 Emperor Taizu of Song ( r . 960 – 976 ) unified the empire by conquering other lands during his reign , ending the upheaval of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . In Kaifeng , he established a strong central government over the empire . He ensured administrative stability by promoting the civil service examination system of drafting state bureaucrats by skill and merit ( instead of aristocratic or military position ) and promoted projects that ensured efficiency in communication throughout the empire . In one such project , cartographers created detailed maps of each province and city that were then collected in a large atlas . Emperor Taizu also promoted groundbreaking scientific and technological innovations by supporting such works as the astronomical clock tower designed and built by the engineer Zhang Sixun . 
 The Song court maintained diplomatic relations with Chola India , the Fatimid Caliphate , Srivijaya , the Kara @-@ Khanid Khanate of Central Asia , and other countries that were also trade partners with Japan . 316 However , China 's closest neighbouring states most affected its domestic and foreign policy . From its inception under Taizu , the Song dynasty alternated between warfare and diplomacy with the ethnic Khitans of the Liao dynasty in the northeast and with the Tanguts of the Western Xia in the northwest . The Song dynasty used military force in an attempt to quell the Liao dynasty and to recapture the Sixteen Prefectures , a territory under Khitan control that was traditionally considered to be part of China proper . Song forces were repulsed by the Liao forces , who engaged in aggressive yearly campaigns into northern Song territory until 1005 , when the signing of the Shanyuan Treaty ended these northern border clashes . The Song were forced to provide tribute to the Khitans , although this did little damage to the Song economy since the Khitans were economically dependent upon importing massive amounts of goods from the Song . More significantly , the Song state recognized the Liao state as its diplomatic equal . The Song dynasty managed to win several military victories over the Tanguts in the early 11th century , culminating in a campaign led by the polymath scientist , general , and statesman Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) . However , this campaign was ultimately a failure due to a rival military officer of Shen disobeying direct orders , and the territory gained from the Western Xia was eventually lost . There was also a significant war fought against the Lý dynasty of Vietnam from 1075 to 1077 over a border dispute and the Song 's severing of commercial relations with the Đại Việt kingdom . After Lý forces inflicted heavy damages in a raid on Guangxi , the Song commander Guo Kui ( 1022 – 1088 ) penetrated as far as Thăng Long ( modern Hanoi ) . Heavy losses on both sides prompted the Lý commander Thường Kiệt ( 1019 – 1105 ) to make peace overtures , allowing both sides to withdraw from the war effort ; captured territories held by both Song and Lý were mutually exchanged in 1082 , along with prisoners of war . 
 During the 11th century , political rivalries divided members of the court due to the ministers ' differing approaches , opinions , and policies regarding the handling of the Song 's complex society and thriving economy . The idealist Chancellor , Fan Zhongyan ( 989 – 1052 ) , was the first to receive a heated political backlash when he attempted to institute the Qingli Reforms , which included measures such as improving the recruitment system of officials , increasing the salaries for minor officials , and establishing sponsorship programs to allow a wider range of people to be well educated and eligible for state service . 
 After Fan was forced to step down from his office , Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) became Chancellor of the imperial court . With the backing of Emperor Shenzong ( 1067 – 1085 ) , Wang Anshi severely criticized the educational system and state bureaucracy . Seeking to resolve what he saw as state corruption and negligence , Wang implemented a series of reforms called the New Policies . These involved land value tax reform , the establishment of several government monopolies , the support of local militias , and the creation of higher standards for the Imperial examination to make it more practical for men skilled in statecraft to pass . 
 The reforms created political factions in the court . Wang Anshi 's " New Policies Group " ( Xin Fa ) , also known as the " Reformers " , were opposed by the ministers in the " Conservative " faction led by the historian and Chancellor Sima Guang ( 1019 – 1086 ) . As one faction supplanted another in the majority position of the court ministers , it would demote rival officials and exile them to govern remote frontier regions of the empire . One of the prominent victims of the political rivalry , the famous poet and statesman Su Shi ( 1037 – 1101 ) , was jailed and eventually exiled for criticizing Wang 's reforms . 
 While the central Song court remained politically divided and focused upon its internal affairs , alarming new events to the north in the Liao state finally came to its attention . The Jurchen , a subject tribe of the Liao , rebelled against them and formed their own state , the Jin dynasty ( 1115 – 1234 ) . The Song official Tong Guan ( 1054 – 1126 ) advised Emperor Huizong ( 1100 – 1125 ) to form an alliance with the Jurchens , and the joint military campaign under this Alliance Conducted at Sea toppled and completely conquered the Liao dynasty by 1125 . 
 However , the poor performance and military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jurchens , who immediately broke the alliance , beginning the Jin – Song Wars of 1125 and 1127 ; during the latter invasion , the Jurchens captured not only the capital , but the retired emperor Huizong , his successor Emperor Qinzong , and most of the Imperial court . This took place in the year of Jingkang ( Chinese : <unk> ) and it is known as the Jingkang Incident ( Chinese : <unk> ) . 
 The remaining Song forces regrouped under the self @-@ proclaimed Emperor Gaozong of Song ( 1127 – 1162 ) and withdrew south of the Yangtze to establish a new capital at Lin 'an ( modern Hangzhou ) . The Jurchen conquest of North China and shift of capitals from Kaifeng to Lin 'an was the dividing line between the Northern and Southern Song dynasties . 
 = = = Southern Song , 1127 – 1279 = = = 
 Although weakened and pushed south beyond the Huai River , the Southern Song found new ways to bolster its strong economy and defend itself against the Jin dynasty . It had able military officers such as Yue Fei and Han Shizhong . The government sponsored massive shipbuilding and harbor improvement projects , and the construction of beacons and seaport warehouses to support maritime trade abroad , including at the major international seaports , such as Quanzhou , Guangzhou , and Xiamen , that were sustaining China 's commerce . To protect and support the multitude of ships sailing for maritime interests into the waters of the East China Sea and Yellow Sea ( to Korea and Japan ) , Southeast Asia , the Indian Ocean , and the Red Sea , it was necessary to establish an official standing navy . The Song dynasty therefore established China 's first permanent navy in 1132 , with a headquarters at Dinghai . With a permanent navy , the Song were prepared to face the naval forces of the Jin on the Yangtze River in 1161 , in the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi . During these battles the Song navy employed swift paddle wheel driven naval vessels armed with trebuchet catapults aboard the decks that launched gunpowder bombs . Although the Jin forces commanded by Wanyan Liang ( the Prince of Hailing ) boasted 70 @,@ 000 men on 600 warships , and the Song forces only 3 @,@ 000 men on 120 warships , the Song dynasty forces were victorious in both battles due to the destructive power of the bombs and the rapid assaults by paddle wheel ships . The strength of the navy was heavily emphasized after that . A century after the navy was founded it had grown in size to 52 @,@ 000 fighting marines . The Song government confiscated portions of land owned by the landed gentry in order to raise revenue for these projects , an act which caused dissension and loss of loyalty amongst leading members of Song society but did not stop the Song 's defensive preparations . Financial matters were made worse by the fact that many wealthy , land @-@ owning families — some of which had officials working for the government — used their social connections with those in office in order to obtain tax @-@ exempt status . 
 Although the Song dynasty was able to hold back the Jin , a new foe came to power over the steppe , deserts , and plains north of the Jin dynasty . The Mongols , led by Genghis Khan ( r . 1206 – 1227 ) , initially invaded the Jin dynasty in 1205 and 1209 , engaging in large raids across its borders , and in 1211 an enormous Mongol army was assembled to invade the Jin . The Jin dynasty was forced to submit and pay tribute to the Mongols as vassals ; when the Jin suddenly moved their capital city from Beijing to Kaifeng , the Mongols saw this as a revolt . Under the leadership of Ögedei Khan ( <unk> – 1241 ) , both the Jin dynasty and Western Xia dynasty were conquered by Mongol forces . The Mongols also invaded Korea , the Abbasid Caliphate of the Middle East , and Kievan Rus ' . The Mongols were at one time allied with the Song , but this alliance was broken when the Song recaptured the former imperial capitals of Kaifeng , Luoyang , and Chang 'an at the collapse of the Jin dynasty . The Mongol leader Möngke Khan led a campaign against the Song in 1259 but died on August 11 during the Battle of <unk> Fortress in Chongqing . Möngke 's death and the ensuing succession crisis prompted Hulagu Khan to pull the bulk of the Mongol forces out of the Middle East where they were poised to fight the Egyptian Mamluks ( who defeated the remaining Mongols at Ain Jalut ) . Although Hulagu was allied with Kublai Khan , his forces were unable to help in the assault against the Song , due to Hulagu 's war with the Golden Horde . 
 Kublai continued the assault against the Song , gaining a temporary foothold on the southern banks of the Yangtze . Kublai made preparations to take Ezhou , but a pending civil war with his brother Ariq Böke — a rival claimant to the Mongol Khaganate — forced Kublai to move back north with the bulk of his forces . In Kublai 's absence , the Song forces were ordered by Chancellor Jia Sidao to make an opportune assault , and succeeded in pushing the Mongol forces back to the northern banks of the Yangzi . There were minor border skirmishes until 1265 , when Kublai won a significant battle in Sichuan . From 1268 to 1273 , Kublai blockaded the Yangzi River with his navy and besieged Xiangyang , the last obstacle in his way to invading the rich Yangzi River basin . Kublai officially declared the creation of the Yuan dynasty in 1271 . In 1275 , a Song force of 130 @,@ 000 troops under Chancellor Jia Sidao was defeated by Kublai 's newly appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief , general Bayan . By 1276 , most of the Song territory had been captured by Yuan forces . In the Battle of Yamen on the Pearl River Delta in 1279 , the Yuan army , led by the general Zhang <unk> , finally crushed the Song resistance . The last remaining ruler , the 8 @-@ year @-@ old emperor Emperor <unk> of Song , committed suicide , along with Prime Minister Lu <unk> and 800 members of the royal clan . On Kublai 's orders , carried out by his commander Bayan , the rest of the former imperial family of Song were unharmed ; the deposed Emperor Gong was demoted , being given the title ' Duke of Ying ' , but was eventually exiled to Tibet where he took up a monastic life . The former emperor would eventually be forced to commit suicide under the orders of Kublai 's great @-@ great grandson , <unk> Khan , out of fear that Emperor Gong would stage a coup to restore his reign . Other members of the Song Imperial Family continued to live in the Yuan dynasty , including Zhao <unk> and Zhao Yong . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 The Song dynasty was an era of administrative sophistication and complex social organization . Some of the largest cities in the world were found in China during this period ( Kaifeng and Hangzhou had populations of over a million ) . People enjoyed various social clubs and entertainment in the cities , and there were many schools and temples to provide the people with education and religious services . The Song government supported social welfare programs including the establishment of retirement homes , public clinics , and paupers ' graveyards . The Song dynasty supported a widespread postal service that was modeled on the earlier Han dynasty ( 202 BCE – CE 220 ) postal system to provide swift communication throughout the empire . The central government employed thousands of postal workers of various ranks to provide service for post offices and larger postal stations . In rural areas , farming peasants either owned their own plots of land , paid rents as tenant farmers , or were serfs on large estates . 
 Although women were on a lower social tier than men ( according to Confucian ethics ) , they enjoyed many social and legal privileges and wielded considerable power at home and in their own small businesses . As Song society became more and more prosperous and parents on the bride 's side of the family provided larger dowries for her marriage , women naturally gained many new legal rights in ownership of property . Under certain circumstances , an unmarried daughter without brothers , or a surviving mother without sons , could inherit one @-@ half of her father 's share of undivided family property . There were many notable and well @-@ educated women , and it was a common practice for women to educate their sons during their earliest youth . The mother of the scientist , general , diplomat , and statesman Shen Kuo taught him essentials of military strategy . There were also exceptional women writers and poets , such as Li Qingzhao ( 1084 – 1151 ) , who became famous even in her lifetime . 
 Religion in China during this period had a great effect on people 's lives , beliefs , and daily activities , and Chinese literature on spirituality was popular . The major deities of Daoism and Buddhism , ancestral spirits , and the many deities of Chinese folk religion were worshipped with sacrificial offerings . Tansen Sen asserts that more Buddhist monks from India travelled to China during the Song than in the previous Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) . With many ethnic foreigners travelling to China to conduct trade or live permanently , there came many foreign religions ; religious minorities in China included Middle Eastern Muslims , the Kaifeng Jews , and Persian Manichaeans . 
 The populace engaged in a vibrant social and domestic life , enjoying such public festivals as the Lantern Festival and the Qingming Festival . There were entertainment quarters in the cities providing a constant array of amusements . There were puppeteers , acrobats , theatre actors , sword <unk> , snake charmers , storytellers , singers and musicians , prostitutes , and places to relax , including tea houses , restaurants , and organized banquets . People attended social clubs in large numbers ; there were tea clubs , exotic food clubs , antiquarian and art collectors ' clubs , horse @-@ loving clubs , poetry clubs , and music clubs . Like regional cooking and cuisines in the Song , the era was known for its regional varieties of performing arts styles as well . Theatrical drama was very popular amongst the elite and general populace , although Classical Chinese — not the vernacular language — was spoken by actors on stage . The four largest drama theatres in Kaifeng could hold audiences of several thousand each . There were also notable domestic pastimes , as people at home enjoyed activities such as the go and xiangqi board games . 
 = = = Civil service examinations and the gentry = = = 
 During this period greater emphasis was laid upon the civil service system of recruiting officials ; this was based upon degrees acquired through competitive examinations , in an effort to select the most capable individuals for governance . Selecting men for office through proven merit was an ancient idea in China . The civil service system became institutionalized on a small scale during the Sui and Tang dynasties , but by the Song period it became virtually the only means for drafting officials into the government . The advent of widespread printing helped to widely circulate Confucian teachings and to educate more and more eligible candidates for the exams . This can be seen in the number of exam takers for the low @-@ level prefectural exams rising from 30 @,@ 000 annual candidates in the early 11th century to 400 @,@ 000 candidates by the late 13th century . The civil service and examination system allowed for greater meritocracy , social mobility , and equality in competition for those wishing to attain an official seat in government . Using statistics gathered by the Song state , Edward A. <unk> , Sudō Yoshiyuki , and Ho Ping @-@ ti supported the hypothesis that simply having a father , grandfather , or great @-@ grandfather who had served as an official of state did not guarantee one would obtain the same level of authority . Robert Hartwell and Robert P. Hymes criticized this model , stating that it places too much emphasis on the role of the nuclear family and considers only three paternal <unk> of exam candidates while ignoring the demographic reality of Song China , the significant proportion of males in each generation that had no surviving sons , and the role of the extended family . Many felt disenfranchised by what they saw as a bureaucratic system that favored the land @-@ holding class able to afford the best education . One of the greatest literary critics of this was the official and famous poet Su Shi . Yet Su was a product of his times , as the identity , habits , and attitudes of the scholar @-@ official had become less aristocratic and more bureaucratic with the transition of the periods from Tang to Song . At the beginning of the dynasty , government posts were disproportionately held by two elite social groups : a founding elite who had ties with the founding emperor and a semi @-@ hereditary professional elite who used long @-@ held clan status , family connections , and marriage alliances to secure appointments . By the late 11th century , the founding elite became obsolete , while political partisanship and factionalism at court undermined the marriage strategies of the professional elite , which dissolved as a distinguishable social group and was replaced by a multitude of gentry families . 
 Due to Song 's enormous population growth and the body of its appointed scholar @-@ officials being accepted in limited numbers ( about 20 @,@ 000 active officials during the Song period ) , the larger scholarly gentry class would now take over grassroots affairs on the vast local level . Excluding the scholar @-@ officials in office , this elite social class consisted of exam candidates , examination degree @-@ holders not yet assigned to an official post , local tutors , and retired officials . These learned men , degree @-@ holders , and local elites supervised local affairs and sponsored necessary facilities of local communities ; any local magistrate appointed to his office by the government relied upon the cooperation of the few or many local gentry in the area . For example , the Song government — excluding the educational @-@ reformist government under Emperor Huizong — spared little amount of state revenue to maintain prefectural and county schools ; instead , the bulk of the funds for schools was drawn from private financing . This limited role of government officials was a departure from the earlier Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) , when the government strictly regulated commercial markets and local affairs ; now the government withdrew heavily from regulating commerce and relied upon a mass of local gentry to perform necessary duties in their communities . 
 The gentry distinguished themselves in society through their intellectual and antiquarian pursuits , while the homes of prominent landholders attracted a variety of courtiers , including artisans , artists , educational tutors , and entertainers . Despite the disdain for trade , commerce and the merchant class exhibited by the highly cultured and elite exam @-@ drafted scholar @-@ officials , commercialism played a prominent role in Song culture and society . A scholar @-@ official would be frowned upon by his peers if he pursued means of profiteering outside of his official salary ; however , this did not stop many scholar @-@ officials from managing business relations through the use of intermediary agents . 68 – 69 
 = = = Law , justice , and forensic science = = = 
 The Song judicial system retained most of the legal code of the earlier Tang dynasty , the basis of traditional Chinese law up until the modern era . Roving sheriffs maintained law and order in the municipal jurisdictions and occasionally ventured into the countryside . Official magistrates overseeing court cases were not only expected to be well @-@ versed in written law but also to promote morality in society . Magistrates such as the famed Bao <unk> ( 999 – 1062 ) embodied the upright , moral judge who upheld justice and never failed to live up to his principles . Song judges specified the guilty person or party in a criminal act and meted out punishments accordingly , often in the form of caning . A guilty individual or parties brought to court for a criminal or civil offense were not viewed as wholly innocent until proven otherwise , while even accusers were viewed with a high level of suspicion by the judge . Due to costly court expenses and immediate jailing of those accused of criminal offences , people in the Song preferred to settle disputes and quarrels privately , without the court 's interference . 
 Shen Kuo 's Dream Pool Essays argued against traditional Chinese beliefs in anatomy ( such as his argument for two throat valves instead of three ) ; this perhaps spurred the interest in the performance of post @-@ mortem autopsies in China during the 12th century. footnote 27 The physician and judge known as Song Ci ( 1186 – 1249 ) wrote a pioneering work of forensic science on the examination of corpses in order to determine cause of death ( strangulation , poisoning , drowning , blows , etc . ) and to prove whether death resulted from murder , suicide , or accidental death . Song Ci stressed the importance of proper coroner 's conduct during autopsies and the accurate recording of the inquest of each autopsy by official clerks . 72 
 = = = Military and methods of warfare = = = 
 The Song military was chiefly organized to ensure that the army could not threaten Imperial control , often at the expense of effectiveness in war . Northern Song 's Military Council operated under a Chancellor , who had no control over the imperial army . The imperial army was divided among three marshals , each independently responsible to the Emperor . Since the Emperor rarely led campaigns personally , Song forces lacked unity of command . The imperial court often believed that successful generals endangered royal authority , and relieved or even executed them ( notably Li Gang , Yue Fei , and Han Shizhong 
 Although the scholar @-@ officials viewed military soldiers as lower members in the hierarchic social order , a person could gain status and prestige in society by becoming a high @-@ ranking military officer with a record of victorious battles . At its height , the Song military had one million soldiers divided into platoons of 50 troops , companies made of two platoons , battalions composed of 500 soldiers . Crossbowmen were separated from the regular infantry and placed in their own units as they were prized combatants , providing effective missile fire against cavalry charges . The government was eager to sponsor new crossbow designs that could shoot at longer ranges , while crossbowmen were also valuable when employed as long @-@ range snipers . Song cavalry employed a slew of different weapons , including halberds , swords , bows , spears , and ' fire lances ' that discharged a gunpowder blast of flame and shrapnel . 
 Military strategy and military training were treated as science that could be studied and perfected ; soldiers were tested in their skills of using weaponry and in their athletic ability . The troops were trained to follow signal standards to advance at the waving of banners and to halt at the sound of bells and drums . 
 The Song navy was of great importance during the consolidation of the empire in the 10th century ; during the war against the Southern Tang state the Song navy employed tactics such as defending large floating pontoon bridges across the Yangzi River in order to secure movements of troops and supplies . There were large naval ships in the Song that could carry 1 @,@ 000 soldiers aboard their decks , while the swift @-@ moving paddle @-@ wheel craft were viewed as essential fighting ships in any successful naval battle . 
 In a battle on January 23 , 971 , massive arrow fire from Song dynasty crossbowmen decimated the war elephant corps of the Southern Han army . This defeat not only marked the eventual submission of the Southern Han to the Song dynasty , but also the last instance where a war elephant corps was employed as a regular division within a Chinese army . 
 There was a total of 347 military treatises written during the Song period , as listed by the history text of the Song Shi ( compiled in 1345 ) . However , only a handful of these military treatises have survived , which includes the Wujing Zongyao written in 1044 . It was the first known book to have listed formulas for gunpowder ; it gave appropriate formulas for use in several different kinds of gunpowder bombs . It also provided detailed descriptions and illustrations of double @-@ piston pump flamethrowers , as well as instructions for the maintenance and repair of the components and equipment used in the device . 
 = = = Arts , literature , and philosophy = = = 
 The visual arts during the Song dynasty were heightened by new developments such as advances in landscape and portrait painting . The gentry elite engaged in the arts as accepted pastimes of the cultured scholar @-@ official , including painting , composing poetry , and writing calligraphy . The poet and statesman Su Shi and his associate Mi Fu ( 1051 – 1107 ) enjoyed antiquarian affairs , often borrowing or buying art pieces to study and copy . Poetry and literature profited from the rising popularity and development of the ci poetry form . Enormous encyclopedic volumes were compiled , such as works of historiography and dozens of treatises on technical subjects . This included the universal history text of the Zizhi Tongjian , compiled into 1000 volumes of 9 @.@ 4 million written Chinese characters . The genre of Chinese travel literature also became popular with the writings of the geographer Fan <unk> ( 1126 – 1193 ) and Su Shi , the latter of whom wrote the ' <unk> essay ' known as Record of Stone Bell Mountain that used persuasive writing to argue for a philosophical point . Although an early form of the local geographic gazetteer existed in China since the 1st century , the matured form known as " treatise on a place " , or fangzhi , replaced the old " map guide " , or tujing , during the Song dynasty . 
 The imperial courts of the emperor 's palace were filled with his entourage of court painters , calligraphers , poets , and storytellers . Emperor Huizong was a renowned artist as well as a patron of the arts . A prime example of a highly venerated court painter was Zhang Zeduan ( 1085 – 1145 ) who painted an enormous panoramic painting , Along the River During the Qingming Festival . Emperor Gaozong of Song initiated a massive art project during his reign , known as the Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute from the life story of Cai Wenji ( b . 177 ) . This art project was a diplomatic gesture to the Jin dynasty while he negotiated for the release of his mother from Jurchen captivity in the north . 
 In philosophy , Chinese Buddhism had waned in influence but it retained its hold on the arts and on the charities of monasteries . Buddhism had a profound influence upon the budding movement of Neo @-@ Confucianism , led by Cheng Yi ( 1033 – 1107 ) and Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) . Mahayana Buddhism influenced Fan Zhongyan and Wang Anshi through its concept of ethical universalism , while Buddhist metaphysics deeply affected the pre – Neo @-@ Confucian doctrine of Cheng Yi . The philosophical work of Cheng Yi in turn influenced Zhu Xi . Although his writings were not accepted by his contemporary peers , Zhu 's commentary and emphasis upon the Confucian classics of the Four Books as an introductory corpus to Confucian learning formed the basis of the Neo @-@ Confucian doctrine . By the year 1241 , under the sponsorship of Emperor Lizong , Zhu Xi 's Four Books and his commentary on them became standard requirements of study for students attempting to pass the civil service examinations . The East Asian countries of Japan and Korea also adopted Zhu Xi 's teaching , known as the <unk> ( <unk> , School of Zhu Xi ) of Japan , and in Korea the <unk> ( <unk> ) . Buddhism 's continuing influence can be seen in painted artwork such as Lin <unk> 's <unk> Laundering . However , the ideology was highly criticized and even scorned by some . The statesman and historian Ouyang Xiu ( 1007 – 1072 ) called the religion a " curse " that could only be remedied by uprooting it from Chinese culture and replacing it with Confucian discourse . A true revival of Buddhism in Chinese society would not occur until the Mongol rule of the Yuan dynasty , with Kublai Khan 's sponsorship of Tibetan Buddhism and Drogön Chögyal Phagpa as the leading lama . The Christian sect of Nestorianism , which had entered China in the Tang era , would also be revived in China under Mongol rule . 
 = = = Cuisine and apparel = = = 
 <unk> laws regulated the food that one consumed and the clothes that one wore according to status and social class . Clothing was made of hemp or cotton cloths , restricted to a colour standard of black and white . Trousers were the acceptable attire for peasants , soldiers , artisans , and merchants , although wealthy merchants might choose to wear more ornate clothing and male blouses that came down below the waist . Acceptable apparel for scholar @-@ officials was rigidly defined by social ranking system . However , as time went on this rule of rank @-@ graded apparel for officials was not as strictly enforced . Each official was able to display his awarded status by wearing different @-@ coloured traditional silken robes that hung to the ground around his feet , specific types of headgear , and even specific styles of girdles that displayed his graded @-@ rank of officialdom . 
 Women wore long dresses , blouses that came down to the knee , skirts and jackets with long or short sleeves , while women from wealthy families could wear purple scarves around their shoulders . The main difference in women 's apparel from that of men was that it was fastened on the left , not on the right . 
 The main food staples in the diet of the lower classes remained rice , pork , and salted fish . Song restaurant and tavern menus are recorded which list entrées for feasts , banquets , festivals , and carnivals . They reveal a diverse and lavish diet for those of the upper class . They could choose from a wide variety of meats and seafood , including shrimp , geese , duck , mussel , shellfish , fallow deer , hare , partridge , pheasant , francolin , quail , fox , badger , clam , crab , and many others . Dairy products were rare in Chinese cuisine at this time . Beef was rarely consumed since the bull was a valuable draft animal , and dog meat was absent from the diet of the wealthy , although the poor could choose to eat dog meat if necessary ( yet it was not part of their regular diet ) . People also consumed dates , raisins , jujubes , pears , plums , apricots , pear juice , lychee @-@ fruit juice , honey and ginger drinks , pawpaw juice , spices and seasonings of Sichuan pepper , ginger , soy sauce , oil , sesame oil , salt , and vinegar . 
 = = = Daily life in the Southern Song = = = 
 During the era of the Southern Song there was a vast imbalance of population between city and country . The small group of elite had all very uniform customs , and tried to control others , especially country people , to take their way of life . 
 = = = = Urban commoners = = = = 
 At this time the main concentration of wealth was in cities . In contrast poverty spanned the countryside . This resulted in many people to moving to the city to seek their fortune . The result of this mass immigration of people was a surplus of manpower . This caused labor to be cheap and wages meager . Guilds formed to help people find jobs , and employers find workers , as there was almost always a middle @-@ man involved in hiring people . Since the wealthy mainly lived in cities there was a large job market for positions such as servants , gardeners , and cooks . Some of the richest families even had their own artisans and private militia . This led to the majority of people in the city to work for the wealthy . The rest had to work such jobs as heavy laborers , peddlers , shop keepers , actors , storytellers , puppeteers , and other various entertainment positions . 
 “ Shadow [ puppet ] plays originated in the old capital … The stories of the shadow plays are pretty much the same as used by the storytellers ; generally speaking they are a mixture of truth and fiction . The loyal and righteous were given a handsome appearance , whereas the wicked and treacherous are depicted monstrously <unk> a kind of implicit criticism that is easily understood by the people in the streets ” 
 Another job with a vast market was prostitution . While their Mongol counterparts in the north forced prostitutes to live outside the city the Song in the South allowed prostitutes free roam of the city . 
 = = = = Country residents = = = = 
 Another result of the mass immigration of people to cities was that the country lacked enough producers such as farmers and fishermen to adequately sustain urban life . Many of the wealthy city dwellers also possessed vast tracts of land which they rented out to tenant farmers . <unk> were poor which brought debt , and interest on loans were high . Many of them lived their lives as virtual slaves because of this . Even with all the hardships people in the country kept their spirits up with annual festivals . Children cared for the animals , collected wood , fetched water , and of course if there was time played . 
 = = Economy , industry , and trade = = 
 The Song dynasty had one of the most prosperous and advanced economies in the medieval world . Song Chinese invested their funds in joint stock companies and in multiple sailing vessels at a time when monetary gain was assured from the vigorous overseas trade and domestic trade along the Grand Canal and Yangzi River . Prominent merchant families and private businesses were allowed to occupy industries that were not already government @-@ operated monopolies . Both private and government @-@ controlled industries met the needs of a growing Chinese population in the Song . Artisans and merchants formed guilds that the state had to deal with when assessing taxes , requisitioning goods , and setting standard worker 's wages and prices on goods . 94 
 The iron industry was pursued by both private entrepreneurs who owned their own smelters as well as government @-@ supervised smelting facilities . 181 – 183 The Song economy was stable enough to produce over a hundred million kilograms ( over two hundred million pounds ) of iron product a year . Large @-@ scale deforestation in China would have continued if not for the 11th @-@ century innovation of the use of coal instead of charcoal in blast furnaces for smelting cast iron . Much of this iron was reserved for military use in crafting weapons and armouring troops , but some was used to fashion the many iron products needed to fill the demands of the growing domestic market . The iron trade within China was advanced by the construction of new canals , facilitating the flow of iron products from production centres to the large market in the capital city . 
 The annual output of minted copper currency in 1085 reached roughly six billion coins . The most notable advancement in the Song economy was the establishment of the world 's first government issued paper @-@ printed money , known as Jiaozi ( see also Huizi ) . For the printing of paper money , the Song court established several government @-@ run factories in the cities of Huizhou , Chengdu , Hangzhou , and Anqi . The size of the workforce employed in paper money factories was large ; it was recorded in 1175 that the factory at Hangzhou employed more than a thousand workers a day . 
 The economic power of Song China heavily influenced foreign economies abroad . The Moroccan geographer al @-@ Idrisi wrote in 1154 of the prowess of Chinese merchant ships in the Indian Ocean and of their annual voyages that brought iron , swords , silk , velvet , porcelain , and various textiles to places such as Aden ( Yemen ) , the Indus River , and the Euphrates in modern @-@ day Iraq . Foreigners , in turn , affected the Chinese economy . For example , many West Asian and Central Asian Muslims went to China to trade , becoming a preeminent force in the import and export industry , while some were even appointed as officers supervising economic affairs . Sea trade with the South @-@ east Pacific , the Hindu world , the Islamic world , and East Africa brought merchants great fortune and spurred an enormous growth in the shipbuilding industry of Song @-@ era Fujian province . However , there was risk involved in such long overseas ventures . In order to reduce the risk of losing money on maritime trade missions abroad , wrote historians Ebrey , Walthall , and Palais : 
 [ Song era ] investors usually divided their investment among many ships , and each ship had many investors behind it . One observer thought eagerness to invest in overseas trade was leading to an outflow of copper cash . He wrote , ' People along the coast are on intimate terms with the merchants who engage in overseas trade , either because they are fellow @-@ countrymen or personal acquaintances .... [ They give the merchants ] money to take with them on their ships for purchase and return conveyance of foreign goods . They invest from ten to a hundred strings of cash , and regularly make profits of several hundred percent ' . 
 = = Technology , science , and engineering = = 
 = = = Gunpowder warfare = = = 
 Advancements in weapons technology enhanced by gunpowder , including the evolution of the early flamethrower , explosive grenade , firearm , cannon , and land mine , enabled the Song Chinese to ward off their militant enemies until the Song 's ultimate collapse in the late 13th century . The Wujing Zongyao manuscript of 1044 was the first book in history to provide formulas for gunpowder and their specified use in different types of bombs . While engaged in a war with the Mongols , in 1259 the official Li Zengbo wrote in his <unk> <unk> , <unk> that the city of Qingzhou was manufacturing one to two thousand strong iron @-@ cased bomb shells a month , dispatching to Xiangyang and Yingzhou about ten to twenty thousand such bombs at a time . In turn , the invading Mongols employed northern Chinese soldiers and used these same types of gunpowder weapons against the Song . By the 14th century the firearm and cannon could also be found in Europe , India , and the Islamic Middle East , during the early age of gunpowder warfare . 
 = = = Measuring distance and mechanical navigation = = = 
 As early as the Han dynasty , when the state needed to effectively measure distances traveled throughout the empire , the Chinese relied on the mechanical odometer device . The Chinese odometer came in the form of a wheeled @-@ carriage , its inner gears functioning off the rotated motion of the wheels , and specific units of distance — the Chinese li — marked by the mechanical striking of a drum or bell for auditory alarm . The specifications for the 11th century odometer were written by Chief Chamberlain Lu Daolong , who is quoted extensively in the historical text of the Song Shi ( compiled by 1345 ) . In the Song period , the odometer vehicle was also combined with another old complex mechanical device known as the south @-@ pointing chariot . This device , originally crafted by Ma Jun in the 3rd century , incorporated a differential gear that allowed a figure mounted on the vehicle to always point in the southern direction , no matter how the vehicle 's wheels ' turned about . The device concept of the differential gear for this navigational vehicle is now found in modern automobiles in order to apply the equal amount of torque to wheels rotating at different speeds . 
 = = = Polymaths , inventions , and astronomy = = = 
 Polymath figures such as the statesmen Shen Kuo and Su Song ( 1020 – 1101 ) embodied advancements in all fields of study , including biology , botany , zoology , geology , mineralogy , mechanics , horology , astronomy , pharmaceutical medicine , archeology , mathematics , cartography , optics , art criticism , and more . 
 Shen Kuo was the first to discern magnetic declination of true north while experimenting with a compass . Shen theorized that geographical climates gradually shifted over time . He created a theory of land formation involving concepts accepted in modern geomorphology . He performed optical experiments with camera obscura just decades after Ibn al @-@ Haytham was the first to do so . He also improved the designs of astronomical instruments such as the widened astronomical sighting tube , which allowed Shen Kuo to fix the position of the pole star ( which had shifted over centuries of time ) . Shen Kuo was also known for hydraulic clockworks , as he invented a new overflow @-@ tank clepsydra which had more efficient higher @-@ order interpolation instead of linear interpolation in calibrating the measure of time . 
 Su Song was best known for his horology treatise written in 1092 , which described and illustrated in great detail his hydraulic @-@ powered , 12 metres ( 39 ft ) tall astronomical clock tower built in Kaifeng . The clock tower featured large astronomical instruments of the armillary sphere and celestial globe , both driven by an early intermittently working escapement mechanism ( similarly to the western verge escapement of true mechanical clocks appeared in medieval clockworks , derived from ancient clockworks of classical times ) . Su 's tower featured a rotating gear wheel with 133 clock jack mannequins who were timed to rotate past shuttered windows while ringing gongs and bells , banging drums , and presenting announcement plaques . 445 In his printed book , Su published a celestial atlas of five star charts . These star charts feature a cylindrical projection similar to Mercator projection , the latter being a cartographic innovation of Gerardus Mercator in 1569 . 
 = = = Mathematics and cartography = = = 
 There were many notable improvements to Chinese mathematics during the Song era . Mathematician Yang Hui 's 1261 book provided the earliest Chinese illustration of Pascal 's triangle , although it had earlier been described by Jia Xian in around 1100 . Yang Hui also provided rules for constructing combinatorial arrangements in magic squares , provided theoretical proof for Euclid 's forty @-@ third proposition about parallelograms , and was the first to use negative coefficients of ' x ' in quadratic equations . 59 – 60 , 104 Yang 's contemporary Qin <unk> ( c . 1202 – 1261 ) was the first to introduce the zero symbol into Chinese mathematics ; before this blank spaces were used instead of zeroes in the system of counting rods . He is also known for working with the Chinese remainder theorem , Heron 's formula , and astronomical data used in determining the winter solstice . Qin 's major work was the Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections published in 1247 . 
 Geometry was essential to surveying and cartography . The earliest extant Chinese maps date to the 4th century BCE , yet it was not until the time of Pei Xiu ( 224 – 271 ) that topographical elevation , a formal rectangular grid system , and use of a standard graduated scale of distances was applied to terrain maps . Following a long tradition , Shen Kuo created a raised @-@ relief map , while his other maps featured a uniform graduated scale of 1 : 900 @,@ 000 . A 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) squared map of 1137 — carved into a stone block — followed a uniform grid scale of 100 li for each gridded square , and accurately mapped the outline of the coasts and river systems of China , extending all the way to India . Plate LXXXI Furthermore , the world 's oldest known terrain map in printed form comes from the edited encyclopedia of Yang Jia in 1155 , which displayed western China without the formal grid system that was characteristic of more professionally made Chinese maps . Plate <unk> Although gazetteers had existed since 52 CE during the Han dynasty and gazetteers accompanied by illustrative maps ( Chinese : tujing ) since the Sui dynasty , the illustrated gazetteer became much more common in the Song dynasty , when the foremost concern was for illustrative gazetteers to serve political , administrative , and military purposes . 409 – 412 
 = = = Movable type printing = = = 
 [ [ File : Su Song Star Map <unk> | alt = A rectangular ink on paper diagram with several hundred dots , several of which are organized into constellations , such as a drawn bow ( bottom center ) and a tree ( top left ) . | thumb | left | One of the star charts from Su Song 's Xin Yi Xiang Fa Yao published in 1092 , featuring cylindrical projection similar to Mercator projection and the corrected position of the pole star thanks to Shen Kuo 's astronomical observations . Su Song 's celestial atlas of five star maps is actually the oldest in printed form . The innovation of movable type printing was made by the artisan Bi Sheng ( 990 – 1051 ) , first described by the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo in his Dream Pool Essays of 1088 . The collection of Bi Sheng 's original clay @-@ fired typeface was passed on to one of Shen Kuo 's nephews , and was carefully preserved . Movable type enhanced the already widespread use of woodblock methods of printing thousands of documents and volumes of written literature , consumed eagerly by an increasingly literate public . The advancement of printing deeply affected education and the scholar @-@ official class , since more books could be made faster while mass @-@ produced , printed books were cheaper in comparison to laborious handwritten copies . The enhancement of widespread printing and print culture in the Song period was thus a direct catalyst in the rise of social mobility and expansion of the educated class of scholar elites , the latter which expanded dramatically in size from the 11th to 13th centuries . 
 The movable type invented by Bi Sheng was ultimately trumped by the use of woodblock printing due to the limitations of the enormous Chinese character writing system , yet movable type printing continued to be used and was improved in later periods . The Yuan dynasty scholar @-@ official Wang Zhen ( fl . 1290 – 1333 ) implemented a faster typesetting process , improved Bi 's baked @-@ clay movable type character set with a wooden one , and experimented with tin @-@ metal movable type . 217 The wealthy printing patron Hua Sui ( 1439 – 1513 ) of the Ming dynasty established China 's first metal movable type ( using bronze ) in 1490 . In 1638 the Beijing Gazette switched their printing process from woodblock to movable type printing . Yet it was during the Qing dynasty that massive printing projects began to employ movable type printing . This includes the printing of sixty @-@ six copies of a 5 @,@ 020 volume long encyclopedia in 1725 , the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Complete Collection of Illustrations and Writings from the Earliest to Current Times ) , which necessitated the crafting of 250 @,@ 000 movable type characters cast in bronze . By the 19th century the European style printing press replaced the old Chinese methods of movable type , while traditional woodblock printing in modern East Asia is used sparsely and for aesthetic reasons . 
 = = = Hydraulic and nautical engineering = = = 
 The most important nautical innovation of the Song period seems to have been the introduction of the magnetic mariner 's compass , which permitted accurate navigation on the open sea regardless of the weather . The magnetized compass needle – known in Chinese as the " south @-@ pointing needle " – was first described by Shen Kuo in his 1088 Dream Pool Essays and first mentioned in active use by sailors in Zhu Yu 's 1119 Pingzhou Table Talks . 
 [ [ File : <unk> | alt = A diagram of the pound lock system , from a bird 's eye perspective and from a side perspective . The bird 's eye view illustrates that water enters the enclosed area through two culverts on either side of the upper lock gate . The side view diagram illustrates how the elevation is higher before reaching the top gate than it is afterwards . | thumb | right | <unk> | A plan and side view of a canal pound lock , a concept pioneered in 984 by the Assistant Commissioner of Transport for Huainan , the engineer Qiao <unk> . There were other considerable advancements in hydraulic engineering and nautical technology during the Song dynasty . The 10th @-@ century invention of the pound lock for canal systems allowed different water levels to be raised and lowered for separated segments of a canal , which significantly aided the safety of canal traffic and allowed for larger barges . There was the Song @-@ era innovation of watertight bulkhead compartments that allowed damage to hulls without sinking the ships . If ships were damaged , the Chinese of the 11th century employed drydocks to repair them while suspended out of the water . The Song used crossbeams to brace the ribs of ships in order to strengthen them in a skeletal @-@ like structure . Stern @-@ mounted rudders had been mounted on Chinese ships since the 1st century , as evidenced with a preserved Han tomb model of a ship . In the Song period , the Chinese devised a way to mechanically raise and lower rudders in order for ships to travel in a wider range of water depths . The Song arranged the protruding teeth of anchors in a circular pattern instead of in one direction . David Graff and Robin Higham state that this arrangement " [ made ] them more reliable " for anchoring ships . 
 = = = Structural engineering and architecture = = = 
 Architecture during the Song period reached new heights of sophistication . Authors such as Yu Hao and Shen Kuo wrote books outlining the field of architectural layouts , craftsmanship , and structural engineering in the 10th and 11th centuries , respectively . Shen Kuo preserved the written dialogues of Yu Hao when describing technical issues such as slanting struts built into pagoda towers for diagonal wind bracing . Shen Kuo also preserved Yu 's specified dimensions and units of measurement for various building types . The architect Li Jie ( 1065 – 1110 ) , who published the Yingzao Fashi ( ' Treatise on Architectural Methods ' ) in 1103 , greatly expanded upon the works of Yu Hao and compiled the standard building codes used by the central government agencies and by craftsmen throughout the empire . He addressed the standard methods of construction , design , and applications of moats and fortifications , stonework , greater woodwork , lesser woodwork , wood @-@ carving , turning and drilling , sawing , bamboo work , tiling , wall building , painting and decoration , brickwork , glazed tile making , and provided proportions for mortar formulas in masonry . In his book , Li provided detailed and vivid illustrations of architectural components and cross @-@ sections of buildings . These illustrations displayed various applications of corbel brackets , cantilever arms , mortise and tenon work of tie beams and cross beams , and diagrams showing the various building types of halls in graded sizes . 108 – 109 He also outlined the standard units of measurement and standard dimensional measurements of all building components described and illustrated in his book . 
 <unk> building projects were supported by the government , including the erection of towering Buddhist Chinese pagodas and the construction of enormous bridges ( wood or stone , trestle or segmental arch bridge ) . Many of the pagoda towers built during the Song period were erected at heights that exceeded ten stories . Some of the most famous are the Iron Pagoda built in 1049 during the Northern Song and the Liuhe Pagoda built in 1165 during the Southern Song , although there were many others . The tallest is the Liaodi Pagoda of Hebei built in 1055 , towering 84 m ( 276 ft ) in total height . Some of the bridges reached lengths of 1 @,@ 220 m ( 4 @,@ 000 ft ) , with many being wide enough to allow two lanes of cart traffic simultaneously over a waterway or ravine . The government also oversaw construction of their own administrative offices , palace apartments , city fortifications , ancestral temples , and Buddhist temples . 
 The professions of the architect , craftsman , carpenter , and structural engineer were not seen as professionally equal to that of a Confucian scholar @-@ official . Architectural knowledge had been passed down orally for thousands of years in China , in many cases from a father craftsman to his son . Structural engineering and architecture schools were known to have existed during the Song period ; one prestigious engineering school was headed by the renowned bridge @-@ builder Cai Xiang ( 1012 – 1067 ) in medieval Fujian province . 
 Besides existing buildings and technical literature of building manuals , Song dynasty artwork portraying cityscapes and other buildings aid modern @-@ day scholars in their attempts to reconstruct and realize the nuances of Song architecture . Song dynasty artists such as Li Cheng , Fan Kuan , Guo Xi , Zhang Zeduan , Emperor Huizong of Song , and Ma Lin painted close @-@ up depictions of buildings as well as large expanses of cityscapes featuring arched bridges , halls and pavilions , pagoda towers , and distinct Chinese city walls . The scientist and statesman Shen Kuo was known for his criticism of artwork relating to architecture , saying that it was more important for an artist to capture a holistic view of a landscape than it was to focus on the angles and corners of buildings . For example , Shen criticized the work of the painter Li Cheng for failing to observe the principle of " seeing the small from the viewpoint of the large " in portraying buildings . 
 There were also pyramidal tomb structures in the Song era , such as the Song imperial tombs located in Gongxian , Henan province . About 100 km ( 62 mi ) from Gongxian is another Song dynasty tomb at Baisha , which features " elaborate facsimiles in brick of Chinese timber frame construction , from door lintels to pillars and pedestals to bracket sets , that adorn interior walls . " The two large chambers of the Baisha tomb also feature conical @-@ shaped roofs . Flanking the avenues leading to these tombs are lines of Song dynasty stone statues of officials , tomb guardians , animals , and mythological creatures . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 In addition to the Song gentry 's antiquarian pursuits of art collecting , scholar @-@ officials during the Song became highly interested in retrieving ancient relics from archaeological sites , in order to revive the use of ancient vessels in ceremonies of state ritual . Scholar @-@ officials of the Song period claimed to have discovered ancient bronze vessels that were created as far back as the Shang dynasty ( 1600 – 1046 BCE ) , which bore the written characters of the Shang era . Some attempted to recreate these bronze vessels by using imagination alone , not by observing tangible evidence of relics ; this practice was criticized by Shen Kuo in his work of 1088 . Yet Shen Kuo had much more to criticize than this practice alone . Shen objected to the idea of his peers that ancient relics were products created by famous " sages " in lore or the ancient aristocratic class ; Shen rightfully attributed the discovered handicrafts and vessels from ancient times as the work of artisans and commoners from previous eras . He also disapproved of his peers ' pursuit of archaeology simply to enhance state ritual , since Shen not only took an interdisciplinary approach with the study of archaeology , but he also emphasized the study of functionality and investigating what was the ancient relics ' original processes of manufacture . Shen used ancient texts and existing models of armillary spheres to create one based on ancient standards ; Shen described ancient weaponry such as the use of a scaled sighting device on crossbows ; while experimenting with ancient musical measures , Shen suggested hanging an ancient bell by using a hollow handle . 
 Despite the gentry 's overriding interest in archaeology simply for reviving ancient state rituals , some of Shen 's peers took a similar approach to the study of archaeology . His contemporary Ouyang Xiu ( 1007 – 1072 ) compiled an analytical catalogue of ancient rubbings on stone and bronze which pioneered ideas in early epigraphy and archaeology . During the 11th century , Song scholars discovered the ancient shrine of Wu Liang ( 78 – 151 CE ) , a scholar of the Han dynasty ( 202 BCE – 220 CE ) ; they produced rubbings of the carvings and bas @-@ reliefs decorating the walls of his tomb so that they could be analyzed elsewhere . On the unreliability of historical works written after the fact , scholar @-@ official Zhao <unk> ( 1081 – 1129 ) stated " ... the inscriptions on stone and bronze are made at the time the events took place and can be trusted without reservation , and thus discrepancies may be discovered . " Historian R.C. Rudolph states that Zhao 's emphasis on consulting contemporary sources for accurate dating is parallel with the concern of the German historian Leopold von Ranke ( 1795 – 1886 ) , and was in fact emphasized by many Song scholars . The Song scholar Hong Mai ( 1123 – 1202 ) heavily criticized what he called the court 's " ridiculous " archaeological catalogue <unk> compiled during the Huizong reign periods of Zheng He and Xuan He ( 1111 – 1125 ) . Hong Mai obtained old vessels from the Han dynasty and compared them with the descriptions offered in the catalogue , which he found so inaccurate he stated he had to " hold my sides with laughter . " Hong Mai pointed out that the erroneous material was the fault of Chancellor Cai Jing ( 1047 – 1126 ) , who prohibited scholars from reading and consulting the written histories . 
 = Amir Hamzah = 
 Tengku Amir Hamzah ( 28 February 1911 – 20 March 1946 ) was an Indonesian poet and National Hero of Indonesia . Born into a Malay aristocratic family in the Sultanate of Langkat in North Sumatra , he was educated in both Sumatra and Java . While attending senior high school in Surakarta around 1930 , the youth became involved with the nationalist movement and fell in love with a Javanese schoolmate , Ilik Sundari . Even after Amir continued his studies in legal school in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) the two remained close , only separating in 1937 when Amir was recalled to Sumatra to marry the sultan 's daughter and take on responsibilities of the court . Though unhappy with his marriage , he fulfilled his courtly duties . After Indonesia proclaimed its independence in 1945 , he served as the government 's representative in Langkat . The following year he was killed in a socialist revolution led by the Communist Party of Indonesia and buried in a mass grave . 
 Amir began writing poetry while still a teenager : though his works are undated , the earliest are thought to have been written when he first travelled to Java . Drawing influences from his own Malay culture and Islam , as well as from Christianity and Eastern literature , Amir wrote 50 poems , 18 pieces of lyrical prose , and numerous other works , including several translations . In 1932 he co @-@ founded the literary magazine Poedjangga Baroe . After his return to Sumatra , he stopped writing . Most of his poems were published in two collections , Nyanyi Sunyi ( 1937 ) and Buah Rindu ( 1941 ) , first in Poedjangga Baroe then as stand @-@ alone books . 
 Poems by Amir deal with the themes of love and religion and his poetry often reflects a deep inner conflict . His diction , using both Malay and Javanese words and expanding on traditional structures , was influenced by the need for rhythm and metre , as well as symbolism related to particular terms . His earlier works deal with a sense of longing and both erotic and idealised love , whereas his later works have a deeper religious meaning . Of his two collections , Nyanyi Sunyi is considered the most developed . Amir has been called the " King of the Poedjangga Baroe @-@ era Poets " and the only international @-@ class Indonesian poet from before the Indonesian National Revolution . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Amir was born as <unk> Amir Hamzah Pangeran Indra <unk> in Tanjung Pura , Langkat , North Sumatra , the youngest son of Vice Sultan Tengku Muhammad Adil and his third wife Tengku <unk> . Through his father , he was related to the Sultan of Langkat , <unk> . Sources disagree over his date of birth . The date officially recognised by the Indonesian government is 28 February 1911 , a date Amir used throughout his life . However , his elder brother Abdullah Hod states that the poet was born on 11 February 1911 . Amir later took the name of his grandfather , <unk> Hamzah , as a second name ; thus , he was referred to as Amir Hamzah . Though a child of nobility , he would often associate with non @-@ nobles . 
 It is known that Amir was schooled in Islamic principles such as Qu 'ran reading , fiqh , and tawhid , and studied at the Azizi Mosque in Tanjung Pura from a young age . He remained a devout Muslim throughout his life . Sources disagree on the period in which he completed his formal studies . Several sources , including the Indonesian government 's Language Centre , state that he started school in 1916 , while the biographer M. Lah Husny puts the future poet 's first year of formal schooling as 1918 . At the Dutch @-@ language elementary school where Amir first studied , he began writing and received good marks ; in her biography of him , Nh . Dini writes that Amir was nicknamed " older brother " ( <unk> ) by his classmates as he was much taller than them . 
 In 1924 or 1925 , Amir graduated from the school in Langkat and moved to Medan to study at the Meer Uitgebreid Lager Onderwijs ( <unk> ; middle school ) there . After completing his studies some two years later , he entered a formal relationship with his cousin from his mother 's side , Aja ( also <unk> ) Bun . Husny writes that the two were arranged to be married by their parents , while Dini casts the relationship as a vow to be always faithful . As his parents permitted him to finish his studies in Java , Amir moved to the colonial capital at Batavia ( now Jakarta ) to complete his studies . 
 = = = Java = = = 
 Alone aboard the Plancus , Amir made the three @-@ day boat trip to Java . Upon arriving at Batavia , he enrolled at a Christian <unk> there , where he completed his last year of junior high school . Anthony H. Johns of Australian National University writes that he learned some Christian concepts and values . Also in Batavia , Amir became involved with the social organisation Jong Sumatera . During this period , the young man wrote his first poems . Husny credits several to his heartbreak after he found that Aja Bun had been married to another man without Amir 's knowing ( the two never spoke again ) , while Dini suggests that the poem " Tinggallah " was written not long after he boarded the Plancus , while he was longing after his parents . 
 After a brief return to Sumatra , Amir continued to a Boedi <unk> @-@ operated <unk> <unk> School ( AMS ; senior high school ) in Surakarta , Central Java , where he studied eastern literature and languages , including Javanese , Sanskrit , and Arabic . Preferring solitude to the bustle of the dormitories , Amir boarded at a privately @-@ owned home of a <unk> resident . Later he met several future writers , including Armijn Pane and Achdiat Karta Mihardja ; they soon found him to be a friendly and diligent student with complete notes and a spotless bedroom ( sheets folded so well , Mihardja later recalled , that a " lost fly could have easily slid over them " ) , but also a romantic prone to thinking wistfully beneath the <unk> and isolating himself from his classmates . 
 In Surakarta Amir joined the nationalist movement . He would meet with fellow Sumatrans and discuss the social plight of the Malay archipelago 's populace under Dutch colonial rule . Though most educated youth at the time preferred using Dutch , he insisted on speaking Malay . In 1930 Amir became head of the <unk> branch of the Indonesia Muda ( Young Indonesians ) , delivering a speech at the 1930 Youth Congress and serving as an editor of the organisation 's magazine Garuda Merapi . At school he also met Ilik Sundari , a Javanese woman nearly his age with whom he fell in love . Sundari , the daughter of Raden Mas <unk> , was one of the few female students at the school , and her home was near one of those in which Amir boarded . According to Dini , the two grew closer , Amir teaching Sundari Arabic and Sundari teaching him Javanese . They were soon meeting every day , conversing on a variety of topics . 
 Amir 's mother died in 1931 , and his father the year after , meaning that his education could no longer be funded . After his AMS studies concluded , he wanted to continue to study at a law school in Batavia . As such , he wrote to his brother , <unk> , who arranged for the remainder of his studies to be paid for by the Sultan . In 1932 Amir was able to return to Batavia and begin his legal studies , taking up a part @-@ time job as a teacher . At first , his relationship with Sundari was continued through letters , though she soon continued her studies in <unk> , a city much closer than Surakarta ; this allowed the two to meet furtively – when Sundari 's parents had discovered their relationship , Amir and Sundari had been forbidden from meeting . 
 This year Amir 's first two poems , " Sunyi " ( " Silent " ) and " Mabuk ... " ( " <unk> ... " ) , were published in the March edition of the magazine Timboel . His other eight works published in 1932 included a syair based on the Hikayat Hang Tuah , three other poems , two pieces of lyrical prose , and two short stories ; the poems were again published in Timboel , while the prose was included in the magazine Pandji Poestaka . Around September 1932 Armijn Pane , upon the urgings of Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana , editor of " Memadjoekan Sastera " ( " Advancing Literature " , the literary section of Pandji Poestaka ) , invited Amir to help them establish an independent literary magazine . Amir accepted , and was tasked with writing letters to solicit submissions ; a total of fifty letters were sent to noted writers , including forty sent to contributors to " Memadjoekan Sastera " . After several months of preparations , the initial edition was published in July 1933 , under the title Poedjangga Baroe . The new magazine was left under the editorial control of Armijn and Alisjahbana , while Amir published almost all of his subsequent writings there . 
 In mid @-@ 1933 Amir was recalled to Langkat , where the Sultan informed him of two conditions which he had to fulfil to continue his studies : be a diligent student and abandon the independence movement . Despite the Sultan 's disapproval , Amir became more heavily involved in the nationalist movement , bringing him under increasing Dutch scrutiny . He continued to publish in Poedjangga Baroe , including a series of five articles on Eastern literatures from June to December 1934 and a translation of the Bhagavad Gita from 1933 to 1935 . His legal studies , however , were delayed , and by 1937 he had still not graduated . 
 = = = Return to Langkat = = = 
 The Dutch , concerned about Amir 's nationalistic tendencies , convinced the Sultan to send him back to Langkat , an order which the fledgling poet was unable to refuse . In 1937 , Amir , together with two of the Sultan 's vassals tasked with escorting him , boarded the <unk> <unk> from Tanjung Priok and returned to Sumatra . Upon arriving in Langkat , he was informed that he was to be married to the Sultan 's eldest daughter , Tengku Puteri Kamiliah , a woman he had barely met . Before the wedding Amir returned to Batavia to face his final exam – and have one last meeting with Sundari . Several weeks later he returned to Langkat , where he and Kamiliah were married in an extravagant ceremony . His cousin , Tengku <unk> , later stated that Amir 's indifference throughout the seven @-@ day event was due to his thinking of Sundari . 
 Now a prince ( <unk> ) , Amir was given the title Tengku Pangeran Indra <unk> . He lived with Kamiliah in their own home . By all accounts , she was a devout and loving wife , and in 1939 the couple had their only child , a daughter named Tengku <unk> . According to Dini , Amir professed to Kamiliah that he could never love her as he had Sundari and that he felt obligated to marry her , something which Kamiliah reportedly accepted . The poet retained an album with his Javanese sweetheart 's photographs at home and would often isolate himself from his family , lost in thought . As a prince of Langkat , Amir became a court official , handling administrative and legal matters , and at times judging criminal cases . He once represented the sultanate at the funeral of Pakubuwono X in Java – Amir 's last trip to the island . 
 Although Amir had little correspondence with his friends in Java , his poems – most of which had been written in Java – continued to be published in Poedjangga Baroe . His first poetry collection , Nyanyi Sunyi ( Songs of Silence ) , was published in the magazine 's November 1937 edition . Nearly two years later , in June 1939 , the magazine published a collection of poems Amir had translated , entitled <unk> Timur ( Incense from the East ) . In June 1941 his last collection , Buah Rindu ( Fruits of Longing ) , was published . All were later republished as stand @-@ alone books . A last book , Sastera Melayu Lama dan Raja @-@ <unk> ( Old Malay Literature and its Kings ) , was published in Medan in 1942 ; this was based on a radio speech Amir had delivered . 
 After the German invasion of the Netherlands in 1940 , the government of the Indies began preparing for a possible Japanese invasion . In Langkat , a Home Guard , or <unk> , division was established to defend Tanjung Pura , in Langkat . Amir and his cousin Tengku Harun were in charge ; the nobility , trusted by the general populace , was selected to ensure easier recruitment of commoners . When the invasion became a reality in early 1942 , Amir was one of the soldiers sent to Medan to defend it . He and the other Dutch @-@ allied forces were quickly captured by the Japanese . He was held as a prisoner of war until 1943 , when influence from the Sultan allowed him to be released . Throughout the remainder of the occupation , which lasted until 1945 , Amir was employed as a radio commentator and censor in Medan . In his position as prince , he was tasked with helping to collect rice to feed the Japanese occupation army . 
 = = = Post @-@ Independence and death = = = 
 After Indonesia proclaimed its independence on 17 August 1945 , the entirety of Sumatra was declared a de facto part of the country . The central government established Teuku Muhammad Hasan as the island 's first governor , and on 29 October 1945 Hasan selected Amir as the government representative in Langkat ( later equated to regent ) , with his office at <unk> . Amir accepted the position readily , subsequently handling numerous tasks set by the central government , including inaugurating the first local division of the People 's Safety Army ( Tentara Keamanan Rakjat ; the predecessor to the Indonesian Army ) opening meetings of various local branches of national political parties , and promoting education – particularly Latin @-@ alphabet literacy . 
 The ongoing Indonesian National Revolution , with various battles in Java , meant that the newly established republic was unstable . In early 1946 , rumours spread in Langkat that Amir had been seen dining with representatives of the returning Dutch government , and there was growing unrest within the general populace . On 7 March 1946 , during a socialist revolution led by factions of the Communist Party of Indonesia , a group staunchly against feudalism and the nobility , Amir 's power was stripped from him and he was arrested ; Kamiliah and <unk> escaped . Together with other members of the Langkat nobility , he was sent to a Communist @-@ held plantation at Kuala <unk> , some 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) outside of <unk> . Later testimony suggests that the detainees were tried by their captors , forced to dig holes , and tortured . 
 Amir 's last piece of writing , a fragment from his 1941 poem " Buah Rindu " , was later found in his cell : 
 On the morning of 20 March 1946 , Amir was killed with 26 other people and buried in a mass grave which the detainees had dug ; several of his siblings were also killed in the revolution . After it was quashed by nationalist forces , the revolution 's leaders were questioned by a team led by Amir Sjarifuddin and Adnan Kapau Gani : they are reported to have repeatedly asked " Where is Amir Hamzah ? " during the investigation . In 1948 the grave at Kuala <unk> was dug up and the remains identified by family members ; Amir 's bones were identified owing to a missing false tooth . In November 1949 his body was reinterred at the Azizi Mosque in Tanjung Pura , Langkat . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Amir was raised in a court setting , where he spoke Malay until it had " become his flesh and blood " . From a young age he was exposed to oral and written pantuns and syair , both listening and improvisationally creating his own . As with his father before him , Amir enjoyed traditional texts , such as Hikayat Hang Tuah , Syair Siti Zubaidah , and Hikayat Panca Tanderan . He would listen to these when they were read in public ceremonies , and as an adult he kept a large collection of such texts , though these were destroyed during the communist revolution . 
 Throughout his formal education Amir read works of Arabic , Persian , and Hindu literature . He was also influenced by works from other Eastern countries : poems translated in <unk> Timur , for instance , include works by Omar Khayyám ( Persia ) , Du Fu ( China ) , Fukuda Chiyo @-@ ni ( Japan ) , and Rabindranath Tagore ( India ) . These works were not read in the original , but from Dutch translations . The literary critic Muhammad Balfas writes that , unlike his contemporaries , Amir drew little influence from sonnets and the neo @-@ romantic Dutch poets , the Tachtigers ; Johns comes to the same conclusion . The Australian literary scholar Keith Foulcher , however , noting that the poet quoted Willem <unk> 's " <unk> " in his article on pantuns , suggests that Amir was very likely influenced by the Tachtigers . 
 Many writers have commented on Amir 's influence from Islamic doctrine . The Indonesian literary documentarian H.B. Jassin and the poet Arief <unk> Prasetyo , among others , argue that Amir was a purely orthodox Muslim and that it showed in his work . Prasetyo argues that this was evident in his treatment of God ; he does not view God as his equal , a theme found in the works of such Sufi poets as Hamzah <unk> , but as the master to Amir 's servant . Johns writes that , though he was not a mystic , Amir was also not a purely devotional writer , instead promoting a form of " Islamic Humanism " . Others , such as the Dutch scholar of Indonesian literature A. Teeuw and the Indonesian scholar of literature Abdul Hadi WM , find Amir to be influenced by Sufism . <unk> Salam of Gadjah Mada University , of the same position , points to the instances where Hamzah treats God as a lover as indicative of Sufi influence . Ultimately , the poet Chairil Anwar wrote that Amir 's Nyanyi Sunyi could be termed " obscure poetry " as readers cannot understand the works without prior knowledge of Malay history and Islam . 
 Some attempts have also been made to connect Amir 's works to a Christian perspective . In analysing " Padamu Jua " , the Indonesian critic Bakri Siregar suggests that some influences from the Christian Bible are evident , pointing to several aspects of the poem that would seem to support such a view , including the depiction of an anthropomorphic God ( not allowed in orthodox Islam ) and the idea of a jealous God . He writes that the concept of a jealous God is not found in Islam , but is in the Bible , citing Exodus 20 : 5 and Exodus 34 : 14 . In another poem , " <unk> " , Hamzah uses the sentence " Kau <unk> <unk> " ( You harden his heart ) ; Jassin draws a parallel to God hardening the Pharaoh 's heart in the Book of Exodus . 
 Jassin writes that Amir 's poems were also influenced by his love for one or more women , in Buah Rindu referred to as " <unk> " and " Sendari @-@ Dewi " ; he opines that the woman or women are never named as Amir 's love for them is the key . Husny writes that at least nine of the works in Buah Rindu were inspired by his longing for Aja Bun , portraying a sense of disappointment after their engagement was called off . Regarding the book 's three @-@ part dedication , " to the mournful Greater Indonesia / to the ashes of the Mother @-@ Queen / and to the feet of the Sendari @-@ Goddess " , Mihardja writes that Sundari was immediately recognisable to any of Amir 's classmates ; he considers her the poet 's inspiration as " Laura to Petrarch , Mathilde to Jacques Perk " . The critic Zuber Usman finds Sundari 's influence on Nyanyi Sunyi as well , suggesting his parting from her led Amir closer to God , an opinion Dini echoes . The translator Burton Raffel connects a couplet at the end of the book , reading " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> seni <unk> " ( " A flower floating in a loose knot of hair / Gave birth to my sorrowful poems " ) as a call out to a forbidden love . Dini credits Amir 's love for Sundari for his frequent use of Javanese terms in his writing . 
 = = Works = = 
 Altogether Amir wrote fifty poems , eighteen pieces of lyrical prose , twelve articles , four short stories , three poetry collections , and one original book . He also translated forty @-@ four poems , one piece of lyrical prose , and one book ; these translations , Johns writes , generally reflected themes important in his original work . 
 The vast majority of Amir 's writings were published in Poedjangga Baroe , although some earlier ones were published in Timboel and Pandji Poestaka . None of his creative works are dated , and there is no consensus regarding when individual poems were written . However , there is a consensus that the works included in Nyanyi Sunyi were written after those included in Buah Rindu , despite the latter being published last . Johns writes that the poems in the collections appear to be arranged in chronological order ; he points to the various degrees of maturity Amir showed as his writing developed . 
 Jassin writes that Amir maintained a Malay identity throughout his works , despite attending schools run by Europeans . Unlike the works of his contemporaries Alisjahbana or Sanusi Pane , his poems did not include symbols of a Europeanised modernity such as electricity , trains , telephones , and engines , allowing " the natural Malay world to show wholly " . Ultimately , when reading Amir 's poems " in our imagination we do not see a man in pants , a jacket , and tie , but a youth in traditional Malay garb " . Mihardja notes that Amir wrote his works at a time when all of their classmates , and many poets elsewhere , were " pouring their hearts or thoughts " in Dutch , or , if " able to free themselves from the shackles of Dutch " , in a local language . 
 Amir 's work often dealt with love ( both erotic and idealised ) , with religious influences showing in many of his poems . Mysticism is important in many of his works , and his poetry often reflects a deep inner conflict . In at least one of his short stories , he criticised the traditional view of nobility and " subverts the traditional representation of female characters " . There are several thematic differences between his two original poetry collections , discussed further below . 
 = = = Nyanyi Sunyi = = = 
 Nyanyi Sunyi , Amir 's first poetry collection , was published in the November 1937 issue of Poedjangga Baroe , then as a stand @-@ alone book by Poestaka Rakjat in 1938 . It consists of twenty @-@ four titled pieces and an untitled quatrain , including Hamzah 's best @-@ known poem , " Padamu Jua " . Jassin classifies eight of these works as lyrical prose , with the remaining thirteen as regular poems . Although it is his first published collection , based on the well @-@ developed nature of the poems within , general consensus is that the works in Buah Rindu were written earlier . The poet Laurens Koster <unk> considers the poems included in Nyanyi Sunyi as having been written between 1933 and 1937 , while Teeuw dates the poems to 1936 and 1937 . 
 Readings of Nyanyi Sunyi have tended to focus on religious undertones . According to Balfas , religion and God are omnipresent throughout the collection , beginning with its first poem " Padamu Jua " . In it , Jassin writes , Amir shows a feeling of dissatisfaction over his own lack of power and protests God 's absoluteness , but seems aware of his own smallness before God , acting as a puppet for God 's will . Teeuw summarises that Amir recognises that he would not exist if God did not . Jassin finds that the theme of religion is meant as an escape from the poet 's worldly sorrows . Johns , however , suggests that ultimately Amir finds little solace in God , as he " did not possess the transcendent faith which can make a great sacrifice , and resolutely accept the consequences " ; instead , he seems to regret his choice to go to Sumatra and then revolts against God . 
 = = = Buah Rindu = = = 
 Amir 's second poetry collection , Buah Rindu , was published in the June 1941 issue of Poedjangga Baroe , then as a stand @-@ alone book by Poestaka Rakjat later that year . It consists of twenty @-@ five titled pieces and an untitled quatrain ; one , " Buah Rindu " , consists of four parts , while another , " <unk> " , consists of two . At least eleven of the works had previously been published , either in Timboel or in Pandji Poestaka . This collection though published after Nyanyi Sunyi , is generally considered to have been written earlier . The poems in Buah Rindu date to the period between 1928 and 1935 , Amir 's first years in Java ; the collection gives the two years , as well the location of writing as Jakarta – Solo ( Surakarta ) – Jakarta . 
 Teeuw writes that this collection is united by a theme of longing , which Jassin expands on : longing for his mother , longing for his lovers ( both the one in Sumatra and the one in Java ) , and longing for his homeland . All are referred to as " <unk> " ( beloved ) in turn . These longings , Teeuw writes , are unlike the religious overtones of Nyanyi Sunyi , being more worldly and grounded in reality . Jassin notes another thematic distinction between the two : unlike Nyanyi Sunyi , with its clear depiction of one god , Buah Rindu explicitly puts forth several deities , including the Hindu gods Shiva and Parvati and abstract ones like the god and goddess of love . 
 = = Style = = 
 Amir 's diction was influenced by the need for rhythm and metre , as well as symbolism related to particular terms . This careful diction emphasised simple words as the basic unit and occasional uses of alliteration and assonance . Ultimately he is freer in his language use than traditional poets : Jennifer Lindsay and Ying Ying Tan highlight his " verbal inventiveness " , injecting a " lavishness of expression , a mellifluous of sound and meaning " into his poetry . Siregar writes that the result is " a beautiful wordplay " . Teeuw writes that Amir had a complete understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of Malay , mixing eastern and western influences , whilst Johns writes that his " genius as a poet lay in his remarkable ability to resurrect the burnt @-@ out embers of Malay poetry , and to infuse into the forms and rich vocabulary of traditional Malay an unexpected and vivid freshness and life . " 
 The choice of words depends heavily on old Malay terms which saw little contemporary use . Amir also borrows heavily from other Indonesian languages , particularly Javanese and Sundanese ; the influences are more predominant in Nyanyi Sunyi . As such , early printings of Nyanyi Sunyi and Buah Rindu were accompanied by footnotes explaining these words . Teeuw writes that the poems included numerous clichés common in pantuns which would not be understood by foreign readers . According to the translator John M. Echols , Amir was a writer of great sensitivity who was " not a prolific writer but his prose and poetry are on a very high level , though difficult reading even for Indonesians . " Echols credits Amir with a revival of the Malay language , breathing new life into Malay literature in the 1930s . 
 Structurally , Amir 's early works are quite different from his later ones . The works compiled in Buah Rindu generally followed the traditional pantun and syair style of quatrains with tail rhymes , including many with rhyming couplets ; some works , however , combined the two , or had additional lines or more words than traditionally acceptable , resulting in a different rhythm . Though these early works were not as detailed as Amir 's later works , Teeuw writes that they did reflect the poet 's mastery of the language and his drive to write poems . Works in this anthology repeated terms of sadness such as <unk> ( cry ) , <unk> ( grief ) , <unk> ( longing ) , and air mata ( tears ) , as well as words such as cinta ( love ) , <unk> ( passion ) , and <unk> ( wander ) . 
 By the time Amir wrote the works later compiled in Nyanyi Sunyi , his style had shifted . No longer did he confine himself to the traditional forms , but instead he explored different possibilities : eight of his works approached lyrical prose in form . Anwar described his predecessor 's use of language in the collection as clean and pure , with " compactly violent , sharp , and yet short " sentences which departed from the " destructive force " of flowery traditional Malay poetry . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Amir has received extensive recognition from the Indonesian government , beginning with recognition from the government of North Sumatra soon after his death . In 1969 he was granted both a Satya Lencana <unk> ( Satya Lencana Award for Culture ) and <unk> Anugerah Seni ( Art Prize ) . In 1975 he was declared a National Hero of Indonesia . A park named after him , Taman Amir Hamzah , is found in Jakarta near the National Monument . A mosque in Taman Ismail Marzuki , opened to the public in 1977 , is also named after him . Several streets are named after Amir , including in Medan , Mataram , and Surabaya . 
 Teeuw considers Amir the only international @-@ class Indonesian poet from before the Indonesian National Revolution . Anwar wrote that the poet was the " summit of the Pudjangga Baru movement " , considering Nyanyi Sunyi to have been a " bright light he [ Amir ] shone on the new language " ; however , Anwar disliked Buah Rindu , considering it too classical . Balfas describes Amir 's works as " the best literary products to surpass their time " . Hamzah 's work , particularly " Padamu Jua " , is taught in Indonesian schools . His œuvre was also one of the inspirations for <unk> <unk> 's 1992 postmodern stage play <unk> Yanti <unk> 12 Menit ( Biography of Yanti After 12 Minutes ) . 
 Jassin has called Amir the " King of the Pudjangga Baru @-@ era Poets " , a name he used as the title of his book on the poet . In closing his book , Jassin writes : 
 Amir was not a leader with a loud voice driving the people , either in his poems or his prose . He was a man of emotion , a man of awe , his soul easily shaken by the beauty of nature , sadness and joy alternating freely . All his poems were imbibed with the breath of love : for nature , for home , for flowers , for a beloved . He longed <unk> , in the most dark of days , for joy , for ' life with a definite purpose ' . Not one poem of struggle , not a single call for empowerment like those which echoed from the other Poedjangga Baroe poets . But his songs of nature were an intimate permeation of a person whose love for his country was never in doubt . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Nodar Kumaritashvili = 
 Nodar Kumaritashvili ( Georgian : <unk> <unk> ; pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 25 November 1988 – 12 February 2010 ) was a Georgian luger who suffered a fatal crash during a training run for the 2010 Winter Olympics competition in Whistler , Canada , on the day of the opening ceremony . He became the fourth athlete to have died during Winter Olympics preparations , after British luger Kazimierz Kay @-@ <unk> , Australian skier Ross Milne ( both Innsbruck 1964 ) , and Swiss speed skier Nicolas <unk> ( Albertville 1992 ) , and the seventh athlete to die in either a Summer or Winter Olympic Games . 
 Kumaritashvili , who first began to luge when he was 13 , came from a family of seasoned lugers ; a relative of his was the founder of organised sledding in Georgia , and his father competed when he was younger . A cousin of Kumaritashvili on his father 's side was the head of the Georgian Luge Federation ; Kumaritashvili himself began competing in the 2008 – 09 Luge World Cup , where he finished 55th out of 62 racers . Outside of luge , Kumaritashvili had been a student at the Georgian Technical University , where he earned an economics degree in 2009 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Nodar Kumaritashvili was born on November 25 , 1988 , in Borjomi , Georgian SSR , present day Georgia , to David and Dodo Kumaritashvili . He had one sister , Mariam , who is four years younger . The region Kumaritashvili grew up has many ski hills , and he enjoyed several different winter sports . Kumaritashvili started luge when he was 13 years old . While he maintained a rigorous training and competition schedule , Kumaritashvili graduated from the Georgian Technical University , where he received a bachelor 's degree in economics in 2009 . A devout member of the Georgian Orthodox Church , he prayed at a local church before leaving for the Olympics . Though his family endured economic hardship , Kumaritashvili attended as many luge events as he could , often driving for days to reach World Cup events . 
 Kumaritashvili 's family has had a long association with luge . His father , David , won a USSR Youth Championship when Georgia was part of the Soviet Union . His aforementioned paternal cousin , Felix Kumaritashvili , is the head of the Georgian Luge Federation . Nodar was also related to <unk> Kumaritashvili , the founder of organized sledding sports in Georgia . 
 During his first season of competition , Kumaritashvili finished 55th out of 62 competitors in the 2008 – 09 Luge World Cup as he entered four races . Kumaritashvili finished 28th out of 32 competitors in the 2009 – 10 Luge World Cup event at Cesana Pariol in January , which was his fifth and last World Cup event . At the time of his death , he was ranked 44th out of 65 competitors in the 2009 – 10 World Cup season and was regarded as one of the best lugers to come from Georgia . 
 = = Accident and death = = 
 By December 31 , 2009 , the cut @-@ off date for luge qualifications for the Olympics , Kumaritashvili was ranked 38th overall . As he had also raced in the minimum of five World Cup races over the previous two years , he qualified for the luge men 's singles event at the 2010 Winter Olympics , which would be his Olympic debut . On February 12 , 2010 , Kumaritashvili was fatally injured in a crash during his final training run at the Whistler Sliding Centre when he lost control in the penultimate turn of the course and was thrown off his luge and over the sidewall of the track , striking an unprotected steel support pole at the end of the run . He was travelling at 143 @.@ 6 km / h ( 89 @.@ 2 mph ) at the moment of impact . At a test event in 2009 , a luger had clocked a record 153 @.@ 937 km / h ( 95 @.@ 652 mph ) on the same track , prompting Josef Fendt , president of the International Luge Federation ( FIL ) , to comment : " It makes me worry . " 
 Medics were at his side within seconds of the crash . <unk> @-@ pulmonary resuscitation began within one minute , and a plastic breathing tube was inserted into his mouth . He was airlifted to a Whistler hospital , where he died of his injuries . It was luge 's first fatality since December 10 , 1975 when an Italian luger was killed . Kumaritashvili 's final run had been his 25th on the Whistler track , and his 13th from the men 's start . 
 = = = Georgian response = = = 
 There was shock and mourning in Georgia after footage of his death was televised . In response to the accident , the Georgian team announced that it would consider skipping the opening ceremonies or withdraw from the games entirely . However , Nika <unk> , the Georgian minister for sports and culture , later announced the team would stay in Vancouver and " dedicate their efforts to their fallen comrade . " The other seven members of the Georgian Olympic team wore black armbands during the opening ceremony , tied a black ribbon to the Georgian flag , and left a space vacant in the procession as a mark of respect . They were greeted with a standing ovation from the assembled crowd , and immediately left BC Place Stadium after the procession . 
 A moment of silence was held during the opening ceremonies to honour his memory , when both the Canadian and Olympic flags were lowered to half @-@ staff . Upon learning of Kumaritashvili 's death , the Governor General of Canada ordered flags on federal government buildings throughout the province of British Columbia , including at all Olympic venues , flown at half @-@ staff until midnight , February 13 , 2010 . Fellow teammate and luger Levan <unk> who was to compete with Nodar withdrew after the crash telling teammates that he " couldn 't go on " and went home to attend the funeral . 
 In the early morning on February 17 , 2010 , Kumaritashvili 's body arrived in Tbilisi , Georgia , via Munich , Germany . It reached his hometown of Bakuriani later that day and he was buried on Saturday , February 20 , at the church he attended . Thousands of Georgians attended a funeral feast for him the day before and Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili attended his funeral service dressed in a Georgian Olympic uniform . The street where his childhood home is located was renamed in his honour . 
 = = = Other responses = = = 
 The FIL stated that Kumaritashvili 's death " was not caused by an unsafe track " . As a preventive measure , the walls at the exit of curve 16 were raised and the ice profile was adjusted . Padding was also added to exposed metal beams near the finish line . Olympic officials claimed the changes were " not for safety reasons but to accommodate the emotional state of the lugers " . In addition , the start of the men 's luge was moved to the women 's starting point to reduce speed , while the start of the women 's luge was also moved farther down the track . 
 Training runs on the track resumed on February 13 , after the changes to the track had been finished . Three lugers , including Kumaritashvili 's teammate Levan <unk> , did not participate in any training runs on February 13 . <unk> decided to fly back to Georgia to mourn the loss of his teammate , and the athletes who decided to participate all wore a black stripe on their helmets in honour of Kumaritashvili . 
 On March 10 , 2010 , the FIL announced that it had made a € 10 @,@ 000 donation to the Kumaritashvili family in Georgia at the request of the Georgian Luge Federation in an effort to rebuild the Kumaritashvili family house . 
 = = = International Luge Federation report = = = 
 On April 19 , 2010 , the FIL published its final report to the International Olympic Committee into Kumaritashvili 's death . The report found that the sled used by Kumaritashvili had met all FIL criteria and standards . It attributed the accident to " driving errors starting in curve 15 / 16 which as an accumulation ended in the impact that resulted in him leaving the track and subsequently hitting a post ... This is a tragic result that should not have occurred as a result of an initial driving error " . As the sled hit the wall at the curve 16 exit , it catapulted off the track , causing Kumaritashvili to lose control of it entirely . This was a type of accident not seen before , and therefore " [ w ] ith the unknown and unpredictable dynamics of this crash , the calculation and construction of the walls in that section of the track did not serve to prevent the tragedy that happened " . However , the report also determined that during the homologation process and later sessions of the Whistler Sliding Centre , the track was faster than originally calculated . While calculations called for a top speed around 136 km / h ( 85 mph ) , the highest speed recorded was 153 @.@ 98 km / h ( 95 @.@ 68 mph ) . The FIL felt that luge athletes were able to cope with this speed , but " this was not a direction the FIL would like to see the sport head " , and that President Fendt had written to the Sochi 2014 Organizing Committee that the FIL would <unk> the proposed Sochi track only if speeds did not exceed 130 to 135 km / h ( 81 to 84 mph ) . The FIL also said it was " determined " to do what it could to prevent such accidents occurring . It would re @-@ examine changes to the sport , sled design and track technology . FIL Secretary General Svein Romstad summarized : " What happened to Nodar has been an unforeseeable fatal accident " . 
 = = = Coroner 's report = = = 
 The British Columbia coroner 's office investigated the incident . It was reported to be considering , among other pieces of evidence , written complaints about the safety of the Whistler track by Venezuelan luger Werner Hoeger who crashed on the track on November 13 , 2009 , and suffered severe concussion , and information suggesting that the track was constructed in its present location near the Whistler and Blackcomb mountains for commercial reasons despite the site being too narrow and steep . The track designer , Udo <unk> , said : " The track had to be near Whistler , for use after the Olympics . You don 't want to ruin an investment so the track is on terrain that 's a little steep . " According to John Furlong , the chief executive of the 2010 Winter Olympics organizing committee , proposals to build the sliding centre on Grouse Mountain near Vancouver were rejected early in the bid phase due to reservations expressed by international bobsleigh , luge and skeleton federations . 
 In a report dated September 16 , 2010 , the coroner ruled Kumaritashvili 's death an accident brought on by a " convergence of several factors " , including the high speed of the track , its technical difficulty and the athlete 's relative unfamiliarity with the track . He wrote that during Kumaritashvili 's training runs , it was reasonable to assume that " Mr. Kumaritashvili was sliding faster than ever before in his life , and was attempting to go even faster , while simultaneously struggling to learn the intricacies of the track and the dynamics it created " . The coroner accepted that <unk> would always carry an element of risk and that best practices known at the time had been followed in the construction of the Whistler track . However , he called upon the International Luge Federation to require athletes to engage in more mandatory training sessions prior to the Olympic Games and other major competitions . Responding to the report , Kumaritashvili 's father said : " I don 't accept the statement about Nodar 's lack of experience . He wouldn 't have won the right to take part in the Olympics if he lacked experience . " 
 In 2013 , Mont Hubbard , a University of California , Davis mechanical and aerospace professor , issued a report claiming that Kumaritashvili 's crash was probably caused by a " fillet " , a joint between the lower edge of the curve and a vertical wall . Hubbard suggested that the right runner of Kumaritashvili 's sled rose up the fillet , launching him into the air . Terry <unk> , the president of ISC / IBG Group , a consortium involved in the construction of the Whistler track , dismissed Hubbard 's theory as " flawed " , stating that the data to replicate the ice surface at the site of the accident in three dimensions do not exist . The luge track built for use at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , Russia , was designed with two uphill sections to reduce speeds , and runs about 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) slower than the Whistler track . 
 = Joe Borden = 
 Joseph Emley Borden , aka Joe Josephs , ( May 9 , 1854 – October 14 , 1929 ) , nicknamed " Josephus the Phenomenal " , was a starting pitcher in professional baseball for two seasons . Born in <unk> in North Hanover Township , New Jersey , he was playing for a Philadelphia amateur team when he was discovered by the Philadelphia White Stockings of the National Association ( NA ) in 1875 . The White Stockings needed a replacement for a recently released pitcher , and were awaiting the arrival of a replacement . During his short , seven @-@ game stint with the team , he posted a 2 – 4 win – loss record , both victories recorded as shutouts . On July 28 of that season , he threw the first no @-@ hitter in professional baseball history . 
 When the NA folded after the 1875 season , Borden signed a three @-@ year contract with the Boston Red Caps . On April 22 , 1876 , Borden and the Red Caps were victorious in the first National League ( NL ) game ever played . Later that season , on May 23 , he pitched a shutout , which some historians claim was the first no @-@ hitter in Major League Baseball . Known for having an eccentric personality , he played under different surnames , such as Josephs and <unk> , so as to disguise his involvement in baseball ; his prominent family would have disapproved had they known . After he was released from the Red Caps as a player during the first season of his contract , he worked for a short period of time as their groundskeeper until he and the owner agreed to a buyout of the remainder of his contract . Little is known about his post @-@ baseball life , and it has been claimed that he died as early as 1889 , in the Johnstown Flood , but his official death date is recognized as occurring in 1929 when he was 75 years of age . 
 = = Career = = 
 Joseph Emley Borden was born on May 9 , 1854 in <unk> in North Hanover Township , New Jersey into a wealthy family . It is claimed that his family would have been embarrassed that their son was playing baseball for money , and would have disapproved . To hide his playing career , he assumed several various last names , such as Josephs and <unk> , which is Borden spelled backwards . 
 = = = 1875 season = = = 
 The Philadelphia White Stockings , of the NA , had recently dismissed pitcher Cherokee Fisher in July 1875 due to his clashing with team captain , Mike McGeary , and were in need of a replacement . The White Stockings signed George Zettlein , but there was a delay in his arrival . The team then signed Borden , who was a local Philadelphia amateur player , as a replacement until Zettlein arrived . His first appearance in a game for the White Stockings was on July 24 , an 11 – 4 loss to the Dick McBride and the Philadelphia Athletics . 
 In his next start , on July 28 against the Chicago White Stockings , he pitched the first recorded no @-@ hitter in professional baseball history . Borden lost the next three games he started before defeating the St. Louis Brown Stockings , and future Hall of Fame pitcher Pud Galvin , 16 – 0 on August 9 . By this time , Zettlein had settled in as their regular pitcher , and Borden was no longer needed . During his time with the White Stockings , he pitched in seven games , all of which he started and completed . He finished the season with a 2 – 4 win – loss record , two shutouts , a 1 @.@ 50 earned run average in 66 innings pitched . 
 = = = 1876 season = = = 
 After the 1875 season concluded , the league , and subsequently the Philadelphia White Stockings , folded , allowing the NL to form , becoming the first " Major " league . Before the season , Borden signed a three @-@ year contract worth $ 2000 a season ( $ 44 @,@ 440 current dollar adjustment ) with the Boston Red Caps of the NL . The club had high expectations that he could adequately replace Albert Spalding who had recently departed for the Chicago White Stockings . Sportswriters were in agreement with the club and dubbed him " Josephus the Phenomenal " . Hall of Fame baseball writer Henry Chadwick described Borden 's pitching style as having speed , but with little strategy . In addition to his swiftly moving fastball , he also delivered a curveball that moved down and away from right @-@ handed batters ; both pitches he delivered from a low arm angle . His Red Caps played the Philadelphia Athletics in the first game in NL history on April 22 ; the only game of the day due to rain cancelling the rest of the league 's schedule . The Red Caps defeated the Athletics with two runs in the ninth inning , and a final score of 6 – 5 at Athletic Park , with Borden pitching the complete game for the victory . 
 On May 23 , Borden pitched a two @-@ hit 8 – 0 shutout victory against the Cincinnati Reds . Various historians claim that this performance was , instead , the first no @-@ hitter thrown in the NL , thus the first in major league history . According to Lee Allen , baseball historian and writer , the scorecard shows that Borden gave up two bases on balls , which were counted as hits in the final score . The official scorekeeper for the game was O. P. Caylor , a writer for The Cincinnati Enquirer , who believed , unlike his contemporaries , that bases on balls should be scored as hits . Bases on balls were only officially counted as hits for the 1887 season . The Boston Daily Globe reported on the game the following day , and noted that Reds had had two clean one @-@ base hits during the game . Furthermore , on June 6 , the New York Clipper did not report an occurrence of a no @-@ hitter in their summary of the game , though the box score did have differing stats in other categories than what the Daily Globe had reported . Consequently , the first official no @-@ hitter in Major League history was pitched by George Bradley , of the St. Louis Brown Stockings on July 15 , 1876 . 
 Two days after his near no @-@ hitter , on May 25 , Borden and the Red Caps faced the Reds again ; this time against Cherokee Fisher , resulting in a scoreless game through nine innings . The Red Caps scored four runs in tenth inning for a 4 – 0 victory . Unfortunately for Borden , his pitching effectiveness declined rapidly after this , and at one point he reportedly lost his temper during a game in response to his own ineffectiveness , admonishing his teammates , even the well @-@ liked and good @-@ natured future Hall of famer George Wright . Due to his erratic pitching and behavior , he was released from the team by August . In 29 games pitched during the 1876 season , he started 24 , completed 16 and recorded two shutouts . Additionally , he had an 11 – 12 win – loss record , a 2 @.@ 89 earned run average in 218 ⅓ innings pitched , and led the league in allowing 51 bases on balls . 
 = = Post @-@ baseball career = = 
 Though the Red Caps had released him as a player , he was still under contract , so they had him work in various other capacities , such as a ticket @-@ taker and groundskeeper . Eventually , team owner Nicholas <unk> agreed to pay Borden approximately three @-@ quarters of the two remaining years of his contract , and released him from the team . Borden reportedly found work stitching baseballs in Philadelphia . Little is known of Borden 's life after baseball , and it has been alleged that he died in May 1889 during the Johnstown Flood , the same disaster that had stranded the entire Louisville Colonels team . Official records show that he died in Yeadon , Pennsylvania at the age of 75 , and is interred at Oaklands Cemetery in West Chester , Pennsylvania . 
 = SMS Hansa ( 1898 ) = 
 SMS Hansa was a protected cruiser of the Victoria Louise class , built for the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) in the 1890s , along with her sister ships Victoria Louise , Hertha , Vineta , and Freya . Hansa was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1896 , launched in March 1898 , and commissioned into the Navy in April 1899 . The ship was armed with a battery of two 21 cm guns and eight 15 cm guns and had a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Hansa served abroad in the German East Asia Squadron for the first six years of her career . She contributed a landing party to the force that captured the Taku Forts during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . In August 1904 , she participated in the internment of the Russian battleship Tsesarevich after the Battle of the Yellow Sea during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . After returning to Germany in 1906 , she was modernized and used as a training ship in 1909 , following the completion of the refit . At the outbreak of World War I , Hansa was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Hansa was ordered under the contract name " N " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1896 . She was launched on 12 March 1898 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the German navy on 20 April 1899 . The ship was 110 @.@ 6 meters ( 363 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 17 @.@ 4 m ( 57 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 m ( 21 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 491 t ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ; 7 @,@ 155 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of three vertical 4 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Dürr boilers . Her engines provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 412 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 319 km ; 3 @,@ 926 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 31 officers and 446 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with two 21 cm SK L / 40 guns in single turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns were supplied with 58 rounds of ammunition each . They had a range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . Hansa also carried eight 15 cm SK L / 40 guns . Four were mounted in turrets amidships and the other four were placed in casemates . These guns had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . She also carried ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns . The gun armament was rounded out by machine guns . She was also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the broadside and the third was in the bow , all below the waterline . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Following her commissioning in 1899 , Hansa was deployed to Germany 's overseas possessions . Hansa 's first commander on the China station was Hugo von Pohl , who went on to command the High Seas Fleet during World War I. As part of the East Asia Squadron during the Boxer Rebellion , the ship made a noteworthy contribution in the Battle of the Taku Forts . In June 1900 , Hansa , along with Hertha , Gefion , and Irene landed detachments of <unk> ( marines ) to seize the Taku Forts . The marines joined detachments sent from warships of several other countries . A total of around 450 German troops were contributed to the multi @-@ national force , which totaled around 2 @,@ 200 officers and men . 
 On 11 July 1903 , the ship steamed into the British naval base at Weihaiwei , along with the Chinese cruiser Hai Chi . Hansa left the port two days later . On 16 January 1904 , Hansa visited <unk> Bay outside of Hong Kong and departed after two days in the harbor . In February , the Russo @-@ Japanese War broke out ; Hansa was sent from Che Foo for Port Arthur , which was under attack by Japanese forces . Hansa evacuated the German civilians in the port . In early March , she was again in Hong Kong , and was joined there by the flagship of the East Asia Squadron , Fürst Bismarck on the 8th . In August , the badly damaged Russian battleship Tsesarevich and three destroyers sought refuge in the German naval base at Tsingtao following the Russian defeat in the Battle of the Yellow Sea . As Germany was neutral , the East Asia Squadron interned Tsesarevich and the destroyers . On 13 August , the Russian ships restocked their coal supplies from three British steamers , but Hansa and Fürst Bismarck cleared for action to prevent them from leaving the port . The two cruisers were joined by Hertha , Geier , and the gunboats Luchs and Tiger . 
 Hansa returned to Germany in 1906 . The following year , she went to dry dock at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig for a refit , during which she was re @-@ boilered . Hertha originally had three stacks , and during the modernization they were trunked into two funnels . The refit was finished by 1909 , at which point Hansa became a cadet training ship . From 1911 to 1912 , Günther Lütjens served aboard Hansa as commander of the naval cadets that trained on the ship . Lütjens went on to command the task force composed of Bismarck and Prinz Eugen in World War II . In early January , Hansa cruised into the Atlantic and visited Bermuda . 
 Hansa had a short career during World War I. At the outbreak of hostilities , she was briefly mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , which was tasked with training cadets in the Baltic Sea . By the end of 1914 , however , the ships were again removed from service . She was then put into service as a coastal defense ship . After 1915 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line duty again and employed as a barracks ship for the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . She was stricken from the naval register on 6 December 1919 and sold to ship @-@ breakers in Audorf @-@ Rendsburg . She was scrapped the following year . 
 = Bob Timberlake ( American football ) = 
 Robert W. " Bob " Timberlake ( born October 18 , 1943 ) is a former football player who played college football for the University of Michigan Wolverines from 1962 to 1964 and for the New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) in 1965 . 
 Timberlake was the starting quarterback for Michigan who led the Wolverines to the 1964 Big Ten Conference championship and a 34 – 7 victory over Oregon State Beavers in the 1965 Rose Bowl . Timberlake was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ American in 1964 , received the Chicago Tribune Silver Football trophy as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten , and finished fourth in the 1964 Heisman Trophy voting . Over his three years at Michigan , Timberlake rushed for 315 yards and passed for 1 @,@ 507 yards . He was responsible for 19 touchdowns , eleven rushing and eight passing . He also served as the team 's punter and placekicker with six field goals , 36 extra points , and a total of 121 points scored . 
 After a brief career in professional football , Timberlake became an ordained Presbyterian minister . Even during his football career , Timberlake was outspoken about his Christian faith . He has also been active in Habitat for Humanity . Since 2003 , he has been on the faculty of Marquette University where he teaches courses in community service and affordable housing . 
 = = College football = = 
 Timberlake was born in Middletown , Ohio , but he was raised in Franklin , Ohio and played football for the Franklin Wildcats . He was originally recruited as a halfback and played more than any other Michigan player at halfback in 1962 . However , he was later switched to the quarterback position and had his greatest success there . 
 = = = 1964 regular season = = = 
 In 1964 , Timberlake led the Wolverines football team to their first Big Ten Conference championship since 1950 , breaking the longest championship drought in school history . Playing quarterback , Timberlake 's total offense of 1 @,@ 381 yards ( 807 passing and 574 rushing ) was the second highest in Michigan history at that time . The 1964 Wolverines outscored their opponents 235 – 83 , finished the regular season 8 – 1 , and narrowly missed an undefeated season with a 21 – 20 loss to a Purdue Boilermakers team led by sophomore Bob Griese . By virtue of turnovers , Purdue led 21 – 14 with five minutes remaining . Timberlake ran an option play to the left side and went 54 yards for a touchdown . Rather than kick the extra point for the tie , Timberlake carried again on the option play to the right , but was tackled one foot short of the goal line , and two points short of an undefeated season . When Michigan and Ohio State met in Columbus , Ohio on November 21 , 1964 , both teams were in the Top 10 in the national rankings . Michigan had not beaten Ohio State since 1959 . Michigan won 10 – 0 , as Ohio native Timberlake was responsible for all ten points , including a 17 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Jim Detwiler and a fourth @-@ quarter , 27 @-@ yard field goal to clinch the game . 
 = = = 1965 Rose Bowl = = = 
 The Wolverines ( ranked No. 4 ) advanced to the Rose Bowl where they defeated Tommy <unk> 's Oregon State Beavers , 34 – 7 , on New Year 's Day . Prior to the Rose Bowl , much of the attention was focused on Michigan 's veteran quarterback . The Pasadena Star @-@ News wrote that Timberlake was " the key " to Michigan 's attack : " He does everything — run , pass , kick field goals , soup up the team … Timberlake has had that strength . The Wolverines listen to him and they believe in him . At 6 – 4 and weighing 215 pounds , Timberlake is a Lincoln to look up to . " Mel Anthony scored three touchdowns for Michigan , and Timberlake and the Wolverines gained 415 yards in the game . Timberlake was 7 @-@ for @-@ 10 passing for 77 yards , and added 57 yards rushing , including a 24 @-@ yard touchdown run in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Post @-@ season honors = = = 
 At the end of the 1964 season , Timberlake was awarded the Chicago Tribune Silver Football as the Most Valuable Player in the Big Ten Conference . He placed fourth in the Heisman Trophy voting ( losing to Notre Dame 's John Huarte ) , and was also named to multiple All @-@ American teams . After attending an All @-@ American dinner at New York 's Waldorf Astoria Hotel , Timberlake reported , " There is a great deal of loneliness in being an All @-@ America . . . . I get sick of it . They all want to shake your hand , but they don 't really know you . All they do is stick out the glad hand . I don 't mind talking to anyone who is interested in ideas , but nothing makes me sicker than having my name dropped by people who don 't know anything about me except that I 'm an All @-@ America . " He joked that he might write an autobiography called , " The Loneliness of an All @-@ America . " He was also an A @-@ minus student majoring in sociology , was named a scholar @-@ athlete by National Football Association , and was placed on the Big Ten All @-@ Academic team two years in a row . 
 = = Religion in Timberlake 's life = = 
 Timberlake was outspoken during his time in the limelight about the importance of his Christian faith . Timberlake taught Sunday school in Ann Arbor while attending the University of Michigan and said he intended to become a Presbyterian minister . At a speech in Mansfield , Ohio , shortly after winning the Rose Bowl in January 1965 , Timberlake said , " I couldn 't have played football if it hadn 't been for Jesus Christ . " He continued , " God changed my life . He promises the abundant life , which he has given me , and eternal life , which if I die I 'm sure I will have . There 's peace associated with being a Christian . " 
 Timberlake also spoke openly of his personal conversion as he walked in a parking lot while on a night watchman 's job at a Chevrolet plant in Warren , Michigan . Timberlake defined a Christian as " one who has Christ as his personal savior , " and not just a person who was brought up in a Christian home or goes to church . 
 When he signed a professional football contract with the New York Giants , Timberlake stated that he intended to take ministerial training at Princeton Theological Seminary during the off @-@ season . He noted , " I don 't really want to play professional football , because there is no privacy and no time to be alone when you 're a famous athlete . " He emphasized that , if he were ever forced to choose between professional football or studying for the ministry , he would give up football : " I see no reason why I can 't do both , but if I have to give up pro ball , I 'll certainly do it . " Timberlake said the thing he would always remember about playing football was the 20 minutes before kickoff . He recalled that those 20 minutes were " horrible . " " You want to go home . You want to quit football . It is times like these when something happens to me . I can 't explain it . I put my face in my hands and ask God to come into my heart and give me courage . He gives me peace . " 
 When a boy asked Timberlake for his autograph at the Giants ' rookie camp in 1965 , Timberlake signed his name but also wrote citations to two Bible verses : John 3 : 16 and 1 Peter 1 : 5 – 9 . The boy asked , " What 's that ? " Timberlake explained they were Bible verses , and he told reporters he started doing it about six months earlier , hoping the kids would look up the verses . In 1965 , such public religious expressions were not common among athletes , and columnists made note of the fact that Timberlake " packs a Bible in his suitcase and keeps one in his locker . " 
 While playing for the Giants in October 1965 , he told an interviewer : " I 'm playing football to convey Christianity either indirectly or directly and to give me access to you people . The eye of American is upon the sports ' field , so I can reach more people playing football . I guess you can say my goal is to spread a Christian message . " At that time , he was attending Princeton Theological Seminary once a week and planned to attend full @-@ time after the football season . Asked if the violent nature of football was inconsistent with his Christian beliefs , Timberlake noted that " you don 't need to hurt anyone to get by " in football and that the game involved skill , timing and execution more than violence . He then joked , " There 's nothing really wrong with good , clean violence . " 
 = = Professional football = = 
 The New York Giants drafted Timberlake in the third round of the 1965 NFL Draft . He signed a two @-@ year contract with the Giants for an estimated $ 85 @,@ 000 ( $ 12 @,@ 500 per year base plus $ 60 @,@ 000 in bonuses and fringe benefits ) . Timberlake turned down offers from the Buffalo Bills in the American Football League and the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in the Canadian Football League because he had an opportunity to compete for a starting job with the Giants . Future Pro Football Hall of Famer Y.A. Tittle ’ s tenure with the Giants was over , and Timberlake was expected to compete in a new system that would emphasize rushing quarterbacks . 
 Timberlake did not get the quarterback spot with the Giants and was assigned as kickoff specialist ; he was also used as a kicker on long field goals for the 1965 NFL season . In a nationally televised game on October 3 , 1965 , at Pittsburgh , Timberlake hit a 43 @-@ yard field goal in a 23 – 13 win . Timberlake ’ s kick against the Pittsburgh Steelers was the last field goal by any Giants kicker that season . 
 Early in an October 24 game against the Cleveland Browns , the Giants ' main placekicker twisted an ankle . Timberlake took over as the team ’ s full @-@ time kicker until the season ’ s final week . Timberlake went 0 @-@ for @-@ 14 in field goal attempts for the rest of the season , and three of his shorter attempts were blocked . Though he went 1 @-@ for @-@ 15 in field goal attempts , Timberlake converted all but one of his extra points . After his one miss , he said : " I ’ m the guy who put the suspense back in the extra point . " 
 In the 1966 pre @-@ season , Timberlake was third on the Giants ' depth chart at quarterback . In the September 1966 issue of the Sporting News , Timberlake lamented : " I ’ m not doing anything . For four days the other week , I didn ’ t throw a single pass . Not a single pass . " After just one season , the Giants cut Timberlake from the team on August 29 , 1966 , at their camp in Fairfield , Connecticut . 
 In an article concluding that Timberlake may have been the worst placekicker in NFL history , the writer concluded : " Timberlake ’ s 1 @-@ for @-@ 15 performance makes him look like a laughingstock . He ’ s better remembered as one of Michigan ’ s great quarterbacks , a Rose Bowl hero who might have had what it took to be a fine pro quarterback or running back . It ’ s a shame he was asked to do what he couldn ’ t . " Sports blog Deadspin ranked Timberlake the 2nd @-@ worst player to ever play in the NFL , only behind quarterback Rusty <unk> . 
 = = = Impact on the AFL @-@ NFL merger = = = 
 Because of Timberlake 's poor performance as a kicker in 1965 , the Giants signed Buffalo Bills kicker Pete Gogolak in 1966 , who was also football 's first soccer @-@ style kicker . Previously , kickers kicked the ball straight on instead of at a soccer @-@ style angle , which improved accuracy and is the standard at all levels of football today . This ended a " gentleman 's agreement " between the NFL and the AFL in not signing each other 's players , and would start a rash of signings that would eventually led to the two leagues merging . 
 In an NFL Films documentary featuring Timberlake , Steve <unk> called Timberlake the " father of the Super Bowl " , because his poor performance indirectly led to the two leagues merging and the Super Bowl being formed . 
 = = Life after football = = 
 Timberlake went on to become an ordained Presbyterian minister and a hospital administrator at Children 's Hospital of Wisconsin , which is located in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . In 2003 , Timberlake joined the faculty of Marquette University where he teaches courses on community service and faith , and mentors the student Habitat for Humanity chapter . In 2007 , Timberlake said he saw the community service course as " an excellent opportunity to bring along the next generation " to address problems of neighborhood blight , poverty , family disorganization , failure in school , and incarceration for African @-@ American males . He described the problems facing the poor as " a colossal , colossal waste of human life . " Timberlake has been a volunteer for several years with Milwaukee 's Habitat for Humanity chapter , and one of the courses he teaches at Marquette is called " Decent and Affordable Housing , " in which students are instructed in construction methods ( and use of power tools ) , investigate the causes of hyper @-@ segregation , study substandard housing as a social injustice issue , and spend part of the semester at a Habitat for Humanity work site helping to build a house . The course is taught through the Civil and Environmental Engineering Department , which has hired Timberlake as an adjunct professor . Timberlake , who is not an engineer by trade , has overseen the construction of eleven garages through the project . Timberlake is a proponent of gay marriage . 
 = Horse @-@ fly = 
 Horse @-@ flies or horseflies ( for other names , see common names ) are true flies in the family Tabanidae in the insect order Diptera . They are often large and agile in flight , and the females bite animals , including humans , to obtain blood . They prefer to fly in sunlight , avoiding dark and shady areas , and are inactive at night . They are found all over the world except for some islands and the polar regions . 
 Adult horse @-@ flies feed on nectar and plant exudates ; the males have weak mouthparts and only the females bite animals to obtain enough protein from blood to produce eggs . The mouthparts of females are formed into a stout stabbing organ with two pairs of sharp cutting blades , and a <unk> part used to lap up the blood that flows from the wound . The larvae are <unk> and grow in semiaquatic habitats . 
 Female horse @-@ flies can transfer blood @-@ borne diseases from one animal to another through their feeding habit . In areas where diseases occur , they have been known to carry equine infectious anaemia virus , some trypanosomes , the <unk> worm Loa loa , anthrax among cattle and sheep , and tularemia . As well as making life outdoors uncomfortable for humans , they can reduce growth rates in cattle and lower the milk output of cows if suitable shelters are not provided . 
 Horse @-@ flies have appeared in literature since Aeschylus in Ancient Greece mentioned them driving people to madness through their persistent pursuit . 
 = = Common names = = 
 Apart from the common name " horse @-@ flies " , broad categories of biting , bloodsucking Tabanidae are known by a large number of common names . The word " Tabanus " was first recorded by Pliny the Younger and has survived as the generic name . In general , country @-@ folk did not distinguish between the various biting insects that irritated their cattle and called them all " <unk> @-@ flies " , from the word " <unk> " meaning a spike . The most common name is " <unk> [ g ] " , " <unk> " or " <unk> " , which comes from Old Norse and may have originated from the Vikings . Other names such as " stouts " refer to the wide bodies of the insects and " dun @-@ flies " to their sombre colouring . Chrysops species are known as " deer @-@ flies " , perhaps because of their abundance on moorland where deer roam , and " buffalo @-@ flies " , " moose @-@ flies " and " elephant @-@ flies " emanate from other parts of the world where these animals are found . In North America they are known as " breeze @-@ flies " , and in Australia , some are known as " March flies " , a name used in other <unk> countries to refer to the non @-@ bloodsucking <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Adult tabanids are large flies with prominent compound eyes , short antennae composed of three segments , and wide bodies . In females , the eyes are widely separated but in males , they are almost touching ; they are often patterned and brightly coloured in life but appear dull in preserved specimens . The terminal segment of the antennae is pointed and is <unk> , appearing to be made up of several tapering rings . There are no hairs or <unk> arising from the antennae . Both head and thorax are clad in short hairs but there are no bristles on the body . The membranous forewings are clear , uniformly shaded grey or brown , or patterned in some species ; they have a basal lobe ( or <unk> ) that covers the modified knob @-@ like hindwings or halteres . The tips of the legs have two lobes on the sides ( <unk> ) and a central lobe or <unk> in addition to two claws that enable them to grip surfaces . Species recognition is based on details of head structures ( antennae , frons , and maxillae ) , the wing venation and the body patterning ; minute variations of surface structure cause subtle alterations of the overlying hairs which alters the appearance of the body . 
 Tabanid species range from medium @-@ sized to very large , robust insects . Most have a body length between 5 and 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 and 1 @.@ 0 in ) , with the largest having a wingspan of 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . Deer flies in the genus Chrysops are up to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long , have yellow to black bodies and striped abdomens and have membranous wings with dark patches . Horse @-@ flies ( genus Tabanus ) are larger , up to 25 mm ( 1 in ) in length and are mostly dark brown or black , with dark eyes , often with a metallic sheen . Yellow flies ( genus <unk> ) are similar in shape to deer flies but have yellowish bodies and the eyes are purplish @-@ black with a green sheen . Some species in the subfamily Pangoniinae have an exceptionally long proboscis ( tubular mouthpart ) . 
 The larvae are long and cylindrical with small heads and twelve body segments . They have rings of tubercles ( warty outgrowths ) known as pseudopods around the segments , and also bands of short setae ( bristles ) . The posterior tip of each larva has a breathing siphon and a bulbous area known as Graber 's organ . The outlines of the adult insect 's head and wings are visible through the pupa , which has seven movable abdominal segments , all except the front one of which bears a band of setae . The posterior end of the pupa bears a group of spine @-@ like tubercles . 
 Some species , such as deer flies and the Australian March flies , are known for being extremely noisy during flight , though <unk> , for example , fly quietly and bite with little warning . <unk> are agile fliers ; <unk> have been observed to perform aerial manoeuvres similar to those performed by fighter jets , such as the Immelmann turn . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Horse @-@ flies are found worldwide , except for the polar regions , but they are absent from some islands such as Greenland , Iceland , and Hawaii . The genera Tabanus , Chrysops , and Haematopota all occur in temperate , subtropical and tropical locations , but Haematopota are absent from Australia and South America . Horse @-@ flies mostly occur in warm areas with suitable moist locations for breeding , but also occupy a wide range of habitats from deserts to Alpine meadows . They are found from sea level to at least 3 @,@ 300 metres ( 10 @,@ 800 ft ) . 
 = = Evolution and taxonomy = = 
 The first record of a <unk> comes from the Late Jurassic of China , and specimens from the Cretaceous have been found in England , Spain , and possibly South Africa . In the New World , the first discoveries date from the Miocene of Florissant , Colorado . These insects are recognisable as tabanids both from their mouthparts and their wing venation . Although the bloodsucking habit is associated with a long proboscis , a fossil insect that has elongated mouthparts is not necessarily a bloodsucker , as it may instead have fed on nectar . The ancestral tabanids may have co @-@ evolved with the angiosperm plants on which they fed . With a necessity for high @-@ protein food for egg production , the diet of early <unk> was probably predatory , and from this the bloodsucking habit may have evolved . In the Santana Formation in Brazil , no mammals have been found , so the fossil tabanids found there likely fed on reptiles . Cold bloodsucking probably preceded warm bloodsucking , but some dinosaurs are postulated to have been warm @-@ blooded and may have been early hosts for the horse @-@ flies . 
 The Tabanidae are true flies and members of the insect order Diptera . With the families <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , Tabanidae are classified in the superfamily <unk> . Along with <unk> , this superfamily makes up the infraorder <unk> . <unk> families seem to be united by the presence of a venom canal in the mandible of the larvae . Worldwide , about 4 @,@ 455 species of Tabanidae have been described , over 1 @,@ 300 of them in the genus Tabanus . 
 Tabanid identification is based mostly on adult morphological characters of the head , wing venation , and sometimes the last abdominal segment . The genitalia are very simple and do not provide clear species differentiation as in many other insect groups . In the past , most taxonomic treatments considered the family to be composed of three subfamilies : Pangoniinae ( tribes <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) , Chrysopsinae ( tribes <unk> , Chrysopsini , <unk> ) , and Tabaninae ( tribes <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . Some treatments increased this to five subfamilies , adding the subfamily <unk> , with the single genus <unk> , and the subfamily <unk> , with the two genera <unk> and <unk> . 
 A 2015 study by Morita et al. using nucleotide data , aimed to clarify the phylogeny of Tabanidae and supports there being three subfamilies . The subfamilies Pangoniinae and Tabaninae were shown to be monophyletic . The tribes <unk> , Chrysopsini , <unk> and <unk> were found to be monophyletic , with <unk> also being monophyletic apart from the difficult @-@ to @-@ place genus <unk> . <unk> was recovered within <unk> as were the genera previously placed in <unk> , and <unk> and <unk> were recovered within Chrysopsini . 
 Subfamily Chrysopsinae ( deer flies or banded horse @-@ flies ) 
 Subfamily Pangoniinae ( long @-@ tongued horse @-@ flies ) 
 Subfamily Tabaninae ( horse @-@ flies ) 
 The Tabaninae lack ocelli ( simple eyes ) and have no spurs on the tips of their hind tibiae . In the Pangoniinae , ocelli are present and the antennal flagellum ( whip @-@ like structure ) usually has eight annuli ( or rings ) . In the Chrysopsinae , the antennal flagellum has a basal plate and the flagellum has four annuli . Females have a shining callus on the frons ( front of the head between the eyes ) . The <unk> have a divided tergite on the ninth abdominal segment , and the <unk> have highly reduced mouthparts . Members of the family <unk> were initially included in the Tabanidae and moved into the <unk> before being elevated into a separate family . The infraorder <unk> share the blood @-@ feeding habit as a common primitive character , although this is restricted to the female . 
 Two well @-@ known genera are the common horse @-@ flies , Tabanus , named by Swedish taxonomist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 , and the deer flies , Chrysops , named by the German entomologist Johann Wilhelm <unk> in 1802 . <unk> did pioneering research on flies and was the author of Die <unk> ( Flies ) ; he gave the name Haematopota , blood @-@ drinker , to another common genus of horse @-@ flies . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Diet and biting behavior = = = 
 Adult horse @-@ flies feed on nectar and plant exudates , and some are important pollinators of certain specialised flowers ; several South African and Asian species in the Pangoniinae have spectacularly long proboscises adapted for the extraction of nectar from flowers with long , narrow corolla tubes , such as <unk> , and certain Pelargonium . 
 Both males and females engage in nectar feeding , but in addition to this , females of most species are <unk> , meaning they require a blood meal before they are able to reproduce effectively . To obtain the blood , the females bite animals , including humans , while the males are harmless . It takes the female about six days to fully digest its blood meal and after that it needs to find another host . It seems that the flies are attracted to a potential victim by its movement , warmth , and surface texture , and by the carbon dioxide it breathes out . The flies mainly choose large mammals such as cattle , horses , camels , and deer , but few are species specific . They have also been observed feeding on smaller mammals , birds , lizards and turtles , and even on animals that have recently died . Because their bite is irritating to the victim , they are often brushed off , and may have to visit multiple hosts to obtain sufficient blood . This behaviour means that they may carry disease @-@ causing organisms from one host to another . 
 The mouthparts of females are of the usual <unk> form and consist of a bundle of six chitinous stylets that , together with a fold of the flesh labium , form the proboscis . On either side of these are two maxillary palps . When the insect lands on an animal it grips the surface with its clawed feet , the labium is retracted , the head is thrust downwards and the stylets slice into the flesh . Some of these have sawing edges and muscles can move them from side @-@ to @-@ side to enlarge the wound . Saliva containing anticoagulant is injected into the wound to prevent clotting . The blood that flows from the wound is lapped up by another mouthpart which functions as a sponge . Horsefly bites can be painful for a day or more ; fly saliva may provoke allergic reactions such as hives and difficulty with breathing . Tabanid bites can make life outdoors unpleasant for humans , and can reduce milk output in cattle . They are attracted by reflections from water which are polarized , making them a particular nuisance near swimming pools . Since tabanids prefer to be in sunshine , they normally avoid shaded places such as barns , and are inactive at night . 
 Attack patterns vary with species : <unk> fly silently and prefers to bite humans on the wrist or bare leg ; large species of Tabanus buzz loudly , fly low , and bite ankles , legs or backs of knees ; Chrysops fly somewhat higher , bite the back of the neck , and have a high buzzing note . It has been suggested that the striped hides of zebras have evolved to reduce their attractiveness to horse @-@ flies and tsetse flies than either plain dark or plain white hides . The closer together the stripes , the fewer flies are visually attracted ; the zebra 's legs have particularly fine striping , and this is the shaded part of the body that is most likely to be bitten in other , unstriped equids . This does not preclude the possible use of stripes for other purposes such as signaling or camouflage . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 The eggs of horse @-@ flies are often attacked by tiny parasitic wasps , and the larvae are consumed by birds as well as being parasitised by tachinid flies , fungi and nematodes . Adult horse @-@ flies are eaten by generalized predators such as birds , and some specialist predators , such as the horse guard wasp ( a <unk> wasp ) , also preferentially attack horse @-@ flies , catching them to provision their nests . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Mating often occurs in swarms , generally at landmarks such as hilltops . The season and time of day , and type of landmark , used for mating swarms is specific to particular species . 
 Eggs are laid on stones or vegetation near water , in clusters of up to one thousand , especially on emergent water plants . The eggs are white at first but darken with age . They hatch after about six days , the emerging larvae using a special hatching spike to open the egg case . The larvae fall into the water or onto the moist ground below . Chrysops species develop in particularly wet locations while Tabanus species prefer drier places . The larvae are legless grubs , tapering at both ends . They have small heads and eleven or twelve segments and moult six to thirteen times over the course of up to a year or more . In temperate species , the larvae have a quiescent period during winter ( diapause ) while tropical species breed several times a year . In the majority of species they are white , but in some , they are greenish or brownish , and they often have dark bands on each segment . A respiratory siphon at the hind end allows the larvae to obtain air when submerged in water . Larvae of nearly all species are carnivorous , often cannibalistic in captivity , and consume worms , insect larvae , and arthropods . The larvae may be parasitized by nematodes , flies of the families Bombyliidae and Tachinidae ; and Hymenoptera in the family <unk> . When fully developed , the larvae move into drier soil near the surface of the ground to pupate . 
 The pupae are brown and glossy , rounded at the head end and tapering at the other end . Wing and limb buds can be seen and each abdominal segment is fringed with short spines . After about two weeks , metamorphosis is complete , the pupal case splits along the thorax and the adult fly emerges . Males usually appear first , but when both sexes have emerged , mating takes place , courtship starting in the air and finishing on the ground . The female needs to feed on blood before depositing her egg mass . 
 = = = As disease vectors = = = 
 <unk> are known vectors for some blood @-@ borne bacterial , viral , protozoan and worm diseases of mammals , such as the equine infectious anaemia virus and various species of Trypanosoma which cause diseases in animals and humans . Species of the genus Chrysops transmit the parasitic <unk> worm Loa loa between humans , and tabanids are known to transmit anthrax among cattle and sheep , and tularemia between rabbits and humans . 
 Blood loss is a common problem in some animals when large flies are abundant . There are anecdotal reports of horse @-@ fly bites leading to fatal anaphylaxis in humans , an extremely rare occurrence . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Controlling horse @-@ flies is difficult . <unk> traps are most often used to capture them and these can be modified with the use of baits and <unk> that include carbon dioxide or <unk> . A dark shiny ball suspended below them that moves in the breeze can also attract them and forms a key part of a modified " Manitoba trap " that is used most often for trapping and sampling Tabanidae . Cattle can be treated with pour @-@ on pyrethroids which may repel the flies , and fitting them with insecticide impregnated <unk> or collars has had some success in killing the insects . 
 = = Horse @-@ fly bites = = 
 Humans find horse @-@ fly bites painful . There is usually a weal ( raised area of skin ) around the site and other symptoms may include urticaria ( a rash ) , dizziness , weakness , wheezing , and angioedema ( a temporary itchy , pink or red swelling occurring around the eyes or lips ) ; a few people experience an allergic reaction . The site of the bite should be washed and a cold compress applied . Scratching the wound should be avoided and an antihistamine preparation can be applied . In most cases , the symptoms subside within a few hours but if the wound becomes infected , medical advice should be sought . 
 = = In literature = = 
 The Ancient Greek playwright Aeschylus has a gadfly pursue and torment Io , a maiden associated with the moon , watched constantly by the eyes of the herdsman Argus , associated with all the stars : " Io : Ah ! Hah ! Again the prick , the stab of gadfly @-@ sting ! O earth , earth , hide , the hollow shape — Argus — that evil thing — the hundred @-@ eyed . " William Shakespeare , inspired by Aeschylus , has Tom o <unk> in King Lear , " Whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame , through ford and whirlpool , o 'er bog and quagmire " , driven mad by the constant pursuit . In Antony and Cleopatra , Shakespeare likens Cleopatra 's hasty departure from the Actium battlefield to that of a cow chased by a gadfly : " The breeze [ gadfly ] upon her , like a cow in June / hoists sail and flies " , where " June " may allude not only to the month but also to the goddess Juno who torments Io ; and the cow in turn may allude to Io , who is changed into a cow in Ovid 's Metamorphoses . 
 The physician and naturalist Thomas Muffet wrote that the horse @-@ fly " carries before him a very hard , stiff , and well @-@ compacted sting , with which he strikes through the <unk> his hide ; he is in fashion like a great Fly , and forces the beasts for fear of him only to stand up to the belly in water , or else to <unk> themselves to wood sides , cool shades , and places where the wind blows through . " The " Blue Tail Fly " in the eponymous song was probably the mourning horse @-@ fly ( Tabanus atratus ) , a <unk> with a blue @-@ black abdomen common to the southeastern United States . 
 = O ' Horten = 
 O ' Horten is a 2007 Norwegian film directed by Bent Hamer . The film 's title character Odd Horten is a habit @-@ bound train driver , who is about to retire . On the day of his retirement he ends up in an unexpected situation , and is forced to reconsider his life . As in other films by Hamer , the themes are loneliness and old age , and the courage to take chances . O ' Horten has been described as a film without a strong plot or a clear chronology . 
 The film 's main cast consists mainly of senior Danish and Norwegian actors , including Bård Owe , Espen Skjønberg , and Ghita Nørby . There are also several cameos from various well @-@ known Norwegians , such as ski jumper Anette Sagen in her first film role . The music was composed by John Erik Kaada . Generally well received by critics , it was chosen for Un Certain Regard at the Cannes Film Festival . Skjønberg was awarded an Amanda Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Odd Horten is an overcautious 67 @-@ year @-@ old man about to retire after forty years as a train driver on the route between Oslo and Bergen . As he awakes , he goes through a meticulous daily routine , as he prepares for his second @-@ to @-@ last time driving the train to Bergen . When he gets there , he makes small talk with Svea , who owns the boarding house where he stays when there and whom he now may never see again . 
 Back in Oslo , his colleagues throw him a farewell party , but Odd — a timid man — is uncomfortable with the attention . As the party moves to a co @-@ worker 's apartment , he ends up getting accidentally locked out . He climbs up a scaffold , trying to reach the apartment window , and ends up in a young boy 's room . The boy asks him to stay and wait for him to fall asleep , but Odd falls asleep first . He <unk> in the unfamiliar room and arrives too late for the train he was to drive on his final working day . He is left standing on the platform without any fixed points in his life , with nothing but a life of emptiness stretching out before him . 
 A number of scenes then follow whose exact sequence is unclear . Odd goes to visit his mother at the retirement home , which only makes him more unhappy : his mother is senile and spends her days staring emptily out the window , and the visit reminds him of his own impending old age . While Odd is at a restaurant , police come in and arrest the cook . At the shop where he normally buys his pipe tobacco , he learns that the owner has died . He decides to sell his boat , leading to misadventures when the buyer , who works at an airport , asks Odd to meet him there inside the secure zone . Odd goes to the local swimming pool , but his shoes were removed when the facility closed ; as he is leaving , he finds a pair of red high @-@ heeled boots and walks away in them . 
 By chance he then runs into another man his age , the far more spontaneous Trygve Sissener , who has fallen asleep in the snow @-@ covered street . The two spend the evening in conversation over a few drinks at Sissener 's house , and Odd is led to realisations about his own life . It emerges that his mother — a free @-@ spirited woman — was a ski jumper , but Odd himself never had the courage to try the sport . He now feels as if he has let her down , by never having the courage to seize the day and try new things . 
 In the early morning Sissener suggests the two go driving blindfolded . The stunt goes surprisingly well , but as Sissener pulls over the car , he dies . Odd is now left with responsibility for Sissener 's dog and with an urgency to live life to the fullest . He makes his way up to the Holmenkollen ski jump , where he sees a vision of his mother as a young woman , doing the jump . He comes to a decision and starts to do the ski jump . Odd , for the first time no longer wearing his railwayman 's jacket , rides the train to Bergen , where Svea is happily waiting for him on the platform . 
 = = Main cast = = 
 Bård Owe as Odd Horten : The " O " in O ' Horten stands for " Odd " . The name " Odd " is a quite common boys ' name in Norway , and does not carry the same meaning as the English word " odd " , though the film and the character 's bizarre qualities have been pointed out by some . Though not intentionally meant as a pun , Hamer himself has said : " I know the meaning of the word in English , and that doesn 't hurt . " Born in Norway , Owe has spent most of his professional career in Denmark , where he is known to a contemporary audience primarily from Lars von Trier 's The Kingdom . His career , however , goes all the way back to Carl Theodor Dreyer 's classic Gertrude from 1964 . Owe has also done much theatre and television work , yet after acting in over thirty films , this was his first leading role . 
 Espen Skjønberg as Trygve Sissener : Trygve lives alone in one of the finer parts of Oslo , and when he meets Odd he is happy to have someone to share a few drinks with . Skjønberg has been a presence in Norwegian theatre and film since 1945 , and debuted on film as a child , as early as 1937 . He has received several awards , among them an honorary Amanda in 2004 . 
 Ghita Nørby as Mrs. <unk> : Mrs. <unk> works at the store where Odd buys his tobacco . Nørby is a well @-@ established actress in Denmark , where she has been referred to as " the first lady of Danish theatre " . She had also worked in Norway prior to O ' Horten ; in 1996 she played the role of Marie Hamsun in the film Hamsun . 
 Henny Moan as Svea : Henny Moan plays the part of the old lady who owns the boarding house where Odd lives when he is in Bergen . There is a special connection between the two . Moan has acted in films since 1955 , and at the time O ' Horten was made , she had just retired from a long career at the theatre . 
 Bjørn <unk> as Flo 
 Kai <unk> as Steiner Sissener 
 Per Jansen as Train driver 
 <unk> Hjelmeland as Conductor 
 Trond Viggo Torgersen as <unk> 
 Anette Sagen as Young Vera Horten 
 = = Production = = 
 The film contains several cameos from well @-@ known actors and other celebrities , made possible by Hamer 's high standing as a director . His previous film was the international production Factotum , based on the novel by Charles Bukowski , starring Matt Dillon , Lili Taylor , and Marisa Tomei . Some of the appearances are relatively brief ; Nørby , for instance , is on screen for less than three minutes , while the well @-@ known Norwegian entertainer Trond Viggo Torgersen appears for only 59 seconds . Before the film 's première on Boxing Day 2007 , a pre @-@ screening was held for journalists on 22 December . This was followed by dinner , attended by all the protagonists , at the restaurant Valkyrien in Oslo , where Odd Horten is also a regular customer in the film . 
 Among the more original castings was Anette Sagen , the world 's leading female ski jumper , in her first film role . Sagen , 22 at the time , played the part of 70 @-@ year @-@ old Owe 's ski jumping mother , although in a younger incarnation . Hamer had already considered Sagen for the role , when he ran into her by chance at the Holmenkollen Ski Museum . Without knowing to whom he was talking , Hamer mentioned that he was shooting a film in this location , and was planning to ask Anette Sagen to be in it . The reason the theme of ski jumping was chosen was that Hamer 's own mother performed the sport , and the film has been described as a tribute to all female ski jumpers . Sagen herself had also earlier been involved in a controversy over women 's access to professional venues and competitions . Incidentally , Sagen and Owe are also both from the Norwegian town of Mosjøen . 
 The two lonely old men make part of a recurring theme in Hamer 's films , as seen also in Eggs ( 1995 ) and Kitchen Stories ( 2003 ) . However , Hamer himself has described the film as equally much about women ; " the women who once gave birth to these men . " He also cites a great fascination with trains as an inspiration for the film 's setting , and claims that he had long wanted to make a film with this theme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Norwegian newspapers Verdens Gang and Dagbladet both gave the film five out of six points . Verdens Gang 's Jon <unk> called it " a little film about living " and praised it for its " applied existential philosophy " . Dagbladet 's Vegard Larsen had certain objections to a few unnecessary scenes , but nevertheless found that the film had met the high expectations created by Hamer 's previous films . Aftenposten 's <unk> <unk> , on the other hand , felt O ' Horten failed to live up to the director 's best work , and gave it only four points . She nevertheless pointed out the good qualities in the film , in particular the filming and the soundtrack by John Erik Kaada . 
 Foreign reviewers also gave the film generally positive reviews ; Duane <unk> of The Hollywood Reporter called it a " Warm story from frigid Norway " . Variety 's Alissa Simon wrote that it " lacks the fully developed characters and tightly constructed narrative of his more poignant and substantial Kitchen Stories " , but that it " nevertheless provides a warm and gently humorous divertissement " . She also found the production and score excellent . James Rocchi , writing for Cinematical , chose to highlight Bård Owe 's performance , and his " warm demeanor " and meticulous " capacity for double @-@ takes " . Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum compared Owe to Jack Nicholson 's Warren Schmidt in the film About Schmidt . Like others , she also used Finnish director Aki Kaurismäki as a reference to describe Hamer 's particular cinematic style . 
 O ' Horten was picked for the Un Certain Regard @-@ section of the Cannes Film Festival . Here it was praised by one reviewer as " deliciously funny " in a festival that contained few happy stories . This marked the fourth time that Hamer was represented at Cannes , which makes him one of only two Norwegians to accomplish this feat . This instance , however , marked a step up for Hamer , as his previous appearances had been in the slightly less prestigious Directors ' Fortnight @-@ category . At the festival , the film was picked for international distribution by the distribution company Sony Pictures Classics . Hamer also won the Norwegian Film Critics ' Award in 2008 , thereby becoming the first director to win this award three times . At the Amanda Awards that year , O ' Horten was nominated for a number of awards – including " Best Film " and " Best Direction " – but won only two : " Best Sound " and " Best Actor in a Supporting Role " for Espen Skjønberg . 
 In spite of good critical reception , the film did not perform very well at the box office , with only about 35 @,@ 000 tickets sold domestically . Hamer expressed some disappointment with this , while hoping that the DVD @-@ release would fare better . Internationally , the film did somewhat better , and was sold to forty countries . By early August 2009 , the film had in fact been seen by more people in the United States than in Norway . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of the film was released in 2008 , under the name Music from the Motion Picture O ' Horten . It was fully composed by Norwegian pop / experimental singer Kaada . 
 = Chestnut sparrow = 
 The chestnut sparrow ( Passer <unk> ) is a species of passerine bird in the sparrow family Passeridae . It is the smallest member of the sparrow family , at about 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long . The breeding male has deep chestnut plumage and the female and juvenile are duller in appearance . Like its closest relatives in the genus Passer , the Arabian golden sparrow and the Sudan golden sparrow , it is gregarious , and is found in arid areas . Ranging through the east of Africa from Darfur to Tanzania , it is found in dry savanna , papyrus swamps , and near human habitation . Adults and juveniles both feed mostly on grass seeds , and fly in flocks , often with other species of bird , to find food . It nests in trees , building its own domed nests , and also usurping the more elaborate nests of weavers . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like the other members of the sparrow family , the chestnut sparrow is a small , chunky songbird with a thick bill suited to its diet of seeds . At 10 @.@ 5 to 11 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 5 in ) in length , it is the smallest member of the sparrow family . It weighs between 12 grams ( 0 @.@ 42 oz ) and 17 grams ( 0 @.@ 60 oz ) . Wing length ranges from 6 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) in males and from 5 @.@ 7 to 6 @.@ 0 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) in females . The tail , bill , and tarsus lengths are about 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) , 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) , and 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) respectively . 
 The plumage of the breeding male is mostly a deep shade of chestnut in colour with black colouration on the face , wings , and tail . The chestnut colour is used descriptively in the common name . The breeding male is not easily confused with any other birds except the chestnut weaver , which is substantially larger and has white on its wings . The breeding male 's legs and feet are horn ( pale grey ) in colour . The non @-@ breeding male chestnut sparrow has white <unk> on the upperparts , and much of its plumage is buff or whitish with chestnut crescent markings , until the bright chestnut of the breeding plumage is exposed by wear . The non @-@ breeding male 's bill fades to a dusky @-@ tipped horn , similar to that of females , but without dusky tones on the cutting edge of the mandible ( lower portion of beak ) . 
 Females have the same plumage pattern as males , though with somewhat duller colouration . The female has a grey head ; buff supercilium , chin , and throat ; black and warm brown upperparts ; and off @-@ white underparts . The bill of the female is pale yellow with the tip and cutting edge of mandible dusky . Juveniles are dull grey with a brown back , a pale yellow supercilium , and a pale horn bill . Females and juveniles have hints of chestnut on their supercilium , shoulders , and throat , by which they may be distinguished from other sparrows , such as the Kenya sparrow and the other rufous sparrows , which are common in much of the chestnut sparrow 's range ; or the house sparrow , which also occurs in parts of its range . 
 The basic call of the chestnut sparrow is a subdued chirp , with two recorded variations : a scolding threat call , rendered <unk> or <unk> and a chew chew flight call . Displaying males give a high twittering trill , rendered as <unk> <unk> tchi @-@ tchi @-@ tchi @-@ <unk> see @-@ see @-@ see @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first described in 1880 , by Gustav Hartlaub in the Journal für <unk> , as Sorella <unk> Bey . Hartlaub gave it the specific name <unk> Bey in honour of the explorer Emin Pasha , who collected the type specimen in modern South Sudan or Uganda near Lado , and it is occasionally given the eponymous common name Emin Bey 's sparrow . Hartlaub 's unusual spelling of its specific epithet as two words led some to spell the name <unk> or <unk> @-@ bey . No subspecies are recognised , but one was described by British ornithologist George L. G. Van <unk> in 1922 from Archers Post in central Kenya , as Sorella <unk> <unk> . 
 Hartlaub considered the chestnut sparrow 's colouration and morphology to be distinct enough to allocate it to its own monotypic genus , Sorella . Although several authors have followed Hartlaub 's treatment , it is usually placed in the genus Passer . It is very similar to the two golden sparrows , from which it may have once been only clinally different . The male Arabian golden sparrow is almost entirely gold @-@ coloured , the male chestnut sparrow is mostly chestnut , and the male Sudan golden sparrow is intermediate . British ornithologist Richard Meinertzhagen considered these three species to be conspecific ; however , the range of the Sudan golden sparrow overlaps with that of the chestnut sparrow without any known interbreeding in a small area of Sudan . These species are similar in their behaviour , which is adapted to the unpredictable conditions of their arid habitat . In particular , they and the Dead Sea sparrow share a courtship display in which males quiver their wings above their body . This intense display is probably an adaptation to nesting in a clump of trees surrounded by similar habitat , where such an intense display may serve important purposes in keeping a colony together . 
 The chestnut and golden sparrows have been seen as highly primitive among the genus Passer , only distantly related to the house sparrow and the related " Palaearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrows " . In recognition of this they are sometimes placed in a separate genus or subgenus <unk> . The courtship display of the Dead Sea sparrow was thought to have evolved separately in a similar environment from that of these species , in an example of convergent evolution . However , studies of sparrow mitochondrial DNA indicate that the chestnut and golden sparrows are either derived from or are the closest relatives of the Palaearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrows . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The chestnut sparrow is found in East Africa in mostly lower country from Darfur through Kordofan , South Sudan , Somalia , Uganda , and Kenya to north @-@ central Tanzania . Its range also extends northeast into the southwest and Great Rift Valley of Ethiopia . Like the golden sparrows , it is sometimes nomadic when not breeding . Vagrants have been recorded as far from their breeding range as Dar es Salaam . It is found mostly in dry savanna and in fields and villages , but unlike its relations the golden sparrows , it is sometimes found in swamps of papyrus ( certain Cyperus spp . ) . Its population has not been quantified , but it appears to be common across a very large range and it is assessed by the IUCN Red List as Least Concern for global extinction . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Chestnut sparrows are gregarious , and are only occasionally found away from flocks . They frequently associate with <unk> and other weavers . Adults feed on grass seeds , and those near human habitations will also eat crumbs and other household scraps . Nestlings are fed mostly softer grass seeds , and small beetles are also recorded in their diet . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The nesting behaviour of the chestnut sparrow chestnut sparrow has been the subject of confusion . Early reports described the chestnut sparrow 's nest as being a typical sparrow nest built in a tree ; later it was reported that chestnut sparrows had elaborate nests like those of weavers . In 1967 , the ornithologist Robert B. Payne studied chestnut sparrows in a grey @-@ capped social weaver colony in an acacia grove near Lake <unk> in southern Kenya , and in 1969 he reported his findings in the ornithological journal The Ibis . Payne found that chestnut sparrows only nested by usurping the nests of the social @-@ weavers . After reporting this , and noting that the distribution of the chestnut sparrow closely coincides with that of the social @-@ weavers of the genus <unk> , Payne suggested that the chestnut sparrow was an obligate nest parasite ( not a brood parasite , like many Old World cuckoos and cowbirds ) . Payne also noted in his paper that " Nest parasitism is generally thought to have been a stage in the evolutionary development of brood parasitism " , an idea that remains accepted , and suggested the chestnut sparrow could be evolving towards obligate brood parasitism . However , it is known that besides parasitising the nests of weavers or using their abandoned nests , the chestnut sparrow also builds its own nests . Nests built by the chestnut sparrow , like most sparrow nests , are untidy domed structures which are made of grass and lined with feathers . Its breeding season varies between different regions , following rains , and the breeding seasons of its hosts in areas where it parasitises nests ; as a result it has been recorded breeding in every month of the year across its range . 
 At Payne 's study locality the breeding season of the chestnut sparrow lagged behind that of its host . The sparrows began courting when the weavers started constructing their elaborate nests . Once the breeding season began , " the first impression was of the sparrows nesting and the grey @-@ capped social weavers unobtrusively skulking nearby " . Males displayed around the new weaver nests , crouching , raising and quivering their wings in a shallow V , and giving a high , twittering trill . The males were chased by the social @-@ weavers , but returned persistently , until joined by females . When a female came near a displaying male , the male would increase his rate of wing quivering , spread and depress his tail , and bow down his head , until his body formed an arc . This exaggerated display may be an adaptation related to pair formation in the absence of male nest @-@ building , and it may also serve to focus attention in breeding colonies and keep the birds in a colony together , as colonies are in clumps of trees surrounded by similar habitat . 
 During Payne 's study , copulation was seen only in the acacias , around the social @-@ weaver nests . Females would fly to displaying males and solicit copulation in typical sparrow fashion , crouching , quivering , and drooping their wings . When males saw displaying females , they would fly to them and mount them immediately . Males continued their wing quivering during copulation , and females would crouch , quiver , raise their head , and hold their tails horizontally . After a copulation the female would fly off and the male would continue displaying . During this courtship and afterwards , males and mated pairs would interfere with the social @-@ weavers ' nest building , until they drove the social @-@ weavers out . During Payne 's study period , " Chases and fights between the two species were seen nearly every minute of observation " , and the male sparrows spent about a fifth of their day annoying the social @-@ weavers . Little is recorded of incubation and fledging periods in the wild . In captivity the incubation period lasts for 18 to 19 days . Clutches typically contain three or four eggs , which are ovular , mostly coloured white or bluish @-@ white . Some observations indicate that nestlings are fed by the female alone . 
 = Providence ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Providence " is the tenth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 10 , 2002 , and later aired in the United Kingdom on BBC One on January 19 , 2003 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Carter . " Providence " helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 2 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . The episode received mixed reviews from critics ; some reviewers enjoyed the story and the show 's way of integrating an absent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) into the storyline , whereas others felt the plot was ludicrous . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Scully , distrustful of both Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and Brad Follmer ( Cary Elwes ) , circumvents the FBI 's investigation into William 's kidnapping and performs her own , assisted by Reyes and The Lone Gunmen . Scully discovers that William has been taken by a UFO cult that believes William is destined to become the savior of mankind , but only if Fox Mulder is still alive . If Mulder is dead , William will lead the forces of evil : the alien invaders . 
 Co @-@ written and directed by Carter , the episode opens with a shot of a fire fight during the Gulf War and the Super Soldiers involvement therein . Many of the cast and crew were pleased with Carter 's directing , including Anderson and Gish . The episode makes reference to rubbings from an alien wreck , a direct continuation from the plots of the sixth season finale " Biogenesis " and the seventh season opener " The Sixth Extinction " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Retired Lieutenant Colonel Zeke Josepho recounts a strange experience during the Persian Gulf War and how he claims it brought him to God : as his squad was ambushed during the Battle of Al <unk> and on the verge of defeat , four mysterious men showed up and defeated the enemy with astonishing ease . While Josepho thinks of them as guardian angels , they are revealed to be the almost @-@ indestructible Super Soldiers . In the present , Josepho stands above the wreckage of a spacecraft in Canada . 
 At the FBI , Brad Follmer ( Cary Elwes ) discloses to a room of agents that Dana Scully ’ s ( Gillian Anderson ) son William has been abducted . Follmer notes that The Lone Gunmen are identifying the woman who took the child and ran over John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) . However , Follmer leaves out any potential motive for these crimes , which causes a frustrated Scully to leave the room . Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) reveals that he put a cell phone in the baby ’ s belongings so they can track the Overcoat Woman ; Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) and Scully head out to find William . The two eventually find William 's car seat along with the cell phone in an abandoned SUV . Meanwhile , the Overcoat Woman reports to Josepho that she has William . 
 Scully goes to Agent Robert Comer , whom she was forced to shoot after his attempt on William 's life , and uses the alien artifact to heal him . Comer explains that Josepho believes a physical manifestation of God exists inside the spacecraft . According to an ancient prophecy , William is destined to become the savior of humanity , but only if Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is still alive . If he dies , William will instead lead the Colonists . Comer claims that Mulder was supposedly killed by the cult in order for the aliens to successfully invade ; he tried to kill William to prevent him from causing humanity 's destruction . Suddenly , a nurse and the Toothpick Man ( Alan Dale ) arrive and ask Reyes and Scully to leave . Comer ends up alone with the Toothpick Man . 
 Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) later reports to Reyes and Scully that Comer has died . Reyes accuses Toothpick Man and others in the room of killing Comer . Meanwhile , Scully visits Doggett , who warns her not to trust the cultists . However , Scully goes to meet Josepho near Calgary . Josepho claims to be protecting William , but demands Mulder 's head as collateral in exchange for the baby 's release . When Josepho returns to the wreck site , the Overcoat Woman relates that the aperture of the craft began to glow when William started crying . The craft soon rises up out of the ground . Looking on the site from a distance , Scully and Reyes see the craft burst out of an enclosure and into space , lighting the ground beneath it on fire as it goes . The two find an unharmed William among the charred bodies of the cultists . 
 At the FBI headquarters , Follmer asks Kersh to remove his name from the final report . Instead , Kersh rebukes him and goes in to see the Toothpick Man , who is revealed to be a Super Soldier . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Providence " was written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz . A large portion of the episode , as well as the previous entry , was based on the ancient astronaut theory ; a theory that proposes intelligent extraterrestrial beings have visited Earth in antiquity or prehistory and made contact with humans . The themes had previously been visited in the " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " story arc . This episode , as well as the one that proceeds it , plays around with questions concerning traditional religion and faith . About the plot , series co @-@ star Robert Patrick later joked : " The baby 's the Messiah . I don 't understand any of it . I 'm Episcopalian ; I don 't get it . " 
 Carter also directed the episode ; initially , the episode was supposed to have been helmed by another individual , but no one was ever selected . At the last minute , Carter took on the role . Due to time constraints , Carter was writing whole parts of the script while the episode was being filmed . Many of the cast and crew were pleased with Carter 's directing . Gillian Anderson said that she thought " Chris has directed some of our best episodes . He 's very even tempered , and he 's quiet and gentle and quite nice to have as a director , because that energy can 't help but pervade the rest of the set [ … ] He 's got a clear vision , and he 's good at communicating that . " Annabeth Gish noted that Carter 's directing was " very meticulous " and that he " knows exactly what he wants " . 
 The episode 's opening scene depicts a fire fight during the Gulf War . This sequence , which took two days to film , was shot on a dry expanse of land located an hour outside of Los Angeles . This area had been selected due to its resembles to an Iraqi desert . Series ' co @-@ executive producer Michelle MacLaren said : " We [ MacLaren and location manager Ilt Jones ] were way out in the desert and we drove around this corner of these hills and I felt like we had entered another country . It was so desolate , and there were these stone buildings that looked like a bomb had gone off in them . It was perfect . " To add authenticity to the shoot , several of the extras used during this scene were former US military personnel . 
 Unlike many of the sets featured on the show which were filmed on a Fox soundstage , the shot of the buried alien space craft was actually filmed in the hills near Simi Valley , California . Carter wanted a full @-@ scale mock @-@ up of the alien ship to be buried in the ground . This was unusual for the show ; usually , a small portion of the ship would have been buried in the ground and the rest would have been filled in either via digital graphics , or with a scale model . In this episode , however , all of the shots of the alien ship , sans the take off , were done practically . To create the otherworldly glow of the ship , over 100 lamps were hidden within the craft . In addition , the ship itself was covered in glyphs that are supposed to be part of an unknown alien language . This was accomplished by designing fictional characters and programming them into a computer . These were then printed as letters which could be applied to the ship 's hull . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Providence " first premiered on the Fox network in the United States on March 10 , 2002 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 2 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 2 % of the nation 's estimated households and was viewed by 5 @.@ 49 million households , and 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . " Providence " was the 56th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 10 . The episode eventually aired on BBC Two on January 19 , 2003 . " Providence " was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 " Providence " received mixed reviews from television critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity awarded the episode a B + rating . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it a 9 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode took the promising beginning of the last episode and delivered a strong and surprising larger meaning to the pieces of the mythology we ’ ve seen over the past few seasons . I ’ ve said it before , and I ’ ll say it again … those who bash these episodes simply because they relate to the “ new direction ” ought to be ashamed of themselves . With this kind of creativity , this series could easily end in a way that makes the entire series one seamless tapestry . " Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk concluded that " Providence " , along with the previous episode " Provenance " , " does a fairly good job without including Duchovny " due to its adherence to " the series ' main storyline [ about ] the government conspiracies . " 
 Other reviews were more negative . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The called the entry " shallow and pretentious , and internally inconsistent " and derided its plot . They wrote that " at the centre of [ the show 's ] mythology [ is ] a situation dependent on Mulder and a baby . One of them is absent , and one of them can 't talk . " Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson criticized the line asking for Mulder 's head , but praised the episode 's teaser . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , also complimented the teaser sequence , calling it " glorious " , but was heavily critical of the rest of the episode 's " confused and impenetrable " story . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , wrote a largely negative review of the episode and derided its plot . He wrote that " as this series winds down , you would think Carter and Spotnitz would be in a hurry to resolve some of the myriad of questions they 've posed . Instead , ' Providence ' was just more of what we 've come to expect the past two seasons . " 
 = National Museum of Vietnamese History = 
 The National Museum of Vietnamese History ( Vietnamese : <unk> Bảo <unk> <unk> <unk> Việt Nam ; Hán <unk> : <unk> ) is located in the Hoan Kiem district of Hanoi , Vietnam . The museum building which was an archaeological research institution of the French School of the Far East under French colonial rule ( Louis <unk> École française d 'Extrême @-@ Orient EFEO ) of 1910 , was extensively refurbished in 1920 . It was redesigned between 1926 and 1932 by architect Ernest <unk> . The museum was acquired by the Government of Vietnam in 1958 and then the artifact collections were expanded to cover eastern arts and national history . 
 The museum highlights Vietnam 's prehistory ( about 300 @,@ 000 – 400 @,@ 000 years ago ) up to the August 1945 Revolution . It has over 200 @,@ 000 exhibits displayed covering items from prehistory up to the 1947 revolution and founding of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam , arranged in five major sections . 
 = = Location = = 
 The museum is situated at the back of the Hanoi Opera House . It is in 1 Trang Tien Street , 216 Tran Quang Khai Street , Hanoi . 
 = = History = = 
 The museum building used to be the archaeological research institution of the French School of the Far East under French colonial rule ( Louis <unk> École française d 'Extrême @-@ Orient EFEO ) , which opened in 1910 . This was extensively refurbished in 1920 , and redesigned between 1926 and 1932 by the architect Ernest <unk> . It is considered a blend of French colonial and traditional Vietnamese architecture , also called Indochina architecture . The museum was acquired by the Government of Vietnam in 1958 and then the artifact collections were expanded to cover eastern arts and national history . It was formally opened for public viewing on 3 September 1958 . The museum 's exhibits highlight Vietnam 's prehistory ( about 300 @,@ 000 – 400 @,@ 000 years ago ) up to the August 1945 Revolution . 
 = = Features = = 
 The museum is housed in a colonial French building which is a cupola shaped edifice in the shape of a pagoda . The design of the building is an amalgamation of French and Chinese architecture known as Indochina architecture . The building designed by <unk> , incorporates double walls and balconies for a natural ventilation system and protection from sunshine . The exhibition area is more than 2 @,@ 200 square metres ( 24 @,@ 000 sq ft ) with exhibits arranged chronologically . It is divided into five major sections : Section 1 covers period from the prehistoric period from the Stone Age ( 30 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 years ) to 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 years ago ; Section 2 has displays from the time of nation building during the Tran Dynasty ; Section 3 has exhibits from the period of the Ho Dynasty to the August 1945 Revolution ; and Section 4 has artifacts of the Champa stone sculptures . The museum showcases Vietnam 's history with very large collection of about 200 @,@ 000 items , covering the <unk> age , Bronze age , Sa <unk> , Oc Eo , and Hung periods , <unk> dynasty , Cham period , and also northern Vietnam 's Dong Son , a culture which existed about 1000 BC @-@ 100 AD . These exhibits are in the main building . The exhibits highlight communism and depict the rule of the French colonists as cruel . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 Exhibits in the museum include Hung era and <unk> mortuaries , Bronze Age implements such as axe heads , and Cham period artifacts . There is an intimidating sculpture of Quan Am , the Goddess of Mercy , which has 1 @,@ 000 eyes and arms . Also on display are the 13 Nguyễn dynasty emperor 's ornamented throne , dresses and other antiquities . These include the large Dong Son drums , which are symbolic of Vietnamese culture . At ground level the display consist of stone implements , pottery , and ornaments , up to 1400 AD . On the first floor the exhibits pertain to the monarchic reign from the time of the Dinh and Le eras of 900 <unk> to Vietnam 's last emperors ; these are decorative items such as a chest of drawers inlaid with mother @-@ of @-@ pearl , cylindrical containers of enamel ( these are funerary jars ) , ceramics and bright lacquer ware . There is a stele which was found during an archaeological excavation with an inscription at a monument labeled G1 , which is dedicated to God <unk> by <unk> I ( ca . 1137 ) is preserved in the museum . The exhibits of new artifacts cover Central Vietnam , Central Highlands , South Vietnam and also an old shipwreck near Cu Lao Cham Island . The museum has signage in English , but this is inadequate to express all that is on display in the museum . 
 To popularize Vietnam 's history from the past to the present , the Museum administration organized an exhibition of 450 artifacts ( 416 from 13 Vietnamese museums and the balance from 8 European museums ) in Austria and Belgium from September 2003 to November 2004 . The Royal Museum of Arts and History ( Kingdom of Belgium ) and the Vienna Ethnology Museum ( Republic of Austria ) were associated with this exhibition , which was titled " Vietnam – Past and Present . " 
 = Show Your Hand = 
 " Show Your Hand " is a song by Welsh rock band Super Furry Animals and was the first single from their 2007 album , Hey Venus ! . The single was made available for download on 16 July 2007 as an iTunes exclusive and was later released in physical formats on 13 August in the UK . The track failed to penetrate the UK singles chart 's Top 40 , peaking at # 46 . 
 According to lead singer Gruff Rhys the track is " a song about gambling " and was originally going to be left off Hey Venus ! for being " too generic " before Rough Trade boss Geoff Travis persuaded the band to reconsider their decision . Critical reaction to the track was mixed with some reviewers claiming " Show Your Hand " was " ponderously mature " and " more like the generic pop songs one would find on the radio " while others hailed the track as " classic Furries " . 
 Unlike the two other singles taken from Hey Venus ! , " Run @-@ Away " and " The Gift That Keeps Giving " , no music video was produced for " Show Your Hand " . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 In an interview with Pitchfork Media given before the release of Hey Venus ! , singer Gruff Rhys claimed " Show Your Hand " was " a song about gambling . There 's lots of card @-@ playing going on in the Super Furry Animals [ tour bus ] , which may have [ had ] a slight influence on the subject matter " . Rhys went on to state that the song was initially left off Hey Venus ! for being " too generic " : 
 A combination of pressure from Rough Trade 's Geoff Travis and Jeannette Lee ( " Where 's that song gone ? That 's our favorite song ! " ) and the addition of a French horn part , written by Cian Ciaran , resulted in the song finally taking its place on the record . Although the majority of the track was recorded at Miraval Studios , France along with the rest of Hey Venus ! , additional recording also took place with Chris Shaw who mixed the album . According to Cian Ciaran both b @-@ sides to " Show Your Hand " , namely " Aluminium Illuminati " and " Never More " , were originally recorded during sessions for 2003 's Phantom Power although " Aluminium Illuminati " was mentioned as a working title as early as May 2000 in connection with 2001 's Rings Around the World album . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Show Your Hand " is 2 minutes 51 seconds long and is in the key of E minor . The song begins with a " Kevin Ayers @-@ style psych @-@ pop intro " ; " a Beatlesque harpsichord line " accompanied by intermittent bass and occasional strummed guitar chords with Rhys singing the lines " You 're perched so neatly on the fence , you 're keeping your cards all to yourself ... " as the songs builds to its first chorus on 30 seconds . 
 " <unk> power chords " takes the song into the " rarefied soft @-@ rock territory " of the chorus with Rhys singing the title phrase four times before being joined by " sugar @-@ sweet harmonies from the Brian Wilson School of Spine @-@ Tingling Pop " on the last lines : " I 'm jumping off the fence , into your corner " . Another verse and chorus follow before the song 's middle 8 at 1 minute 31 seconds , a multi @-@ layered vocal take on a regular verse featuring just ' bah , bah , <unk> ' in place of lyrics . 
 The song ends with a triple chorus ( the third of which features a key change to A major ) as " French horn counterpoints usher the song towards its climax " , the line " jumping off the fence " repeating three times before a staccato finish with Rhys singing " into your corner " , drawing out the last word . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Although some critics hailed the track as a ' return to form ' for the band , with the Manchester Evening News describing the song as a " the best that the Furries have sounded in ages ... a return to the mellow @-@ but @-@ bouncy pop fare of their early albums Fuzzy Logic and Guerilla " , others pointed out that " Show Your Hand " is " ponderously mature " , rather " straightforward " and " more like the generic pop songs one would find on the radio than [ that ] of a historically experimental band " . However , The Guardian stated that " Show Your Hand " " is the sort of music [ the Super Furry Animals ] do best - hazy , lazy sunshine pop " . And while Cokemachineglow believed the track " may not have the staying power or the immediate pull of the Super Furry Animals ' best singles " their reviewer conceded that " it 's not too far behind " . 
 The ' retro ' nature of the track was commented on by several critics with The Independent describing the track as being performed in a " sophisticated soft @-@ rock style " which recalls " the arrangements of The Association and Surf 's Up @-@ era Beach Boys " , Pitchfork Media calling the song " Zombies @-@ esque orchestral pop " , and Drowned in Sound describing " Show Your Hand " as " an almost <unk> gem " : 
 BBC Wales described " Show Your Hand " as " classic Furries " in a favourable review on their website to coincide with the release of the track as a single going on to state that it is : 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 CD ( <unk> ) 
 " Show Your Hand " – 2 : 51 
 " Aluminium Illuminati " – 2 : 37 
 " Never More " – 2 : 25 
 7 " ( <unk> ) 
 " Show Your Hand " – 2 : 51 
 " Never More " – 2 : 25 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Singles chart positions = = 
 = Kimigayo = 
 " Kimigayo " ( <unk> ) is the national anthem of Japan . Its lyrics are the oldest among the world 's national anthems , and with a length of 11 measures and 32 characters " Kimigayo " is also one of the world 's shortest . Its lyrics are from a waka poem written in the Heian period ( 794 – 1185 ) , and the current melody was chosen in 1880 , replacing an unpopular melody composed eleven years earlier . While the title " Kimigayo " is usually translated as His Imperial Majesty 's Reign , no official translation of the title or lyrics has been established in law . 
 From 1888 to 1945 " Kimigayo " served as the national anthem of the Empire of Japan . When the Empire was dissolved following its surrender at the end of World War II , the State of Japan succeeded it in 1945 . This successor state was a parliamentary democracy and the polity therefore changed from a system based on imperial sovereignty to one based on popular sovereignty . Emperor Hirohito was not dethroned , and " Kimigayo " was retained as the de facto national anthem . The passage of the Act on National Flag and Anthem in 1999 recognized it as the official national anthem . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Following the meaning of the original Chinese , " kimi " has been used either as a noun to indicate an emperor or one 's lord ( i.e. , master ) since at least the Heian period ; as an honorific noun or suffix to indicate a person or most commonly as a friendly , informal word for " you . " For example , the protagonist Hikaru Genji ( <unk> ? ) of the Tale of Genji is also called " Hikaru no Kimi " or " Hikaru @-@ <unk> " ( <unk> or <unk> ? ) . But before Nara period , the emperor was often called " <unk> " ( great lord ) ; so it is controversial whether the word " kimi " in " <unk> " had meant emperor or not originally . 
 In Kamakura period , " Kimigayo " was used as a festive song among samurai and then became popular among the people in Edo period . In latter Edo period , " Kimigayo " was used in the Ōoku ( harem of Edo Castle ) and Satsuma @-@ han ( now Kagoshima Prefecture ) as a common festive new year song . In those contexts , " kimi " never meant the emperor but only the Tokugawa shogun , the Shimazu clan as rulers of the Satsuma @-@ han , guests of honour or all members of festive drinking party . After the Meiji Restoration , samurai from Satsuma @-@ han controlled the Imperial Japanese government and they adopted " Kimigayo " as the national anthem of Japan . From this time until the Japanese defeat in World War II , " Kimigayo " was understood to mean the long reign of the emperor . With the adoption of the Constitution of Japan in 1947 , the emperor became no longer a sovereign who ruled by divine right , but a human who is a symbol of the state and of the unity of the people . The Ministry of Education did not give any new meanings for " Kimigayo " after the war ; this allowed the song to mean the Japanese people . The Ministry also did not formally renounce the pre @-@ war meaning of " Kimigayo " . 
 In 1999 , during the deliberations of the Act on National Flag and Anthem , the official definition of Kimi or Kimi @-@ ga @-@ yo was questioned repeatedly . The first suggestion was given by Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiromu Nonaka that , due to the new status of emperor as established in Article 1 of the Constitution of Japan , kimi meant the " emperor as the symbol of Japan " and the entire lyrics wish for the peace and prosperity of Japan . Then Prime Minister Keizō Obuchi confirmed this meaning with a statement on June 29 , 1999 : 
 " Kimi " indicates the Emperor , who is the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people , and whose position is derived from the consensus @-@ based will of Japanese citizens , with whom sovereign power resides . And , the phrase " Kimigayo " indicates our State , Japan , which has the Emperor enthroned as the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people by the consensus @-@ based will of Japanese citizens . And it is reasonable to take the lyric of " Kimigayo " to mean the wish for the lasting prosperity and peace of such country of ours . 
