 Stevie is the privately educated daughter of rich parents , who have abandoned her to go travelling . She is said to be clueless about real life , with her profile on the official E20 website describing her as generous , creative and unlucky in love , though she has a boyfriend . Although she is described as posh , Fairbank @-@ Hynes said Stevie is not just like a posh girl in East London , but would be out of place anywhere as she is in her own world . Fairbank @-@ Hynes opined that posh characters in Walford stand out and can bring comedy to the show . Stevie is very naive and , according to Fairbank @-@ Hynes , " away with the fairies " — the most naive person anyone could meet . However , writer Emer Kenny was worried that Stevie being " away with the fairies " would make her unrealistic , but said that Fairbank @-@ Hynes made the character recognisable . Because of Stevie 's naivety and her kind nature , people see this as an invitation to take advantage of her . Stevie does not understand why people are cruel to her because she sees the good in them and wants to look after them , be around people and mother them . Fairbank @-@ Hynes commented , " Stevie 's the type of person who thinks a stranger is a friend she hasn 't met yet " . However , Stevie is very forward , which can scare people away . She is also creative , empathetic and a complete daydreamer who lacks common sense but has bursts of assertiveness and intelligence , which can surprise people . Thompson said that Stevie has a good balance as she can be ditzy but also quite smart . Fairbank @-@ Hynes identified with the character 's mad outbursts , innocence and daydreaming , and also said Stevie is quirky , lovely and eccentric . Her daydreaming can lead people to believe she is a bimbo , but she is not . 
 Stevie 's relationship with Olly is complicated and he treats her badly , but she ignores his flaws and holds onto any nice thing he does , however small . When he ends their relationship , Stevie is heartbroken , alone and lost , and does not fit in . She invites Asher to stay and is surprised when he brings Sol and Naz as well , but because Stevie loves to make new friends , she reacts in a way most people would not in that situation . She builds relationships with them and they grow to love her eventually . Fairbank @-@ Hynes commented : " Sol , Naz and Asher inform her about the real world and help her harden up just enough to survive in Albert Square ! " Stevie starts to see her new friends as the family she always wanted , but it proves to be difficult as they all have family issues of their own . Stevie wants to look after her new friends , which confuses them . The actress described the four friends as an unlikely gang , and said her favourite scenes were when Stevie and Sol caused a blackout across Albert Square , as the two characters did not have much interaction before then . Thompson described Stevie as a " fish out of water " , and Hussen said Stevie starts off being unappreciated , but eventually her friends see that she is important to them . 
 Stevie falls for Masood quite early on and it plays out through the whole series . She believes she has met the man of her dreams , but her feelings are not reciprocated because of the way she is . Fairbank @-@ Hynes said the storyline is interesting and funny . Stevie also sees Pippa as " the cold @-@ hearted ' other woman ' " who has stolen her boyfriend , but later discovers that she is " actually human too and not some evil goddess whose sole intention is to steal boyfriends ! " McKee said that Pippa 's role in the series is the drive Stevie 's story forward and help her find her identity . In an interview with Last Broadcast the actress said that over the course of the series , Stevie becomes more streetwise and a better judge of character . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Stevie is one of four characters who has an official profile on social networking site Twitter , where it is revealed that the character is living in Albert Square before the series starts , staying with her boyfriend Olly . Further posts show that he went out on their anniversary and she hoped to make the relationship work but he hinted that he would end it . Stevie also appears in additional video content on the official E20 website . In the first video , she performs a rap about Olly on the tube after leaving the party in episode 2 . In another , Stevie and Naz have a picnic in the park , and Naz makes a video of Stevie , hoping to make Olly jealous , but Stevie ends up with cake on her face . The four friends play a drinking game in the café in another video , and another scene features Stevie and Naz talking about kissing . 
 = State Route 346 ( New York – Vermont ) = 
 New York State Route 346 ( NY 346 ) and Vermont Route 346 ( VT 346 ) are short , adjoining state highways in the northeastern United States . Together , they extend for a combined 7 @.@ 25 miles ( 11 @.@ 67 km ) through the towns of Petersburgh in Rensselaer County , New York , and Pownal in Bennington County , Vermont . The bi @-@ state highway begins at an intersection with NY 22 in the hamlet of North Petersburgh and heads generally southeastward across the New York – Vermont state line to a junction with U.S. Route 7 ( US 7 ) in the village of Pownal . Both NY 346 and VT 346 parallel the Hoosick River . 
 The Vermont portion of the highway was originally designated as Vermont Route 112 by 1926 . The New York continuation was assigned NY 346 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , and VT 112 was renumbered to VT 346 in the late 1930s to match the designation on the New York side . VT 346 , the longer of the two routes at 4 @.@ 628 miles ( 7 @.@ 448 km ) in length , is currently the highest @-@ numbered state highway in Vermont . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = NY 346 = = = 
 NY 346 begins at an intersection with NY 22 southeast of the Rensselaer County State Forest in North Petersburgh , a hamlet within the town of Petersburgh . The route heads eastward out of the hamlet , crossing over the Little Hoosick River just east of North Petersburgh before following the Hoosick River eastward along the base of a valley surrounding the river . About 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) east of the hamlet , NY 346 meets County Route 95 ( CR 95 ) , the only through road that NY 346 intersects between NY 22 and the Vermont state line . Past CR 95 , NY 346 turns southeastward , paralleling both the Hoosick River and CR 96 on the other side of the river to the Vermont state line , where the highway becomes VT 346 . Unlike NY 346 , which is posted with east – west cardinal directions , VT 346 is signed as north – south . 
 = = = VT 346 = = = 
 While NY 346 follows the southern bank of the Hoosick River , VT 346 largely runs along the northern bank . The switch in positioning is made just east of the state line , where VT 346 crosses over the waterway . The route continues eastward , intersecting Indian Massacre Road , the continuation of CR 96 , and crossing a Pan Am Railways @-@ owned railroad line on its way to a junction with Lime Kiln Road , a local highway leading to the village of Pownal Center . At this point , VT 346 turns southward into the village of North Pownal . The route heads generally north – south through the community , running alongside both the Hoosick River and the Pan Am Railways line . 
 South of North Pownal , VT 346 heads through a more rural area of the town of Pownal , passing by farmland and open fields as it follows the river and the railroad toward the village of Pownal . Roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the community , VT 346 also begins to follow US 7 ( the Ethan Allen Highway ) , which runs parallel to VT 346 farther up the side of the river valley . US 7 descends the valley into Pownal , where both US 7 and VT 346 follow north – south routings through the small village . The two routes meet at a junction southeast of the village center , at which point VT 346 comes to an end . The average annual daily traffic of VT 346 is highest in Pownal , where the route handles around 2 @,@ 800 cars per day as of 2012 , and lowest between Church Street and Dean Road , where it dips to about 1 @,@ 600 vehicles per day . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of the North Petersburgh – Pownal highway within the state of Vermont was originally designated as VT 112 by 1926 . Its continuation into the state of New York was designated as NY 346 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . VT 112 was renumbered to VT 346 in the late 1930s to match the New York designation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = James Inglis Hamilton = 
 General James Inglis Hamilton , ( before 1742 – 27 July 1803 ) was a Scottish soldier . He enlisted in the British Army in 1755 and commanded several regiments . He was the only colonel of the 113th Regiment of Foot . During the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) , Hamilton fought in the Siege of Fort St Philip , the Raid on St Malo , and the Capture of Belle Île . 
 In the American War of Independence ( 1775 – 1783 ) , Hamilton fought in the Invasion of Canada and the Battle of Freeman 's Farm , commanding the middle column during the latter . He was in the Convention Army , imprisoned in Cambridge , Massachusetts after its surrender following the Battles of Saratoga . While a prisoner of war , he adopted James Hamilton , the son of a non @-@ commissioned officer in the British Army . 
 After his brother 's death , Hamilton took over Murdostoun , where he renovated the castle extensively . Under the 15th Regiment of Foot , Hamilton participated in Battle of Martinique as well as the Invasion of Guadeloupe in the French Revolutionary Wars . He died on 27 July 1803 at Murdostoun and is buried at Kirk O ’ Shotts graveyard . His adopted son took over Murdostoun before dying at the Battle of Waterloo . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Very little is known of Hamilton 's early life . He was the third son of Alexander ( died 1768 ) and Margaret Hamilton ( died 1742 ) . His two older brothers were Alexander ( died 1783 ) and Gavin Hamilton ( 1723 – 1798 ) , the latter a painter and archeologist in Rome . Inglis was added to the family name in 1719 as a condition of the will by which Alexander Inglis bequeathed Murdostoun to his nephew Alexander Hamilton , James 's father . 
 = = Seven Years ' War = = 
 Hamilton enlisted in the British Army on 28 February 1755 and was stationed at Portsmouth . He first saw action in June 1756 at the Siege of Fort St Philip , part of the Seven Years ' War . Assigned to the 34th Regiment of Foot , he was one of the 2 @,@ 800 British soldiers fighting under the command of William Blakeney against 15 @,@ 000 Frenchmen under the Duke de Richelieu and Roland @-@ Michel <unk> de La <unk> . The French sailed to Fort St. Philip and forced the British to surrender . During the siege , Admiral John Byng sailed there with a relief group , hoping to save the island for the British , but was unsuccessful . The French killed or wounded 400 British in the French victory . 
 Hamilton fought in the Raid on St Malo in June 1758 . The British landed near St Malo , at first planning to attack the town . However , they decided to destroy shipping first and attack the town later . Finding that to occupy the town would require a full siege , for which they had insufficient troops , they occupied St <unk> , where they burned over one hundred vessels including thirty privateers . British ships retreated after seeing a large French force , but sailed around the coast for a few weeks seeking another place to attack . Even though the Raid on St Malo was small and little damage was done , it is considered a British victory . 
 In 1761 , Hamilton took part in the Capture of Belle Île as one of the 5 @,@ 000 British troops led by Studholme Hodgson . The first attempt by the British was unsuccessful and lost approximately 500 troops . With reinforcements , a second attempt succeeded on 7 June 1761 . 
 On 17 October 1761 , while holding the rank of major , Hamilton became major commandant ( colonel ) of the 113th Regiment of Foot . It was formed from independent companies and served as a depot for sending drafts to Highland regiments serving overseas . The regiment disbanded in 1763 , and Hamilton retired on half pay . He became a lieutenant @-@ colonel on 25 May 1772 . 
 = = American War of Independence = = 
 In 1774 , Hamilton commanded the 21st Regiment of Foot in the American War of Independence ; General John Burgoyne said that he " was the whole time engaged and acquitted himself with great honor , activity , and good conduct . " Early in 1776 , while in the 21st Regiment , Hamilton accompanied General Guy Carleton in the British response to the Continental Army 's 1775 invasion of Quebec . On 15 September 1776 he was appointed temporary commander of the 1st Brigade when Brigadier General Nesbit fell ill . Upon Nesbit 's death , Hamilton was promoted to brigadier . He was assigned to the 2nd Brigade , which consisted of the 34th , 53rd , 62nd , and 20th Regiments of Foot . It was originally intended to include Hamilton 's 21st Regiment of Foot in the brigade , but it was replaced by the 53rd . 
 = = = Saratoga campaign = = = 
 Hamilton helped General Burgoyne organize troops for his campaign to divide the rebellious provinces . He was assigned to the 1st Brigade , comprising the 9th , 47th , and 53rd Regiments of Foot . Later , when Henry Watson Powell transported the 62nd Regiment to Fort Ticonderoga , the 1st and 2nd Brigades were amalgamated . 
 On 19 September 1777 , in Stillwater , New York , Hamilton commanded 1 @,@ 100 men of the centre column , consisting of the 9th , 20th , 21st , and 62nd Regiments of Foot , which attacked the heights at the Battle of Freeman 's Farm . His column was arrayed with the 21st on the right , the 20th on the left , the 62nd in the middle , and the 9th in reserve . To his left , Friedrich Adolf Riedesel commanded the 47th Regiment of Foot and some German troops . To Hamilton 's right , Simon Fraser commanded the 24th Regiment of Foot along with light infantry and grenadiers . Even though Hamilton was considered the commander , Burgoyne led the attack . 
 The centre column migrated toward the southwest to meet up with the right column . During the battle , Colonel Daniel Morgan of the United States led a charge , but Hamilton 's men turned it back and the British won the battle . Burgoyne had gained the field of battle , but suffered nearly 600 casualties , mostly in Hamilton 's centre column , where the 62nd was reduced to the size of a single company and three quarters of the artillery men were killed or wounded . American losses were nearly 300 killed and seriously wounded . 
 In the next battle , the Battle of Bemis Heights , Hamilton was not as engaged as he was at Freeman 's Farm : he was the guard of the camp near the heights . He was in the Convention Army that surrendered after the battle , among about 5 @,@ 900 troops that surrendered at Saratoga . The prisoners arrived at Cambridge , Massachusetts on 8 November 1777 . William Phillips commanded the Convention Army until he was exchanged for American General Benjamin Lincoln in 1780 ; then Hamilton became the commander . While a prisoner of war , Hamilton adopted a boy named Jamie Anderson ( 1777 – 1815 ) , the son of Sergeant Major William Anderson of the 21st Foot . Hamilton name was " signed to the parole given by the officers ... in December " . The Convention Army had to move to Charlottesville , Virginia and arrived around January 1779 . Hamilton was released on 3 September 1781 , subject to the condition that he could not travel to America until the war was over . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his exchange , Hamilton returned to Britain , where he funded his adopted son 's education at Glasgow University . Because of his high rank , Hamilton was able to obtain a commission for his son , who became a cornet in 1792 . The boy changed his name to James Hamilton when he enlisted in the British Army . 
 Around 1790 , Hamilton made various renovations to Murdostoun : filling the turret staircase and the old dungeons , adding a parapet running round the roof @-@ line , and changing the original courtyard . On his brother Galvin 's death in 1798 , Hamilton took over Murdostoun . He came to be considered as one of the most influential freeholders in Lanarkshire . 
 Hamilton was the colonel of the 15th Regiment of Foot from 22 August 1792 to 1794 , during which he took part in the 1790s West Indies Campaign . The 15th Foot was awarded the battle honour Martinique 1794 ( 5 February – 25 March ) . During the battle , the 15th Foot was a part of the First Brigade , which consisted of the 39th and 43rd Regiment of Foot and was led by Sir C. Gordon . 
 The regiment also saw service at Guadeloupe ( 12 April ) the same year . He was colonel of his old regiment , the 21st Foot , from 1794 to 1803 . While with them he was promoted to lieutenant @-@ general on 26 January 1797 and to full general on 29 April 1802 . Hamilton died on his estate in Scotland on 27 July 1803 . On 18 August 1803 , his son , who was his only heir , took over Murdostoun . James was killed while commanding the Royal Scots Greys at the Battle of Waterloo . 
 = The Problem Solverz = 
 The Problem Solverz is an American animated television series that aired on Cartoon Network . Created by Ben Jones , it follows Alfe , Horace , and Roba , a group of detectives in their troubled town , <unk> . The aforementioned characters were designed while Jones attended college in the 1990s ; he later founded the art collective Paper Rad with Jessica and Jacob <unk> . The characters were featured in Jones ' and the collective 's animations and comics before the creator pitched a pilot to Adult Swim featuring the trio . The network 's executives referred Jones to Cartoon Network , who commissioned a series featuring the same characters . The series was produced in Adobe Flash , with around fifteen animators employed at Cartoon Network Studios and the co @-@ production of Mirari Films . 
 The Problem Solverz was first aired on April 4 , 2011 . The first season consisted of eighteen episodes , concluding on September 29 , 2011 . A second and final season was released exclusively on Netflix in 2013 . The series has received mixed to negative reviews , with writers of entertainment @-@ related publications criticizing the visual style and writing , while art @-@ related publications gave praise to Jones ' creativity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series follows the eponymous detectives Alfe ( Ben Jones ) , Horace ( Kyle Kaplan ) , and Roba ( also Jones ) . The trio take up solving , and sometimes creating , the numerous problems that plague their town , <unk> . To their aid is Tux Dog ( John DiMaggio ) , an extremely wealthy dog who helps the Solverz in some of their cases but is just as often the source of their problems . 
 Alfe ( pronounced <unk> ) is a large , fluffy , man – dog – anteater found and raised by Horace when both was young . He loves devouring large quantities of food , especially pizza , and acts impulsively during missions . Roba , Horace 's twin brother and cyborg , is the smartest member of the group , but he suffers from insecurity and anxiety . Horace is the calm and collected leader of the team , usually applying common sense with his detective work and caring after Alfe . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Growing up in Pittsburgh , creator Ben Jones had an appreciation for comics and animation . His father 's Macintosh computer served as a vehicle for Jones to create art and influenced his later visual style . Jones attended the Massachusetts College of Art and Design in the mid @-@ 1990s , where he became motivated to launch a project he could adapt to different media . This impetus manifested itself in the characters Alfe , Horace , and Roba . Tux Dog , another principal character , was designed while Jones was in primary school . After his graduation , Jones formed the art collective Paper Rad with Jessica and Jacob <unk> in 2000 . The collective moved that year to Providence , Rhode Island , to participate in the Fort Thunder music venue . After the venue 's closure in 2001 , Jones released animations on the Web using Adobe Flash , with some featuring Alfe . 
 Paper Rad later produced animations with the premise of The Problem Solverz but with the three principal characters absent . The collective 's 2006 direct @-@ to @-@ DVD release Trash Talking features a segment called " Gone Cabin <unk> " in which Alfe , Horace , and Roba appear . In tandem with these experiments , Jones worked as a television animator on Yo Gabba Gabba ! and Wonder <unk> . The year of the DVD 's release , Jones talked to Nick <unk> , then an executive producer at Adult Swim , about an idea for a series of his own . The result was Neon <unk> , a pilot produced by <unk> and Williams Street , released on Adult Swim 's website as part of a development contest sponsored by Burger King . The network 's executives later referred Jones to Cartoon Network , believing his creativity would fit better there . Jones agreed to do business with Cartoon Network on the condition that Alfe be a character on The Problem Solverz . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Eric Pringle , a veteran of 2D digital animation , was employed as animation director , providing Jones with much technical assistance . Pringle 's colleagues from Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends , another Cartoon Network production , comprised a team of around fifteen full @-@ time animators at the network 's studio , all working on Apple computers . Greg Miller was hired as supervising director , Martin <unk> as technical director , and John Pham with Jon Vermilyea as character designers . Miller is the creator of Whatever Happened to ... Robot Jones ? , another series on the network . Vermilyea worked also as a character designer on the network 's series Adventure Time , while <unk> , Pham , and Jones all contributed to the anthology comic book Kramers <unk> . Michael Yank was employed as a writer for most episodes , with Mirari Films ' CEO Eric Kaplan supervising the creation of scripts . 
 The series was noted for its visual style employing highly saturated colors and varying shapes . Jones was inspired by the limited @-@ animated series Roger <unk> and The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show , which he felt employed good character design , cohesiveness , jokes , and timing . He credited The Problem Solverz as the first seamless use of Flash for television animation , with conceptualization and the end result occurring in the same program . Writing was the longest aspect of production , taking up to several months for the crew to conceive the story and draft a script . Animation was comparatively quicker , with the team delivering work in only a few weeks given the digital approach ; Jones felt that the animators could to play to the strengths of the fully digital animation process . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Problem Solverz was first aired on April 4 , 2011 , on Cartoon Network . The premiere was seen by 1 @.@ 1 million viewers , receiving a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 8 , in that 0 @.@ 8 percent of families with a television set viewed the episode on that date . The most @-@ watched episode of the series ( " The Mayan Ice Cream Caper " ) was seen by 1 @.@ 6 million viewers . Viewership fell with the first episode to have been aired on a Thursday ( " Hamburger <unk> " ) , which was watched by 1 @.@ 1 million viewers . The first season concluded on September 29 , 2011 , after eighteen episodes . A second season consisting of eight episodes was released exclusively on Netflix in 2013 . Cartoon Network passed on a third season renewal . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Problem Solverz has received mixed to negative reviews , with writers of entertainment @-@ related publications criticizing the visual style and writing . Rob Owen writing for the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette called the style reminiscent of Atari 5200 video games and wrote that viewers could " thank " or " blame " Jones for his creation . For the magazine Variety , Brian Lowry disregarded the series as uninteresting and challenging to watch , the visuals and sounds weird for weirdness ' sake . Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media defined the series as misguided , its stories as undeveloped , and its visual style as unappealing . The Weekly Alibi 's Devin D. O 'Leary acknowledged the style as Paper Rad 's own and found the writing more solid than that of Adult Swim 's programming for which it could be mistaken . The jokes were not instantly funny according to O 'Leary , but the visual style combined with the writing would provide amusement for Paper Rad 's existing fans . 
 Art @-@ related publications , on the other hand , gave praise to Jones ' creativity . Dan Nadel , a former publisher of Jones , lauded the series in The Comics Journal for the imagination displayed , " funny and humane and invaluable " at the same time . Paper writer Sammy <unk> called The Problem Solverz " radical " and unlike any another series on television . Geek Exchange writer Liz Ohanesian called the second season more " subdued " than the first , allowing viewers to concentrate on the principal character 's relationships . She compared the series to the band <unk> , in that its unique and polarizing style makes fans of the series hard to find . 
 = New York State Route 342 = 
 New York State Route 342 ( NY 342 ) is a short east – west state highway in Jefferson County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of NY 342 is at an intersection with NY 12 near the hamlet of <unk> Corners in the town of Pamelia . The eastern terminus is at a junction with NY 3 in the town of Le Ray , west of the village of Black River . Along the way , NY 342 connects to Interstate 81 ( I @-@ 81 ) in Pamelia and intersects U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) outside of the Le Ray hamlet of Calcium . 
 What is now NY 342 was originally built during the 1950s as a federal @-@ aid highway known as the " Watertown Bypass " . It became a state highway in 1960 , at which time it was designated as New York State Route 181 . The designation was short @-@ lived as NY 181 was renumbered to NY 342 c . 1963 . The portion of NY 342 between US 11 and NY 3 was part of NY 26 from the late 1950s to the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 In the west , NY 342 begins at an intersection with NY 12 in Pamelia , a town to the north of the city of Watertown . It heads northeastward through open , mostly undeveloped fields for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to an interchange with I @-@ 81 . East of I @-@ 81 , the development along NY 342 increases as the route enters Pamelia Center , a hamlet centered on NY 342 's intersection with NY 37 . NY 342 continues on , passing through the eastern portion of the community and serving a local country club before entering another rural area dominated by open fields . 
 Upon intersecting Nellis Road , NY 342 turns to follow a linear , southeasterly routing into the town of Le Ray . The rural surroundings remain until the hamlet of Calcium , where NY 342 meets US 11 north of the community 's center in a lightly populated residential area just southwest of the Fort Drum Military Reservation . The route continues on , running along the southwestern edge of Fort Drum to a junction with NY 283 . At this point , NY 342 curves to the south , bypassing the village of Black River to the west as it heads through another undeveloped area consisting of little more than open fields . The route ends roughly 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the south of NY 283 at an intersection with NY 3 southwest of the village . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of modern NY 342 between NY 12 in Pamelia and US 11 in Le Ray was originally built in stages between 1951 and 1955 as a federal @-@ aid highway named the " Watertown Bypass " . The remainder of the route ( via Le Ray and South Main Streets in Black River ) was built around this time . NY 26 was realigned between 1956 and 1958 to use the portion of the bypass between US 11 and NY 3 . The change was part of a larger realignment of NY 26 between Carthage and Antwerp . 
 In 1960 , the New York State Department of Transportation assumed ownership and maintenance of the Watertown Bypass . The entirety of the new state highway , including the portion already part of NY 26 , was initially designated as NY 181 . It was renumbered to NY 342 c . 1963 , eliminating potential confusion between NY 181 and the nearby I @-@ 81 . NY 342 was also rerouted to bypass Black River to the west around this time . The overlap with NY 26 was eliminated in the mid @-@ 1970s when NY 26 was truncated to Carthage . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Jefferson County . 
 = Operation Brevity = 
 Operation Brevity was a limited offensive conducted in mid @-@ May 1941 , during the Western Desert Campaign of the Second World War . Conceived by the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the British Middle East Command , General Archibald Wavell , Brevity was intended to be a rapid blow against weak Axis front @-@ line forces in the Sollum – Capuzzo – Bardia area of the border between Egypt and Libya . Although the operation got off to a promising start , throwing the Axis high command into confusion , most of its early gains were lost to local counter @-@ attacks , and with German reinforcements being rushed to the front the operation was called off after one day . 
 Egypt had been invaded by Libyan @-@ based Italian forces in September 1940 , but by February of the following year a British counter @-@ offensive had advanced well into Libya , destroying the Italian Tenth Army in the process . British attention then shifted to Greece , which was under the threat of Axis invasion . While Allied divisions were being diverted from North Africa , the Italians reinforced their positions and were supported by the arrival of the German Afrika Korps under General Erwin Rommel . Rapidly taking the offensive against his distracted and over @-@ stretched opponent , by April 1941 Rommel had driven the British and Commonwealth forces in Cyrenaica back across the Egyptian border . Although the battlefront now lay in the border area , the port city of Tobruk — 100 miles ( 160 km ) inside Libya — had resisted the Axis advance , and its substantial Australian and British garrison constituted a significant threat to Rommel 's lengthy supply chain . He therefore committed his main strength to besieging the city , leaving the front line only thinly held . 
 Wavell defined Operation Brevity 's main objectives as the acquisition of territory from which to launch a further planned offensive toward Tobruk , and the depletion of German and Italian forces in the region . With limited battle @-@ ready units to draw on in the wake of Rommel 's recent successes , on 15 May Brigadier William Gott attacked in three columns with a mixed infantry and armoured force . The strategically important Halfaya Pass was taken against stiff Italian opposition , and deeper inside Libya Fort Capuzzo was captured , but German counter @-@ attacks under Colonel Maximilian von Herff regained the fort during the afternoon causing heavy casualties amongst its defenders . Gott — concerned that his forces were in danger of being caught by German armour in open ground — conducted a staged withdrawal to the Halfaya Pass on 16 May , and Brevity was closed down . The importance of the Halfaya Pass as a safe supply route was highlighted to Rommel , and 11 days later it was recaptured during Operation Skorpion , a German counter @-@ attack . 
 = = Background = = 
 In early September 1940 , Italian 10th Army based in Libya conducted the Italian invasion of Egypt and three months later , the British and Commonwealth troops of the Western Desert Force began a counter @-@ offensive , codenamed Operation Compass . In two months , the British advanced 500 miles ( 800 km ) , occupying the Italian province of Cyrenaica and destroying the 10th Army but the operation was halted in February 1941 to give priority to the Battle of Greece . Renamed XIII Corps and reorganised under HQ Cyrenaica Command , the troops of the former Western Desert Force adopted a defensive posture . Over the next few months , HQ Cyrenaica lost its commander , Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson , the 2nd New Zealand Division and the 6th Australian Division when they were redeployed to Greece . The 7th Armoured Division , with virtually no serviceable tanks left after Compass , was also withdrawn and sent to the Nile Delta for rest and refitting . Wilson was replaced by Lieutenant @-@ General Philip Neame and parts of the 2nd Armoured Division and 9th Australian Division were deployed to Cyrenaica but both formations were inexperienced , ill @-@ equipped and in the case of the 2nd Armoured , well under strength after detachments to Greece . 
 The Italians responded by despatching the 132nd Armoured Division <unk> and 102nd Motorised <unk> to North Africa , and beginning in February 1941 and continuing until early May , Operation Sonnenblume saw the arrival of the German Afrika Korps in Tripoli to reinforce their Italian allies . Commanded by General Erwin Rommel and consisting of the 5th Light and 15 . <unk> , the Afrika Korps ' mission was to block Allied attempts to drive the Italians out of the region . However , Rommel seized on the weakness of his opponents and , without waiting for his forces to fully assemble , rapidly went on the offensive . During March and April , the 2nd Armoured Division was destroyed as the Axis forces advanced , which also forced the British and Commonwealth forces into retreat . Adding to the Allied discomfiture , Neame and the General Officer Commanding British Troops Egypt — Lieutenant @-@ General Richard O 'Connor — were captured and the British command structure had to be reorganised . HQ Cyrenaica was dissolved on 14 April and its command functions taken over by the reactivated HQ Western Desert Force under Lieutenant @-@ General Noel Beresford @-@ Peirse . The 9th Australian Infantry Division fell back to the fortress port of Tobruk , and the remaining British forces withdrew a further 100 miles ( 160 km ) east to Sollum on the Libyan – Egyptian border . With Tobruk under siege from the main German @-@ Italian force , a small battlegroup ( Kampfgruppe ) commanded by Colonel Maximilian von Herff continued to press eastward . Capturing Fort Capuzzo and Bardia in passing , it then advanced into Egypt and by the end of April had taken Sollum and the tactically important Halfaya Pass . Rommel garrisoned these positions , reinforcing the battlegroup and ordering it onto the defensive . 
 The Tobruk garrison — although isolated by land — continued to receive supplies from the Royal Navy and Rommel was unable to take the port . This failure was significant ; his front line positions at Sollum were at the end of an extended supply chain that stretched back to Tripoli and was threatened by the Tobruk garrison , and the substantial commitment required to invest Tobruk prevented him from building up his forces at Sollum , making further advances into Egypt impractical . By maintaining possession of Tobruk , the Allies had regained the initiative . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 General Archibald Wavell — the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the British Middle East Command — conceived Operation Brevity as a rapid blow in the Sollum area . Wavell intended to create advantageous conditions from which to launch Operation Battleaxe , the main offensive that he was planning for June . Operation Brevity 's primary objectives were to recapture the Halfaya Pass , to drive the enemy from the Sollum and Capuzzo areas , and to deplete Rommel 's forces . A secondary objective was to advance toward Tobruk , although only as far as supplies would allow , and without risking the force committed to the operation . 
 = = = Allied force = = = 
 Operation Brevity would be carried out by the 22nd Guards Brigade and elements of the 7th Armoured Division . Its armoured component consisted of 29 cruiser tanks of the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment ( 2RTR ) and 24 infantry tanks of the 4th Royal Tank Regiment ( 4RTR ) . The Royal Air Force ( RAF ) allocated all available fighters and a small force of bombers to the operation . 
 Brigadier William Gott — in command of all Allied front @-@ line forces since the retreat — was to lead the operation in the field , and his plan was to advance in three parallel columns . On the desert flank to the south , the 7th Armoured Brigade group was to move 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Bir el Khireigat to Sidi Azeiz destroying any opposition encountered en route . This group included three small mobile forces ( " Jock columns " ) of the 7th Support Group , the cruiser tanks of 2RTR , and the armoured cars of the 11th Hussars , whose task was to patrol the open desert on the left flank and monitor the Sidi Azeiz – Bardia road . In the centre , the 22nd Guards Brigade group was to clear the top of the Halfaya Pass , secure Bir Wair , Musaid , and Fort Capuzzo , and conduct a company @-@ sized probe toward Bardia . The group included the infantry battalions of the 1st Durham Light Infantry and 2nd Scots Guards , and the infantry tanks of 4RTR . In the north , the " coast group " was to advance along the coast road , capturing the lower Halfaya Pass , Sollum barracks , and the town of Sollum . The group included elements of the 2nd Battalion The Rifle Brigade , and the 8th Field Regiment Royal Artillery . 
 = = = Axis force = = = 
 The main Axis opposition was Kampfgruppe von Herff , positioned on the desert plateau . It included 30 – 50 tanks of the 2nd Battalion Panzer Regiment 5 , an Italian motorised infantry battalion of the Trento Division , and supporting arms . The front line area around Halfaya Pass was defended by two companies of Bersaglieri — well trained Italian motorised infantry — with artillery support . 
 On 9 May , the Germans intercepted a British weather report over the radio . The Afrika Korps war diary noted that " In the past , such reports had always been issued prior to the important enemy offensives to capture Sidi Barrani , Bardi , Tobruk , and the Gebel . " Rommel 's response was to strengthen the eastern side of his cordon around Tobruk as a precaution against sorties from the garrison , and to order Kampfgruppe von Herff to adopt a more aggressive posture . On 13 May , Axis aircraft bombed British tank concentrations , and von Herff expected an imminent British attack . However , the following day aircraft were unable to locate the British , and it was reported that the " enemy intentions to attack were not known " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 13 May , Wavell 's infantry battalions began to concentrate at their start lines , followed by the tank regiments during the early hours of 15 May . At 06 : 00 , the three columns began their advance , supported overhead by a standing patrol of Hawker Hurricane fighters . 
 = = = Centre column = = = 
 Reaching the top of the Halfaya Pass , the 22nd Guards Brigade group ran into heavy opposition from an Italian Bersaglieri infantry company , supported by anti @-@ tank guns , under the command of Colonel Ugo <unk> . This unit fought tenaciously , doing much to repair the poor impression Rommel had of his Italian allies . Opening fire upon the attacking British tanks , the Bersaglieri found their 47mm anti @-@ tank guns to be unable to penetrate the armour of the Matilda infantry tanks . At 400 yards ( 370 m ) , the gunners shifted targets . Now aiming at the tracks and undercarriages , when the tanks raised up crossing low stone walls and rocks , seven tanks were disabled . For his conduct during this action , Rommel recommended that <unk> be awarded the Iron Cross First Class . At the cost of these seven tanks , the position was taken by C Squadron 4RTR and G Company 2nd Scots Guards , and the brigade group pushed on towards the Bir Wair @-@ Musaid road . At around 08 : 00 , it received the surrender of a large German @-@ Italian camp , and by 10 : 15 Bir Wair and Musaid had been taken in the face of limited opposition . 
 A Squadron 4RTR and the 1st Durham Light Infantry ( 1DLI ) continued the advance toward Fort Capuzzo . Concealed in hull down positions behind a ridge near the fort were 20 – 30 German tanks , supported by anti tank guns . These engaged A Squadron , disabling five tanks , but were forced to withdraw as the squadron pressed its attack . On the final approach to Fort Capuzzo , contact was lost between 4RTR 's tanks and 1DLI 's leading C Company , and the attack on the fort began without armoured support . The fort was vigorously defended , and it was not until just before midday that C Company , reunited with A Squadron 4RTR and reinforced by A and B Companies 1DLI , eventually took the position . D Company 1DLI — which had been in reserve during the attack — then made a wide left hook to capture a small landing ground to the north of the fort . 
 In the afternoon , one company of the 2nd Scots Guards probed toward Bardia , the infantry coming under heavy machine gun fire from three positions as they neared Sollum barracks . A group of Universal Carriers — commanded by Sergeant F. Riley — charged the gun positions and quickly neutralised them , but one carrier was disabled when the group was subsequently engaged by anti @-@ tank guns . Riley executed a second charge , silencing these too and taking their crews prisoner . His carrier was hit three times ; for his actions Riley was awarded the Military Medal , the battalion 's first decoration of the war . 
 = = = Desert column = = = 
 On the desert flank , 2RTR advanced with the 7th Armoured Brigade group . During the morning , reports were received of up to 30 German armoured vehicles operating nearby , and A Squadron 2RTR moved to investigate . Most of the German force had pulled back , but three tanks were located and brought under fire . One Panzer IV was disabled and the other two driven off , for the loss of one British tank due to mechanical failure . A second force of 15 German tanks was engaged by two tanks of No 2 Troop , destroying a Panzer III and forcing the remainder to withdraw . By midday , the brigade group had reached a position west of Fort Capuzzo , and in the afternoon the nine remaining cruisers of A Squadron 2RTR began a reconnaissance patrol towards Sidi Azeiz . 
 = = = Coastal column = = = 
 The advance along the coastal road — which lacked tank support — was held up all morning by determined Italian resistance at the bottom of Halfaya Pass . This objective was finally achieved toward evening when S Company 2nd Rifle Brigade — supported by Australian anti @-@ tank gunners fighting as infantry — overran the Italian positions taking around 130 prisoners . 
 = = = Axis reactions = = = 
 Although the German and Italian commands in North Africa knew that a British offensive was imminent , Operation Brevity nevertheless caught them unprepared , and Rommel recorded in his diary that the initial attacks had caused him considerable losses . By midday on 15 May , Axis command was showing signs of confusion . It was erroneously believed that the offensive involved more than 100 tanks , and repeated requests were made to both the Luftwaffe and the Regia Aeronautica for a concerted effort to defeat it . Forces around Tobruk were redeployed east of the besieged city , to block any attempt at relief and to prevent the garrison from breaking out to meet the British advance . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Hans Cramer was sent to reinforce Kampfgruppe von Herff with a tank battalion from Panzer Regiment 8 and a battery of 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) FlaK guns , and additional reinforcements under General von <unk> were despatched the following day . 
 The Germans concentrated their riposte against the central column . Von Herff — who had been prepared to fall back — instead launched a local counter @-@ attack toward Fort Capuzzo during the afternoon of 15 May with the 2nd Battalion Panzer Regiment 5 . At around 13 : 30 , D Company 1DLI at the landing ground was overrun , and with no anti @-@ tank support more capable than the Boys anti @-@ tank rifle , the remaining troops of 1DLI were forced to fall back toward Musaid . A fortuitous dust cloud aided their withdrawal , but by 14 : 45 Panzer Regiment 5 was reporting that it had recaptured Capuzzo , inflicting heavy casualties on the British and taking 70 prisoners . 
 On the desert flank , A Squadron 2RTR 's patrol toward Sidi Azeiz was being monitored by Panzer Regiment 5 , but the Germans misidentified the light cruiser tanks as heavily armoured Matilda infantry tanks , and reported that an attack was not possible . Colonel von Herff — believing the British had two divisions operating in the area — had grown uneasy . A Squadron 's patrol was interpreted as an attempt to concentrate south of Sidi Azeiz , in preparation for a thrust north the next day ; such a move threatened to sweep aside von Herff 's force and completely unhinge the German front in the Sollum – Bardia area . In response , von Herff broke contact with the British ; his plan was to join up with Cramer 's Panzer Regiment 8 to mount a concentrated counter @-@ attack the following morning . 
 = = = British withdrawal = = = 
 Realising that the 22nd Guards Brigade group would be vulnerable to German armoured counterattacks in the open ground around Bir Wair and <unk> , Brigadier Gott withdrew it during the early hours of the morning of 16 May . By 10 : 00 , the infantry had taken up new positions back at Halfaya Pass , although the 7th Armoured Brigade group was ordered to remain west of Fort Capuzzo for the time being . 
 Cramer 's reinforcements arrived in the Sidi Azeiz area at 03 : 00 and reached Fort Capuzzo at 06 : 30 . At around 08 : 00 , he made contact with Kampfgruppe von Herff , but by mid @-@ morning both groups had run out of fuel . The German advance resumed at 16 : 00 before being stopped by around 17 tanks of 2RTR . The British reported one German tank set alight and another disabled and that an advance of up to fifty tanks had been halted , while the Germans believed that they had repulsed a strong British tank attack . As nightfall approached , von Herff broke off the action and went on to the defensive . He intended to repair his damaged machines , reorganise , and resume offensive operations on 18 May . 2RTR pulled back to Bir el Khireigat , initially followed by two German tanks , one of which withdrew after the other was destroyed . The regiment arrived at Bir el Khireigat , from where it had set out two days previously , at around 02 : 30 on 17 May . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Brevity failed to achieve most of its objectives , succeeding only in retaking the Halfaya Pass . The British lost five tanks destroyed and a further 13 were damaged but the tank regiments suffered no losses in personnel . Total casualties amounted to at least 206 men . The 1st Durham Light Infantry suffered the most during the operation losing 196 men killed , wounded or captured . The 2nd Scots Guards lost one man killed and four wounded , the 3rd Coldstream Guards lost one man killed and the 11th Hussars suffered four men wounded . Losses among the 2nd Rifle Brigade are unknown . German casualties numbered three tanks ( a Panzer II and two Panzer IIIs , although several more suffered minor damage ) and 258 men killed , wounded or captured . Jack Greene and Alessandro <unk> place total Italian losses at 395 . Allied accounts record the capture of 347 of these men . 
 On 5 August , Colonel von Herff praised the Bersaglieri , who had defended Halfaya Pass " ... with <unk> courage until the last man against stronger enemy forces . The greatest part of them died faithful to the flag . " Lieutenant Giacinto Cova , a platoon commander in the 8th Bersaglieri Regiment , received a posthumous Gold Medal of Military Valour , Italy 's highest award for bravery . The medal citation reported that Cova had organised a counter @-@ attack and was killed attempting to throw a hand @-@ held bomb at a British tank . The British received plaudits from Winston Churchill , who sent a telegram to Wavell betraying his ignorance of events by stating : " Without using the Tiger cubs you have taken the offensive , advanced 30 miles ( 48 km ) , captured Halfaya and Sollum , taken 500 German prisoners and inflicted heavy losses in men and tanks . For this twenty I tanks and 1 @,@ 000 or 1 @,@ 500 casualties do not seem too heavy a cost . " Churchill ended the message by asking Wavell " What are your dates for bringing Tiger cubs into action ? " , in reference to the reinforcements that had arrived at Alexandria on 12 May as part of a convoy code @-@ named Operation Tiger . The 11th Hussar 's regimental history notes that " it was clear that no further offensive action would be possible before 7 [ th ] Arm [ <unk> Division ] was fully prepared " . The Tiger convoy brought 238 tanks and made it possible to refit the 7th Armoured Division , which had been out of action since February as a result of the losses it sustained during Operation Compass . Preparations could now be made for Operation Battleaxe and the relief of Tobruk . In the system of British and Commonwealth battle honours , units that served in the Halfaya Pass area between 15 and 27 May were awarded the honour Halfaya 1941 in 1957 . 
 Historian Thomas <unk> suggests that Brevity could have ended in victory for the British . While their tank forces were fighting ineffectively , the " gutsy " actions by 2RTR and their patrol toward Sidi Azeiz had convinced the Germans that the battle was lost by the evening of 15 May . Because of their failure to engage 2RTR late that day , several German commanders from Panzer Regiment 5 , including its commanding officer , were removed from their posts after the battle . <unk> notes that a feint by the 1st and 7th RTR out of Tobruk might have caused a realignment of the Axis forces , weakening their overall position and perhaps even forcing them to give up the Sollum area . 
 Operation Brevity highlighted to Rommel the importance of the Halfaya Pass ; whichever side held it would have a " comparatively safe route for his supplies " during offensives in the area . On 27 May , he launched Operation Skorpion , during which von Herff recaptured the pass and reversed the last British territorial gain from Brevity . 
 = Reciprocity ( Fringe ) = 
 " Reciprocity " is the eleventh episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 54th episode overall . In the episode , the Fringe division follows a chain of shapeshifter murders as the assembly of the doomsday device nears completion . Ryan McDonald and Charles Parnell guest starred . 
 Co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer wrote " Reciprocity " , his seventh such credit for the series . For his third Fringe directional credit , Jeannot Szwarc served as the director . The episode first aired in the United States on January 28 , 2011 to an estimated 4 @.@ 57 million viewers , making it the highest rated program of the night . Television critics generally viewed the episode positively , with a number praising the reveal of the shapeshifter killer 's identity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Fringe division visits a secured Massive Dynamic facility where the prime universe 's version of the doomsday device , believed to be an artifact of the " First People " , has been assembled . The company is trying to use the books about the First People , including those that William Bell had sought , that they have collected to understand the workings of the device . They are aware that before her departure , Fauxlivia ( Anna Torv ) — Olivia 's parallel universe doppelgänger — stole one component of the unit , possibly its power source as they cannot find any other way to engage the device . However , as Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) nears it , the device reacts , moving into a new configuration and sending out electromagnetic pulses , while Peter suddenly has a nosebleed . Peter returns with Olivia ( Torv ) and Walter ( John Noble ) to Massive Dynamic to undergo some tests to see if he was the cause for the device 's activation . Meanwhile , Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) asks Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) to discreetly review the files pulled from Fauxlivia 's computer for any hidden messages , not wishing to have Olivia or Peter be forced to learn of what Fauxlivia wrote about them . 
 The next day , the corpse of a shapeshifter is found , shot in the head with its data disc — encoded information regarding its mission — missing . When the identity connects it to one of the employees at the facility where the Fringe mainframe is housed , Broyles suspects a mole seeking to wipe out Fauxlivia 's data , and orders a mainframe lockdown , while verifying the humanity of key people in the FBI and Massive Dynamic . Astrid identifies several other potential candidates , including a doctor from Massive Dynamic who had already left . By the time Fringe division reaches his home , they find the man , a shapeshifter , already dead . 
 Olivia returns to the lab and convinces Astrid to let her review Fauxlivia 's notes , believing that she should think like her doppelgänger , she will see something they missed . Eventually , she comes to identify a cipher based on her childhood name , Olive , that identifies Newton and the other slain shapeshifters , and one that has yet to be killed . Fringe begins to descend on his residence . 
 Meanwhile , Walter , having thought Peter had returned to Massive Dynamic for tests , learns he is not there . Walter enters his room , finding printed pages of Fauxlivia 's notes including the circled names of the shapeshifters , those that Olivia just identified . Walter arrives at the home of the final shapeshifter just as Peter finishes killing him . Peter tries to justify his actions as no longer wanting to be just reactive to the situation and to learn of the shapeshifters ' goal . Peter and Walter depart before the Fringe team arrives ; Walter postulates that the device , when it activated , may have " weaponized " Peter to take these steps and fears what else Peter may attempt to do . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer was responsible for writing " Reciprocity " , his seventh such credit for the series . The episode was directed by Jeannot Szwarc , his third directional credit for the series . The episode featured one @-@ time guest roles by actors Charles Parnell as Dr. James Falcon and Sean Campbell as Zach Alpert . Ryan McDonald reprised his role as Massive Dynamic scientist Brandon Fayette . 
 Alluding to the premise of " Reciprocity " , story editor Glen Whitman noted that " often in science fiction simply because you need a source of conflict , it ends up being that science or technology is the source of evil . And that happens a lot in Fringe . I think that ’ s unavoidable . But the flip side of that coin is that on Fringe , science just as often ends up being able to save the day . " The machine around which the episode is based was rendered using CGI . 
 Since the parallel universe was revealed in the season two finale , viewers have debated nicknames for the various doppelgangers featured . Olivia Dunham 's double from the parallel universe was one such matter of contention ; such nicknames included Bolivia , Fauxlivia , and Altlivia . " Reciprocity " was believed by some critics to have resolved this , as one character refers to her as Fauxlivia . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Reciprocity " , with the intention of having " students learn about the classification of blood into blood types based upon the molecules on the surface of red blood cells . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Reciprocity " was the second episode to air on Friday in the United States . On its initial broadcast on January 28 , 2011 , " Reciprocity " maintained similar numbers of viewers from the previous episode , " The Firefly " , with a 1 @.@ 9 / 6 share and an estimated 4 @.@ 57 million viewers . There was some concern that Fringe would be aired against Supernatural , a CW show with a similar science fiction theme , but that network decided to move the episode to the following week , when it aired opposite the Fringe episode " Concentrate and Ask Again " . " Reciprocity " was broadcast against reruns and news programs from the other rival networks . It was the highest @-@ rated program of the night , as it tied with NBC 's Dateline , but its ratings were not enough to prevent the Fox network from placing fourth in total viewers . With time shifting devices taken into account , the episode had been watched by an estimated 6 @.@ 17 million a week from its initial broadcast . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Reviews of the episode from television critics were generally positive . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly enjoyed the scenes set at Massive Dynamic , and thought the episode did a good job tricking the audience into thinking Peter was not responsible for the shapeshifter killings . After not loving the previous week 's episode , Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times thought " Reciprocity " had " all the aspects of Fringe I loved " . Hanson particularly loved the opening 's first few minutes , and like Tucker , he was pleasantly surprised about Peter and the murders . A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded " Reciprocity " with a B , explaining that despite the awe @-@ inspiring opening ( which reminded him of the film Close Encounters Of The Third Kind ) and the final revelations , Murray found the episode " solid but largely unexceptional " . He thought the shapeshifter investigation " lacked a certain frisson " and found the Peter – Olivia relationship scenes to be " more of a drag " . 
 SFScope contributor Sarah Stegall believed the episode " got us quickly back on track after last week 's lackluster tale , " and called the killer revelation the greatest shock she has received on the series thus far . She continued that one of her favorite parts of the Peter @-@ as @-@ a @-@ killer arc is being able to watch the emotional setbacks he is facing as a result of Fauxlivia 's betrayal ; she called it " good characterization , and excellent acting " . However , Stegall questioned why Massive Dynamic would build a machine known to be the destroyer of mankind . IGN columnist Ramsey Isler praised the writing staff because " just when you think they might be stuck in old habits , they come up with new ideas and put a whole new perspective on old storylines and characters . " Isler continued that while " ' Reciprocity ' " isn 't the most groundbreaking episode in the series , it does try a number of new ideas , and it gives us one big new plot point that could change the tone of the rest of the season . " 
 = Scott & Bailey = 
 Scott & Bailey is a British drama series that debuted on ITV on 29 May 2011 and had its last showing of Season 5 on 27 April 2016 . The series stars Suranne Jones , Lesley Sharp , Amelia Bullmore ( series 1 @-@ 4 ) , Nicholas Gleaves ( series 1 @-@ 2 ) , Danny Miller ( series 3 @-@ 4 ) , and Pippa Haywood ( series 5 ) . Based on an original idea by Jones and Sally Lindsay , the show revolves around the personal and professional lives of its protagonists . The programme features Detectives Janet Scott ( played by Sharp ) and Rachel Bailey ( played by Jones ) . Both characters are members of the Syndicate Nine Major Incident Team ( MIT ) of the fictional Manchester Metropolitan Police . 
 = = Production = = 
 Scott & Bailey was commissioned after the concept was introduced to executive producer Nicola Shindler , who brought it to writer Sally Wainwright . The series is produced by Manchester @-@ based Red Production Company and is largely filmed in the Greater Manchester area . 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Scott & Bailey is based on an original idea by Suranne Jones and Sally Lindsay , with Jones commenting that there needed to be more roles for women " that weren 't wife @-@ of , sidekick @-@ to , mother @-@ of , mistress @-@ to , etc . " Jones remarked , " We were just chatting away over a bottle of wine in a pub " when the idea came to fruition . Lindsay , a fan of television programmes such as Cagney & Lacey , was interested in the concept of a programme detailing the lives of two professional women . Jones later spoke of the programme , saying it is " the Cagney & Lacey of Manchester " , though she acknowledged that Scott & Bailey as a drama was more " gritty " and " real " . 
 Upon taking the idea to Nicola Shindler of Red Productions , Shindler contacted Sally Wainwright , who wrote a script for an episode and , according to Jones , they " loved it " . Despite the positive reaction , the project " kind of got a bit lost " until ITV discovered it and requested that Wainwright rewrite the script . 
 Subsequently , Wainwright paired up with Diane Taylor , a former Detective Inspector from Greater Manchester Police , to create the programme , and the production expanded from Jones and Lindsay 's original concept . From Taylor 's perspective , police procedurals were often filled with not only technical inaccuracies , but what she felt were inaccuracies of how officers behaved , saying : " that 's what really irritates me in other dramas – detectives crying over dead bodies and getting drunk senseless . You 'd last about two weeks " . She said , of her time as a police officer in comparison to portrayals on television , that " reality is much more interesting . I could pull a thousand cases out of my head people would say would never happen . People need drama because they would not believe the reality " . 
 = = = Production team = = = 
 Scott & Bailey is produced by Manchester @-@ based Red Production Company , which itself is majority owned by StudioCanal following an acquisition estimated at £ 30 million in December 2013 . Nicola Shindler , who founded the company in 1998 , is the programme 's executive producer alongside writer Sally Wainwright and Tom Sherry . When speaking of Shindler , Wainwright said : " Nicola is just a genius . She makes you raise your game . So if you 're good , she 'll make you better " . 
 The role of producer was undertaken by Yvonne <unk> for Series 1 , and from Series 2 – 3 , Tom Sherry . Sherry , who has worked for Red Productions for over 15 years , described his job as " the opportunity to meddle in all departments – it 's about being able to have a passable stab at everyone 's job and to be able to empathise with what they 're trying to achieve " . For the production of Series 4 , Sherry undertook the role of executive producer alongside Wainwright and Shindler , while the position of producer is staffed by Juliet Charlesworth . For the fifth series , filmed in 2015 , Suranne Jones became an executive producer alongside Schindler . 
 The involvement of Diane Taylor as a consultant producer is credited with maintaining Scott & Bailey 's " rigorous authenticity " . According to Jessamy Calkin of The Telegraph , " the attention to detail is more extreme on this series , say many of the crew , than others they have worked on " . During the filming of Unforgiven in 2008 ( written by Wainwright and also starring Suranne Jones ) , Wainwright was told to meet Taylor by Grant Montgomery , the show 's designer . After meeting , the production was given the green light by ITV and the script was largely re @-@ written , with Wainwright commenting : " I wasn 't writing a single line of dialogue that Diane hadn 't influenced " . Wainwright is responsible for writing the majority of episodes . 
 Amelia Bullmore , who plays Gill Murray , wrote three episodes ; Wainwright had wanted to get other writers involved in the process . For her first episode as writer , " Bullmore was given a brief – that everything must be from Scott and Bailey 's point of view – and she was given a murder " . Though she had been a professional writer for almost two decades , Scott and Bailey marked the first instance of Bullmore writing and starring in the same production . Due to Wainwright 's increased workload on her other drama series ' Last Tango in Halifax and Happy Valley , Bullmore was chosen to be the head writer for Scott and Bailey 's fourth series in 2014 . She was joined on the writing team by Lee Warburton , who wrote two episodes of the fourth series. and returned to write Scott & Bailey 's fifth series in 2015 . 
 The directing of Scott & Bailey is undertaken in a method whereby " each director directs a ' block ' of two or three episodes , dictated by the schedule – when each episode has finished shooting , the director goes into the edit and a new director takes over for the next block " , according to Calkin . The most prolific director of Scott & Bailey is Morag Fullerton , who directed seven episodes . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Jones , who had always envisaged herself playing Rachel Bailey when the idea of the project came in to mind , was given the role , though at the programme 's pre @-@ production stages the character had a different first name , Cathy . It was originally intended that Lindsay would star with Jones in Scott & Bailey , but she became pregnant with twins , so the role of Janet was given to Lesley Sharp instead ; Lindsay received the smaller role of Rachel 's sister , Alison . Lindsay approved of Sharp playing the role ; Jones also felt pleased at the prospect of working with Sharp , saying " I was really excited on the day of the read @-@ through " . Sharp 's husband Nicholas Gleaves was awarded the role of Scott 's lover , DS Andy Roper . Despite the actors ' relationship , Sharp stated that it was not a contributing factor in his casting , stating : " Nick 's an actor and I 'm an actress — we don 't have the same agent . There 's a script with a role in it that was right for him and it so happened that there was a role that was right for me and we both got cast , but it wasn 't a conversation that we had that it would be a good idea if we did a television series together because that 's not the way life works " . 
 Both Rachel and Janet are Detective Constables in the Major Incident Team of the Manchester Metropolitan Police Service , with the team headed by DCI Gill Murray ( Amelia Bullmore ) , who is loosely based on Diane Taylor . Producers were undecided on what age DCI Murray would be , but had originally pictured an actress older than Bullmore . After auditioning , Bullmore returned a month later , intent on playing Murray " tough " , however , when meeting casting director Beverley Keogh in the toilets beforehand , Bullmore recounted that Keogh said to her : " That 's not what we 've got you back for . We were interested in seeing a warmer side " . 
 Danny Miller joined the cast as series regular Rob Waddington in series 3 and Tracie Bennett also appeared in the third series as DC Bailey 's estranged mother , Sharon . In a continuing story arc for the third series , Nicola Walker was cast in the role of Helen Bartlett , a character driven to emotional instability by past events unearthed by the Manchester Metropolitan Police . In preparation for the role Walker visited a psychologist in order to build upon her characterisation . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the first series took place in a twelve @-@ week window from November 2010 onwards , it was reported by Female First . The series was filmed on location in and around Greater Manchester . Jones mentioned that " On the first day of filming [ she and Sharp ] were stuck in a car on the moors " . Oldham was another location chosen for filming , with local press reporting that Beal Lane in Shaw was used for filming . The Oldham Evening Chronicle supplied specially mocked @-@ up newspapers to be used as props in filming . Other locations such as Manchester Crown Court were used for filming . The Major Incident Team 's headquarters for the first three series were filmed in an old Barclays branch on Silver Street , Bury . The filming location used the team 's new station , the fictional Oldham Road police station , took place at former Greater Manchester Police Grey Mare Lane police station in Beswick . A local mortuary was also used for filming scenes . The programme was also granted permission to film in HM Prison Risley in Cheshire , where locations manager James Muirhead and a crew of 35 filmed for a day . 
 Sharp , when describing filming with her husband , Gleaves , who plays her on @-@ screen lover , said , " there aren 't too many people who can go to work and have an affair with their husband " . When discussing the filming of Scott & Bailey , Jones said " I can 't pretend it wasn 't a tough shoot , both emotionally and physically , because it was " , before adding that on the last day of filming she had to shoot a gruelling scene involving her chasing a suspect from a crime scene , while Sharp and Bullmore " were having massages and facials ready for the wrap party " . 
 When Scott & Bailey was recommissioned for a second series it was announced that production on the series would commence at the end of October 2011 , to be aired in 2012 . In November it was reported that while filming on Hamilton Road , Whitefield — the set of DC Scott 's home — that an emergency call was made after a member of the television crew , a lighting technician , became stranded atop a " cherry @-@ picker style platform " 12 metres ( 39 ft ) above the ground . Fearing the mechanism could fail and cause the crew member to fall to the ground , they sought assistance from firefighters , who safely brought the technician to the ground . In February 2012 , The Sun reported that series 2 was still being filmed , with Jones pictured on location in Manchester with a prosthetic wound on her forehead . 
 Filming for series 3 began in November 2012 , with an airing date scheduled for May 2013 . In November Jones and Sharp were photographed filming on location in Manchester for the series . As the fourth series had a different air date ( its television broadcast began in September , unlike May for the three previous series ) it became the first series not to be filmed in the winter months . A longer break in production between series 3 and 4 was the reason that the fourth series was instead filmed in summer . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Debuting to strong viewing figures and with a fairly positive critical reception , Scott & Bailey ran from 29 May 2011 until 3 July over the course of six episodes . The second series premiered 12 March 2012 and consisted of eight episodes . A third series was announced 28 May 2012 , began filming November 2012 , and premiered on 3 April 2013 . In August 2013 , it was announced that a fourth series had been commissioned , with production set to begin in the spring of 2014 . With filming several months earlier in the year , series 4 began broadcasting on ITV on 10 September 2014 and finished on 29 October 2014 . On 31 July 2015 , ITV renewed Scott & Bailey for a three @-@ part fifth series . Scott & Bailey has received generally good reviews thus far . Tom Sutcliffe of The Independent remarked that although it was a " less @-@ than @-@ courageous decision " for ITV to commission a detective drama for Sunday nights , Scott & Bailey had " genuine signs of life in the thing " . Sam Wollaston of The Guardian , however , questioned the plausibility of the idea that the character of Rachel would not realise her partner of two years was already married , considering she was a detective , and described the series as " Lewis with skirts on " . However , Grace Dent , also of The Guardian , described it as " of great televisual comfort " . Alexandra <unk> , another writer for The Guardian , described it as " a genuinely gripping crime series " and added : " what about a second series ? " Euan Ferguson of The Observer stated that it was " actually rather gripping " . Horatia Harrod , reviewing the third series for The Daily Telegraph , praised the programme 's script and its likeness to reality in portraying the professional conduct of modern policing , stating : " this is a beautifully engineered programme : it 's both pleasingly sudsy and deliciously grisly , but manages to transcend both the soap and detective genres [ ... ] Somehow Sally Wainwright , the show 's creator and writer , has made the traditionally dull quality of professional competence seem positively thrilling " . 
 John Preston of The Daily Telegraph gave a mixed review : though he commended the acting of Sharp and Jones , he stated that " it badly needs some shape and tension " . The Metro took a decidedly critical stance , with its reviews getting progressively worse with each new episode ; first describing it as " comforting but could have been so much better " , then later quipping that " Scott & Bailey will never be compelling TV " , and that the programme was " a mediocre crime drama amidst a saturated market of mediocre crime dramas " . 
 One of the more persistent criticisms of the show ( especially its first two series ) has been its indifferent or decidedly negative depiction of male characters . Tim Oglethorpe , reviewing the first series in the Daily Mail , wrote that " the men often appear to be feckless , devious or dangerous " and stated that DS Andy Roper ( Gleaves ) was " the only man to emerge with any credit " . Dianne Butler , who reviewed the programme upon its airing in Australia , made a similar point , questioning the relevance of the show 's male characters : " there are some men in this but they 're fairly incidental " . The Guardian 's John Crace expressed his belief that most of the programme 's male characters are deficient in some way , writing : " surely it must be possible to make a show with women lead characters without having to make every male a complete dork ? From Janet 's useless husband and Rachel 's idiot brother who can 't boil an egg without burning down the kitchen " . 
 The performances of Amelia Bullmore and Nicola Walker in the Series 3 finale were highly praised . Julia Raeside of The Guardian commented that both " give an incredible acting masterclass that will take your breath away . Truly gripping and the jewel in ITV 's increasingly impressive drama crown . Splendid stuff . " The series was nominated for the BAFTA TV award for Best Drama Series in both 2012 and 2013 . 
 = = = Television ratings = = = 
 Since Scott & Bailey 's debut it has fared well in the ratings . Days after its premiere , The Sun reported that overnight figures suggested 8 @.@ 2 million watched the episode , which was , according to the newspaper , the most successful drama launch of 2011 so far . It reported that the show had secured a 33 % audience share in its timeslot . The programme 's closest rival was a broadcast of the film Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest , which received 20 @.@ 9 % of the audience share . Scott and Bailey aired as the follow @-@ on programme from Britain 's Got Talent , which had received 9 @.@ 86 million viewers and a 40 @.@ 4 % audience share in its timeslot . 
 The Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board ( BARB ) later released consolidated information stating that the first episode had received 8 @.@ 31 million viewers on ITV , with a further 801 @,@ 000 tuning in on ITV HD , and 310 @,@ 000 on ITV1 + 1 , totalling the viewing figures to 9 @.@ 42 for the first episode . The episode was 2011 's fourth highest @-@ rating drama broadcast , as well as the highest @-@ rating broadcast for a new drama . By episode two it was reported that Scott & Bailey has dropped nearly 1 @.@ 8 million viewers from episode one , with overnight figures suggesting 6 @.@ 14 million ( 23 @.@ 6 % ) tuned in , though it was still the number one rated programme in its timeslot . The programme continued to outperform its competitors in its timeslot until its end , beating competition including BBC One dramas Case Histories and Stolen . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 = = = Region 1 ( U.S. and Canada ) = = = 
 Scott & Bailey : Season 1 , 270 minutes ( 270 + <unk> ) ; 17 June 2014 
 Scott & Bailey : Season 2 , 360 minutes ( 359 + <unk> ) ; 16 September 2014 
 Scott & Bailey : Season Three , 382 ( 364 + <unk> ) minutes ; 6 October 2015 
 Scott & Bailey : Season Four , 359 minutes ; 1 March 2016 
 = Dr. Holbrook 's Military School = 
 Dr. Holbrook 's Military School was a military academy and boarding school for boys . The school was located in the town of Ossining and overlooked the Hudson River . After the 1906 annexation of Scarborough by the village of Briarcliff Manor , Holbrook 's became part of the village within Ossining . 
 The school was founded in 1864 as Mr. Tracy 's School . In 1866 , after David A. Holbrook purchased the school , it became known as Dr. Holbrook 's Military School . The school ran until 1915 , after which it was used in World War I as a field hospital and headquarters to a New York Guard regiment . From 1919 until at least 1927 , the school served as the Teachers College Country Club . 
 = = History = = 
 Saint Denis Institute was said to have occupied the land prior to the school . It was founded in 1864 as Mr. Tracy 's School , a seminary for young women on a 10 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) estate . In 1866 , Reverend David A. Holbrook , PhD , purchased the school and turned it into a boy 's school and enlarged it to 25 acres ( 10 ha ) , and it had 60 students . 
 After Holbrook 's death in December 1898 , Dr. Holbrook 's sons Dudley and Henry became involved with running the school . They were joined in 1899 by their brother Dwight , and ran the school until its closure as Holbrook 's Preparatory School for Boys . When it closed in 1915 the school had 80 students . 
 Shortly after the school 's closure , in 1917 , events in World War I had led the New York Guard 's First Provisional Regiment ( 1 @,@ 500 men operating under Colonel John B. Rose ) to guard the Croton Aqueduct . Captain Charles W. Baldwin , Chaplain of the regiment and Rector of Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church in Scarborough and also in present @-@ day Briarcliff Manor , had arranged a deal with V. Everit Macy , then the owner of the school estate , for free use of the campus and buildings for until three months after the war 's end . 
 The regiment , originally headquartered at Pines Bridge Inn on Croton Lake , moved its headquarters to the Holbrook Military Academy , and the academic building at the school became Field Hospital No. 2 of the Atlantic Division of the American Red Cross . The ground floor of the west wing and the mess hall on the first floor was turned into a large , well @-@ heated office with glass @-@ partitioned private offices , and equipped with typewriters and mimeograph machines . The new regimental office had strong contrast with their Pines Bridge Inn office , it having been drafty , dirt @-@ floored and poorly @-@ lit . The site opened for their use on October 8 , 1918 , and the regiment fully demobilized on February 1 , 1919 . A reunion was held at the former school grounds for many of the troops from March 23 to 25 , 1919 . 
 In June 1919 , V. Everit Macy gave the property , buildings , and $ 7 @,@ 500 for remodeling to the Teachers College Country Club ; Macy was chairman of the college 's board of trustees at the time . The club was founded on October 4 , 1919 and initially used a building called Hill Cottage , which it outgrew shortly thereafter . The club opened there on September 1 , 1919 and existed there until at least 1927 . Presidents included Henry C. Pearson ( 1919 – 21 ) , Jesse C. Williams ( 1921 – 23 ) , Walter H. Eddy ( 1923 – 25 ) , and Edward S. <unk> ( 1925 ) . Walter W. Law gave the club 's members ( which numbered 200 in 1920 ) the right to use Briarcliff Manor 's 9 @-@ hole golf course , the present @-@ day Trump National Golf Club . 
 = = Curricula = = 
 In 1903 the school consisted of six forms , the first two making up the lower school and the remaining four making up the upper school ; in the upper school students chose from three curricula : classical , Latin @-@ scientific , or English @-@ scientific . Students received grades for deportment , application , spelling , declamation and composition , church attendance , and skill at military drill , as well as in classes where they learned arithmetic , algebra , French , Latin , German , and Greek . Sports included baseball , football , tennis , hockey , track , athletics , and golf . The school issued a merit roll every four weeks , where students were ranked on conduct , lessons and attendance . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 George Whipple , a physician and pathologist , was a teacher at the school for a year before he started work at Johns Hopkins University . Notable students include Donn Barber , an architect , Nelson Doubleday , a publisher , Edward Avery <unk> , a businessman , explorer , and conservationist , John Avery <unk> , a businessman , soldier , politician , and public servant , Harold Medina , a lawyer , teacher and judge , and John W. Norton , a muralist and easel artist . 
 = The Kingsroad = 
 " The Kingsroad " is the second episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series Game of Thrones , first aired on April 24 , 2011 . It was written by the show creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by Tim Van Patten . 
 Nearly all the action of the episode happens during travel : Eddard Stark and his daughters accompany the king 's entourage to King 's Landing to occupy the post of Hand of the King , Tyrion joins Jon in his travel to the Wall , and the newly wed Daenerys goes with her husband 's khalasar to the city of Vaes Dothrak . Meanwhile in Winterfell a grieving Catelyn Stark watches over her unconscious son Bran . 
 Viewing figures were unchanged from the premiere , despite the second episode airing on Easter Sunday . Critical reception to the episode was favorable . Filming locations included several notable Northern Ireland locations , and the filming itself was complicated by the difficulty of integrating canine actors into several crucial scenes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = In the Dothraki Sea = = = 
 On their way to Vaes Dothrak with Drogo 's khalasar , Jorah Mormont ( Iain Glen ) reveals to Viserys ( Harry Lloyd ) that he was exiled for selling poachers to slavers . Viserys assures Jorah that he would not have been punished if Viserys had been the king and demonstrates impatience for Drogo ( Jason Momoa ) to lend Viserys his army . 
 Daenerys ( Emilia Clarke ) has difficulty adjusting to her new marriage and the nomadic lifestyle of her adopted people . Her only comfort is the three petrified dragon eggs given to her by Illyrio . She is visibly distraught and in pain during intimate relations with the Khal . In order to feel more in control of her marital life , she asks one of her handmaidens , former courtesan Doreah ( Roxanne McKee ) , to teach her how to please her new husband . 
 = = = In the North = = = 
 Bran ( Isaac Hempstead @-@ Wright ) has been in a coma for more than a month since being thrown from the tower by Jaime Lannister . After slapping his nephew Prince Joffrey ( Jack Gleeson ) for refusing to give his condolences to the Starks , Tyrion Lannister ( Peter Dinklage ) informs his siblings that despite Bran 's fall , the boy will survive , much to the dismay of the incestuous Lannister twins . 
 It is time for farewells , with the Stark family having to split apart . Ned 's two daughters journey with their father to the capital . Jon Snow ( Kit Harington ) journeys to join his uncle Benjen ( Joseph Mawle ) as a man of the Night 's Watch at the Wall . Tyrion , who wants to see the " edge of the world " , accompanies them . Before leaving , Jon gives a sword to his sister Arya ( Maisie Williams ) as a present . Lady Catelyn Stark ( Michelle Fairley ) is devastated by her husband 's imminent departure and has stood vigil beside her son Bran since his fall . Having always deeply resented Jon , Catelyn asks him to leave when he comes to say goodbye to Bran and then chastises her husband Ned ( Sean Bean ) for leaving her and giving in to the demands of King Robert ( Mark Addy ) . Before they part , Jon asks Ned about his mother , and Ned promises to tell Jon about her the next time they meet . While stopping for a meal , Robert tells Ned that he has received word about Daenerys Targaryen 's wedding to Khal Drogo and voices concern about the possibility of Viserys crossing the Narrow Sea with a Dothraki army to overthrow him with help from those in the Seven Kingdoms who still support the Targaryens ' claim to the throne and think of Robert as a usurper . 
 Late one night after Ned 's departure , a fire breaks out at Winterfell , and during the ensuing chaos , a hired assassin tries to kill Bran . Catelyn holds off the attacker long enough for Bran 's direwolf to jump in and tear out the assassin 's throat . The murder attempt arouses Catelyn 's suspicions , and after finding a strand of long blonde hair in the abandoned tower where Bran fell , she concludes that the Lannisters are somehow involved . After confiding with her most trusted advisers - her son Robb ( Richard Madden ) , Maester Luwin ( Donald Sumpter ) , Master @-@ at @-@ Arms Ser Rodrik Cassel ( Ron Donachie ) and the Starks ' ward Theon Greyjoy ( Alfie Allen ) - she decides to go to King 's Landing in secret with Rodrik as her escort to warn her husband . 
 = = = At the Wall = = = 
 Jon and Tyrion see the Wall for the first time as they arrive with Benjen and the other recruits . En route to the Wall , Tyrion and Jon discuss the Night 's Watch . Tyrion is quick to disabuse Jon of his romantic notions of the Watch as a noble calling battling the mythical horrors beyond the Wall ( as it was in history ) , pointing out that now it is more a dumping ground for the unwanted of Westeros : criminals , prisoners , and bastards . 
 = = = At the Inn at the Crossroads = = = 
 On their way to King 's Landing , the king 's entourage has stopped to rest at an inn . While the recently promised Prince Joffrey ( Jack Gleeson ) and Sansa Stark ( Sophie Turner ) are walking along the river , they run into Arya sparring with sticks with her friend , a butcher 's boy named <unk> ( Rhodri Hosking ) . Taunting the boy , Joffrey draws his sword and demands a duel , under pretext of punishing him for accidentally hitting Arya , a member of the nobility . <unk> and Arya desperately explain that she asked him to spar with her so she could practice . As Joffrey savors the butcher boy 's pain and fear , Arya hits Joffrey while her friend flees . Enraged , Joffrey turns on Arya and is about to strike her with his sword when her direwolf Nymeria bites his wrist . Arya seizes his sword and throws it into the river before running into the forest , where she drives away Nymeria and hides until dark . 
 Afterward , Joffrey lies to the courtly entourage and accuses Arya and her direwolf of ganging up on him . Unwilling to lose favor with her betrothed by publicly exposing his lie , Sansa claims she remembers nothing . Sick of the petty bickering , King Robert chastises his son for allowing himself to be disarmed by the younger girl and declares that the fathers themselves will punish their respective children , dismissing the audience . However , Robert gives in to his wife Cersei 's ( Lena Headey ) demands and orders the direwolf killed . Since Nymeria has fled , Sansa 's wolf , Lady , is to be sacrificed . Unable to convince the king otherwise , Eddard takes responsibility for killing Sansa 's pet himself . As he walks to the back of the inn , he encounters Joffrey 's bodyguard , Sandor " The Hound " Clegane ( Rory McCann ) , who has ridden down the butcher 's boy and brought in his bloody corpse for the prince . 
 Eddard approaches Lady and holds her down as he unsheathes a blade . Saddened , he kills the direwolf , who utters a sharp cry of pain . Meanwhile , up North , Bran suddenly awakens from his coma and opens his eyes as Sansa 's wolf is killed . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The second episode was written by the show creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , based on the original book by George R. R. Martin . " The Kingsroad " includes chapters 10 @-@ 11 , 13 @-@ 18 and 24 . ( Tyrion I , Jon II , Eddard II , Tyrion II , Catelyn III , Sansa I , Eddard III , Bran III , Daenerys III . ) 
 While the events in this episode follow the book , differences in the screen adaptation include not introducing the council 's delegation with Ser Barristan and Lord Renly and the conversation between Robert and Eddard taking place during breakfast instead of on horseback . Some scenes were also created for the series , most notably a conversation between Catelyn and Cersei at Bran 's bedside remembering a Queen 's dead infant , and a confrontation between Jaime and Jon before Jon leaves for the Wall . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 This episode marks the first appearance of regular guest star Roxanne McKee , best known for her role of Louise Summers in the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks . McKee was chosen among a great number of candidates to play the part of Doreah , a slave serving as Daenerys Targaryen 's handmaiden . 
 Also introduced in this episode is British musician Wilko Johnson as the executioner <unk> Payne . The mute <unk> of Game of Thrones is Johnson 's first acting job . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 The principal shooting for the episode was done at The Paint Hall studio . The scenes at the Inn at the Crossroads were filmed on location at the <unk> Estate , in <unk> , during the first days of September 2010 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 " The Kingsroad " has a significant number of scenes that include direwolves . To stand in for the extinct species , the production team considered using real wolves , but the UK safety laws and close work with child actors made this impractical . Instead , they chose to use Northern Inuit Dogs due to their resemblance to wolves . 
 During this episode , the dogs had to interact with the main characters , which proved difficult . Actor Sean Bean reported that for the final scene where he has to sacrifice Lady , the animal was too scared to remain still . They had to keep rehearsing the scene until the dog felt comfortable , making a shot that should have taken a few minutes about three hours long . 
 The dog that portrayed Lady , Zanni , was adopted after the season wrapped by the family of Sophie Turner , the actress playing the direwolf 's owner , Sansa Stark . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The second episode of Game of Thrones attracted the same viewing figures as the premiere , with 2 @.@ 2 million viewers . The second repeat obtained 0 @.@ 7 million , which was also similar to the previous week 's figure . These ratings have been considered positive , especially considering that it was aired on an Easter Sunday . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical reaction was favorable , although some critics felt it was inferior to the first episode . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes surveyed 10 reviews of the episode and judged 100 % of them to be positive . The website 's critical consensus reads , " ' The Kingsroad ' brings surprising new developments for characters undergoing change while pushing the various plots forward at an effective pace . " Entertainment Weekly 's James Hibberd considered the second episode better than the first one , while TV Squad 's Maureen Ryan gave " The Kingsroad " the lowest score from the first six episodes of the series . Matt Fowler , who reviewed the episode for IGN , gave it a score of 8 / 10 , and maintained that it was still a solid effort that focused on shifting all the main characters out of their comfort zones . Tod VanDerWerff , from The A.V. Club , gave the episode a " B , " saying " it was a small step up from the pilot ... and is a particularly eventful hour of Game Of Thrones , layering on plot point after plot point in a brisk , fairly economical matter . " 
 Alan Sepiwall , from HitFix , has described " The Kingsroad " as a transition episode and therefore " not as likely to excite as the premiere or some of the season 's later episodes . " Maureen Ryan felt that the show lacked a thematic unity , and while it had some effective moments , in some ways " lacked emotional spark . " At Cultural Learnings , Myles McNutt admitted that having to move all pieces into place made the episode resemble a travelogue , but he considered the lack of cohesion to be very purposeful since it helped to emphasize the splitting of the Stark family and the different motivations and destinies that awaited the protagonists . 
 = Flu Shot ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Flu Shot " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by Jon Pollack , and directed by series producer Don Scardino . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 15 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include George Bartenieff , Scott Bryce , Salma Hayek , and Chris Parnell . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) campaigns for her staff 's right to get flu shots from Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Parnell ) , but Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) will not allow it due to a limited supply . Meanwhile , Jack tries to think of creative ways to spend time with his girlfriend , Elisa ( Hayek ) , as she works seven days a week . At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) try to do something nice for the crew . 
 " Flu Shot " received a mixed response from television critics , with Robert Canning of IGN concluding that the episode fell below 30 Rock standards . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 6 @.@ 6 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is excited about her vacation week , until she gets a text message from her assistant , Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) , that the hotel she had planned to stay at was overbooked . Liz goes to see Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) who is giving out flu shots at the 30 Rock studios . She learns that the shots are given to select few employees . Her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , asks her to let him know about the most important individuals in her staff that should receive flu shots . Liz does not agree with Jack that he should ration out health care , which results in Liz not getting a shot . Jack considers giving the show 's page , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , one of the remaining shots , as he is very ill with the flu , though Kenneth refuses . Later , Jack continuously asks Liz , but still refuses . This time , she displays her solidarity in front of the The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) crew who show her their appreciation . However , as she sees the crew getting sicker , as days go by , she panics and gets the shot . 
 Meanwhile , Jack wants to spend time with his girlfriend , Elisa ( Salma Hayek ) , but her job as a nurse does not allow it . While taking care of an elderly man named Mr. Templeton ( George Bartenieff ) , who suffers from dementia , Jack persuades her to spend time with him , to which Elisa gives in to , and results in the two bringing Mr. Templeton along on their dates . One day , as they prepare to go out again , Jack and Elisa are shocked when Mr. Templeton 's son , Michael ( Scott Bryce ) , visits unexpectedly . The elderly man tells his son about the late night escapades , though Elisa tells the son that his story is not true . As Elisa distracts the son , Jack tries to leave the apartment , until Mr. Templeton sees him . Jack explains his situation with Elisa to Mr. Templeton , which he understands , and promises Jack he will not tell his son anything more of the late nights . 
 At the 30 Rock studios , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , the stars of TGS , decide they want to help the sick crew . They think about getting the crew soup but are too lazy to do it ; instead they decide that laughter is the best medicine . Jenna and Tracy , dressed as clowns , put on a very unsuccessful show at the TGS stage where they end up throwing a pie on Liz 's face . The crew stands up for Liz until they see the red dot where she received the shot . She confesses that she chose the vacation over the crew , as she later was told by Cerie that the hotel had rooms available , which results in the crew hating her for it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Flu Shot " was written by Jon Pollack and directed by Don Scardino . This was Pollack 's second writing credit , having written season two episode " Greenzo " . This was Scardino 's seventeenth directed episode . " Flu Shot " originally aired on NBC as the eighth episode of the show 's third season in the United States on January 15 , 2009 . 
 This episode was actress Salma Hayek 's second appearance on 30 Rock as the character Elisa . She first appeared in the episode " Señor Macho Solo " as a nurse for Jack Donaghy 's mother and love interest for Jack . In this episode , composer Jeff Richmond wrote a theme for the Elisa character . Actor Chris Parnell , who played Dr. Leo Spaceman in " Flu Shot " , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL . Alec Baldwin , who plays Jack , has also hosted SNL fifteen times . This was Parnell 's eighth appearance on the show . Actor Scott Bryce guest @-@ starred as Michael Templeton , the son of Mr. Templeton ( George Bartenieff ) , though Bryce would make an appearance on the show 's fourth season episode " Don Geiss , America and Hope " as Dave Hess , a former colleague of Jack 's . 
 According to Fey , in the DVD commentary for this episode , the show was not allowed to " say or imply " that the United States government had truly run out of flu shots , as many jokes in the original script were cut out . In addition , there were " a lot of meetings " in regards to where the red dot on Liz Lemon 's arm would be . In the commentary , Fey revealed that the show had to ask Disney permission to " imply " that Jack and Elisa , while on their date , were in attendance at The Lion King musical , which was granted . The romantic scenes between Jack and Elisa , which showed them at a park at night , were filmed in front of a green screen . The show 's producers initially wanted to go to different locations around New York , but believed it would be too hard to shoot . In addition , Liz 's scenes at the beach were also shot in front of a green screen . 
 Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Michael Bublé performed the song " Mr. Templeton " that was featured in this episode . In a January 2009 interview , the singer said he was notified by his manager that both Alec Baldwin and Salma Hayek — fans of the singer — hoped he could write a " funny little tune " to the " Flu Shot " episode , to which he agreed . Bublé was referenced in the previous episode , " Señor Macho Solo " , as Hayek 's character teases Baldwin 's Jack over his many album collections of the singer . Bublé , a fan of 30 Rock , in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , said he was asked by the show to perform the song , and as a result , Bublé went to Canadian singer Bryan Adams ' studio in Vancouver and recorded " Mr. Templeton " there . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Flu Shot " was watched by 6 @.@ 6 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was an increase from the previous episode , " Señor Macho Solo " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 4 million American viewers . 
 Since airing , the episode has received a mixed response from television critics . IGN contributor Robert Canning said " Flu Shot " had a number of aspects that he enjoyed , but " as a whole " the episode was not completely satisfying , and reasoned that this episode fell below 30 Rock standards . He said that he personally did not buy the idea of Liz taking a tropical vacation , " [ t ] hat 's just not the Liz I know . But even ignoring this , the bits involved , especially the flashes to Liz on the beach , weren 't all that inspired . " Canning also was critical of Jack and Elisa 's story as he felt it was weak . Overall , he rated the episode a 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad wrote , " Is it just me or was this one of the more lacking episodes of 30 Rock ? It 's not that it was terrible ... but this one just seemed to meander . It wasn 't as funny as other episodes ... and that whole crew @-@ as @-@ zombies @-@ with @-@ the @-@ flu stuff was a little bit too surreal , even for this show . " Further in his review , Sassone wrote that the Tracy and Jenna subplot started funny , but ended " in a lame , predictable manner . " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger , also disliked " Flu Shot " , opining that it was a disappointment . Sepinwall further added that the Jack and Elisa story " felt like something out of a bad ' 80s sitcom – and not even the 30 Rock take on a bad ' 80s sitcom episode . " Sepinwall , however , wrote that the episode did have a good moment with Kenneth suggesting to Tracy that he and Jenna get soup for the sick crew themselves , and with Tracy replying " With what ? My arms ? " . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Claire Zulkey for The A.V. Club wrote , " For me , there are two types of episodes of 30 Rock : the really really good ones , where all the parts come together to make a wonderful whole , and the pretty good ones , where there memorable jokes and lines are all there , but put all together create a kind of uneven episode . That struck me as tonight 's type of episode . " Though , Zulkey felt that the zombies scene " didn 't really work " except for when Liz smashed a picture frame over Pete Hornberger 's ( Scott Adsit ) head . She said that the " funniest part " from " Flu Shot " was the look on Jack and Elisa 's faces " as the animals from The Lion King walked through the audience . " The Palm Beach Post ’ s Kevin D. Thompson , in his review of " Flu Shot " , said it featured many funny lines . 
 = Laryngitis ( Glee ) = 
 " Laryngitis " is the eighteenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on May 11 , 2010 . It was directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon and written by series creator Ryan Murphy . In " Laryngitis " , glee club member Puck ( Mark Salling ) dates Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) in an attempt to raise his social status . Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) is jealous of the time his father is spending with Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) worries about her future when she is diagnosed with tonsillitis . Mike O 'Malley guest @-@ stars as Kurt 's father Burt , and Zack Weinstein appears as disabled former football player Sean <unk> . 
 The episode features cover versions of seven songs , five of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and three of which are included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 – Showstoppers . " Laryngitis " was watched by 11 @.@ 57 million American viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle , Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk and James Poniewozik of Time all enjoyed the episode , noting that it came after several lesser @-@ quality episodes since the show 's return from its mid @-@ season break . In contrast , Lisa Respers France of CNN felt that " Laryngitis " was lecturing in tone , and more sad than it was comedic . Henrik Batallones of BuddyTV and Entertainment Weekly 's Darren Franich both expressed concern with the disability plot , the former finding it forced and the latter questioning whether Glee honors its disabled actors , or uses them shamelessly . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When glee club member Puck ( Mark Salling ) has his mohawk shaved off at the insistence of his dermatologist for medical purposes , he discovers he is no longer considered a credible bully . He realizes that Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) has become popular since joining the cheerleading squad , and resolves to date her . Mercedes initially attempts to dissuade him , but after the two sing a duet of " The Lady Is a Tramp " , she warms to him . Puck 's former girlfriend Santana ( Naya Rivera ) is jealous , and she and Mercedes sing " The Boy Is Mine " . When Mercedes realizes that Puck has returned to being a bully , she breaks up with him and resigns from the cheerleading squad . 
 Meanwhile , Rachel ( Lea Michele ) realizes that some glee club members are faking their singing . She tells glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , complaining that she is doing most of the work , exhausting herself and getting ill in the process . She reveals the non @-@ participants as Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , Puck , Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , and Santana . Will gathers the students and gives them a new task for the week : each club member will have to do solos , and each must choose a song that best represents their feelings . 
 Rachel then confronts the non @-@ participating glee members and insults them , but when she starts to sing Miley Cyrus 's " The Climb " , she sounds terrible : she has started to lose her voice . Later , after an examination by Rachel 's doctor reveals that she suffers from tonsillitis and may need to have her tonsils removed , she is afraid to have the surgery lest it affect her voice , as she believes her singing ability is her only asset . Finn , who accompanied her to the doctor 's , tries to convince her that he loves everything about her and that there is more to her than her voice . He warns her that if she loses her ability to sing then Jesse ( Jonathan Groff ) would no longer find her attractive . Rachel tells Finn that she still cares about Jesse and that he needs to move on , prompting Finn to sing " Jessie 's Girl " as his solo assignment . To put her fear into perspective , Finn introduces her to his friend Sean ( Zack Weinstein ) , who was paralyzed from the upper chest down during a football game . At first , Rachel is nervous and overwhelmed by the meeting , but Finn forces her to stay as Sean tells her about his grueling experiences with his disability and how he realized that a person is not just one single thing . She then begins to understand why Finn brought her and thanks Sean as she leaves . 
 In the meantime , Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) is jealous of the time his father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) is spending with Finn , now that their parents are dating , and attempts to emulate Burt 's personality . He dresses in outdoorsman gear , sings John Mellencamp 's " Pink Houses " during a glee club rehearsal , and attempts to have a fling with Brittany , making out with her in his bedroom and ensuring that his father is aware of his new behavior . Frustrated that Burt is still spending time alone with Finn , Kurt reverts to his former personality and sings " Rose 's Turn " . Burt overhears his performance , praises Kurt 's singing and apologizes for not spending enough time with him . He reassures Kurt that he still loves him , and always will , no matter who his son chooses to be with . 
 Rachel eventually recovers her voice after taking the antibiotics her doctor prescribed . She goes back to Sean 's house to thank him again , and offers to give him singing lessons . They start singing U2 's " One " , and the scene switches back and forth between her duet with Sean and the full glee club 's performance of the song on stage at school . 
 = = Production = = 
 Recurring characters who appear in " Laryngitis " are Kurt 's father Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) , glee club members Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) and AV club president Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) . Rizwan Manji plays Dr. <unk> . Zack Weinstein guest stars as Sean <unk> , a football player who was paralyzed below the upper chest after injuring his spinal cord at C4 in an accident , similar to the actor 's injury in real life . Sean is the second wheelchair @-@ using character to appear on Glee . In November 2009 , the episode " Wheels " attracted criticism from disability advocates , who called attention to the fact that disabled character Artie Abrams is played by able @-@ bodied actor Kevin McHale . Weinstein defended McHale 's casting , opining that if he was the best auditioning actor for the role , then his ability to walk should be irrelevant . However , Weinstein also stated he " would like to see wheelchair users given the chance to audition and be seriously considered for roles that aren 't specifically written for someone with a disability . " Weinstein revealed that he wished he had auditioned for the role of Artie , and that Glee was his favorite show . Around February 2010 , Weinstein 's agent got him an audition to play Sean , and within a week and a half , he learned he had got the part . Glee was Weinstein 's first professional acting job . He called the twelve hours he spent filming his scenes " twelve of the most important hours of [ his ] life " . 
 The episode features cover versions of seven songs . Rachel performs " The Climb " by Miley Cyrus , and Finn sings " Jessie 's Girl " by Rick Springfield . Puck and Mercedes duet on Sammy Davis Jr . ' s " The Lady Is a Tramp " , and Mercedes and Santana sing " The Boy Is Mine " by Brandy and Monica . Kurt sings John Mellencamp 's " Pink Houses " , and " Rose 's Turn " from Gypsy : A Musical Fable . The glee club closes the episode with " One " by U2 , featuring guest vocals from Weinstein as Sean . " Jessie 's Girl " , " The Lady Is a Tramp " , " The Boy Is Mine " , " Rose 's Turn " and " One " were released as singles , available for digital download . " The Lady Is a Tramp " , " Rose 's Turn " and " One " are also included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 – Showstoppers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Laryngitis " was watched by 11 @.@ 57 million American viewers and attained a 4 @.@ 8 / 12 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 81 million viewers and was the most @-@ watched show of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels . In Canada , " Bad Reputation " was watched by 1 @.@ 97 million viewers , making Glee the 13th most watched program of the week . In Australia , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 44 million viewers , making " Laryngitis " the 15th most @-@ watched program of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Lisa Respers France of CNN felt that " Laryngitis " highlighted a trend of Glee storylines becoming progressively sadder , rather than comedic . She wrote that the plotlines came across as lecturing , and concluded : " I still heart Glee , which is clearly one of the best shows on television right now . I just think they may want to lighten the life lessons a bit or spread them out more over several episodes rather than clobbering us all at once . " Henrik Batallones of BuddyTV wrote that he was uncertain what to make of the episode , noting : " Sure , there were some high points , and it was a pretty enjoyable watch , but unlike the last few episodes this one left me a little high and dry . " Batallones observed that the Sean storyline felt " totally forced into the episode , making Rachel 's epiphany [ ... ] very forced and unnatural . " Entertainment Weekly 's Darren Franich was also troubled by the storyline , noting : " It seems like the height of vanity to basically use this storyline to teach Rachel an important lesson about being herself . [ ... ] Glee has used disabled actors before , and I think it 's worth debating whether the show honors that or uses it shamelessly . " 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " B + " . While he had been disappointed with several episodes since the show 's mid @-@ season break , VanDerWerff noted : " Glee still has its inconsistencies , but it 's getting back to the show I so enjoyed last fall . " He wrote of the Sean storyline that it : " should feel offensive but mostly skates away from actually being so because it treats the paralyzed character with a great deal of respect " . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle also noted that he had been underwhelmed with the show since its return , but loved " Laryngitis " , writing : " The story focused exclusively on the kids — not Mr. Shue or Sue Sylvester — and the performances were realistically small @-@ scale . [ ... ] All that classic Glee charm came washing over me once more and it was glorious . " Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times similarly stated : " When Glee is at its best , you get episodes like this week 's . There were no gimmicks , no over @-@ the @-@ top productions , no unnecessary stars [ ... ] It was just great storytelling and superb finger @-@ snapping music . " Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk deemed " Laryngitis " a " truly successful episode " , but also highlighted the show 's inconsistency in quality since its return . James Poniewozik of Time called " Laryngitis " the first episode of Glee since its mid @-@ season break that he enjoyed " ( mostly ) without reservation . " Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode 8 @.@ 8 / 10 , deeming it one of his favorite episodes of Glee , " with some of the funniest material the show has delivered thus far . " 
 = Lie Kim Hok = 
 Lie Kim Hok ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lǐ <unk> ; 1 November 1853 – 6 May 1912 ) was a peranakan Chinese teacher , writer , and social worker active in the Dutch East Indies and styled the " father of Chinese Malay literature " . Born in Buitenzorg ( now Bogor ) , West Java , Lie received his formal education in missionary schools and by the 1870s was fluent in Sundanese , vernacular Malay , and Dutch , though he was unable to understand Chinese . In the mid @-@ 1870s he married and began working as the editor of two periodicals published by his teacher and mentor D. J. van der Linden . Lie left the position in 1880 . His wife died the following year . Lie published his first books , including the critically acclaimed syair ( poem ) Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari and grammar book Malajoe Batawi , in 1884 . When van der Linden died the following year , Lie purchased the printing press and opened his own company . 
 Over the following two years Lie published numerous books , including Tjhit Liap Seng , considered the first Chinese Malay novel . He also acquired printing rights for Pembrita Betawi , a newspaper based in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) , and moved to the city . After selling his printing press in 1887 , the writer spent three years working in various lines of employment until he found stability in 1890 at a rice mill operated by a friend . The following year he married Tan Sioe Nio , with whom he had four children . Lie published two books in the 1890s and , in 1900 , became a founding member of the Chinese organisation Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan , which he left in 1904 . Lie focused on his translations and social work for the remainder of his life , until his death from typhus at age 58 . 
 Lie is considered influential to the colony 's journalism , linguistics , and literature . According to the Malaysian scholar Ahmad Adam , he is best remembered for his literary works . Several of his writings were printed multiple times , and Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari was adapted for the stage and screen . However , as a result of the language politics in the Indies and independent Indonesia , his work has become marginalised . When several of his writings were revealed as uncredited adaptations of existing works , Lie was criticised as unoriginal . Other critics , however , have found evidence of innovation in his writing style and handling of plots . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lie was born in Buitenzorg ( now Bogor ) , West Java , on 1 November 1853 , the first child of seven born to Lie Hian Tjouw and his second wife Oey <unk> Nio . The elder Lie had four children from a previous marriage , with Lie Kim Hok his first child from the new marriage . The well @-@ to @-@ do peranakan Chinese couple was living in Cianjur at the time but went to Buitenzorg , Lie Hian Tjouw 's hometown , for the birth as they had family there . The family soon returned to Cianjur , where Lie Kim Hok was homeschooled in Chinese tradition and the local Sundanese culture and language . By age seven he could haltingly read Sundanese and Malay . 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century the colony 's ethnic Chinese population was severely undereducated , unable to enter schools for either Europeans or natives . Aged ten , Lie was enrolled in a Calvinist missionary school run by Christiaan Albers . This school had roughly 60 male students , mostly Chinese . Under Albers , a fluent speaker of Sundanese , he received his formal education in a curriculum which included the sciences , language , and Christianity – the schools were meant to promote Christianity in the Dutch East Indies , and students were required to pray before class . Lie , as with most students , did not convert , although biographer Tio Ie Soei writes that an understanding of Christianity likely affected his world view . 
 Lie and his family returned to Buitenzorg in 1866 . At the time there were no schools offering a European @-@ style education in the city , and thus he was sent to a Chinese @-@ run school . For three years , in which the youth studied under three different headmasters , he was made to repeat traditional Hokkien phrases and copy Chinese characters without understanding them . Tio suggests that Lie obtained little knowledge at the school , and until his death Lie was unable to understand Chinese . During his time in Buitenzorg , he studied painting under Raden Saleh , a friend of his father 's . Although he reportedly showed skill , he did not continue the hobby as his mother disapproved . He also showed a propensity for traditional literary forms such as pantun ( a form of poetry ) and was fond of creating his own . 
 When Sierk Coolsma opened a missionary school in Buitenzorg on 31 May 1869 , Lie was in the first class of ten . Once again studying in Sundanese , he took similar subjects to his time in Cianjur . Around this time he began studying Dutch . After a government @-@ run school opened in 1872 , most of Lie 's classmates were ethnic Chinese ; the Sundanese students , mostly Muslim , had transferred to the new school for fear of being converted to Christianity . In 1873 Coolsma was sent to <unk> to translate the Bible into Sundanese and was replaced by fellow missionary D. J. van der Linden . Studies resumed in Malay , as van der Linden was unable to speak Sundanese . Lie and his new headmaster soon became close . The two later worked together at van der Linden 's school and publishing house and shared an interest in traditional theatre , including wayang ( puppets ) . 
 = = Teacher and publisher = = 
 By the age of twenty Lie had a good command of Sundanese and Malay ; he also spoke fair Dutch , a rarity for ethnic Chinese at the time . Lie assisted van der Linden at the missionary school , and in the mid @-@ 1870s operated a general school for poor Chinese children . He also worked for the missionary 's printing press , Zending Press , earning forty gulden a month while serving as editor of two religious magazines , the Dutch @-@ language monthly De <unk> and the Malay @-@ language bi @-@ weekly Bintang <unk> . He married Oey Pek Nio , seven years his junior , in 1876 . Tio , in an interview with the scholar of Chinese Malay literature Claudine Salmon , stated that Lie had been betrothed to Oey 's elder sister , but when she ran away the night before the ceremony , he was told to by his parents to marry Oey Pek Nio to save face . Although displeased with the arrangement , he obeyed . The pair soon grew close . The following year they had their first child , although the baby died soon after birth . Lie 's mother died in 1879 , and his father died the next year . 
 Following these deaths Lie was unable to support his wife . He therefore sold his school to Oey Kim Hoat and left his position at Zending Press to take a job as a land surveyor . In the next four years he held various jobs . In 1881 Oey Pek Nio gave birth again . She died soon afterwards and the baby was sent to live with her grandfather father in <unk> , a village to the southeast of Buitenzorg , to be raised . The child died in 1886 . Lie published his first books in 1884 . Two of these , Kitab Edja and Sobat Anak @-@ Anak , were published by Zending Press . The former was a study book to help students learn to write Malay , while the latter was a collection of stories for children that <unk> Salam of Gadjah Mada University credits as the first work of popular literature in the Indies . The other two books were published by W. Bruining & Co . , based in the colonial capital at Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . One of these , Malajoe Batawi , was a grammar of Malay intended to standardise the language 's spelling . The other was the four @-@ volume syair ( a traditional Malay form of poetry ) Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari ; this book , dealing with a gender @-@ disguised warrior who conquers the Sultanate of Hindustan to save her husband , became one of Lie 's best @-@ known works . 
 After van der Linden 's death in 1885 , Lie paid his teacher 's widow a total of 1 @,@ 000 gulden to acquire the Zending Press ; the funds were , in part , borrowed from his friends . He changed the printer 's name to Lie Kim Hok soon afterwards . He devoted most of his time to the publishing house , and it grew quickly , printing works by other authors and reprinting some of Lie 's earlier writings . The publishing house was , however , unable to turn a profit . That year he published a new syair , consisting of 24 quartets , entitled Orang Prampoewan . He also wrote opinion pieces in various newspapers , including Bintang Betawi and <unk> . 
 The following year Lie purchased publishing rights to the Malay @-@ language newspaper Pembrita Betawi , based in Batavia and edited by W. Meulenhoff , for 1 @,@ 000 gulden . He again borrowed from his friends . From mid @-@ 1886 , Lie 's publishing house ( which he had moved to Batavia ) was credited as the newspaper 's printer . While busy with the press , he wrote or contributed to four books . Two were pieces of nonfiction , one a collection of Chinese prophecies and the last outlined lease laws . The third was a partial translation of the One Thousand and One Nights , a collection already popular with Malay audiences . The last was his first novel , Tjhit Liap Seng . Following a group of educated persons in mainland China , Tjhit Liap Seng is credited as the first Chinese Malay novel . 
 Lie continued to publish novels set in China through 1887 , writing five in this period . Several of these stories were based on extant Chinese tales , as retold by his Chinese @-@ speaking friends . The writer sold his shares in Pembrita Betawi to <unk> & Co. in 1887 , but continued to print the newspaper until it – and Lie 's printing press – were acquired by Albrecht & Co. later that year . Lie did not work as a publisher again , although he continued to contribute writings to various newspapers , including Meulenhoff 's new publication Hindia <unk> . Over the next three years he did not have fixed employment , taking a multitude of jobs , including bamboo salesman , contractor , and cashier . 
 = = Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan , translations , and death = = 
 In 1890 Lie began working at a rice mill operated by his friend Tan Wie Siong as a supervisor ; this would be his main source of income for the remainder of his life . The following year he married Tan Sioe Nio , twenty years his junior . The new couple had a comfortable life : his salary was adequate , and the work did not consume much energy . To supplement his income Lie returned to translating , Dutch to Malay or vice versa . Sometimes he would translate land deeds or other legal documents . Other times he translated works of literature . This included De Graaf de Monte Cristo , an 1894 translation of Alexandre Dumas ' Le Comte de Monte @-@ Cristo , which he completed in collaboration with the Indo journalist F. Wiggers . The two included footnotes to describe aspects of European culture which they deemed difficult for non @-@ European readers to understand . Three years later Lie published <unk> Kong Hoe <unk> , a book on the teachings of Confucius . Its contents were derived from European writings on Confucianism and his friends ' explanations . 
 With nineteen other ethnic Chinese , including his former schoolmate Phoa Keng Hek , Lie was an establishing member of the Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan ( THHK ) school system and social organisation in 1900 . Meant to promote ethnic Chinese rights at a time when they were treated as second @-@ class citizens and provide standardised formal education to ethnic Chinese students where the Dutch had not , the organisation was based on the teachings of Confucius and opened schools for both boys and girls . The THHK grew quickly and expanded into different fields , and Lie helped organise a debating club , sports club , and charity fairs and concerts . From 1903 to 1904 Lie was a managing member of the board , serving mainly as its treasurer . 
 Lie left the THHK in 1904 , although he remained active in social work . Despite increasingly poor health , he wrote opinion pieces for the dailies Sin Po and <unk> . He also translated extensively . In 1905 Lie published the first volume of his last Chinese @-@ themed novel , Pembalasan Dendam Hati . This was followed three years later by Kapitein Flamberge , a translation of Paul Saunière 's Le Capitaine Belle @-@ <unk> . In the following years he translated several books featuring Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail 's fictional adventurer <unk> , beginning with Kawanan <unk> in 1910 . Two final translations were published in newspapers and collated as novels after Lie 's death : Geneviève de <unk> , from a book entitled De <unk> van <unk> , and <unk> jang <unk> , from Hugo Hartmann 's Dolores , de <unk> <unk> . The former translation was completed by the journalist Lauw Giok Lan . 
 On the night of 2 May 1912 Lie became ill , and two days later his doctor diagnosed him with typhus . His condition steadily declined and on 6 May 1912 he died . He was buried in Kota <unk> , Batavia . THHK schools throughout the city flew their flags at half @-@ mast . Lie was survived by his wife and four children : Soan Nio ( born 1892 ) , Hong Nio ( born 1896 ) , Kok Hian ( born 1898 ) , and Kok <unk> ( born 1901 ) . Tan Sioe Nio died the following year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his journalism career Lie attempted to avoid the yellow press tactics used by his contemporaries and preferred to avoid extensive polemics in the press . Malaysian journalism historian Ahmat Adam , writing in 1995 , notes that Lie 's entry into the press sparked a wave of peranakan Chinese writers to become newspaper editors , and Sumardjo suggests that Lie remained best known to native Indonesians through his work in the press . 
 From a linguist 's perspective , <unk> <unk> of the University of Indonesia describes Malajoe Batawi as " extraordinary " , noting that the first Malay @-@ language textbook was written by a non @-@ Malay . He also emphasises that the book did not use any English @-@ derived linguistics terms which were omnipresent in 20th @-@ century Indonesian textbooks . Linguist <unk> Mahdi writes that Lie 's Malajoe Batawi was the " most remarkable achievement of Chinese Malay writing " from a linguist 's point of view . In his doctoral dissertation , Benitez suggests that Lie may have hoped for bazaar Malay to become a lingua franca in the Dutch East Indies . In his history of Chinese Malay literature , Nio Joe Lan finds that Lie , influenced by his missionary education , tried to maintain an orderly use of language in a period where such attention to grammar was uncommon . Nio describes Lie as the " only contemporary peranakan Chinese writer who had studied Malay grammar methodically . " Adam considers Lie 's works to have left " an indelible mark on the development of modern Indonesian language " . 
 Adam suggests that Lie is best remembered for his contributions to Indonesian literature , with his publications well received by his contemporaries . Tio writes that " old and young intimately read his ( Lie 's ) writings , which were praised for their simple language , rhythm , clarity , freshness , and strength . The skill and accuracy with which he chose his words , the neatness and orderliness with which he arranged his sentences . ... People said that he was ahead of his time . He was likened to a large shining star , a stark contrast to the small , faded stars in the dark sky . " Further praise was awarded by other contemporaries , both native and Chinese , such as Ibrahim <unk> Marah <unk> and Agus Salim . When ethnic Chinese writers became common in the early 1900s , critics named Lie the " father of Chinese Malay literature " for his contributions , including Siti Akbari and Tjhit Liap Seng . 
 Several of Lie 's books , including Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari , Kitab Edja , Orang Prampoewan , and Sobat Anak @-@ anak , had multiple printings , though Tio does not record any after the 1920s . In 2000 Kitab Edja was reprinted in the inaugural volume of Kesastraan Melayu Tionghoa dan Kebangsaan Indonesia , an anthology of Chinese Malay literature . His Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari , which he considered one of his best works , was adapted for the stage several times . Lie used a simplified version for a troupe of teenaged actors , which was successful in West Java . In 1922 the Sukabumi branch of the Shiong Tih Hui published another stage adaptation under the title Pembalesan Siti Akbari , which was being performed by the theatre troupe Miss <unk> 's Orion by 1926 . The Wong brothers directed a film entitled Siti Akbari , starring Roekiah and Rd . Mochtar . The 1940 film was purportedly based on Lie 's poem , although the extent of the influence is uncertain . 
 After the rise of the nationalist movement and the Dutch colonial government 's efforts to use Balai Pustaka to publish literary works for native consumption , Lie 's work began to be marginalised . The Dutch colonial government used Court Malay as a language of administration , a language for everyday dealings that was taught in schools . Court Malay was generally spoken by the nobility in Sumatra , whereas bazaar Malay had developed as a creole for use in trade through much of the Western archipelago ; it was thus more common among the lower class . The Indonesian nationalists appropriated Court Malay to help build a national culture , promoted through the press and literature . Chinese Malay literature , written in " low " Malay , was steadily marginalised and declared to be of poor quality . Tio , writing in 1958 , found that the younger generation were not learning about Lie and his works , and four years later Nio wrote that bazaar Malay had " made its way to the museums " . Literary historian Monique Zaini @-@ Lajoubert indicates that no critical studies of Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari were undertaken between 1939 and 1994 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Writing for the Chinese @-@ owned newspaper Lay Po in 1923 , Tio revealed that Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari had been heavily influenced by the 1847 poem Sjair Abdoel Moeloek , credited variously to Raja Ali Haji or his sister <unk> . He noted that Sair Siti Akbari , which Lie stated to be his own , closely followed the earlier work 's plot . In his 1958 biography , Tio revealed that Lie 's Tjhit Liap Seng was an amalgamation of two European novels : Jacob van <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ( 1865 ) and Jules Verne 's Les Tribulations d 'un <unk> en Chine ( 1879 ) . Tio noted that a third book , Pembalasan Dendam Hati , had extensive parallels with a work by Xavier de <unk> translated as De <unk> van de <unk> . In face of these revelations , literary critics such as Tan <unk> Bing and Tan <unk> Tjeng wrote that none of Lie 's writings were original . 
 This conclusion has been extensively challenged by writers who have shown original elements in Lie 's work . Tio noted that in translating Kapitein Flamberge , Lie had changed the ending : the main character no longer died in an explosion of dynamite , but survived to marry his love interest , Hermine de <unk> . In exploring the similarities between Sjair Abdoel Moeloek and Siti Akbari , Zaini @-@ Lajoubert noted that the main plot elements in both stories are the same , although some are present in one story and not the other – or given more detail . She found that the two differed greatly in their styles , especially Lie 's emphasis on description and realism . Salmon wrote that Tjhit Liap Seng 's general plot mostly followed that of <unk> <unk> , with some sections that seemed to be direct translations . However , she found that Lie also added , subtracted , and modified contents ; she noted his more sparse approach to description and the introduction of a new character , Thio Tian , who had lived in Java . The Indonesian literary critic Jakob Sumardjo summarised that Lie " may be said to have been original in his style , but not in his material " . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari . Batavia : W. Bruining & Co . 1884 . ( 200 pages in 2 volumes ) 
 Orang Prampoewan . Buitenzorg : Lie Kim Hok . 1885 . ( 4 pages in 1 volume ) 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Sobat Anak @-@ anak . Buitenzorg : Zending Pers . 1884 . ( collection of children 's stories ; 40 pages in 1 volume ) 
 Tjhit Liap Seng . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1886 . ( novel ; 500 pages in 8 volumes ) 
 <unk> Touw Bie . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1887 . ( novel ; 300 pages in 4 volumes ) 
 Nio <unk> Lay . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1887 . ( novel ; 300 pages in 4 volumes ) 
 Lok <unk> Tan . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1887 . ( novel ; 350 pages in 5 volumes ) 
 Ho Kioe Tan . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1887 . ( novelette ; 80 pages in 1 volume ) 
 Pembalasan Dendam Hati . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1905 . ( novel ; 239 pages in 3 volumes ) 
 = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = 
 Kitab Edja . Buitenzorg : Zending Pers . 1884 . ( 38 pages in 1 volume ) 
 Malajoe Batawi . Batavia : W. Bruining & Co . 1885 . ( 116 pages in 1 volume ) 
 <unk> Sewa @-@ <unk> . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1886 . ( with W. Meulenhoff ; 16 pages in 1 volume ) 
 Pek <unk> <unk> . Batavia : Lie Kim Hok . 1886 . 
 <unk> <unk> . Batavia : G. Kolff & Co . 1897 . ( 92 pages in 1 volume ) 
 <unk> . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1907 . 
 = = = Translation = = = 
 1001 Malam . Batavia : Albrecht & Co . 1887 . ( at least nights 41 to 94 ) 
 Graaf de Monte Cristo . Batavia : Albrecht & Co . 1894 . ( with F. Wiggers ; at least 10 of the 25 volumes published ) 
 Kapitein Flamberge . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1910 . ( 560 pages in 7 volumes ) 
 Kawanan <unk> . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1910 . ( 560 pages in 7 volumes ) 
 Kawanan <unk> . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1910 . ( 800 pages in 10 volumes ) 
 <unk> Besar . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1911 . ( 960 pages in 12 volumes ) 
 Pembalasan <unk> . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1912 . ( 960 pages in 12 volumes ; posthumous ) 
 <unk> <unk> . Batavia : Hoa Siang In Kiok . 1913 . ( 1250 pages in 16 volumes ; posthumous ) 
 <unk> de <unk> . Batavia : Sin Po . 1913 . ( with Lauw Giok Lan ; 960 pages in 12 volumes ; posthumous ) 
 Prampoewan jang <unk> . Surabaya : <unk> . 1927 . ( 240 pages in 3 volumes ; posthumous ) 
 = Pete Best = 
 Randolph Peter " Pete " Best ( born Randolph Peter Scanland , 24 November 1941 ) is an English musician , principally known as the original drummer for the Beatles from 1960 to 1962 . 
 Best was born in the city of Madras , then part of British India . After Best 's mother , Mona Best ( 1924 – 1988 ) , moved to Liverpool in 1945 , she opened the Casbah Coffee Club in the cellar of the Bests ' house in Liverpool . The Beatles ( at the time known as the Quarrymen ) played some of their first concerts at the club . 
 The Beatles invited Best to join on 12 August 1960 , on the eve of the group 's first Hamburg season of club dates . Ringo Starr eventually replaced Best on 16 August 1962 when the group 's manager , Brian Epstein , dismissed Best under the direction of John Lennon , Paul McCartney and George Harrison , following their first recording session at Abbey Road Studios in London . 
 After working in a number of commercially unsuccessful groups , Best gave up the music industry to work as a civil servant for 20 years , before starting the Pete Best Band . He has been married for over 50 years to Kathy Best ; they have two daughters , Babs and Bonita , and four grandchildren . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Best 's mother , Mona Best ( born Alice Mona Shaw ) , was born in Delhi , India , and was the daughter of Thomas ( an Irish major ) and Mary Shaw . Randolph Peter Scanland ( later surnamed Best ) , her first child , was born in Madras ( now Chennai ) , Madras Presidency , British India , on 24 November 1941 . Best 's biological father was marine engineer Donald Peter Scanland , who subsequently died during World War II . Best 's mother was training to become a doctor in the service of the Red Cross when she met Johnny Best , who came from a family of sports promoters in Liverpool who ran Liverpool Stadium . During World War II , Johnny Best was a commissioned officer serving as a Physical Training Instructor in India , and was the Army 's middleweight boxing champion . After their marriage on 7 March 1944 at St Thomas 's Cathedral , Bombay , Rory Best was born . In 1945 , the Best family sailed for four weeks to Liverpool on the Georgic , the last troop ship to leave India , carrying single and married soldiers who had previously been a part of General Sir William Slim 's forces in south @-@ east Asia . The ship docked in Liverpool on 25 December 1945 . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Best 's family lived for a short time at the family home , " Ellerslie " in West Derby , until Best 's mother fell out with her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Edna , who resented her brother 's choice of wife . The family then moved to a small flat on Cases Street , Liverpool , but Mona Best was always looking for a large house — as she had been used to in India — instead of a smaller semi @-@ detached house , which were prevalent in the area . After moving to 17 Queenscourt Road in 1948 , where the Bests lived for nine years , Rory Best saw a large Victorian house for sale at 8 Hayman 's Green in 1957 and told Mona about it . The Best family claim that Mona then pawned all her jewellery and placed a bet on Never Say Die , a horse that was ridden by Lester Piggott in the 1954 Epsom Derby ; it won at 33 – 1 and she used her winnings to buy the house in 1957 . The house had previously been owned by the West Derby Conservative Club and was unlike many other family houses in Liverpool as the house ( built around 1860 ) was set back from the road , had 15 bedrooms and an acre of land . All the rooms were painted dark green or brown and the garden was totally overgrown . Mona later opened the Casbah Coffee Club in its large cellar . The idea for the club first came from Best , as he asked his mother for somewhere his friends could meet and listen to the popular music of the day . 
 Best passed the eleven plus exam at Blackmoor Park primary school in West Derby , and was studying at the Liverpool Collegiate Grammar School in Shaw Street when he decided he wanted to be in a music group . Mona bought him a drum kit from Blackler 's music store and Best formed his own band , the Black Jacks . Chas Newby and Bill Barlow joined the group , as did Ken Brown , but only after he had left the Quarrymen . The Black Jacks later became the resident group at the Casbah , after the Quarrymen cancelled their residency because of an argument about money . 
 During 1960 , Neil Aspinall became good friends with the young Best and subsequently rented a room in the Best 's house . During one of the extended business trips of Best 's stepfather , Aspinall became romantically involved with Mona . Aspinall fathered a child by Mona : Vincent " Roag " Best , Mona 's third son — who is Best 's half @-@ brother . Aspinall later became the Beatles ' road manager , and denied the story for years before publicly admitting that Roag was indeed his son . 
 = = The Beatles and Hamburg = = 
 In 1960 , Allan Williams , the Beatles manager , arranged a season of bookings in Hamburg , starting on 17 August 1960 , but complained that they did not impress him , and hoped that he could find a better act . 
 Having no permanent drummer , Paul McCartney looked for someone to fill the Hamburg position . Best had been seen playing in the Casbah with his own group , the Black Jacks , and it was noted that he was a steady drummer , playing the bass drum on all four beats in the bar , which pushed the rhythm . In Liverpool , his female fans knew him as being " mean , moody , and magnificent " , which convinced McCartney he would be good for the group . After the Black Jacks broke up , McCartney convinced Best to go to Hamburg with the group , by saying they would each earn £ 15 per week . As Best had passed his school exams ( unlike Lennon , McCartney and Harrison , who had failed most of theirs ) , he had the chance to attend teacher @-@ training college , but he decided that playing in Hamburg would be a better career move . Best had an audition in the Jacaranda club , which Williams owned , and travelled to Hamburg the next day . Williams later said that the audition with Best was unnecessary , as the group had not found any other drummer willing to travel to Hamburg , but did not tell Best in case he asked for more money . 
 The Beatles first played a full show with Best on 17 August 1960 at the Indra club in Hamburg , and the group slept in the Bambi Kino cinema in a small , dirty room with bunk beds , a cold and noisy former storeroom directly behind the screen . Upon first seeing the Indra , where they were booked to play , Best remembered it as a depressing place filled with a few tourists , and having heavy , old , red curtains that made it seem shabby compared to the larger Kaiserkeller . As Best had been the only group member to study O @-@ Level German at school , he could talk with the club 's owner , Bruno Koschmider , and the clientele . After the Indra closed due to complaints about the noise , the group started a residency in the Kaiserkeller . 
 In October 1960 , the group left Koschmider 's club to work at the Top Ten Club , which Peter Eckhorn ran , as he offered the group more money and a slightly better place to sleep . In doing so they broke their contract with Koschmider . When Best and McCartney went back to the Bambi Kino to retrieve their belongings they found it in almost total darkness . As a snub to Koschmider , McCartney found a condom , attached it to a nail on the concrete wall of the room , and set it alight . There was no real damage done , but Koschmider reported them both for attempted arson . Best and McCartney spent three hours in a local prison and were subsequently deported , as was George Harrison , for working under the legal age limit , on 30 November 1960 . 
 Back in Liverpool , the group members had no contact with each other for two weeks , but Best and his mother made numerous phone calls to Hamburg to recover the group 's equipment . Mona arranged all the bookings for the group in Liverpool , after parting company with Williams in late 1961 . 
 Chas Newby , the ex @-@ Black Jacks guitarist , was invited to play bass for four concerts , as bassist Stuart Sutcliffe had decided to stay in Hamburg . Newby played with the group at Litherland Town Hall and at the Casbah . He was shocked at the vast improvement in their playing and singing , and remembered Best 's drumming to be very powerful , which pushed the group to play harder and louder . It was probably due to McCartney that Best developed a loud drumming style , as he would often tell Best in Hamburg to " crank it up " ( play as loud as possible ) . When the group returned to Hamburg , Best was asked to sing a speciality number , " Peppermint Twist " , while McCartney played drums , but always felt uncomfortable being at the front of the stage . 
 = = = " My Bonnie " = = = 
 The reunited Beatles returned to Hamburg in April 1961 . While they played at the Top Ten Club , singer Tony Sheridan recruited them to act as his backing band on a recording for the German Polydor label , produced by bandleader Bert Kaempfert , who signed the group to a Polydor contract at the first session on 22 June 1961 . On 31 October 1961 , Polydor released the recording " My Bonnie " ( Mein Herz ist bei dir nur / My heart is only for you ) which appeared on the German charts under the name " Tony Sheridan and the Beat Brothers " — a generic name used for whoever happened to be in Sheridan 's backup band . The song was later released in the UK . There was a second recording session on 23 June that year , and a third in May 1962 . 
 = = Decca , Parlophone , and dismissal = = 
 Brian Epstein , who had been unofficially managing the Beatles for less than a month , arranged a recording audition at Decca Records in London on New Year 's Day , 1962 . The group recorded 15 songs , mostly cover versions with three Lennon – McCartney songs . John Lennon later admitted they were " terrified and nervous " . A month later , Decca informed Brian Epstein the group had been rejected . The band members were informed of the rejection except for Best . Brian Epstein officially became the manager of the Beatles on 24 January 1962 with the contract signed in Pete 's house . 
 Brian Epstein negotiated ownership of the Decca audition tape , which was transferred to an acetate disc to promote the band to other record companies in London . In the meantime , Brian Epstein negotiated the release of the Beatles from their recording contract with Bert Kaempfert and Polydor Records in Germany , which expired on 22 June 1962 . As a part of this contract , the Beatles recorded at Polydor 's Studio <unk> on 24 May 1962 in Hamburg as a sessions band backing Tony Sheridan . Less than two weeks later the Beatles would be recording again at Abbey Road studios in London for EMI . 
 The record producer at EMI , George Martin , met with Epstein on 9 May 1962 at the Abbey Road studios and was impressed by his enthusiasm . He agreed to sign the Beatles on a recording contract based on listening to the Decca audition tape , without having met them or seeing them play live . 
 Soon after the recording contract was signed , the Beatles performed a " commercial test " ( i.e. an evaluation of a signed artist ) on 6 June 1962 in studio two at the Abbey Road studios . Assistant producer Ron Richards and his engineer Norman Smith recorded four songs : " Bésame Mucho " , " P.S. I Love You " , " Ask Me Why " and " Love Me Do " . The last three songs were the Beatles ' own compositions , which was very unusual for bands new to recording . Martin was in the building but not in the studio . Martin was called into the studio by Norman Smith when he heard the band play " Love Me Do " . At the end of the session Martin asked the individual Beatles if there was anything they personally did not like , to which George Harrison replied , " Well , there 's your tie , for a start . " That was the turning point , according to Smith , as John Lennon , Paul McCartney and Best joined in with jokes and comic wordplay . 
 The Beatles were not new to studio recording and Best 's drumming had been found acceptable by Polydor in Hamburg , but Richards had alerted Martin to Best 's unsuitability for British studio work . Martin wanted to substitute Best with an experienced studio session drummer for the recordings . This was common practice at the time in British recording studios . When Lennon , McCartney and Harrison learned that Martin and the engineers preferred replacing Best with a session drummer for their upcoming recording session on 4 September 1962 , they considered using it as a pretext to permanently sack Best from the group . Eventually , after a very long delay , they asked Epstein to dismiss Best from the band . Epstein agonised over the decision . As he wrote in his autobiography , A Cellarful of Noise , he " wasn 't sure " about Martin 's assessment of Best 's drumming and " was not anxious to change the membership of the Beatles at a time when they were developing as personalities … I asked the Beatles to leave the group as it was " . Epstein also asked Liverpool DJ Bob Wooler , who knew the Beatles intimately , for advice to which Wooler replied that it was not a good idea as Best was very popular with the fans . Ultimately , Epstein decided that " If the group was to remain happy , Pete Best must go " . Epstein summoned Best to his office and dismissed him on Thursday 16 August 1962 , ten weeks and one day after the first recording session . Epstein asked Best to continue to play with the band until Ringo joined on Saturday 18 August 1962 . Best played his last two gigs with the Beatles on 15 August 1962 at the Cavern Club , Liverpool . He was due to play his last show on 16 August 1962 at the <unk> Ballroom , Chester , but never turned up ; Johnny Hutchinson of the Big Three was rushed in as a substitute . Best had been with the group for two years and four days . 
 Best had been good friends with Neil Aspinall since 1961 when he rented a room in the house where Best lived with his parents . Best asked Aspinall to become the band 's road manager and personal assistant ; accepting the job , he bought an old Commer van for £ 80 . During one of the extended business trips of Best 's stepfather , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Aspinall became romantically involved with Best 's mother , Mona Best , who was 17 years his senior . During this period , he fathered a child by Mona : Vincent " Roag " Best . Roag Best was born in late July 1962 , just three weeks before Best 's dismissal . Aspinall was waiting for Best downstairs in Epstein 's NEMS record shop after the dismissal meeting on 16 August 1962 . The two went to the Grapes pub on Mathew Street , the same street as the Cavern Club where the group had played . Aspinall was furious at the news , insisting to Best that he would also resign from the Beatles . Best strongly advised him to remain with the group . Aspinall 's relationship with Mona Best ( and their three @-@ week @-@ old baby , Roag ) was ended . At the next concert Aspinall asked Lennon why they had fired Best , to which he replied " It 's got nothing to do with you , you 're only the driver . " 
 George Martin was surprised to learn that Epstein had sacked Best , hearing the news from Mona Best via telephone . Martin denied that he had ever suggested sacking him , telling Mona : 
 " I never suggested that Pete Best must go . All I said was that for the purposes of the Beatles ' first record I would rather use a sessions man . I never thought that Brian Epstein would let him go . He seemed to be the most saleable commodity as far as looks went . It was a surprise when I learned that they had dropped Pete . The drums were important to me for a record , but they didn 't matter much otherwise . Fans don 't pay particular attention to the quality of the drumming " 
 <unk> Martin 
 Mersey Beat magazine 's editor , Bill Harry , claimed that Epstein initially offered the vacant drummer position in the group to Johnny Hutchinson , whom he also managed . Hutchinson refused the job , saying , " Pete Best is a very good friend of mine . I couldn 't do the dirty on him . " Hutchinson filled in as drummer at short notice when Best failed to appear on the evening of his dismissal , playing at a further two bookings until Starr joined the group . Starr had previously played with Rory Storm and the Hurricanes - the alternating band in the Kaiserkeller - and had deputised when Best was ill or unable to play in Hamburg and Liverpool . Harry reported Best 's dismissal on the front page of Mersey Beat magazine , upsetting many Beatles fans . The group encountered some jeering and heckling in the street and on stage for weeks afterwards , with some fans shouting , " Pete forever , Ringo never ! " One agitated fan headbutted Harrison in The Cavern , giving him a black eye . 
 Best 's replacement , Ringo Starr , accompanied the band on their second recording session with EMI at Abbey Road studios on 4 September 1962 . George Martin was also not impressed with Starr for studio work . On 11 September 1962 at the third EMI recording session Martin used session musician Andy White on the drums for the whole session and not Starr . Starr played tambourine on some songs while White played drums . Starr told Hunter Davies years later that he had thought , " That 's the end . They 're pulling a Pete Best on me . " 
 Many years later Martin still expressed regret about his decision and what followed : 
 " I decided that the drums , which are really the backbone of a good rock group , didn 't give the boys enough support . They needed a good solid beat , and I said to Brian , ' Look , it doesn 't matter what you do with the boys , but on record , nobody need know . I 'm gonna use a hot drummer . ' Brian [ Epstein ] said , ' Okay , fine . ' I felt guilty because I felt maybe I was the catalyst that had changed his [ Best 's ] life … " 
 Paul McCartney remembers it differently : 
 " George Martin was used to drummers being very ' in time ' , because all the big @-@ band session drummers he used had a great sense of time . Now , our Liverpool drummers had a sense of spirit , emotion , economy even , but not a deadly sense of time . This would bother producers making a record . George took us to one side and said , ' I 'm really unhappy with the drummer . Would you consider changing him ? ' We said , ' No , we can 't ! ' It was one of those terrible things you go through as kids . Can we betray him ? No . But our career was on the line . Maybe they were going to cancel our contract … " 
 Paul McCartney finally stated , in his Wingspan documentary in May 2001 , that the sacking of Pete Best had nothing to do with his ability as a drummer . Explaining why one particular member of his subsequent band , Wings , " didn 't last long " in that group McCartney said : " It 's like in the Beatles , we had Pete Best , who was a really good drummer , but there just was something , he wasn 't quite like the rest of us , we had like a sense of humour in common and he was nearly in with it all , but it 's a fine line , you know , as to what is exactly in and what is nearly in . So he ' left ' the band and we were looking for someone who would fit . " He told Mark Lewisohn , similarly , that when George Martin suggested " changing their drummer " the Beatles responded : " Well , we 're quite happy with him , he works great in the clubs , " but also that " Pete had never quite been like the rest of us . We were the wacky trio and Pete was perhaps a little more sensible ; he was slightly different from us , he wasn 't quite as artsy as we were . " 
 = = Reasons for dismissal = = 
 Best was never told to his face , by anybody directly involved in his sacking , exactly why he was dismissed ; the only reason Epstein stated to him was , " The lads don 't want you in the group any more " . Epstein subsequently claimed in his autobiography that Lennon , McCartney and Harrison thought that Best was " too conventional to be a Beatle " and added that " though he was friendly with John , he was not liked by George and Paul " . It has been documented , notably in Cynthia Lennon 's book , John , that while Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison usually spent their offstage time together in Hamburg and Liverpool , writing songs or socialising , Best generally went off alone . This left Best on the outside , as he was not privy to many of the group 's experiences , references , and in @-@ jokes . 
 A German photographer , Astrid Kirchherr , asked if they wouldn 't mind letting her take photographs of them in a photo session , which impressed them , as other groups only had snapshots taken by friends . The next morning Kirchherr took photographs in der Dom , a municipal park , close to the Reeperbahn . In the afternoon Kirchherr took them to her mother 's house in Altona , minus Best , who decided not to attend . Dot Rhone , McCartney 's girlfriend at the time who later visited Hamburg , described Best as being very quiet and never taking part in conversations with the group . 
 = = = Clothes , drugs and hairstyle = = = 
 On their first trip to Hamburg , the group soon realised that the stage suits they wore could not stand up to the hours of sweating and jumping about on stage every night , so they all bought leather jackets , jeans and cowboy boots , which were much tougher . Best initially preferred to play in cooler short sleeves on stage , and so did not match the sartorial style of the group , even though he was later photographed wearing a leather jacket and jeans . Lennon , McCartney , Harrison , and Sutcliffe were introduced to recreational drugs in Hamburg . As they played for hours every night , they often took Preludin to keep themselves awake , which they received from German customers or Astrid Kirchherr , whose mother bought them . Lennon would often take four or five , but Best always refused . 
 It has been claimed that Epstein became exasperated with Best 's refusal to adopt the mop @-@ top @-@ style Beatle haircut as part of their unified look keeping his <unk> hairstyle , although Best later stated that he was never asked to change his hairstyle . In a 1995 BBC Radio Merseyside interview , Kirchherr explained : " My boyfriend , Klaus Voormann , had this hairstyle , and Stuart [ Sutcliffe ] liked it very , very much . He was the first one who really got the nerve to get the Brylcreem out of his hair , and asking me to cut his hair for him . Pete Best has really curly hair , and it wouldn 't work " . 
 = = = Popularity = = = 
 Best 's popularity with fans was a source of friction , as many female fans considered him to be the band 's best @-@ looking member . Radio Merseyside presenter Spencer Leigh wrote a book chronicling Best 's firing , suggesting that the other members , McCartney in particular , were jealous . In the 31 August 1961 issue of Bill Harry 's Mersey Beat music publication in Liverpool , Bob Wooler reported on the Beatles ' local musical impact and singled out Best for special praise , calling the group " musically authoritative and physically magnetic , example the mean , moody magnificence of drummer Pete Best -- a sort of teenage Jeff Chandler " . During the Teenagers ' Turn showcase in Manchester , Lennon , McCartney and Harrison walked on stage to applause , but when Best walked on , the girls screamed . Afterwards , attentive females surrounded Best at the stage door , while the other members were ignored after signing a few autographs . McCartney 's father , Jim McCartney , was present at the time and admonished Best : " Why did you have to attract all the attention ? Why didn 't you call the other lads back ? I think that was very selfish of you " . Lennon called the accusations of jealousy a " myth " , and claimed that Best was recruited only because they needed a drummer to go to Hamburg , saying , " We were always going to dump him when we found a decent drummer " . 
 In 1963 on British television , Mona Best , with her son present , said of his dismissal : " From the point of clash of personalities , well , probably that may be it because Peter did have a terrific fan club , you know , compared to the others . [ Interviewer : Too good looking perhaps ? ] I 'll leave that for other people to say but from my point of view we haven 't come here to sort of throw sticks and stones at the boys because there is no really hard feeling . There was at first , but it 's just the way that it was done that has annoyed us . If it had been done a bit more straightforward it would have been more to the mark . " Hunter Davies , in his authorised Beatles biography published in 1968 , agreed : " There is some justification for a little of Mrs. Best 's anger . The sacking of Pete Best is one of the few murky incidents in the Beatles ' history . There was something sneaky about the way it was done . " 
 = = = Best as a drummer = = = 
 Musically , Best has been judged to have had a limited rhythmic vocabulary that was seen as holding the other three band members back from their collective musical growth . Martin ( see above ) deemed Best 's drumming to be inadequate for a recording . As stated in Bob Spitz 's 2005 biography : " All Pete could do was play ' Fours ' " , a style of drumming that uses kick drum notes on every quarter note to hold down the beat . Spitz 's book also contains engineer Ron Richards ' account of his failed attempts to teach Best somewhat more complicated beats for different songs . Critic and Beatles historian Richie Unterberger described Best 's drumming at the Decca session as " thinly textured and rather unimaginative " , adding that Best " pushes the beat a little too fast for comfort " . Unterberger thought Starr to be " more talented " . Beatles ' critic Alan W. Pollack compared the Best , Starr , and Andy White versions of " Love Me Do " , and concluded that Best was " an incredibly unsteady and tasteless drummer " on his version . Beatles ' historian Ian MacDonald , recounting the Decca audition , said that " Best 's limitations as a drummer are nakedly apparent " . MacDonald notes of the 6 June EMI recording session that " ... this audition version [ of " Love Me Do " ] shows one of the reasons why Pete Best was sacked : in moving to the ride cymbal for the first middle eight , he slows down and the group falters " . MacDonald incorrectly notes that the session was an audition ; it actually was the first recording for a single release . 
 All the other Beatles went on record about the dismissal of Best . McCartney stated : " It was a strictly professional decision . If he wasn 't up to the mark ... then there was no other choice . " He also pronounced Best to be " a bit limited " . Harrison said that " Pete kept being sick and not showing up for gigs " and admitted , " I was quite responsible for stirring things up . I conspired to get Ringo in for good ; I talked to Paul and John until they came round to the idea . " For his part , Starr said : " I felt I was a much better drummer than he [ Best ] was " . 
 Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison all later stated that they regretted the manner in which Best was sacked . Lennon admitted that " we were cowards when we sacked him . We made Brian do it . " McCartney stated : " I do feel sorry for him , because of what he could have been on to . " Harrison said : " We weren 't very good at telling Pete he had to go , " and " Historically it may look like we did something nasty to Pete and it may have been that we could have handled it better . " Starr , on the other hand , feels he has no apology to make : " I never felt sorry … I was not involved . " In 1968 , authorised Beatles biographer Hunter Davies wrote : " But for the sake of Pete 's career , whatever happened to the Beatles afterward , the handling and especially the announcing of the sacking might have been done more neatly and cleanly . He could have been fixed up with a job in another group before the news was announced . " Over twenty years later Mark Lewisohn concluded that " Despite his alleged shortcomings , it was still shabby treatment for Pete , who had served the group <unk> from their hapless , <unk> Silver Beatles days through three lengthy Hamburg seasons and over 200 Cavern Club performances . He had shared in the heartaches and the headaches , had controlled the Beatles ' bookings before Epstein took over , and had made his home -- the <unk> their home . The Beatles had had two years in which to dismiss him but hadn 't done so , and now -- as they were beginning to reap the rewards for their long , hard slog , with money rolling in and an EMI contract secured -- he was out . It was the most underhand , unfortunate and unforgivable chapter in the Beatles ' rise to monumental power . " 
 = = = Difficulties between Mona Best and others = = = 
 Before Brian Epstein took the Beatles on , Mona Best had been handling most of the management and promotional work . According to promoter and manager Joe Flannery , Mona had done a great deal for the band by arranging a number of important early gigs and lending them a badly needed helping hand when they returned from Hamburg the first time , but this came at the cost of having to contend with her overbearing nature . At this crucial time in the history of the Beatles , John Lennon confided to Flannery that he considered Mona " bossy like [ his aunt ] Mimi " and believed that she was using the Beatles only for the sake of her son , though this should be weighed against the fact that the Beatles ' cordial relations with Mona would soon resume . She often met them while visiting Neil Aspinall at his London home . On these occasions , the Beatles often had small gifts for her which they had acquired on their travels . For her part , Mona allowed them to use her father 's military medals in the photo shoot for the Sgt. Pepper album cover . 
 Although Brian Epstein 's publicly stated reluctance to fire Best quickly became a matter of record in the early biographies , he had found Mona Best to be the cause of mounting aggravation . Brian 's distaste for her interference in the Beatles ' management , including her " aggressive opinions about his handling of her son 's career " was obvious to everyone , and he also reportedly considered Mona Best a loose cannon who must not be allowed to interfere in his operations . Moreover , the very recent birth of Pete 's half @-@ brother Vincent " Roag " Best , from the union of 38 @-@ year @-@ old Mona and 19 @-@ year @-@ old Neil Aspinall , further complicated matters . Although Pete himself was not personally responsible for this development , it would still have caused a grave scandal had it become generally known , and Brian may have been horrified at the prospect . 
 = = After the Beatles = = 
 Soon after Best was dismissed , Epstein attempted to console him by offering to build another group around him , but Best refused . Feeling let down and depressed , he sat at home for two weeks — not wanting to face anybody or answer the inevitable questions about why he had been sacked . Epstein secretly arranged with his booking agent partner , Joe Flannery , for Best to join Lee Curtis & the All Stars , which then broke off from Curtis to become Pete Best & the All Stars . They signed to Decca Records , releasing the single " I 'm Gonna Knock On Your Door " , which was not successful . 
 In 1968 , Best settled a libel lawsuit he had initiated against the Beatles , Ringo Starr and Playboy magazine that centred on comments Starr made to the magazine about Best 's alleged drug use . The conditions of the settlement prevented disclosure of the amount . 
 Best later moved to the United States along with songwriters Wayne Bickerton and Tony Waddington . As the Pete Best Four , and later as the Pete Best Combo ( a quintet ) , they toured the US with a combination of 1950s songs and original tunes , recording for small labels , but they had little success . They ultimately released an album on Savage Records , Best of the Beatles ; a play on Best 's name , leading to disappointment for record buyers ( who neglected to read the song titles on the front cover and expected a Beatles compilation ) . The group disbanded shortly afterwards . Bickerton and Waddington were to find greater success as songwriters in the 1960s and 1970s , writing a series of hits for the American female group the <unk> and the British group the <unk> . In 2000 , the record label Cherry Red reissued the Pete Best Combo 's recordings as a compact disc compilation . Richie Unterberger , reviewing the CD , stated that the music 's " energy level is reasonably high , " that Bickerton and Waddington 's songwriting is " kind of catchy , " and that Best 's drumming is " ordinary . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 Best decided to leave show business , and by the time of Hunter Davies ' authorised Beatles ' biography in 1968 , he was not willing to talk about his Beatles association . Years later he stated in his autobiography , " the Beatles themselves certainly never held out a helping hand and only contributed to the destruction with their readily printed gossip that I had never really been a Beatle , that I didn 't smile , that I was unsociable and definitely not a good mixer . There was not a single friendly word from any one of them " . This culminated in a Beatles ' interview published in Playboy magazine in February 1965 in which Lennon stated that " Ringo used to fill in sometimes if our drummer was ill . With his periodic illness . " Starr added : " He took little pills to make him ill . " Best sued the Beatles for defamation of character , eventually winning an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement for much less than the $ 18 million he had sought . 
 Hunter Davies recalled that while working with the Beatles on their authorised biography in 1968 , " when the subject of Pete Best came up they seemed to cut off , as if he had never touched their lives . They showed little reaction … I suppose it reminded them not just that they had been rather sneaky in the handling of Pete Best 's sacking , never telling him to his face , but that for the grace of God , or Brian Epstein , circumstances might have been different and they could have ended up [ like Pete ] . " During the height of Beatlemania Best attempted to commit suicide , but his mother , Mona , and his brother , Rory , talked him out of it . 
 In 1963 , he married Kathy , who worked behind the biscuit counter at a Woolworth 's store . Their marriage has lasted for 50 years : they have two daughters ( <unk> and Bonita ) and four grandchildren . Best did shift work loading bread into the back of delivery vans , earning £ 8 a week . His education qualifications subsequently helped him become a civil servant working at the Garston <unk> in Liverpool , where he rose from employment officer to training manager for the Northwest of England , and , ironically , remembered " a steady stream of real @-@ life <unk> Hughes types " imploring him to give them jobs . The most he could do , he recalls , was to offer to retrain them in other fields , " which was an emotional issue for people who had done one kind of work all their lives . " 
 In time , Best began giving interviews to the media , writing about his time with the group , and serving as a technical advisor for the television film Birth of the Beatles . He found a modicum of independent fame , and has admitted to being a fan of his former band 's music and owning their records . In 1995 , the surviving Beatles released Anthology 1 , which featured a number of tracks with Best as drummer , including songs from the Decca and Parlophone auditions . Best received a substantial windfall — between £ 1 million and £ 4 million — from the sales , although he was not interviewed for the book or the documentaries . The collage of torn photographs on the Anthology 1 album cover includes an early group photo that featured Best , but Best 's head was removed , revealing a photo of Starr 's head , taken from the Please Please Me cover photo ( the missing section of the photograph appears on the cover of the album Haymans Green ) . A small photograph of Best can be seen on the left side of the Anthology cover . Best appeared in an advertisement for Carlsberg lager that was broadcast during the first commercial break of the first episode of the Anthology TV series on ITV in November 1995 . The tag line was " Probably the Pete Best lager in the world " , a variation of Carlsberg 's well @-@ known slogan . 
 = = = The Pete Best Band = = = 
 In 1988 , after twenty years of turning down all requests to play drums in public , Best finally relented , appearing at a Beatles convention in Liverpool . He and his brother Roag performed , and afterwards his wife and mother told him , " You don 't know it , but you 're going to go back into show business " . Best now regularly tours the world with the Pete Best Band , sharing the drumming with his younger brother Roag . The Pete Best Band 's album Haymans Green , made entirely from original material , was released on 16 September 2008 in the US , 24 October 2008 worldwide excluding the UK and 27 October 2008 in the UK . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 On 6 July 2007 , Best was inducted into the All You Need Is Liverpool Music Hall of Fame as the debut Charter Member . Best was presented with a framed certificate before his band performed . Liverpool has further honoured Best with the announcement , on 25 July 2011 , that two new streets in the city would be named Pete Best Drive and Casbah Close . 
 = = Portrayals of Best = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 Best is portrayed in several films about the Beatles . In the 1979 biopic Birth of the Beatles , for which Best was a technical advisor , he is played by Ryan Michael . In both the 1994 film Backbeat and in the 2000 television biopic In His Life : The John Lennon Story , Best is played by Liverpool native Scot Williams . The 2008 Rainn Wilson film The Rocker , about a drummer kicked out of a glam metal band through no fault of his own , was inspired by Best 's termination . Best had a cameo in the movie . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 BEST ! , a comedy play written by Liverpool playwright Fred Lawless , was staged at the Liverpool Everyman Theatre and the Dublin Theatre Festival in 1995 and 1996 . The play , which was mainly fiction , showed a scenario where after Pete Best 's sacking , he went on to become a world famous rock superstar while his ex @-@ group struggled as one hit wonders . The play was critically acclaimed in both the Liverpool Echo and also in Spencer Leigh 's 1998 book <unk> Out : The Sacking of Pete Best . 
 Pete Best is a main character in David Harrower 's 2001 play Presence , premièred at the Royal Court Theatre , London , dramatising The Beatles ' time in Hamburg . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " I 'm Gonna Knock on Your Door " b / w " Why Did I Fall in Love with You " ( Decca F <unk> , Released : 1964 ) 
 " Don 't Play With Me ( Little Girl ) " b / w " If You Can 't Get Her " ( Happening 405 , Released : 1965 ) 
 " If You Can 't Get Her " b / w " The Way I Feel About You " ( Happening <unk> , Released : 1965 ) 
 " Kansas City " b / w " Boys " ( Cameo 391 , Released : 1965 ) 
 " ( I 'll Try ) Anyway " b / w " I Wanna Be There " ( Original Beatles Drummer 800 , Released : 1965 ) 
 " I Can 't Do Without You Now " b / w " Keys to My Heart " ( Mr. Maestro Records 711 , Released : 1965 ) 
 Another " Peter Best " single , " Carousel Of Love " / " Want You " ( Capitol 2092 ) is not by Best , but an Australian performer with the same name . 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Best of the Beatles ( Savage BM 71 , Released : 1965 ) Includes : " I Need Your Lovin " ; " Just Wait and See " ; " Casting My Spell " ; " Keys to My Heart " ; " Why Did You Leave Me Baby ? " ; " Like My Sister Kate " ; " I Can 't Do Without You Now " ; " I 'm Blue " ; " Some Other Guy " ; " She 's Alright " ; " Nobody But You " ; " Last Night " 
 The Beatle That Time Forgot [ Original Version ] ( Phoenix PB @-@ 22 , Released : 1981 ) Includes : " I 'm Checking Out Now Baby " ; " I 'll Try Any Way " ; " I Don 't Know Why ( I Just Do ) " ; " How 'd You Get to Know Her Name " ; " She 's Not the Only Girl in Town " ; " If You Can 't Get Her " ; " More Than I Need My Self " ; " I 'll Have Everything Too " ; " The Way I feel About You " ; " Don 't Play With Me ( Little Girl ) " ; " Rock and Roll Music " ; " All Aboard " 
 Rebirth ( Phoenix PB @-@ 44 , Released : 1981 ) Includes : " I Can 't Do Without You Now " ; " Off the Hook " ; " She 's Alright " ; " I Need Your Lovin ' " ; " Why Did You Leave Me Baby " ; " High School Shimmy " ; " I Wanna Be There " ; " Everybody " ; " Pete 's Theme " ; " Keys to My Heart " 
 The Beatle That Time Forgot [ Reissue ] ( Phoenix PHX 340 , Released : 1982 ) Includes : " I 'll Try Anyway " ; " I Don 't Know Why I Do ( I Just Do ) " ; " She 's Not the Only Girl in Town " ; " More Than I Need My Self " ; " I 'll Have Everything Too " ; " I 'm Checking Out Now Baby " ; " How 'd You Get to Know Her Name " ; " If You Can 't Get Her " ; " Rock and Roll Music " 
 Back to the Beat – ( 1995 ) 
 The Pete Best Combo : Beyond the Beatles 1964 – 1966 ( 1 February 1996 ) 
 Live at the Adelphi Liverpool 1988 – ( 23 September 1996 ) 
 Best ( 18 August 1998 ) 
 Casbah Coffee Club 40th Anniversary Limited Edition ( 1999 ) 
 The Savage Young Beatles ( 10 May 2004 ) 
 Haymans Green – Released 16 September 2008 ( US ) , August 2008 ( UK ) ( The Pete Best Band ) 
 = = On film = = 
 The Rocker ( Cameo ) DVD ( UK ) Directed by Peter Cattaneo 2008 . 
 = Albert Speer = 
 Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer ( German : [ <unk> ̯ ] ; March 19 , 1905 – September 1 , 1981 ) was a German architect who was , for most of World War II , Minister of Armaments and War Production for Nazi Germany . Speer was Adolf Hitler 's chief architect before assuming ministerial office . As " the Nazi who said sorry " , he accepted moral responsibility at the Nuremberg trials and in his memoirs for complicity in crimes of the Nazi regime , while insisting he was ignorant of the Holocaust . 
 Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931 , launching himself on a political and governmental career which lasted fourteen years . His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party and he became a member of Hitler 's inner circle . Hitler instructed him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the Zeppelinfeld stadium in Nuremberg where Party rallies were held . Speer also made plans to reconstruct Berlin on a grand scale , with huge buildings , wide boulevards , and a reorganized transportation system . 
 In February 1942 , Hitler appointed Speer Minister of Armaments and War Production . He was fêted at the time , and long afterwards , for performing an " armaments miracle " in which German war production dramatically increased ; this " miracle " , however , was brought to a halt by the summer of 1943 by , among other factors , the first sustained Allied bombing of 1943 . 
 After the war , he was tried at Nuremberg and sentenced to 20 years in prison for his role in the Nazi regime , principally for the use of forced labor . Despite repeated attempts to gain early release , he served his full sentence , most of it at Spandau Prison in West Berlin . Following his release in 1966 , Speer published two bestselling autobiographical works , Inside the Third Reich and Spandau : The Secret Diaries , detailing his close personal relationship with Hitler , and providing readers and historians with a unique perspective on the workings of the Nazi regime . He later wrote a third book , Infiltration , about the SS . Speer died of natural causes in 1981 while on a visit to London . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Speer was born in Mannheim , into an upper @-@ middle @-@ class family . He was the second of three sons of Luise <unk> Wilhelmine ( <unk> ) and Albert Friedrich Speer . In 1918 , the family moved permanently to their summer home Villa Speer on Schloss @-@ <unk> , Heidelberg . According to Henry T. King , deputy prosecutor at Nuremberg who later wrote a book about Speer , " Love and warmth were lacking in the household of Speer 's youth . " Speer was active in sports , taking up skiing and mountaineering . Speer 's Heidelberg school offered rugby football , unusual for Germany , and Speer was a participant . He wanted to become a mathematician , but his father said if Speer chose this occupation he would " lead a life without money , without a position and without a future " . Instead , Speer followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture . 
 Speer began his architectural studies at the University of Karlsruhe instead of a more highly acclaimed institution because the hyperinflation crisis of 1923 limited his parents ' income . In 1924 when the crisis had abated , he transferred to the " much more reputable " Technical University of Munich . In 1925 he transferred again , this time to the Technical University of Berlin where he studied under Heinrich Tessenow , whom Speer greatly admired . After passing his exams in 1927 , Speer became Tessenow 's assistant , a high honor for a man of 22 . As such , Speer taught some of Tessenow 's classes while continuing his own postgraduate studies . In Munich , and continuing in Berlin , Speer began a close friendship , ultimately spanning over 50 years , with Rudolf Wolters , who also studied under Tessenow . 
 In mid @-@ 1922 , Speer began courting Margarete ( Margret ) Weber ( 1905 – 1987 ) , the daughter of a successful craftsman who employed 50 workers . The relationship was frowned upon by Speer 's class @-@ conscious mother , who felt that the <unk> were socially inferior . Despite this opposition , the two married in Berlin on 28 August 1928 ; seven years were to elapse before Margarete Speer was invited to stay at her in @-@ laws ' home . 
 = = Nazi architect = = 
 = = = Joining the Nazis ( 1930 – 1934 ) = = = 
 Speer stated he was apolitical when he was a young man , and that he attended a Berlin Nazi rally in December 1930 at the urging of some of his students . On March 1 , 1931 , he applied to join the Nazi Party and became member number 474 @,@ 481 . 
 In 1931 , Speer surrendered his position as Tessenow 's assistant and moved to Mannheim . His father gave him a job as manager of the elder Speer 's properties . In July 1932 , the Speers visited Berlin to help out the Party prior to the Reichstag elections . While they were there , his friend , Nazi Party official Karl Hanke , recommended the young architect to Joseph Goebbels to help renovate the Party 's Berlin headquarters . Speer agreed to do the work . When the commission was completed , Speer returned to Mannheim and remained there as Hitler took office in January 1933 . 
 The organizers of the 1933 Nuremberg Rally asked Speer to submit designs for the rally , bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time . Neither the organizers nor Rudolf Hess were willing to decide whether to approve the plans , and Hess sent Speer to Hitler 's Munich apartment to seek his approval . This work won Speer his first national post , as Nazi Party " Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations " . 
 Speer 's next major assignment was as liaison to the Berlin building trades for Paul Troost 's renovation of the Chancellery . As Chancellor , Hitler had a residence in the building and came by every day to be briefed by Speer and the building supervisor on the progress of the renovations . After one of these briefings , Hitler invited Speer to lunch , to the architect 's great excitement . Hitler evinced considerable interest in Speer during the luncheon , and later told Speer that he had been looking for a young architect capable of carrying out his architectural dreams for the new Germany . Speer quickly became part of Hitler 's inner circle ; he was expected to call on Hitler in the morning for a walk or chat , to provide consultation on architectural matters , and to discuss Hitler 's ideas . Most days he was invited to dinner . 
 The two men found much in common : Hitler spoke of Speer as a " kindred spirit " for whom he had always maintained " the warmest human feelings " . The young , ambitious architect was dazzled by his rapid rise and close proximity to Hitler , which guaranteed him a flood of commissions from the government and from the highest ranks of the Party . Speer testified at Nuremberg , " I belonged to a circle which consisted of other artists and his personal staff . If Hitler had had any friends at all , I certainly would have been one of his close friends . " 
 = = = First Architect of Nazi Germany ( 1934 – 1939 ) = = = 
 When Troost died on January 21 , 1934 , Speer effectively replaced him as the Party 's chief architect . Hitler appointed Speer as head of the Chief Office for Construction , which placed him nominally on Hess 's staff . 
 One of Speer 's first commissions after Troost 's death was the Zeppelinfeld stadium — the Nürnberg parade grounds seen in Leni Riefenstahl 's propaganda masterpiece Triumph of the Will . This huge work was able to hold 340 @,@ 000 people . Speer insisted that as many events as possible be held at night , both to give greater prominence to his lighting effects and to hide the individual Nazis , many of whom were overweight . Speer surrounded the site with 130 anti @-@ aircraft searchlights . Speer described this as his most beautiful work , and as the only one that stood the test of time . 
 Nürnberg was to be the site of many more official Nazi buildings , most of which were never built ; for example , the German Stadium would have accommodated 400 @,@ 000 spectators , while an even larger rally ground would have held half a million people . While planning these structures , Speer conceived the concept of " ruin value " : that major buildings should be constructed in such a way they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins for thousands of years into the future . Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of Nazi Germany , just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of those civilizations . 
 When Hitler deprecated Werner March 's design for the Olympic Stadium for the 1936 Summer Olympics as too modern , Speer modified the plans by adding a stone exterior . Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris . The German and Soviet pavilion sites were opposite each other . On learning ( through a clandestine look at the Soviet plans ) that the Soviet design included two colossal figures seemingly about to overrun the German site , Speer modified his design to include a cubic mass which would check their advance , with a huge eagle on top looking down on the Soviet figures . Speer received , from Hitler Youth leader and later fellow Spandau prisoner Baldur von Schirach , the Golden Hitler Youth Honor Badge with oak leaves . 
 In 1937 , Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for the Reich Capital with the rank of undersecretary of state in the Reich government . The position carried with it extraordinary powers over the Berlin city government and made Speer answerable to Hitler alone . It also made Speer a member of the Reichstag , though the body by then had little effective power . Hitler ordered Speer to develop plans to rebuild Berlin . The plans centered on a three @-@ mile long grand boulevard running from north to south , which Speer called the Prachtstrasse , or Street of Magnificence ; he also referred to it as the " North @-@ South Axis " . At the northern end of the boulevard , Speer planned to build the <unk> , a huge assembly hall with a dome which would have been over 700 feet ( 210 m ) high , with floor space for 180 @,@ 000 people . At the southern end of the avenue a great triumphal arch would rise ; it would be almost 400 feet ( 120 m ) high , and able to fit the Arc de Triomphe inside its opening . The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the postponement , and later the abandonment , of these plans . Part of the land for the boulevard was to be obtained by consolidating Berlin 's railway system . Speer hired Wolters as part of his design team , with special responsibility for the Prachtstrasse . When Speer 's father saw the model for the new Berlin , he said to his son , " You 've all gone completely insane . " 
 In January 1938 , Hitler asked Speer to build a new Reich Chancellery on the same site as the existing structure , and said he needed it for urgent foreign policy reasons no later than his next New Year 's reception for diplomats on January 10 , 1939 . This was a huge undertaking , especially as the existing Chancellery was in full operation . After consultation with his assistants , Speer agreed . Although the site could not be cleared until April , Speer was successful in building the large , impressive structure in nine months . The structure included a " Marble Gallery " 146 metres long , almost twice the length of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles . Speer employed thousands of workers in two shifts . Hitler , who had remained away from the project , was overwhelmed when Speer presented it , fully furnished , two days early . In appreciation for the architect 's work on the Chancellery , Hitler awarded Speer the Nazi Golden Party Badge . Tessenow was less impressed , suggesting to Speer that he should have taken nine years over the project . The second Chancellery was damaged in the Battle of Berlin in 1945 and was eventually dismantled by the Soviets , its stone used for a war memorial . 
 During the Chancellery project , the pogrom of Kristallnacht took place . Speer made no mention of it in the first draft of Inside the Third Reich , and it was only on the urgent advice of his publisher that he added a mention of seeing the ruins of the Central Synagogue in Berlin from his car . 
 Speer was under significant psychological pressure during this period of his life . He would later remember : 
 Soon after Hitler had given me the first large architectural commissions , I began to suffer from anxiety in long tunnels , in airplanes , or in small rooms . My heart would begin to race , I would become breathless , the diaphragm would seem to grow heavy , and I would get the impression that my blood pressure was rising tremendously ... Anxiety amidst all my freedom and power ! 
 = = = Wartime architect ( 1939 – 1942 ) = = = 
 Speer supported the German invasion of Poland and subsequent war , though he recognized that it would lead to the postponement , at the least , of his architectural dreams . In his later years , Speer , talking with his biographer @-@ to @-@ be Gitta Sereny , explained how he felt in 1939 : " Of course I was perfectly aware that [ Hitler ] sought world domination ... [ A ] t that time I asked for nothing better . That was the whole point of my buildings . They would have looked grotesque if Hitler had sat still in Germany . All I wanted was for this great man to dominate the globe . " 
 Speer placed his department at the disposal of the Wehrmacht . When Hitler remonstrated , and said it was not for Speer to decide how his workers should be used , Speer simply ignored him . Among Speer 's innovations were quick @-@ reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris ; before long , these units would be used to clear bomb sites . As the war progressed , initially to great German success , Speer continued preliminary work on the Berlin and Nürnberg plans . Speer also oversaw the construction of buildings for the Wehrmacht and Luftwaffe . 
 In 1940 , Joseph Stalin proposed that Speer pay a visit to Moscow . Stalin had been particularly impressed by Speer 's work in Paris , and wished to meet the " Architect of the Reich " . Hitler , alternating between amusement and anger , did not allow Speer to go , fearing that Stalin would put Speer in a " rat hole " until a new Moscow arose . When Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 , Speer came to doubt , despite Hitler 's reassurances , that his projects for Berlin would ever be completed . 
 = = Minister of Armaments = = 
 = = = Appointment and increasing power = = = 
 On February 8 , 1942 , Minister of Armaments Fritz Todt died in a plane crash shortly after taking off from Hitler 's eastern headquarters at Rastenburg . Speer , who had arrived in Rastenburg the previous evening , had accepted Todt 's offer to fly with him to Berlin , but had canceled some hours before takeoff ( Speer stated in his memoirs that the cancellation was because of exhaustion from travel and a late @-@ night meeting with Hitler ) . Later that day , Hitler appointed Speer as Todt 's successor to all of his posts . In Inside the Third Reich , Speer recounts his meeting with Hitler and his reluctance to take ministerial office , saying that he only did so because Hitler commanded it . Speer also states that Hermann Göring raced to Hitler 's headquarters on hearing of Todt 's death , hoping to claim Todt 's powers . Hitler instead presented Göring with the fait accompli of Speer 's appointment . 
 At the time of Speer 's accession to the office , the German economy , unlike the British one , was not fully geared for war production . Consumer goods were still being produced at nearly as high a level as during peacetime . No fewer than five " Supreme Authorities " had jurisdiction over armament production — one of which , the Ministry of Economic Affairs , had declared in November 1941 that conditions did not permit an increase in armament production . Few women were employed in the factories , which were running only one shift . One evening soon after his appointment , Speer went to visit a Berlin armament factory ; he found no one on the premises . 
 Speer overcame these difficulties by centralizing power over the war economy in himself . Factories were given autonomy , or as Speer put it , " self @-@ responsibility " , and each factory concentrated on a single product . Backed by Hitler 's strong support ( the dictator stated , " Speer , I 'll sign anything that comes from you " ) , he divided the armament field according to weapon system , with experts rather than civil servants overseeing each department . No department head could be older than 55 — anyone older being susceptible to " routine and arrogance " — and no deputy older than 40 . Over these departments was a central planning committee headed by Speer , which took increasing responsibility for war production , and as time went by , for the German economy itself . According to the minutes of a conference at Wehrmacht High Command in March 1942 , " It is only Speer 's word that counts nowadays . He can interfere in all departments . Already he overrides all departments ... On the whole , Speer 's attitude is to the point . " Goebbels would note in his diary in June 1943 , " Speer is still tops with the Führer . He is truly a genius with organization . " Speer was so successful in his position that by late 1943 , he was widely regarded among the Nazi elite as a possible successor to Hitler . 
 While Speer had tremendous power , he was of course subordinate to Hitler . Nazi officials sometimes went around Speer by seeking direct orders from the dictator . When Speer ordered peacetime building work suspended , the Gauleiters ( Nazi Party district leaders ) obtained an exemption for their pet projects . When Speer sought the appointment of Hanke as a labor czar to optimize the use of German labor , Hitler , under the influence of Martin Bormann , instead appointed Fritz <unk> . Rather than increasing female labor and taking other steps to better organize German labor , as Speer favored , <unk> advocated importing labor from the occupied nations – and did so , obtaining workers for ( among other things ) Speer 's armament factories , using the most brutal methods . 
 On December 10 , 1943 , Speer visited the underground <unk> V @-@ 2 rocket factory that used concentration camp labor . Speer later said he had been shocked by the conditions there ( 5 @.@ 7 percent of the work force died that month ) . 
 By 1943 , the Allies had gained air superiority over Germany , and bombings of German cities and industry had become commonplace . However , the Allies in their strategic bombing campaign did not concentrate on industry , and Speer , with his improvisational skill , was able to overcome bombing losses . In spite of these losses , German production of tanks more than doubled in 1943 , production of planes increased by 80 percent , and production time for Kriegsmarine 's submarines was reduced from one year to two months . Production would continue to increase until the second half of 1944 , by which time enough equipment to supply 270 army divisions was being produced — although the Wehrmacht had only 150 divisions in the field . 
 In January 1944 , Speer fell ill with complications from an inflamed knee , and was away from the office for three months . During his absence , his political rivals ( mainly Göring , and Martin Bormann ) , attempted to have some of his powers permanently transferred to them . According to Speer , SS chief Heinrich Himmler tried to have him physically isolated by having Himmler 's personal physician Karl Gebhardt treat him , though his " care " did not improve his health . Speer 's wife and friends managed to have his case transferred to his friend Dr. Karl Brandt , and he slowly recovered . In April , Speer 's rivals for power succeeded in having him deprived of responsibility for construction , and Speer promptly sent Hitler a bitter letter , concluding with an offer of his resignation . Judging Speer indispensable to the war effort , Field Marshal Erhard Milch persuaded Hitler to try to get his minister to reconsider . Hitler sent Milch to Speer with a message not addressing the dispute but instead stating that he still regarded Speer as highly as ever . According to Milch , upon hearing the message , Speer burst out , " The Führer can kiss my ass ! " After a lengthy argument , Milch persuaded Speer to withdraw his offer of resignation , on the condition his powers were restored . On April 23 , 1944 , Speer went to see Hitler who agreed that " everything [ will ] stay as it was , [ Speer will ] remain the head of all German construction " . According to Speer , while he was successful in this debate , Hitler had also won , " because he wanted and needed me back in his corner , and he got me " . 
 = = = Fall of the Reich = = = 
 Speer 's name was included on the list of members of a post @-@ Hitler government drawn up by the conspirators behind the July 1944 assassination plot to kill Hitler . The list had a question mark and the annotation " to be won over " by his name , which likely saved him from the extensive purges that followed the scheme 's failure . 
 When Speer learned that the Red Army had overrun the Silesian industrial region , he drafted a memo to Hitler noting that Silesia 's coal mines now supplied 60 percent of the Reich 's coal . Without them , Speer wrote , Germany 's coal production would only be a quarter of its 1944 total — not nearly enough to continue the war . He told Hitler in no uncertain terms that without Silesia , " the war is lost . " Hitler merely filed the memo in his safe . 
 By February 1945 , Speer was working to supply areas about to be occupied with food and materials to get them through the hard times ahead . On March 19 , 1945 , Hitler issued his Nero Decree , ordering a scorched earth policy in both Germany and the occupied territories . Hitler 's order , by its terms , deprived Speer of any power to interfere with the decree , and Speer went to confront Hitler , reiterating that the war was lost . Hitler gave Speer 24 hours to reconsider his position , and when the two met the following day , Speer answered , " I stand unconditionally behind you . " However , he demanded the exclusive power to implement the Nero Decree , and Hitler signed an order to that effect . Using this order , Speer worked to persuade generals and Gauleiters to circumvent the Nero Decree and avoid needless sacrifice of personnel and destruction of industry that would be needed after the war . 
 Speer managed to reach a relatively safe area near Hamburg as the Nazi regime finally collapsed , but decided on a final , risky visit to Berlin to see Hitler one more time . Speer stated at Nuremberg , " I felt that it was my duty not to run away like a coward , but to stand up to him again . " Speer visited the Führerbunker on April 22 . Hitler seemed calm and somewhat distracted , and the two had a long , disjointed conversation in which the dictator defended his actions and informed Speer of his intent to commit suicide and have his body burned . In the published edition of Inside the Third Reich , Speer relates that he confessed to Hitler that he had defied the Nero Decree , but then assured Hitler of his personal loyalty , bringing tears to the dictator 's eyes . Speer biographer Gitta Sereny argued , " Psychologically , it is possible that this is the way he remembered the occasion , because it was how he would have liked to behave , and the way he would have liked Hitler to react . But the fact is that none of it happened ; our witness to this is Speer himself . " Sereny notes that Speer 's original draft of his memoirs lacks the confession and Hitler 's tearful reaction , and contains an explicit denial that any confession or emotional exchange took place , as had been alleged in a French magazine article . 
 The following morning , Speer left the Führerbunker ; Hitler curtly bade him farewell . Speer toured the damaged Chancellery one last time before leaving Berlin to return to Hamburg . On April 29 , the day before committing suicide , Hitler dictated a final political testament which dropped Speer from the successor government . Speer was to be replaced by his own subordinate , Karl @-@ Otto Saur . 
 = = Nuremberg trial = = 
 After Hitler 's death , Speer offered his services to the so @-@ called Flensburg Government , headed by Hitler 's successor , Karl Dönitz , and took a significant role in that short @-@ lived regime . On May 15 , an allied delegation arrived and asked Speer if he would be willing to provide information on the effects of the air war . Speer agreed , and over the next several days , provided information on a broad range of subjects . On May 23 , two weeks after the surrender of German forces , British troops arrested the members of the Flensburg Government and brought Nazi Germany to a formal end . 
 Speer was taken to several internment centres for Nazi officials and interrogated . In September 1945 , he was told that he would be tried for war crimes , and several days later , he was taken to Nuremberg and incarcerated there . Speer was indicted on all four possible counts : first , participating in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of crime against peace ; second , planning , initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace ; third , war crimes ; and lastly , crimes against humanity . 
 U.S. Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson , the chief U.S. prosecutor at Nuremberg , alleged , " Speer joined in planning and executing the program to dragoon prisoners of war and foreign workers into German war industries , which waxed in output while the workers waned in starvation . " Speer 's attorney , Dr. Hans <unk> , presented Speer as an artist thrust into political life , who had always remained a non @-@ ideologue and who had been promised by Hitler that he could return to architecture after the war . During his testimony , Speer accepted responsibility for the Nazi regime 's actions . 
 An observer at the trial , journalist and author William L. Shirer , wrote that , compared to his codefendants , Speer " made the most straightforward impression of all and ... during the long trial spoke honestly and with no attempt to shirk his responsibility and his guilt " . Speer also testified that he had planned to kill Hitler in early 1945 by introducing <unk> poison gas into the Führerbunker ventilation shaft . He said his efforts were frustrated by the impracticability of <unk> and his lack of ready access to a replacement nerve agent , and also by the unexpected construction of a tall chimney that put the air intake out of reach . Speer stated his motive was despair at realising that Hitler intended to take the German people down with him . Speer 's supposed assassination plan subsequently met with some skepticism , with Speer 's architectural rival Hermann Giesler sneering , " the second most powerful man in the state did not have a ladder . " 
 Speer was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity , though he was acquitted on the other two counts . His claim that he was unaware of Nazi extermination plans , which probably saved him from hanging , was finally revealed to be false in a private correspondence written in 1971 and publicly disclosed in 2007 . On 1 October 1946 , he was sentenced to 20 years ' imprisonment . While three of the eight judges ( two Soviet and one American ) initially advocated the death penalty for Speer , the other judges did not , and a compromise sentence was reached " after two days ' discussion and some rather bitter horse @-@ trading " . 
 The court 's judgment stated that : 
 ... in the closing stages of the war [ Speer ] was one of the few men who had the courage to tell Hitler that the war was lost and to take steps to prevent the senseless destruction of production facilities , both in occupied territories and in Germany . He carried out his opposition to Hitler 's scorched earth programme ... by deliberately sabotaging it at considerable personal risk . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 For additional detail on Speer 's time at Spandau Prison , see Rudolf Wolters # Spandau years 
 On July 18 , 1947 , Speer and his six fellow prisoners , all former high officials of the Nazi regime , were flown from Nuremberg to Berlin under heavy guard . The prisoners were taken to Spandau Prison in the British Sector of what would become West Berlin , where they would be designated by number , with Speer given Number Five . Initially , the prisoners were kept in solitary confinement for all but half an hour a day , and were not permitted to address each other or their guards . As time passed , the strict regimen was relaxed , especially during the three months in four that the three Western powers were in control ; the four occupying powers took overall control on a monthly rotation . Speer considered himself an outcast among his fellow prisoners for his acceptance of responsibility at Nuremberg . 
 Speer made a deliberate effort to make as productive a use of his time as possible . He wrote , " I am obsessed with the idea of using this time of confinement for writing a book of major importance ... That could mean transforming prison cell into scholar 's den . " The prisoners were forbidden to write memoirs , and mail was severely limited and censored . However , as a result of an offer from a sympathetic orderly , Speer was able to have his writings , which eventually amounted to 20 @,@ 000 sheets , sent to Wolters . By 1954 , Speer had completed his memoirs , which became the basis of Inside the Third Reich , and which Wolters arranged to have transcribed onto 1 @,@ 100 typewritten pages . He was also able to send letters and financial instructions , and to obtain writing paper and letters from the outside . His many letters to his children , all secretly transmitted , eventually formed the basis for Spandau : The Secret Diaries . 
 With the draft memoir complete and clandestinely transmitted , Speer sought a new project . He found one while taking his daily exercise , walking in circles around the prison yard . Measuring the path 's distance carefully , Speer set out to walk the distance from Berlin to Heidelberg . He then expanded his idea into a worldwide journey , visualizing the places he was " traveling " through while walking the path around the prison yard . Speer ordered guidebooks and other materials about the nations through which he imagined he was passing , so as to envisage as accurate a picture as possible . Meticulously calculating every meter traveled , and mapping distances to the real @-@ world geography , he began in northern Germany , passed through Asia by a southern route before entering Siberia , then crossed the Bering Strait and continued southwards , finally ending his sentence 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) south of Guadalajara , Mexico . 
 Speer devoted much of his time and energy to reading . Though the prisoners brought some books with them in their personal property , Spandau Prison had no library so books were sent from Spandau 's municipal library . From 1952 the prisoners were also able to order books from the Berlin central library in Wilmersdorf . Speer was a voracious reader and he completed well over 500 books in the first three years at Spandau alone . He read classic novels , travelogues , books on ancient Egypt , and biographies of such figures as Lucas Cranach , Édouard Manet , and Genghis Khan . Speer took to the prison garden for enjoyment and work , at first to do something constructive while afflicted with writer 's block . He was allowed to build an ambitious garden , transforming what he initially described as a " wilderness " into what the American commander at Spandau described as " Speer 's Garden of Eden " . 
 Speer 's supporters maintained a continual call for his release . Among those who pledged support for Speer 's sentence to be commuted were Charles de Gaulle , U.S. diplomat George Ball , former U.S. High Commissioner John J. McCloy , and former Nuremberg prosecutor Hartley Shawcross . Willy Brandt was a strong advocate of Speer 's , supporting his release , sending flowers to his daughter on the day of his release , and putting an end to the de @-@ Nazification proceedings against Speer , which could have caused his property to be confiscated . A reduced sentence required the consent of all four of the occupying powers , and the Soviets adamantly opposed any such proposal . Speer served his full sentence , and was released on the stroke of midnight as October 1 , 1966 , began . 
 = = Release and later life = = 
 Speer 's release from prison was a worldwide media event , as reporters and photographers crowded both the street outside Spandau and the lobby of the Berlin hotel where Speer spent his first hours of freedom in over 20 years . He said little , reserving most comments for a major interview published in Der Spiegel in November 1966 , in which he again took personal responsibility for crimes of the Nazi regime . Abandoning plans to return to architecture ( two proposed partners died shortly before his release ) , he revised his Spandau writings into two autobiographical books , and later researched and published a third work , about Himmler and the SS . His books , most notably Inside the Third Reich ( in German , <unk> , or Reminiscences ) and Spandau : The Secret Diaries , provide a unique and personal look into the personalities of the Nazi era , and have become much valued by historians . Speer was aided in shaping the works by Joachim Fest and Wolf Jobst Siedler from the publishing house Ullstein . Speer found himself unable to re @-@ establish his relationship with his children , even with his son Albert , who had also become an architect . According to Speer 's daughter Hilde , " One by one my sister and brothers gave up . There was no communication . " 
 Following the publication of his bestselling books , Speer donated a considerable amount of money to Jewish charities . According to Siedler , these donations were as high as 80 % of his royalties . Speer kept the donations anonymous , both for fear of rejection , and for fear of being called a hypocrite . 
 As early as 1953 , when Wolters strongly objected to Speer referring to Hitler in the memoirs draft as a criminal , Speer had predicted that were the writings to be published , he would lose a " good many friends " . This came to pass , as following the publication of Inside the Third Reich , close friends , such as Wolters and sculptor Arno <unk> , distanced themselves from him . Hans Baur , Hitler 's personal pilot , suggested , " Speer must have taken leave of his senses . " Wolters wondered that Speer did not now " walk through life in a hair shirt , distributing his fortune among the victims of National Socialism , forswear all the vanities and pleasures of life and live on locusts and wild honey " . 
 Speer made himself widely available to historians and other enquirers . He did an extensive , in @-@ depth interview for the June 1971 issue of Playboy magazine , in which he stated , " If I didn 't see it , then it was because I didn 't want to see it . " In October 1973 , Speer made his first trip to Britain , flying to London under an assumed name to be interviewed on the BBC Midweek programme by Ludovic Kennedy . Upon arrival , he was detained for almost eight hours at Heathrow Airport when British immigration authorities discovered his true identity . The Home Secretary , Robert Carr , allowed Speer into the country for 48 hours . In the same year he appeared in the The World at War television programme . While in London eight years later to participate in the BBC Newsnight programme , Speer suffered a stroke and died on September 1 , 1981 . Speer had formed a relationship with an Englishwoman of German origin , and was with her at the time of his death . 
 Even to the end of his life , Speer continued to question his actions under Hitler . In his final book , Infiltration , he asks , " What would have happened if Hitler had asked me to make decisions that required the utmost hardness ? ... How far would I have gone ? ... If I had occupied a different position , to what extent would I have ordered atrocities if Hitler had told me to do so ? " Speer leaves the questions unanswered . 
 = = Legacy and controversy = = 
 The view of Speer as an unpolitical " miracle man " is challenged by Columbia historian Adam Tooze . In his 2006 book , The Wages of Destruction , Tooze , following Gitta Sereny , argues that Speer 's ideological commitment to the Nazi cause was greater than he claimed . Tooze further contends that an insufficiently challenged Speer " mythology " ( partly fostered by Speer himself through politically motivated , tendentious use of statistics and other propaganda ) had led many historians to assign Speer far more credit for the increases in armaments production than was warranted and give insufficient consideration to the " highly political " function of the so @-@ called armaments miracle . 
 = = = Architectural legacy = = = 
 Little remains of Speer 's personal architectural works , other than the plans and photographs . No buildings designed by Speer during the Nazi era are extant in Berlin , other than the <unk> ( heavy load bearing body ) , built around 1941 . The 46 @-@ foot ( 14 m ) high concrete cylinder was used to measure ground subsidence as part of feasibility studies for a massive triumphal arch and other large structures proposed as part of Welthauptstadt Germania , Hitler 's planned postwar renewal project for the city . The cylinder is now a protected landmark and is open to the public . Along the Strasse des 17 . Juni , a double row of lampposts designed by Speer still stands . The tribune of the Zeppelinfeld stadium in Nuremberg , though partly demolished , can also be seen . More of Speer 's own personal work can be found in London , where he redesigned the interior of the German Embassy to the United Kingdom , then located at 7 – 9 Carlton House Terrace . Since 1967 , it has served as the offices of the Royal Society . His work there , stripped of its Nazi fixtures and partially covered by carpets , survives in part . 
 Another legacy was the Arbeitsstab <unk> <unk> Städte ( Working group on Reconstruction of destroyed cities ) , authorized by Speer in 1943 to rebuild bombed German cities to make them more livable in the age of the automobile . Headed by Wolters , the working group took a possible military defeat into their calculations . The Arbeitsstab 's recommendations served as the basis of the postwar redevelopment plans in many cities , and Arbeitsstab members became prominent in the rebuilding . 
 = = = Actions regarding the Jews = = = 
 As General Building Inspector , Speer was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement . From 1939 onward , the Department used the Nuremberg Laws to evict Jewish tenants of non @-@ Jewish landlords in Berlin , to make way for non @-@ Jewish tenants displaced by redevelopment or bombing . Eventually , 75 @,@ 000 Jews were displaced by these measures . Speer was aware of these activities , and inquired as to their progress . At least one original memo from Speer so inquiring still exists , as does the Chronicle of the Department 's activities , kept by Wolters . 
 Following his release from Spandau , Speer presented to the German Federal Archives an edited version of the Chronicle , stripped by Wolters of any mention of the Jews . When David Irving discovered discrepancies between the edited Chronicle and other documents , Wolters explained the situation to Speer , who responded by suggesting to Wolters that the relevant pages of the original Chronicle should " cease to exist " . Wolters did not destroy the Chronicle , and , as his friendship with Speer deteriorated , allowed access to the original Chronicle to doctoral student Matthias Schmidt ( who , after obtaining his doctorate , developed his thesis into a book , Albert Speer : The End of a Myth ) . Speer considered Wolters ' actions to be a " betrayal " and a " stab in the back " . The original Chronicle reached the Archives in 1983 , after both Speer and Wolters had died . 
 = = = Knowledge of the Holocaust = = = 
 Speer maintained at Nuremberg and in his memoirs that he had no knowledge of the Holocaust . In Inside the Third Reich , he wrote that in mid @-@ 1944 , he was told by Hanke ( by then Gauleiter of Lower Silesia ) that the minister should never accept an invitation to inspect a concentration camp in neighbouring Upper Silesia , as " he had seen something there which he was not permitted to describe and moreover could not describe " . Speer later concluded that Hanke must have been speaking of Auschwitz , and blamed himself for not inquiring further of Hanke or seeking information from Himmler or Hitler : 
 These seconds [ when Hanke told Speer this , and Speer did not inquire ] were uppermost in my mind when I stated to the international court at the Nuremberg Trial that , as an important member of the leadership of the Reich , I had to share the total responsibility for all that had happened . For from that moment on I was inescapably contaminated morally ; from fear of discovering something which might have made me turn from my course , I had closed my eyes ... Because I failed at that time , I still feel , to this day , responsible for Auschwitz in a wholly personal sense . 
 Much of the controversy over Speer 's knowledge of the Holocaust has centered on his presence at the Posen Conference on 6 October 1943 , at which Himmler gave a speech detailing the ongoing Holocaust to Nazi leaders . Himmler said , " The grave decision had to be taken to cause this people to vanish from the earth ... In the lands we occupy , the Jewish question will be dealt with by the end of the year . " Speer is mentioned several times in the speech , and Himmler seems to address him directly . In Inside the Third Reich , Speer mentions his own address to the officials ( which took place earlier in the day ) but does not mention Himmler 's speech . 
 In October 1971 , American historian Erich Goldhagen published an article arguing that Speer was present for Himmler 's speech . According to Fest in his biography of Speer , " Goldhagen 's accusation certainly would have been more convincing " had he not placed supposed incriminating statements linking Speer with the Holocaust in quotation marks , attributed to Himmler , which were in fact invented by Goldhagen . In response , after considerable research in the German Federal Archives in Koblenz , Speer said he had left Posen around noon ( long before Himmler 's speech ) to journey to Hitler 's headquarters at Rastenburg . In Inside the Third Reich , published before the Goldhagen article , Speer recalled that on the evening after the conference , many Nazi officials were so drunk that they needed help boarding the special train which was to take them to a meeting with Hitler . One of his biographers , Dan van der Vat , suggests this necessarily implies he must have still been present at Posen then , and must have heard Himmler 's speech . In response to Goldhagen 's article , Speer had alleged that in writing Inside the Third Reich , he erred in reporting an incident that happened at another conference at Posen a year later , as happening in 1943 . In 2007 , The Guardian reported that a letter from Speer dated December 23 , 1971 had been found in Britain in a collection of his correspondence to Hélène Jeanty , widow of a Belgian resistance fighter . In the letter , Speer states that he had been present for Himmler 's presentation in Posen . Speer wrote : " There is no doubt – I was present as Himmler announced on October 6 , 1943 , that all Jews would be killed . " 
 In 2005 , the Daily Telegraph reported that documents had surfaced indicating that Speer had approved the allocation of materials for the expansion of Auschwitz after two of his assistants toured the facility on a day when almost a thousand Jews were killed . The documents supposedly bore annotations in Speer 's own handwriting . Speer biographer Gitta Sereny stated that , due to his workload , Speer would not have been personally aware of such activities . 
 The debate over Speer 's knowledge of , or complicity in , the Holocaust made him a symbol for people who were involved with the Nazi regime yet did not have ( or claimed not to have had ) an active part in the regime 's atrocities . As film director Heinrich <unk> remarked , " [ Speer created ] a market for people who said , ' Believe me , I didn 't know anything about [ the Holocaust ] . Just look at the Führer 's friend , he didn 't know about it either . ' " 
 = = Career summary = = 
 Joined NSDAP : March 1 , 1931 
 Party Number : 474 @,@ 481 
 = = = Nazi Party positions = = = 
 Member , National Socialist Motor Corps : 1931 
 Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations : 1933 
 Department Chief , German Labor Front : 1934 
 Chief , NSDAP Directorate for Technical Matters : 1942 
 From 1934 to 1939 , Speer was often referred to as " First Architect of the Reich " , however this was mainly a title given to him by Hitler and not an actual political position within the Nazi Party or German government . 
 = = = Government positions = = = 
 General Building Inspector for the Reich Capitol : 1937 
 Reich Minister for Weapons , Munitions , and Armaments : 1942 
 In 1943 , under his authority as Reich Minister of Armaments , Speer also became the Director of Organisation Todt . The standard uniform Speer wore during the later half of World War II was an insignia @-@ less Nazi Party brown jacket , with an " Org Todt " armband . 
 = = = Political ranks = = = 
 <unk> : 1931 
 <unk> der <unk> ( later replaced by <unk> ; equivalent to Leutnant or Second Lieutenant ) : 1934 
 <unk> der <unk> ( later replaced by <unk> ; equivalent to Captain ) : 1935 
 <unk> ( no equivalent , but senior to Colonel ) : 1939 
 <unk> ( no equivalent , but senior to Colonel ) : 1941 
 <unk> ( equivalent to Generalmajor or Brigadier @-@ General ) : 1942 
 <unk> ( equivalent to Generalleutnant or Major @-@ General ) : 1944 
 = = = Awards and decorations = = = 
 Golden Party Badge 
 Golden Hitler Youth Badge ( with Oak Leaves ) 
 Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross 
 NSDAP Long Service Award ( Silver – 15 Years ) 
 Honour Chevron for the Old Guard 
 = Volvopluteus earlei = 
 Volvopluteus earlei is a species of mushroom in the family Pluteaceae . It was originally described in 1911 by American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill as Volvariopsis earlei , based on collections made in a Cuban banana field . The fungus was later shuffled to the genera Volvaria and Volvariella before molecular studies placed it in Volvopluteus , a genus newly described in 2011 . 
 The cap of Volvopluteus earlei is typically between 2 @.@ 5 – 5 cm ( 1 – 2 in ) in diameter , white , and is markedly viscid when fresh . The gills start out as white but they soon turn pink . The stipe is white and measures 5 cm ( 2 in ) long and 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide . It has a smooth , white , sac @-@ like volva at its base . The cap produces a pinkish @-@ brown spore print made of individual elliptical spores measuring up to 11 micrometers long . A saprotrophic fungus that grows on grassy fields , V. earlei has been reported from Africa , Europe , and North America . Microscopic features and DNA sequence data are of great importance for separating this taxon from related species . V. earlei can be distinguished from the three other Volvariella by differences in the size of the fruit bodies , cap color , spore size , and the presence or absence and form of cystidia . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was originally described by American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill in 1911 based on three collections made by his colleague Franklin Sumner Earle in Santiago de las <unk> ( Cuba ) a few years earlier . It was originally described by Murrill in the genus Volvariopsis , created in the same publication , because at that time there was considerable confusion about which generic name was more appropriate for the mushrooms traditionally classified in the genus Volvariella . At the time of Murrill 's proposal most species in this group were classified in the genus Volvaria erected by Paul Kummer in 1871 , but mycologists realized that the name Volvaria was already taken as it had been coined by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle for a genus of lichens in 1805 . A year later Murrill transferred his species of Volvariopsis to the genus Volvaria , citing practical concerns about usage of names for non @-@ taxonomists : " A number of species of gill @-@ fungi described by me from tropical America in Mycologia , 1911 – 1912 , under genera not found in Saccardo 's Sylloge , are here recombined for the benefit of those having or using herbaria arranged according to this work . Collectors , pathologists , and others who may not be intimately acquainted with taxonomic methods will probably find it more convenient to follow the one system until a comprehensive <unk> is completed , at least for some important groups " . 
 Ultimately , neither Volvaria nor Volvariopsis would be used as the correct name for this group . The generic name Volvariella , proposed by the Argentinean mycologist Carlos Luis Spegazzini in 1899 , would be adopted for this group in 1953 after a proposal to conserve Kummer ’ s Volvaria against De Candolle ’ s Volvaria was rejected by the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi established under the principles of the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants . The combination Volvariella earlei would be made by Robert L. Shaffer , who authored the first comprehensive monographic revision of Volvariella in North America in 1957 . 
 The phylogenetic study of Alfredo Justo and colleagues showed that Volvariella earlei is closely related to Volvariella gloiocephala and that this group of species constitutes a separate lineage from the majority of the species traditionally classified in Volvariella . Therefore , this taxon was transferred to the newly proposed genus Volvopluteus . The specific epithet earlei comes from the surname of Franklin Sumner Earle , the collector of the original samples , to whom Murrill dedicated the species . The original specimens of this species are still preserved at the herbarium of the New York Botanical Garden . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of Volvopluteus earlei is between 25 and 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , more or less ovate or hemispherical when young , then expanding to convex or flat . It can have a low , broad umbo in the center in old specimens ; the surface is markedly viscid in fresh fruit bodies ; the cap is pure white , but sometimes develops pale brown tinges with age . The gills are crowded together , free from attachment to the stipe , ventricose , and up to 6 mm broad ; they are white when young but turn pink with age as the spores mature . The cylindrical stipe is 30 – 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long and 2 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide , and broadening towards the base . Its surface is white , smooth or slightly pruinose ( as if covered with a fine white powder ) . The sac @-@ like volva is up to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) high , white and has a smooth surface . The context is white in the stipe and cap and it does not change color when bruised or exposed to air . The smell and taste of the flesh are described as indistinct or herbaceous . The spore print is pinkish @-@ brown . 
 The spores are ellipsoid and measure 11 – 16 by 8 – 11 µm . Basidia are 20 – 40 by 8 – 16 µm ; they are usually four @-@ spored but sometimes two @-@ spored , and , more rarely , one @-@ spored forms can occur . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are absent in most collections ; if present they are scarce and similar to the cheilocystidia . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) measure 30 – 70 by 10 – 35 µm , and are club- , spindle- , or flask @-@ shaped , and usually each one has an apical outgrowth up to 40 µm long . The cheilocystidia completely cover the gill edge . In the form <unk> ( <unk> ) Vizzini & Contu , both pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia are completely absent . The cap cuticle ( pileipellis ) is an ixocutis ( parallel hyphae embedded in a gelatinous matrix ) . The stipe cuticle ( stipitipellis ) is a cutis ( parallel hyphae not embedded in a gelatinous matrix ) . Caulocystidia ( cystidia on the cap ) are sometimes present ; they measure 65 – 140 by 10 – 25 µm , and are mostly cylindrical . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 Volvopluteus earlei is a saprotrophic mushroom that grows in gardens and grassy fields . It was originally found in banana fields in Cuba . In Africa , Spain and Italy it has been reported mostly in urban or anthropogenic garden areas . It usually fruits in groups of several mushrooms but it can also be found growing solitary . This species has been reported from Cuba , North Carolina , Mexico , Spain and Italy . Molecular data have so far corroborated that the European and African collections correspond to the same species . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Molecular analyses of the internal transcribed spacer region clearly separate the four species currently recognized in Volvopluteus , but morphological identification can be more difficult due to the sometimes overlapping morphological variation among the species . Size of the fruit bodies , color of the cap , spore size , presence or absence of cystidia and morphology of the cystidia are the most important characters for morphological species delimitation in the genus . Volvopluteus gloiocephalus has larger fruit bodies ( cap more than 5 cm ( 2 in ) in diameter ) , has pleurocystidia , and the cheilocystidia lack long apical outgrowths . V. asiaticus has pleurocystidia and has predominantly flask @-@ shaped cheilocystidia without long apical outgrowths . In V. michiganensis , pleurocystidia are also present , and this species has smaller spores , typically less than 12 @.@ 5 µm long . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 370 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 370 ( designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR 370 ) is a 16 @.@ 73 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 26 @.@ 92 km ) state highway located in Susquehanna and Wayne counties in Pennsylvania . The western terminus is at Route 171 in East Ararat . The eastern terminus is at Route 191 in Buckingham Township near Hancock , New York . Route 370 was first designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in 1928 from the intersection with then Route 70 in East Ararat to an intersection with Route 570 in the hamlet of Preston Park ( in Preston Township ) . The route was extended to an intersection with Route 90 ( now Route 191 ) in 1946 , when the 23 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 37 km ) Route 570 was decommissioned . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 370 begins at an intersection with Route 171 in the hamlet of East Ararat in Ararat Township . Route 370 heads to the northeast through tree patches and fields before entering a dense patch of woods . Upon leaving the woods , Route 370 crosses the county line from Susquehanna County to Wayne County and enters Preston Township . At the intersection with Mud Pond Road , the highway bends eastward but returns to its northeastern progression at an intersection with Blewett Road . Route 370 turns to the east once again and enters the community of Orson . 
 In Orson , Route 370 passes local farms and some houses . Shortly after it intersects with the northern terminus of Route 670 ( Belmont Turnpike North ) , which continues north as Oxbow Road . Route 370 continues eastward out of Orson , passing Orson Pond and several residences in a mainly rural area before entering the hamlet of Poyntelle . In Poyntelle , the highway passes to the north of Lake Lorain and Lake Lorain Golf Course . At the intersection with Lake Lorain Road , Route 370 turns to the northeast once again , paralleling Cribbs Road into downtown Poyntelle . The two roads cross a former alignment of the Ontario and Western Railroad before merging just north of Poyntelle . 
 After Cribbs Road , Route 370 turns northward , entering Lakewood in dense woods . The route passes Little Hickory Lake and soon Hickory Lake . After entering the Tamarack Swamp and passing a local pond , Route 370 makes a gradual curve to the east at an intersection with Dixie Highway . The route remains rural , paralleling the Ontario and Western Railroad alignment into the hamlet of <unk> . In <unk> , the route is primarily residential , passing the local school . At the intersection with Como Road , Route 370 turns to the northeast , paralleling the railroad alignment into the hamlet of Preston Park . 
 Through Preston Park , Route 370 intersects with an old alignment of itself twice before coming to the main intersection in town , the northern terminus of Route 247 ( <unk> Drive ) and its continuation Rabbit Run Road . The road turns northeastward and passes several residences before intersecting with Shehawken Road , where the road becomes mainly wooded once again . The route parallels an alignment of former State Route 570 and the former Ontario and Western Railroad into Buckingham Township , where the route enters the hamlet of Starlight . In Starlight , Route 370 passes the former Ontario and Western station and turns eastward once the old alignment of Route 570 merges in . After passing a pond , the highway leaves Starlight and continues northeastward in dense forestry . A short while later , the route turns northward and weaves to an intersection with Route 191 ( the Hancock Highway ) in Buckingham Township . This serves as the northern terminus of Route 370 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 370 was first signed along Crosstown Highway in 1928 from its current western terminus of Route 171 ( then designated Route 70 ) in Ararat Township to an intersection with Route 570 , another spur of Route 70 in the hamlet of Preston Park . The entire stretch was paved by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in 1932 . At that point , Route 570 used the current alignment from the intersection with Shehawken Road to the intersection with Route 90 ( now Route 191 ) . Route 570 , along with Route 470 and Route 270 were decommissioned in 1946 by the Department of Highways , and Route 370 was extended along the alignment from Shehawken Road to Route 90 . In 1961 , Route 370 's termini both changed to Route 171 and Route 191 when both were renumbered to prevent duplication with Interstate 70 and Interstate 90 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hatem Ben Arfa = 
 Hatem Ben Arfa ( Arabic : <unk> بن <unk> , French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 7 March 1987 ) is a French footballer who plays as a winger and an attacking midfielder for Paris Saint @-@ Germain . He has been described as " one of the best @-@ rated talents in France " , but has been criticised by the media and players alike for lacking discipline . 
 Ben Arfa 's career started in the Île @-@ de @-@ France region , where he trained at AC Boulogne @-@ Billancourt and Versailles . In 1999 , he was selected to attend the Clairefontaine academy . He spent three years there before leaving for Lyon , where he won four Ligue 1 titles . In his early career at Lyon , he played as a centre forward , but moved into a winger role during the 2007 – 08 season . In the summer of 2008 , Ben Arfa signed with rivals Marseille for € 11 million in a move that required the intervention of the Ligue de Football Professionnel . With Marseille , he won the 2009 – 10 league title , his fifth overall , as well as the Coupe de la Ligue in 2010 . After two years at Marseille , Ben Arfa joined English club Newcastle United on loan for the 2010 – 11 season . The deal was made permanent later in the season . 
 Ben Arfa spent four years at Newcastle , with a loan spell at Hull City in his final season at the club . He signed for Nice in January 2015 , but was unable to make his debut until August , having already represented Newcastle United Reserves and Hull City the previous season . He scored seventeen goals in thirty @-@ two league appearances for Nice , attracting the interest of several European clubs , and signed for Paris Saint @-@ Germain on 1 July 2016 . 
 Ben Arfa is a former French youth international and has played at all levels for France . At the under @-@ 17 level , he was a part of the team that won the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Championship . Ben Arfa was called up to the senior team for the first time in October 2007 for a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against the Faroe Islands . He has made fifteen appearances for France , scoring twice . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Ben Arfa was born into a family with a football history . His father was the former Tunisian international footballer Kamel Ben Arfa . Ben Arfa began his career in France at ASV <unk> @-@ <unk> . After two years at the club , he moved a few miles north to <unk> CF 92 . In 1998 , Ben Arfa joined sporting club AC Boulogne @-@ Billancourt . The following year , he was selected to attend the Clairefontaine academy . While at Clairefontaine , he was a part of A la Clairefontaine , a documentary series which chronicled the lives of some of France 's top young footballers during their time at the academy . During the series , an episode showed Ben Arfa getting into an argument with Abou Diaby . While training at Clairefontaine during the weekdays , he played for FC Versailles on the weekends . 
 = = = Lyon = = = 
 Already labeled a prodigy at the age of fifteen , Ben Arfa joined Lyon , a club that had just won its first ever Ligue 1 championship . In August 2004 , after spending two years in the youth divisions of the Lyon academy , he signed his first professional contract , agreeing to a three @-@ year deal despite late interest from English club Chelsea and Dutch outfit Ajax . Along with fellow youth player Karim Benzema , he was promoted to the senior squad and was assigned the number 34 shirt . 
 Ben Arfa made his professional debut on the opening day of the 2004 – 05 season against Nice . Lyon won the match 1 – 0 with a goal from Giovane Élber , a few minutes after Ben Arfa had come on . After making a few substitute appearances , he made his first start on 11 September 2004 in a 2 – 1 victory over Rennes playing 56 minutes . Ben Arfa scored his first professional goal two months later on 10 November in a Coupe de la Ligue match against Lille , converting from the penalty spot in extra time to give Lyon a 2 – 1 lead , though Lille scored two late goals , beating Lyon 3 – 2 . He made his UEFA Champions League debut in a group stage match against Manchester United coming on as a substitute for Sidney Govou . 
 The following season , Ben Arfa switched to the first team number 18 shirt , but his substitute @-@ to @-@ start ratio was still high as seven of his 12 appearances were as a substitute . He made his first Champions League start in a 2 – 1 victory over Norwegian club Rosenborg , providing the assist on the game @-@ winning goal scored by the Brazilian Fred in the last minutes of the match . Ben Arfa scored his first league goal during the 2006 – 07 season against Sedan just before half @-@ time . The goal proved to be the winner as Lyon won the match 1 – 0 . 
 After the departure of wingers Florent Malouda and Sylvain Wiltord , new manager Alain Perrin preferred the more modern 4 – 3 – 3 formation , and moved Ben Arfa to left wing for the 2007 – 08 season . Ben Arfa quickly adapted to the position and scored his first goal in a 5 – 1 demolition of Metz on 15 September , though his performance was overshadowed by a Karim Benzema hat trick . Arguably his best performances in a Lyon shirt came in a period of 12 days , during which he played a league match on 28 October against Paris Saint @-@ Germain and a Champions League game against German club VfB Stuttgart on 7 November . He scored two goals in each match with both results being in favor of Lyon . Following the season , he was named the National Union of Professional Footballers ( UNFP ) Young Player of the Year . 
 Despite rumors of a rift between himself and Benzema , Ben Arfa signed a contract extension with Lyon in March 2008 until 2010 . However , his career at Lyon reached an impasse after he got into a training session scuffle with Sébastien Squillaci . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 Despite reported interest from English clubs Everton , Manchester United , Arsenal , and Spanish club Real Madrid , rumors of a move to rivals Marseille began to surface . On 28 June 2008 , Lyon confirmed that a proposed transfer to Marseille had been cancelled for the time being . However , Ben Arfa confirmed to the local La Provence newspaper on 29 June that he had signed for the southern coast club and would not return to Lyon for pre @-@ season training the following day . La Provence later reported that Ben Arfa had in fact missed training in Lyon on 30 June , confirming his intentions . 
 Ben Arfa officially joined Marseille on 1 July 2008 for € 12 million , with future incentives to be included later , after an agreement was reached between Marseille and Lyon in a meeting organized by the Ligue de Football Professionnel . As a result of the disagreement over the transfer , in December 2008 , Ben Arfa told the local Lyon newspaper Le <unk> that his former team lacked class and was not a great team . Ben Arfa was presented to the media and had his first training session with the club the same day . He was given the number 20 shirt . On 16 July , Ben Arfa was involved in another training session bust @-@ up , this time with striker and France international Djibril Cissé . Cissé later joined English club Sunderland on loan . 
 Ben Arfa made his league debut on the opening day of the season in a 4 – 4 draw with Rennes . He scored his first goal for Les Marseillais in that match . He continued in form scoring six times in his first 11 matches . However , his reputation for controversy continued to haunt him when he was involved in another dispute , this time with the Cameroon international Modeste M <unk> during a warm up session ahead of the club 's UEFA Champions League match against Liverpool . The two had to be separated by Ronald Zubar . Controversy arose again following Marseille 's 4 – 2 loss to Le Classique rivals Paris @-@ Saint Germain . He drew the ire of manager Eric Gerets after his refusal to leave the bench to warm up . Ben Arfa later said he was injured much to the chagrin of Gerets , but later apologized for the incident to the media and Gerets himself . Upon his return to the squad , Ben Arfa responded by scoring a goal and providing the assists on both the other goals in a 3 – 1 victory over Saint @-@ Étienne . 
 Ben Arfa switched to the number 10 shirt for the 2009 – 10 season and made his debut on the opening match day of the season in a 2 – 0 away victory over Grenoble appearing as a substitute in the 68th minute . The following week , he earned his first start of the season against Lille and assisted the winning goal scored by Brandão . Controversy surfaced again , however , when , on 8 October 2009 , Ben Arfa was fined € 10 @,@ 000 by the club for missing a training session . Ben Arfa blamed the absence on airport delays as he was in Tunisia visiting family members during the international break . A month later , on 18 November , he got into a heated argument with manager Didier Deschamps during a training session , for which Ben Arfa later apologized . Under Deschamps in the first half of the season , Ben Arfa appeared in 15 of the club 's 20 league matches and only played the full 90 minutes in two matches , a 2 – 1 defeat against Monaco and a 2 – 0 defeat to Auxerre . 
 Ben Arfa 's play during the 2010 portion of the season earned praise from both Deschamps and sporting director José Anigo . On 10 January 2010 , Ben Arfa scored his first goal of the season against amateur club <unk> in the Coupe de France . A month later , he was instrumental in Marseille 's 5 – 1 victory over Valenciennes assisting on the opening goal scored by <unk> González . Later that month , Ben Arfa scored an away goal in the first leg of the club 's UEFA Europa League tie against Danish club FC <unk> . In the return leg in Marseille , Ben Arfa struck again , scoring the opening goal in the 43rd minute . Marseille won the match 3 – 1 and the tie 6 – 2 on aggregate . On 27 February , he scored his first league goal of the season in a 3 – 0 victory over Paris Saint @-@ Germain . Ben Arfa 's play in the month of February was validated when he was named the UNFP Player of the Month . Marseille won all four of the league matches the team contested with Ben Arfa starting all of them . On 7 April , Ben Arfa converted a penalty in a 3 – 0 win over Sochaux . The victory placed the club at the top of the table , and they remained there for the rest of the season and clinched the title on 5 May with a 3 – 1 win over Rennes . Ben Arfa appeared as a substitute in the match . 
 = = = = Departure from Marseille = = = = 
 On 22 July 2010 , reports surfaced suggesting that English club Newcastle United were looking to sign Ben Arfa . After being questioned , Newcastle 's manager Chris Hughton denied the reports . Five days later , Ben Arfa 's agent declared that Newcastle were indeed interested in the player , along with German clubs Hoffenheim and Werder Bremen , Turkish club Galatasaray , and Italian club A.C. Milan . On 9 August , a season @-@ long loan with an option to make the move permanent was reportedly being negotiated between the two clubs . However , a loan @-@ fee for the deal could not be reached with Newcastle offering £ 650 @,@ 000 ; £ 350 @,@ 000 short of what Marseille wanted . On 12 August , Marseille president Jean @-@ Claude <unk> announced that Ben Arfa would not be moving to Newcastle and even went as far as to say that an offer from the club had not even existed . 
 Similar to his actions in leaving Lyon , Ben Arfa responded to the statement by telling the French sports newspaper L 'Equipe that he would not be returning to La Commanderie , Marseille 's training facility , and would not play with the team for the remainder of the season . He also stated that his relationship with Deschamps had turned sour and was beyond repair . Ben Arfa confirmed his intentions by travelling to Newcastle upon Tyne , without authorization , with hopes that Newcastle and Marseille would come to an agreement . After returning to Marseille , he missed several training sessions with his parent club and was , subsequently , left off the match day squad for two league matches against Valenciennes and Lorient . Ben Arfa 's number 10 was later given to new signing André @-@ Pierre Gignac , which signaled a transfer was imminent . 
 On 19 August , a proposed move to Werder Bremen failed to come to fruition after the club 's sporting director Klaus <unk> declared that the club was not interested in Ben Arfa , despite reports of Werder Bremen offering Marseille a transfer fee of € 8 million . On 27 August , <unk> confirmed that the club had reached an agreement on a loan fee with Newcastle for the transfer of Ben Arfa with personal terms being the only stumbling block in the deal . Marseille agreed to a £ 2 million loan fee . Newcastle had been set to pay Marseille another £ 5 million if Ben Arfa had made 25 club appearances in the 2010 – 11 season , which would have made the transfer permanent . 
 = = = = Newcastle United ( loan ) = = = = 
 On 27 August 2010 , Ben Arfa agreed to personal terms with Newcastle and , the following day , the club confirmed that it had signed Ben Arfa on a season @-@ long loan . He made his debut on 11 September 2010 , appearing as a substitute in a 2 – 0 defeat at home to Blackpool . He scored his first goal for Newcastle on his full debut on 18 September in the 1 – 0 victory against Everton . On 3 October , Ben Arfa suffered a broken tibia and fibula in his left leg while playing in a league match against Manchester City . The injury came as a result of a tackle by opposing midfielder Nigel de Jong . On 5 January 2011 , Marseille and Newcastle both confirmed on their websites that they had reached an agreement for the permanent transfer of Ben Arfa to Newcastle with the player agreeing to a four and a half year contract . The transfer fee was undisclosed . 
 Ben Arfa spent most of his rehabilitation in his home city of Paris recuperating at the Clairefontaine ( football ) academy . In January 2011 , it was reported by the English media that Ben Arfa had undergone another surgery in November 2010 to repair complications that were preventing his shin bones from healing properly . On 23 February , Newcastle manager Alan Pardew confirmed that Ben Arfa was running and could return to the team in April . However , days later , Pardew revealed that he wasn 't prepared to rush the player 's rehabilitation process and that Ben Arfa probably wouldn 't be available until May , stating " I am going to protect him . I can 't just throw him in " . Ben Arfa returned to training with Newcastle on 5 April . He participated fully in warm @-@ ups with the first @-@ team , but spent the majority of the training session doing light training and fitness work . Ben Arfa ultimately failed to make any more appearances with the team in the 2010 – 11 season . 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 After continuing his rehabilitation during the summer , ahead of the 2011 – 12 season , Ben Arfa began participating in friendly matches with the senior team . He made his return to the team on 15 July 2011 in a match against Conference National club Darlington . Five days later , in the team 's pre @-@ season tour of the United States , he sustained an ankle injury in a match against Sporting Kansas City . Ben Arfa ventured back to his home country to rehab the injury and returned to Newcastle on 18 September . He was , subsequently , named to the first @-@ team to participate in the team 's Football League Cup tie against Nottingham Forest on 21 September . Ben Arfa made his season debut in the match against Nottingham Forest appearing as a substitute . Three days later , he made his Premier League return , coming on as a substitute in a 3 – 1 win over Blackburn Rovers . On 26 December 2011 , after going the majority of the autumn campaign without scoring a goal , Ben Arfa scored his first goal of the season in a 2 – 0 away win over Bolton . 
 On 7 January 2012 , Ben Arfa scored Newcastle 's opening goal in its FA Cup third round tie against Blackburn Rovers . The goal , described by BBC Sport as " magical " , drew the match 1 – 1 and Newcastle later went on to win the tie 2 – 1 . On 22 January 2012 , Ben Arfa scored in Newcastle 's 5 – 2 defeat to Fulham at Craven Cottage . Two months later , Ben Arfa scored the opener in Newcastle 's away league match against Arsenal . The hosts , however , won the match 2 – 1 . On 25 March , he scored one goal and provided the assists on the other two goals in a 3 – 1 victory against West Brom . Two weeks later , on Easter Monday , Ben Arfa scored again against Bolton Wanderers . The goal , described as " a moment of genius " by British publication The Independent , as he was passed the ball just inside his own half , he proceeded to turn and speed past 4 Bolton players , showing incredible control in doing so , and slotted it past Bolton goalkeeper <unk> <unk> , the goal was the opener and Newcastle went on to win the match 2 – 0 . 
 Despite having a disrupted pre @-@ season due to his participation in Euro 2012 , Ben Arfa enjoyed a good start to the new Premier League season . On the opening weekend of the season he won and converted a penalty that gave Newcastle a 2 – 1 victory over Tottenham . Two weeks later he scored with a spectacular 25 @-@ yard drive , on his weaker right foot , to earn Newcastle a point in a 1 – 1 draw against Aston Villa . He injured his hamstring during December , and made his comeback against <unk> <unk> in the Europa League on 7 March 2013 , his 26th birthday . He then developed an injury which kept him out of the team until the second leg of the Europa League quarter final against Benfica on the 11 April 2013 when he came on as a second @-@ half substitute . Ben Arfa scored the equaliser in a 2 – 1 away win at Loftus Road from the penalty spot as Newcastle confirmed their Premier League status for the next season . 
 Ben Arfa started the 2013 – 14 season in a rich vein of form , securing Newcastle 's first win of the season by scoring an individual goal against Fulham and scoring and making an assist in the following game against Aston Villa . Ben Arfa 's third goal of the season when the Frenchman converted a late penalty away at Crystal Palace to help Newcastle ease to 3 – 0 victory . 
 = = = = Hull City ( loan ) = = = = 
 On 2 September 2014 , Ben Arfa signed for Hull City on a season @-@ long loan . He made his debut on 15 September , replacing fellow debutant Abel Hernández for the final 11 minutes of a 2 – 2 home draw against West Ham United . In December 2014 , however , Ben Arfa unexpectedly left England , with Hull manager Steve Bruce later admitting he did not know where the player was and that his career with Hull appeared to be over . 
 On 4 January 2015 , Ben Arfa was released from his Newcastle United contract . 
 = = = Nice = = = 
 On 5 January 2015 , Ben Arfa signed a deal with Ligue 1 side Nice , stating that " Even if Real Madrid had called at that moment , my mind was made up . " He said that he had returned to France because " There are people here who trust me , who do not judge me as some people want to judge me through the press . " 
 Ben Arfa would be ineligible to play for the club , due to a rule that a player can only play for two clubs in a single season , having already played for both Newcastle United and Hull City . On 3 February , Ben Arfa told a press conference his deal with Nice had been terminated , however , on 9 June , Nice would re @-@ sign Ben Arfa at the start of the 2015 – 16 Ligue 1 season . 
 Ben Arfa made his debut for Nice against AS Monaco on 14 August 2015 at home . He scored his first goal for his new club against Troyes from the penalty spot . The game ended 3 – 3 . In the next match , Ben Arfa scored a solo goal against Caen . 
 = = = Paris Saint @-@ Germain = = = 
 On 1 July 2016 , amidst reported interest from all over Europe , Ben Arfa signed for Paris Saint @-@ Germain on a two @-@ year deal , after his contract ran out at Nice . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Ben Arfa has earned caps with all of France 's youth teams . With the under @-@ 16 team , he made ten appearances scoring seven goals . Ben Arfa made his debut with the team at the 2003 edition of the Aegean Cup in Turkey . He scored his first goal in the tournament on 12 January in a 3 – 2 win over Belgium . The victory assured France a third @-@ place finish . At the Montaigu Tournament , Ben Arfa scored a team @-@ leading six goals . He scored two goals in the team 's 8 – 0 win over Gabon in the opening match . In the following match , Ben Arfa scored the final goal in the team 's 3 – 0 win over Russia and , in the final group stage match , bagged another double in a 3 – 1 victory over England . He capped the tournament by scoring a goal in the final against Italy , though France lost the match 5 – 1 . 
 Ben Arfa made his debut with the under @-@ 17 team in the opening match of the season against Sweden converting a first @-@ half hat @-@ trick in a 5 – 2 victory . In the Tournio de Val @-@ de @-@ Marne , Ben Arfa scored two goals as France were crowned champions without conceding a goal . At the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship , Ben Arfa , alongside teammates Samir Nasri , Benzema , and Jérémy Menez contributed to the team winning the competition . Ben Arfa appeared in all five matches and scored goals against Northern Ireland , Turkey and Portugal . In total with the under @-@ 17s , he made 17 appearances and scored a team @-@ high 11 goals . Because of his increased playing time with Lyon , Ben Arfa missed a significant portion of playing time with the under @-@ 18 team . He made his debut on 15 March 2005 , playing in a 3 – 3 draw with Germany . Ben Arfa appeared in the final three matches of the season for the team to bring his appearance total to four . He scored no goals . 
 The foursome of Ben Arfa , Nasri , Benzema , and Menez returned to international play together for under @-@ 19 duty . The four were joined by Issiar Dia , Blaise Matuidi , and Serge Gakpé with the objective of winning the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship . In the first round of qualification for the tournament , Ben Arfa scored his lone goal in the opening match against Wales as France advanced through the round undefeated . Due to injury , Ben Arfa was absent from the final round of qualification for the tournament and , despite going undefeated in the round , France were eliminated after being beaten on points by Scotland . Ben Arfa only made one competitive appearance with the under @-@ 21 team , appearing in a 2009 UEFA Under @-@ 21 Championship qualification match against Romania . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Before representing France , Ben Arfa was eligible to represent Tunisia and was offered a place in the 2006 World Cup , held in Germany . Like Sami Khedira he turned down the opportunity , preferring to continue his career with the French national team . Ben Arfa was called up to the senior team for the first time on 10 October 2007 by Raymond Domenech to replace the injured Louis Saha and played in the Euro 2008 qualifying matches against the Faroe Islands and Lithuania . This move stunned critics of Domenech as they expected striker David Trezeguet to get the call @-@ up . Ben Arfa made his debut on 13 October when he came on for Franck Ribéry in the 64th minute and scored the last goal in France 's 6 – 0 victory over the Faroe Islands . Ben Arfa was , however , omitted from Domenech 's final 23 @-@ man Euro 2008 squad on 28 May . 
 On 25 February 2010 , after a long period without a call @-@ up , Ben Arfa returned to the team , alongside teammates Steve <unk> and Benoît Cheyrou , after being called up for France 's friendly match with Spain on 3 March . On 11 May , he was named to the 30 @-@ man preliminary list by Domenech to play in the 2010 World Cup , but failed to make the final 23 . 
 After going nearly two years without representing France internationally , on 5 August 2010 , Ben Arfa was called up to the senior team by new manager Laurent Blanc for the team 's friendly match against Norway on 11 August 2010 . Ben Arfa made his return to the team in the match appearing as a half @-@ time substitute for Moussa Sissoko . He scored the opening goal of the match in a 2 – 1 defeat . On 29 May 2012 Ben Arfa was included in France 's 23 man squad for UEFA Euro 2012 , making his first start in the final game of Group D , losing 2 – 0 to Sweden . 
 On 12 May 2016 , Ben Arfa was named on the standby list for France 's UEFA Euro 2016 squad . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ben Arfa was born in the Paris suburb of <unk> , and was raised in <unk> @-@ <unk> . His father Kamel Ben Arfa , a former Tunisian international footballer , arrived in France in 1973 settling in Saint @-@ Michel , Aisne to work in a foundry . He later starred for a local club in the commune . Ben Arfa describes himself as a moderately practising Muslim . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 1 May 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 17 November 2015 . 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Lyon 
 Ligue 1 : 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 , 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 
 Coupe de France : 2007 – 08 
 Trophée des champions : 2006 , 2007 
 Marseille 
 Ligue 1 : 2009 – 10 
 Coupe de la Ligue : 2009 – 10 
 Trophée des Champions : 2010 
 = = = International = = = 
 France 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Championship : 2004 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 UNFP Young Player of the Year : 2007 – 08 
 UNFP Player of the Month : February 2010 
 UNFP Team of the Year : 2015 @-@ 16 
 = The X Factor ( UK series 7 ) = 
 The X Factor is a British television music competition to find new singing talent . The seventh series started on ITV on 21 August 2010 and ended on 12 December 2010 . The winner was Matt Cardle and his debut single " When We Collide " was released after the final . Cardle was mentored throughout by Dannii Minogue , who won as mentor for the second time . A total of 15 @,@ 448 @,@ 019 votes were cast throughout the series . It was presented by Dermot O 'Leary , with spin @-@ off show The Xtra Factor presented by Konnie Huq on ITV2 , who took over from Holly Willoughby . 
 The competition was split into several stages : auditions , bootcamp , judges ' houses and live shows . Auditions took place throughout June and July 2010 , with Simon Cowell , Louis Walsh and Cheryl Cole returning as judges . Minogue missed the auditions and bootcamp due to being on maternity leave , so Geri Halliwell , Natalie Imbruglia , Katy Perry , Pixie Lott and Nicole Scherzinger were brought in as guest judges . Cole missed the auditions in Manchester and bootcamp because she had malaria . Following bootcamp , successful acts were split into four categories : Boys ( male soloists aged 16 to 28 ) , Girls ( female soloists aged 16 to 28 ) , Over 28s ( soloists aged 29 and over ) and Groups . Minogue and Cole returned for the judges ' houses stage , and each judge mentored eight acts through judges ' houses . The live shows started on 9 October 2010 . Four acts eliminated at judges ' houses were brought back as wildcards , making this the first series to have 16 acts perform in the live shows . 
 This was the first series of the show to be filmed in high definition , and was simulcast on ITV1 HD and STV HD . From October , The Xtra Factor was also shown in high definition , simulcast on the new channel ITV2 HD . It was sponsored by TalkTalk in the United Kingdom and Dominos Pizza in Ireland . 
 This series proved to be highly controversial , with many people complaining about the use of pitch correction software on the broadcast of contestants ' auditions , the decision to form two groups out of rejected soloists , the rejection of popular contestant Gamu Nhengu at judges ' houses and Cole 's failure to vote to eliminate an act in week 5 of the live shows . Controversy also surrounded contestants Shirlena Johnson , who was axed over fears for her mental health , and Treyc Cohen , who was reported to already have a record deal when the live shows started . There were also accusations of fixing , which were denied by the show 's producers . It was the most watched series to date , with an average of 14 @.@ 13 million viewers per episode . The final was watched by 17 @.@ 71 million people , making it the highest rated television episode of 2010 in the UK . 
 = = Judges , presenters and other personnel = = 
 In February 2010 , Dannii Minogue confirmed that she would not attend the auditions for series 7 due to being pregnant . It was confirmed that guest judges would take Minogue 's place alongside Simon Cowell , Louis Walsh and Cheryl Cole during the auditions . The guest judges were Geri Halliwell , Natalie Imbruglia , Katy Perry , Pixie Lott and Nicole Scherzinger . On 11 June , Minogue was confirmed by ITV to return for the judges ' houses stage . Cole missed the Manchester auditions and bootcamp due to having malaria , so Scherzinger returned as a guest judge for bootcamp . Cole then returned for the judges ' houses stage . 
 Dermot O 'Leary returned for his fourth series as presenter of the main show on ITV , but Holly Willoughby did not return for her third series as presenter on The Xtra Factor on ITV2 and was replaced by Konnie Huq . Brian Friedman returned as creative director , while Ali Tennant and Savan Kotecha were hired as vocal coaches . However , Tennant 's contract was ended before the live shows and was replaced by Yvie Burnett , who worked as vocal coach from series 2 – 6 . Richard " Biff " Stannard began working as show song producer for Minogue 's contestant , and Grace Woodward began working on the show as fashion director . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 = = = Applications and auditions = = = 
 The first appeal for applicants for series 7 was broadcast during series 6 on 5 December 2009 . Applicants for the seventh series were given the opportunity to apply by uploading a video audition to the Internet . Auditions began in June 2010 in six cities : Glasgow ( <unk> , 9 June ) , Birmingham ( LG Arena , 13 – 14 June ) , London ( ExCeL London , 21 – 24 June ) , Dublin ( Convention Centre Dublin , 28 June ) , Cardiff ( International Arena , 2 July ) , and Manchester ( Manchester Central , 9 – 11 July ) . Dublin returned as an audition city for the first time since the third series in 2006 . 
 Halliwell was the first guest judge , and attended the Glasgow auditions . Imbruglia was the second guest judge , appearing for the Birmingham auditions . The guest judge slot was axed for the London auditions , but continued with Perry judging in Dublin , Lott in Cardiff and Scherzinger at the auditions in Manchester . Cole was unable to attend the Manchester auditions because she had contracted malaria and was not replaced for them . 
 The first episode , broadcast on 21 August 2010 , featured auditions from Glasgow and London , while episode two , on 28 August , showcased Dublin 's auditions and more from London . More London auditions were shown on 4 September , along with those from Birmingham , and Cardiff was featured in the 11 September broadcast along with the final set of London auditions . Finally , the Manchester auditions were shown in the 18 and 19 September episodes . 
 = = = Bootcamp = = = 
 The bootcamp stage of the competition began on 22 July 2010 at Wembley Arena , London and was broadcast on 25 – 26 September . Minogue continued her maternity leave and Cole did not attend because she was still in recovery . As Cole and Minogue were absent , producers of the show decided to axe bootcamp 's live audience . The bootcamp stage was broadcast in two episodes on 25 and 26 September . The first day of bootcamp saw Cowell and Walsh split the 211 acts into their four categories : Boys , Girls , Over 25s and Groups . They received vocal coaching and each category later performed one song : the Boys sang " Man in the Mirror " , the Girls sang " If I Were a Boy " , the Over 25s sang " Poker Face " and the Groups sang " Nothing 's Gonna Stop Us Now " . At the end of the day , the number of acts was cut to 108 . On the second day , acts were given dance lessons by creative director Brian Friedman but they were not judged on their performances . 
 Scherzinger then returned as a guest judge on the third day , where each act performed one song from a list of 40 . On the fifth day , Scherzinger suggested that the Over @-@ 25s category be changed to Over 28s , as the quality of older singers was high . The Boys and Girls categories then comprised singers aged 16 to 28 , rather than 16 to 25 . As the groups category was the weakest , five rejected soloists from the Boys category and four from the Girls category were asked to form two groups , Belle Amie and One Direction . After bootcamp , each judge was assigned a category : Cowell was given the Groups , Walsh had the Over @-@ 28s , Minogue was asked to look after the Boys and Cole was assigned the Girls . 
 = = = Judges ' houses and wildcards = = = 
 Minogue and Cole returned to the judging panel for the judges ' houses stage of the competition , where each judge mentored eight acts , increased from six in previous series . Each judge had help from a guest judge to choose their final acts . Original judge Sharon Osbourne returned to assist Walsh at Adare Manor in Adare , County Limerick , Ireland , Cole was assisted by will.i.am in <unk> Park , Ascot , Berkshire , England , Cowell by <unk> in Marbella , Spain , and Natalie Imbruglia returned to assist Minogue in Melbourne , Australia . Contestants spent a week at judges ' houses and performed two songs for their respective judge . Each judge and their guest eliminated five acts , leaving twelve remaining . The judges ' houses stage was broadcast in two episodes on 2 and 3 October 2010 . 
 In the first live show on 9 October , Paije Richardson , Treyc Cohen , Wagner and Diva Fever were brought back as wildcards . 
 = = Finalists = = 
