 After the wildcards were revealed in the first live show , the final sixteen acts were confirmed as follows : 
 Key : 
 – Winner 
 – Runner @-@ up 
 – Third place 
 = = Live shows = = 
 = = = Format = = = 
 The live shows took place at The Fountain Studios in Wembley , north @-@ west London . They started on 9 October 2010 , with contestants performing on the Saturday night shows and the results being announced on the Sunday night shows . As previously , each week had a different song theme . The two acts with the fewest public votes were in the bottom two and sang again in the " final showdown " . The songs they performed in the bottom two were of their own choice and did not necessarily follow that week 's theme . The four judges then each chose one act from the bottom two that they wanted to be eliminated from the show . If each act received an equal number of judges ' votes , the result was deadlocked and the act with the fewest public votes was eliminated . The first live show was extended to two and a half hours to include a surprise twist , namely that each judge was given a wildcard , allowing them to bring back one rejected act from judges ' houses , thus bringing the number of finalists up from twelve to sixteen . Owing to the addition of the wildcards , the first two results were double eliminations . The eighth result was also a double elimination . In the case of a double elimination , instead of the bottom two , the bottom three were announced and the act with the fewest votes was automatically eliminated . The two remaining acts from the bottom three then performed in the final showdown . Starting from the eighth week of live shows , contestants performed two songs each on the Saturday night . 
 At the start of each results show , the remaining finalists performed a song as a group . However , the song was pre @-@ recorded and the contestants mimed , because of technical issues with mixing the number of microphones . Starting this series , the contestants ' live performances were made available to download from iTunes . However , the songs are not eligible to chart to protect the integrity of the contest . Viewers in Ireland were allowed vote again , having been unable to for four years . 
 Each results show featured a number of guest performers . Joe McElderry and Usher performed on the first live results show , and Diana Vickers and Katy Perry performed in the second week . The third results show featured performances from judge Cole and Michael Bublé . Rihanna , Bon Jovi and Jamiroquai performed in the fourth results show , and Shayne Ward and Kylie Minogue performed in the fifth week . Take That , Westlife and JLS all performed on the sixth results show , and Olly Murs performed on the seventh . Week eight featured performances from Justin Bieber , The Wanted and Nicole Scherzinger . The cast of Glee performed on the semi @-@ final on 5 December , along with Alexandra Burke and The Black Eyed Peas . Rihanna performed again in the first show of the final , and Christina Aguilera also performed . Take That performed again in the second show of the final . 
 The final took place on 11 and 12 December , with each episode lasting two hours . During the first show , the voting lines were frozen and the fourth placed contestant was eliminated . The votes carried over and the third placed contestant left on the second show following another freeze . The final two performed the potential winner 's singles before the winner was announced . 
 = = = Results summary = = = 
 Colour key 
 ^ 1 Cowell was not required to vote as there was already a majority . 
 ^ 2 The voting percentages in week 10 for Sunday rounds 1 and 2 do not add up to 100 % , owing to the freezing of votes . Cher Lloyd received 6 @.@ 65 % of the vote at the second freeze , and 4 @.@ 07 % of the final vote . One Direction received 12 @.@ 69 % of the final vote . 
 = = = Live show details = = = 
 = = = = Week 1 ( 9 / 10 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Number @-@ one singles 
 Group performance : " The Rhythm of the Night " 
 Musical guests : Usher ( " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " / " OMG " ) and Joe McElderry ( " <unk> " ) 
 Owing to the addition of four wildcard contestants , two acts were eliminated from the series ' first results show . The three acts with the fewest votes were announced as the bottom three and the act with the fewest public votes was then automatically eliminated . The remaining two acts then performed in the final showdown for the judges ' votes . 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Cowell : Katie Waissel – backed his own act , F.Y.D. 
 Cole : F.Y.D. – based on the final showdown performance , effectively backing her own act , Katie Waissel 
 Minogue : F.Y.D. – based on the final showdown performance 
 Walsh : F.Y.D. – stated that he had to choose the act with more potential , as well as " the right act " 
 = = = = Week 2 ( 16 / 17 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Heroes 
 Group performance : " Telephone " 
 Musical guests : Diana Vickers ( " My Wicked Heart " ) and Katy Perry ( " Firework " ) 
 Owing to the addition of the wildcard contestants , two acts were eliminated from the series ' second results show . The three acts with the fewest public votes were announced as the bottom three and then the act with the fewest votes was automatically eliminated . The remaining two acts then performed in the final showdown for the judges ' votes . 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Walsh : Diva Fever – thought Belle Amie would get better in the competition 
 Minogue : Diva Fever – based on final showdown performances 
 Cole : Diva Fever – gave no reason 
 Cowell was not required to vote as there was already a majority and refused to say how he would have voted as both his acts were in the sing @-@ off . 
 = = = = Week 3 ( 23 / 24 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Guilty pleasures 
 Group performance : " Forget You " 
 Musical guests : Michael Bublé ( " Hollywood " ) and Cheryl Cole ( " Promise This " ) 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Walsh : Treyc Cohen – said Adeleye had more potential , effectively backing his own act , John Adeleye 
 Minogue : John Adeleye – based on the final showdown performances 
 Cole : John Adeleye – backed her own act , Treyc Cohen 
 Cowell : John Adeleye – based on the final showdown performances 
 = = = = Week 4 ( 30 / 31 October ) = = = = 
 Theme : Halloween 
 Group performance : " Livin ' on a Prayer " ( with Bon Jovi ) 
 Musical guests : Bon Jovi with finalists ( " Livin ' on a Prayer " ) , Jamiroquai ( " White Knuckle Ride " ) and Rihanna ( " Only Girl ( In the World ) " ) 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Cowell : Katie Waissel – backed his own act , Belle Amie 
 Cole : Belle Amie – gave no reason , though effectively backed her own act , Katie Waissel 
 Minogue : Belle Amie – based on the final showdown performance 
 Walsh : Katie Waissel – gave no reason 
 With the acts in the bottom two receiving two votes each , the result was deadlocked and reverted to the earlier public vote . Belle Amie were eliminated as the act with the fewest public votes . 
 = = = = Week 5 ( 6 / 7 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : American anthems 
 Group performance : " So What " 
 Musical guests : Shayne Ward ( " Gotta Be Somebody " ) and Kylie Minogue ( " Better than Today " ) 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Cowell : Treyc Cohen – based on who he would prefer to see again the following week 
 Cole refused to vote off either of her acts and offered to vote last to force a deadlock , but O 'Leary then announced it would go to a majority vote 
 Minogue : Katie Waissel – gave no reason 
 Walsh : Treyc Cohen – stated that he would follow his heart and save Katie Waissel 
 = = = = Week 6 ( 13 / 14 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : Songs by Elton John 
 Group performance : " Can 't Stop Moving " 
 Musical guests : JLS ( " Love You More " ) , Westlife ( " Safe " ) and Take That ( " The Flood " ) 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Cowell : Aiden Grimshaw – gave no reason 
 Cole : Aiden Grimshaw – backed her own act , Katie Waissel 
 Minogue : Katie Waissel – gave no reason , though effectively backed her own act , Aiden Grimshaw 
 Walsh : Katie Waissel – felt Grimshaw had more potential 
 With the acts in the bottom two receiving two votes each , the result was deadlocked and reverted to the earlier public vote . Grimshaw was eliminated as the act with the fewest public votes . 
 = = = = Week 7 ( 20 / 21 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : Songs by The Beatles 
 Group performance : " Heroes " ( all finalists ) 
 Musical guest : Olly Murs ( " Thinking of Me " ) 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Cowell : Paije Richardson – said he would want to back Lloyd whom he had continually supported 
 Cole : Paije Richardson – backed her own act , Cher Lloyd 
 Minogue : Cher Lloyd – backed her own act , Paije Richardson 
 Walsh : Paije Richardson – gave no reason 
 = = = = Week 8 ( 27 / 28 November ) = = = = 
 Theme : Rock 
 Musical guests : The Wanted ( " Lose My Mind " ) , Justin Bieber ( " Somebody to Love " / " Baby " ) and Nicole Scherzinger ( " Poison " ) 
 For the first time this series , each contestant performed two songs . 
 Two acts were eliminated from the series ' eighth results show . The three acts with the fewest votes were announced as the bottom three and then the act with the fewest votes was automatically eliminated . The remaining two acts then performed in the final showdown for the judges ' votes . 
 Judges ' votes to eliminate 
 Walsh : Wagner – based on the final showdown performances 
 Minogue : Wagner – backed Byrne whom she thought was the better singer 
 Cole : Wagner – gave no reason 
 Cowell was not required to vote as there was already a majority , but stated that he would have voted for Wagner as he wanted to return the show to being a talent competition 
 = = = = Week 9 : Semi @-@ final ( 4 / 5 December ) = = = = 
 Themes : Club classics ; " songs to get you to the final " ( no theme ) 
 Musical guests : Alexandra Burke ( " The Silence " ) , Glee Cast ( " Don 't Stop Believin ' " ) and The Black Eyed Peas ( " The Time ( Dirty Bit ) " ) 
 For the first time in The X Factor history , the judges chose which act they wanted to see progress to the final . 
 Judges ' votes to send through to the final 
 Walsh : Mary Byrne – backed his own act , Mary Byrne 
 Minogue : Cher Lloyd – said she felt the emotion in Lloyd 's performance 
 Cole : Cher Lloyd – backed her own act , Cher Lloyd 
 Cowell : Cher Lloyd – gave no reason 
 = = = = Week 10 : Final ( 11 / 12 December ) = = = = 
 11 December 
 Themes : No theme ; celebrity duets 
 Group performance : " Flashdance ... What a Feeling " ( all finalists ) 
 Musical guests : Rihanna ( " What 's My Name ? " ) and Christina Aguilera ( " Express " ) 
 12 December 
 Themes : No theme ; winner 's single 
 Group performances : " Never Forget " ( performed with Take That ) and " Bad Romance " ( auditionees ) 
 Musical guest : Take That ( " Never Forget " with finalists ) and ( " The Flood " ) 
 = = Charity single = = 
 The series 7 finalists recorded a cover of David Bowie 's 1977 song " Heroes " as a charity single in aid of Help for Heroes , a charity which supports injured servicemen and women . The song was recorded in the week beginning 18 October 2010 . The video for the single was filmed on 2 November at Three Mills Studios . All sixteen finalists performed the song on 20 November 's results show . It was the third year in a row that finalists have released a charity record . The single entered both the Irish Singles Chart on 25 November 2010 and the UK Singles Chart on 28 November 2010 at number 1 . 
 = = Winner 's single = = 
 It was reported on 2 December 2010 by the Daily Mirror that the final five contestants , Mary Byrne , Matt Cardle , Cher Lloyd , One Direction and Rebecca Ferguson , would each record a different song , rather than the same song as in previous series , for their potential debut single . The change was made after Cowell reportedly increased the budget as he wanted songs to suit each act . It was reported on 10 December that Cardle 's song would be " Many of Horror " , Lloyd 's would be " Impossible " , Ferguson 's would be " Distant Dreamer " and One Direction 's song would be " Forever Young " . Cardle and Ferguson performed their songs in the final as the last two remaining acts and upon Cardle 's winning the contest , his version of " Many of Horror " , renamed to " When We Collide " , was released . It entered both the UK and Ireland Singles Charts at number 1 . 
 = = Voting , revenue and sponsorship = = 
 Over the course of the live shows , 15 @,@ 488 @,@ 019 votes were cast . Votes made via landline telephones or from the Red Button service cost 35 pence each , with calls made from mobile telephones expected to be more expensive . The votes brought in revenue of more than £ 5 @.@ 4 million , though it was expected to be a lot higher because of the unknown cost of mobile phone votes . Proceeds were split between production company Syco , co @-@ producer FremantleMedia , broadcaster ITV and phone vote operator Harvest Media . Advertising slots during the final were sold for up to £ 250 @,@ 000 , which expected to bring in a further £ 25 million in advertising revenues , with the number of commercial breaks increased from five to six . 
 For the second year in a row , The X Factor was sponsored by TalkTalk , as part of a three @-@ year sponsorship deal thought to be worth £ 20 million , including sponsorship of the show , the 2011 live tour and rights to online clips . TalkTalk enlisted series 6 contestants Jedward to launch its interactive initiative on 17 August 2010 . Viewers were invited to record a video of themselves performing karaoke in front of a TalkTalk bright lights backdrop , and clips were screened as part of TalkTalk 's sponsorship break bumpers . In Ireland , where the series was broadcast on TV3 , The X Factor was sponsored by Dominos Pizza . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The first episode on 21 August attracted 11 @.@ 88 million viewers on ITV1 , the highest ever ratings for a series premiere of The X Factor . It was watched by 46 @.@ 5 % of television viewers during its original broadcast . The episode also received ratings of 568 @,@ 000 on ITV1 HD . The first live performance show on 9 October 2010 gained 12 @.@ 62 million viewers , attaining a 48 @.@ 5 % share of the audience during broadcast . The final result on 12 December was the highest rated episode with 16 @.@ 55 million viewers on ITV1 , a 51 @.@ 5 % audience share and 1 @.@ 16 million viewers on ITV1 HD . It peaked at 19 @.@ 4 million ( 18 @.@ 14 million on ITV1 and 1 @.@ 3 million on ITV1 HD ) and was the highest rated television episode of 2010 in the UK . Official ratings concluded that the series averaged 14 @.@ 13 million ( including HD ) , making it the most watched series to date . The series dominated the weekly rankings , taking up the top position for the first four weeks , then the top two positions until the final . The first part of the final was beaten into fourth rank by two episodes of Coronation Street . 
 = = = Controversy and criticism = = = 
 The seventh series of The X Factor sparked several heated controversies , with over 5 @,@ 000 complaints registered with Ofcom throughout the series . A spokesperson told the Daily Mirror newspaper that ITV bosses were worried about the number of complaints as claims that the show had become " seedy and oversexed " and accusations of fixing would tarnish the image of the show and ITV . 
 = = = = Contestants = = = = 
 On 25 August , it was announced that contestant Shirlena Johnson had been asked to leave the show because of concerns over her mental health , that she had apparently kept hidden from the producers . Johnson 's successful audition was broadcast on 21 August . Johnson 's mother claimed that producers knew of Johnson 's medical history as they requested her general practitioner 's details at bootcamp , but producers said the medical report arrived late . A spokesperson said , " The welfare of contestants is of paramount importance , and for this reason it has been agreed that Shirlena Johnson should not continue in the competition . " 
 The decision to form two groups , Belle Amie and One Direction , from soloists at the end of the bootcamp stage was branded unfair by some of the other groups , as neither had entered the competition as groups . The controversy deepened after Cowell put through both Belle Amie and One Direction and picked just one of the original applicants . Cowell defended the decision , saying that the existing groups were not good enough and other groups such as The Wanted and the Spice Girls were created similarly . 
 More controversy erupted after the News of the World reported that after failing to qualify in 2009 , Treyc Cohen signed a management deal with <unk> Music Management Ltd that landed her a recording contract in October that year with Birmingham @-@ based <unk> Records and she released a single entitled " A Time to Be Heard " . The rules of The X Factor strictly forbid record deals while a contestant is on the show . According to the newspaper , The X Factor was attempting to release Cohen from her management deal and remove the single from sale . Katie Waissel also had to be released from a contract in the United States after her audition . 
 = = = = Judges ' actions = = = = 
 Controversy was caused when Cole chose not to send popular contestant Gamu Nhengu through to the live shows . Nhengu was an early favourite to win and many viewers were angry that Waissel and Cher Lloyd were put through despite failing to complete their performances at judges ' houses . Around 1 @,@ 000 people complained to ITV and by 7 October 220 @,@ 000 had joined a Facebook page called " Gamu Should Have Got Through " . Cole reportedly became the target of death threats , and took extra security precautions in her home as well as at The X Factor . <unk> Paddy Power were forced to give odds on Nhengu winning the show after a large number of bets were placed , and made her the favourite to win , but all punters had their losing bets refunded when Nhengu was not chosen as Cole 's wildcard . There was speculation that Cole was pressured by producers to axe Nhengu over issues with her visa , but Cheryl denied those claims , saying it was entirely down to her " gut instinct " and that she believed Lloyd , Waissel and Rebecca Ferguson were the best singers in her category . Later in her 2012 autobiography Cheryl : My Story , Cheryl confessed that she had chosen Waissel for the live shows because she was more entertaining , claiming ... " [ Cowell ] had spent the past two years drumming into me that we needed acts who would be ' good TV . ' ... she had the character and drive it took to withstand the pressure of the show , and so I put her through , even though she messed up when she sang in front of <unk> " 
 More than 1 @,@ 000 viewers complained to ITV and more than 2 @,@ 000 to Ofcom when , in week 5 of the live shows , Cole refused to vote off either act in the bottom two ( Cohen and Waissel ) and was not allowed to vote last and force a deadlock . A spokesperson for The X Factor explained : " A judge can abstain from placing a vote . [ Cole ] made it clear that she would not send anyone home and therefore abstained from voting . [ O 'Leary ] went back to her to clarify that it was going to go to a majority vote if she did that . [ Cole ] was unable to take the vote to deadlock as deadlock requires a valid active vote . " However , a Daily Mail poll of 6 @,@ 890 people showed that 4 @,@ 795 of them wanted Cole to be sacked for refusing to vote . O 'Leary revealed that during the previous commercial break , when the bottom two was known to the producers , they realized that Cole might abstain and decided in that if she did , they would go to a majority vote . After the series ended , voting statistics showed that Waissel received fewer votes than Cohen , meaning that if the result had gone to deadlock , Waissel would have been eliminated instead of Cohen . 
 = = = = Accusations of fixing = = = = 
 After O 'Leary 's revelation that producers had rehearsed what would happen if Cole abstained in week 5 , allegations were made that the result was rigged for Waissel to stay , given that her outlandish performances and growing unpopularity with the public resulted in better ratings and sensational press for the show . Cowell denied this claim , saying he would never want to defraud viewers and said the situation had " been blown out of proportion " . O 'Leary defended himself and the show on Twitter , saying " We never know which way the judges are going to vote . Ever . The only thing I know is who 's in the bottom two when I 'm given the card . I don 't know which judge to go to until I 'm called and the judges , including [ Cowell ] , don 't know the vote or who we 're coming to next . It 's that simple . " The following week , Heat magazine printed a report claiming that Cowell was aware of the public votes before the judges make their votes , and several other media reports contained rumours of the show being fixed . The X Factor 's bosses instructed their lawyers to file a formal complaint to the Press Complaints Commission against Heat , saying that the article was a lie , that very few people know the actual public voting results and conspiracy theories being printed in the media are " total and utter rubbish " . Heat printed an apology in their 1 January 2011 issue and accepted that Cowell was unaware of the votes cast until after the final . 
 There were accusations from viewers of fixing during the semi @-@ final when O 'Leary announced that only the public 's votes would decide which contestants would make it through to the final , but the next day this was changed and there was a final showdown . The show 's official website also stated that it would be decided by public vote , and Walsh confirmed it on a radio show earlier in the week . It was the first time in the show 's history that the judges were given a vote in a semi @-@ final . A spokesperson insisted the change was decided weeks in advance . Cowell ( incorrectly ) stated that " There has always been a sing @-@ off when there are five people left in the competition . This is a lot of nonsense about nothing . " However , eliminated contestant Mary Byrne said she believed the decision would be solely down to the public until the day of the semi @-@ final performances and even claimed that Cowell did not want her in the final . Following Byrne 's comments , Cowell wrote an open letter to the viewers in the Daily Mirror , saying : 
 " It 's always our sole intention to try and make the show as entertaining and hopefully exciting every week . Our main focus is to ensure that the contestants are given every opportunity to benefit from being on the show and show their talent . Throughout the series I have met with fans of the show on a regular basis and have listened and acted on their feedback . I believe they have enjoyed the changes in the show this year and I feel it 's been a better series as it hasn 't followed the same pattern as before . This year we decided to give four contestants a second chance and introduce them as wild card entrants on the first live show . And having 16 finalists rather than just 12 meant that we introduced both single and double eliminations . We decided for the first time some weeks ago to put four people into the final and this meant having five semi @-@ finalists . We also felt it would be fairer that there would be a sing @-@ off rather than automatic elimination as there were more contestants . I understand new decisions are seen as controversial by our viewers but it stops the show becoming boring . As the excitement heats up , debates begin but I do want to assure people that the show is definitely not fixed . The sing @-@ off on Sunday was something that was always going to happen regardless of who was in the bottom two . The contestants all prepared their save @-@ me songs on Monday last week . It was always going to be sad for whoever left . [ ... ] I have always listened to and respected our viewers and have always believed viewers ultimately make the right decision . I hope the viewers trust the show that this is a fair competition . " 
 Voting statistics revealed that Lloyd would have been eliminated had there been no judges ' vote . 
 = = = = Pitch @-@ correction use = = = = 
 Following the first episode , viewers complained on social networking websites after it appeared that pitch correction ( which has been seen as controversial in the music industry ) was used to improve the quality of some singers ' voices , and forty @-@ five viewers complained to Ofcom . Series producers claimed post @-@ production work was necessary on the show because of the number of microphones used during filming : " The judges make their decisions at the auditions stage based on what they hear on the day , live in the arena . The footage and sound is then edited and dubbed into a finished programme , to deliver the most entertaining experience possible for viewers . When it gets to the live shows , it will be all live . " It was reported on 26 August that Cowell had ordered a ban on pitch correction in future episodes , asking for them to be re @-@ edited . In October 2010 , Ofcom ruled that viewers had not been " materially misled " as pitch correction was only used during auditions and not when viewers were paying to vote for the contestants . 
 = = = = ' Raunchy ' final = = = = 
 In December 2010 , it emerged that Ofcom were investigating the show after claims that viewers were being encouraged to purchase songs recorded by guest performers Michael Bublé and Diana Vickers . Ofcom also received over 2 @,@ 868 complaints from viewers about " raunchy " dance routines from Rihanna and Christina Aguilera during the final . Although an ITV spokesperson denied the routines were inappropriate , Cowell was warned by ITV to " cut the sleaze " . In April 2011 , Ofcom ruled that there had been no breach of guidelines over the performances , and highlighted that " approximately 2 @,@ 000 " of the complaints were received after the routines were covered by the Daily Mail , and said the newspaper 's report featured a number of stills that were " significantly more graphic and close @-@ up " than material broadcast , and that were " taken from a different angle to the television cameras " . 
 = = = Praise and awards = = = 
 In its 7 December 2010 issue , Heat magazine said series 7 of The X Factor had been the best series to date , citing many of the controversies , plus events such as Lloyd singing on a spiral staircase , Wagner 's " ludicrous " performances and Walsh likening Richardson to " a little Lenny Henry " , as moments that helped make it " the most deliriously , thrilling , controversial and demented yet . [ ... ] This was the year the biggest and best show on TV somehow got bigger and better . " Before the final , Digital Spy 's reality television editor Alex Fletcher listed his five favourite moments from the series . His favourite moment was Nhengu 's elimination , on which he said " No other show can make people so passionate , angry and feel like they really know the programme 's stars . With only approximately 30 minutes of screentime , Gamu had managed to capture the hearts of millions . Whatever you think of Simon Cowell 's programmes , you have to give them credit for achieving that . " 
 The series won in the Most Popular Talent Show category at the 16th National Television Awards in 2011 , beating series 4 of Britain 's Got Talent , series 6 of Dancing on Ice and series 8 of Strictly Come Dancing . It was also nominated in the TV Reality Programme category at the 2011 <unk> awards , the Entertainment Programme category at the 2011 British Academy Television Awards , and the Best Talent Show category at the 2011 TV Choice Awards . 
 = Council of the European Union = 
 The Council of the European Union ( often still referred to as the Council of Ministers , or sometimes just called the Council ( Latin : <unk> ) ) is the third of the seven institutions of the European Union ( EU ) as listed in the Treaty on European Union . It is part of the essentially bicameral EU legislature ( the other legislative body being the European Parliament ) and represents the executive governments of the EU 's member states . It is based in the Justus Lipsius building in Brussels , Belgium . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Council meets in 10 different configurations of 28 national ministers ( one per state ) . The precise membership of these configurations varies according to the topic under consideration ; for example , when discussing agricultural policy the Council is formed by the 28 national ministers whose portfolio includes this policy area ( with the related European Commissioners contributing but not voting ) . 
 The Presidency of the Council rotates every six months among the governments of EU member states , with the relevant ministers of the respective country holding the Presidency at any given time ensuring the smooth running of the meetings and setting the daily agenda . The continuity between presidencies is provided by an arrangement under which three successive presidencies , known as Presidency trios , share common political programmes . The Foreign Affairs Council ( national foreign ministers ) is however chaired by the Union 's High Representative . 
 Its decisions are made by qualified majority voting in most areas , unanimity in others . Usually where it operates unanimously , it only needs to consult the Parliament . However , in most areas the ordinary legislative procedure applies meaning both Council and Parliament share legislative and budgetary powers equally , meaning both have to agree for a proposal to pass . In a few limited areas the Council may initiate new EU law itself . 
 The General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union , also known as Council Secretariat , assists the Council of the European Union , the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , the European Council and the President of the European Council . The Secretariat is headed by the Secretary @-@ General of the Council of the European Union . The Secretariat is divided into seven directorates @-@ general , each administered by a director @-@ general . 
 = = History = = 
 The Council first appeared in the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) as the " Special Council of Ministers " , set up to counterbalance the High Authority ( the supranational executive , now the Commission ) . The original Council had limited powers : issues relating only to coal and steel were in the Authority 's domain , and the Council 's consent was only required on decisions outside coal and steel . As a whole , the Council only scrutinised the High Authority ( the executive ) . In 1957 , the Treaties of Rome established two new communities , and with them two new Councils : the Council of the European Atomic Energy Community ( EAEC ) and the Council of the European Economic Community ( EEC ) . However , due to objections over the supranational power of the Authority , their Councils had more powers ; the new executive bodies were known as " Commissions " . 
 In 1965 the Council was hit by the " empty chair crisis " . Due to disagreements between French President Charles de Gaulle and the Commission 's agriculture proposals , among other things , France boycotted all meetings of the Council . This halted the Council 's work until the impasse was resolved the following year by the Luxembourg compromise . Although initiated by a gamble of the President of the Commission , Walter Hallstein , who later on lost the Presidency , the crisis exposed flaws in the Council 's workings . 
 Under the Merger Treaty of 1967 , the ECSC 's Special Council of Ministers and the Council of the EAEC ( together with their other independent institutions ) were merged into the Council of the EEC , which would act as a single Council of the European Communities . In 1993 , the Council adopted the name ' Council of the European Union ' , following the establishment of the European Union by the Maastricht Treaty . That treaty strengthened the Council , with the addition of more intergovernmental elements in the three pillars system . However , at the same time the Parliament and Commission had been strengthened inside the Community pillar , curtailing the ability of the Council to act independently . 
 The Treaty of Lisbon abolished the pillar system and gave further powers to Parliament . It also merged the Council 's High Representative with the Commission 's foreign policy head , with this new figure chairing the foreign affairs Council rather than the rotating presidency . The European Council was declared a separate institution from the Council , also chaired by a permanent president , and the different Council configurations were mentioned in the treaties for the first time . 
 The development of the Council has been characterised by the rise in power of the Parliament , with which the Council has had to share its legislative powers . The Parliament has often provided opposition to the Council 's wishes . This has in some cases led to clashes between both bodies with the Council 's system of <unk> contradicting the developing parliamentary system and supranational principles . 
 = = Powers and functions = = 
 The primary purpose of the Council is to act as one of the two chambers of the EU 's legislative branch , the other chamber being the European Parliament . It also holds , jointly with the Parliament , the budgetary power of the Union and has greater control than the Parliament over the more intergovernmental areas of the EU , such as foreign policy and <unk> co @-@ ordination . Finally , before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , it formally held the executive power of the EU which it conferred upon the European Commission . 
 = = = Legislative procedure = = = 
 The EU 's legislative authority is divided between the Council and the Parliament . As the relationships and powers of these institutions have developed , various legislative procedures have been created for adopting laws . In early times , the avis <unk> maxim was : " The Commission proposes , and the Council disposes " ; but now the vast majority of laws are now subject to the ordinary legislative procedure , which works on the principle that consent from both the Council and Parliament are required before a law may be adopted . 
 Under this procedure , the Commission presents a proposal to Parliament and the Council . Following its first reading the Parliament may propose amendments . If the Council accepts these amendments then the legislation is approved . If it does not then it adopts a " common position " and submits that new version to the Parliament . At its second reading , if the Parliament approves the text or does not act , the text is adopted , otherwise the Parliament may propose further amendments to the Council 's proposal . It may be rejected out right by an absolute majority of MEPs . If the Council still does not approve the Parliament 's position , then the text is taken to a " Conciliation Committee " composed of the Council members plus an equal number of MEPs . If a Committee manages to adopt a joint text , it then has to be approved in a third reading by both the Council and Parliament or the proposal is abandoned . 
 The few other areas that operate the special legislative procedures are justice & home affairs , budget and taxation and certain aspects of other policy areas : such as the fiscal aspects of environmental policy . In these areas , the Council or Parliament decide law alone . The procedure used also depends upon which type of institutional act is being used . The strongest act is a regulation , an act or law which is directly applicable in its entirety . Then there are directives which bind members to certain goals which they must achieve , but they do this through their own laws and hence have room to manoeuvre in deciding upon them . A decision is an instrument which is focused at a particular person or group and is directly applicable . Institutions may also issue recommendations and opinions which are merely non @-@ binding declarations . 
 The Council votes in one of three ways ; unanimity , simple majority , or qualified majority . In most cases , the Council votes on issues by qualified majority voting , meaning that there must be a minimum of 255 votes out of 345 ( 73 @.@ 9 % ) and a majority of member states ( sometimes a two – third majority ) . A majority representing 62 % of the EU 's population may also be taken into account . Unanimity is nearly always used where foreign policy is concerned , and in a number of cases under police and judicial co @-@ operation . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 The legal instruments used by the Council for the Common Foreign and Security Policy are different from the legislative acts . Under the CFSP they consist of " common positions " , " joint actions " , and " common strategies " . Common positions relate to defining a European foreign policy towards a particular third @-@ country such as the promotion of human rights and democracy in Burma , a region such as the stabilisation efforts in the African Great Lakes , or a certain issue such as support for the International Criminal Court . A common position , once agreed , is binding on all EU states who must follow and defend the policy , which is regularly revised . A joint action refers to a co @-@ ordinated action of the states to deploy resources to achieve an objective , for example for mine clearing or to combat the spread of small arms . Common strategies defined an objective and commits the <unk> resources to that task for four years . 
 = = = Budgetary authority = = = 
 Furthermore , the legislative branch officially holds the Union 's budgetary authority . The EU 's budget ( which is around 155 billion euro ) is subject to a form of the ordinary legislative procedure with a single reading giving Parliament power over the entire budget ( prior to 2009 , its influence was limited to certain areas ) on an equal footing to the Council . If there is a disagreement between them , it is taken to a conciliation committee as it is for legislative proposals . But if the joint conciliation text is not approved , the Parliament may adopt the budget definitively . In addition to the budget , the Council coordinates the economic policy of members . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The Council 's rules of procedure contain the provisions necessary for its organisation and functioning . 
 = = = Presidency = = = 
 The Presidency of the Council is not a single post , but is held by a member state 's government . Every six months the presidency rotates between the states , in an order predefined by the Council 's members , allowing each state to preside over the body . From 2007 , every three member states co @-@ operate for their combined eighteen months on a common agenda , although only one formally holds the presidency for the normal six @-@ month period . For example , the President for the second half of 2007 , Portugal , was the second in a trio of states alongside Germany and Slovenia with whom Portugal had been co @-@ operating . The Council meets in various configurations ( as outlined below ) so its membership changes depending upon the issue . The person chairing the Council will always be the member from the state holding the Presidency . A delegate from the following Presidency also assists the presiding member and may take over work if requested . The exception however is the foreign affairs council , which has been chaired by the High Representative since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty . 
 The role of the Presidency is administrative and political . On the administrative side it is responsible for procedures and organising the work of the Council during its term . This includes summoning the Council for meetings along with directing the work of <unk> and other committees and working groups . The political element is the role of successfully dealing with issues and mediating in the Council . In particular this includes setting the agenda of the council , hence giving the Presidency substantial influence in the work of the Council during its term . The Presidency also plays a major role in representing the Council within the EU and representing the EU internationally , for example at the United Nations . 
 = = = Configurations = = = 
 Legally speaking , the Council is a single entity , but it is in practice divided into several different council configurations ( or ‘ ( con ) formations ’ ) . Article 16 ( 6 ) of the Treaty on European Union provides : 
 The Council shall meet in different configurations , the list of which shall be adopted in accordance with Article 236 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union . 
 The General Affairs Council shall ensure consistency in the work of the different Council configurations . It shall prepare and ensure the follow @-@ up to meetings of the European Council , in liaison with the President of the European Council and the Commission . 
 The Foreign Affairs Council shall elaborate the Union 's external action on the basis of strategic guidelines laid down by the European Council and ensure that the Union 's action is consistent . 
 Each council configuration deals with a different functional area , for example agriculture and fisheries . In this formation , the council is composed of ministers from each state government who are responsible for this area : the agriculture and fisheries ministers . The chair of this council is held by the member from the state holding the presidency ( see section above ) . Similarly , the Economic and Financial Affairs Council is composed of national finance ministers , and they are still one per state and the chair is held by the member coming from the presiding country . The Councils meet irregularly throughout the year except for the three major configurations ( top three below ) which meet once a month . There are currently ten formations : 
 General Affairs ( GAC ) : General affairs co @-@ ordinates the work of the Council , prepares for European Council meetings and deals with issues crossing various council formations . 
 Foreign Affairs ( FAC ) : Chaired by the High Representative , rather than the Presidency , it manages the CFSP , <unk> , trade and development co @-@ operation . It sometimes meets in a defence configuration . 
 Economic and Financial Affairs ( <unk> ) : Composed of economics and finance ministers of the member states . It includes budgetary and eurozone matters via an informal group composed only of eurozone member ministers . 
 Agriculture and Fisheries ( <unk> ) : Composed of the agriculture and fisheries ministers of the member states . It considers matters concerning the Common Agricultural Policy , the Common Fisheries Policy , forestry , organic farming , food and feed safety , seeds , pesticides , and fisheries . 
 Justice and Home Affairs ( <unk> ) : This configuration brings together Justice ministers and Interior Ministers of the Member States . Includes civil protection . 
 Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs ( <unk> ) : Composed of employment , social protection , consumer protection , health and equal opportunities ministers . 
 Competitiveness ( <unk> ) : Created in June 2002 through the merging of three previous configurations ( Internal Market , Industry and Research ) . Depending on the items on the agenda , this formation is composed of ministers responsible for areas such as European affairs , industry , tourism and scientific research . With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the EU acquired competence in space matters , and space policy has been attributed to the Competitiveness Council 
 Transport , Telecommunications and Energy ( <unk> ) : Created in June 2002 , through the merging of three policies under one configuration , and with a composition varying according to the specific items on its agenda . This formation meets approximately once every two months . 
 Environment ( <unk> ) : Composed of environment ministers , who meet about four times a year . 
 Education , Youth , Culture and Sport ( <unk> ) : Composed of education , culture , youth , communications and sport ministers , who meet around three or four times a year . Includes audiovisual issues . 
 Complementing these , the Political and Security Committee ( PSC ) brings together ambassadors to monitor international situations and define policies within the <unk> , particularly in crises . The European Council is similar to a configuration of the Council , it operates in a similar way and but is composed of the national leaders ( heads of government or state ) and has its own President , currently Donald Tusk . The body 's purpose is to define the general " impetus " of the Union . The European Council deals with the major issues such as the appointment of the President of the European Commission who takes part in the body 's meetings . 
 <unk> 's Eurozone component , the Euro group , is also a formal group with its own President . Its European Council counterpart is the Euro summit formalized in 2011 and the <unk> . 
 Following the entry into force of a framework agreement between the EU and ESA there is a Space Council configuration — a joint and concomitant meeting of the EU Council and of the ESA Council at ministerial level dealing with the implementation of the ESP adopted by both organisations . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 The General Secretariat of the Council provides the continuous infrastructure of the Council , carrying out preparation for meetings , draft reports , translation , records , documents , agendas and assisting the presidency . The Secretary General of the Council is head of the Secretariat . The Secretariat is divided into seven directorates @-@ general , each administered by a director @-@ general . 
 The Committee of Permanent Representatives ( <unk> ) is a body composed of representatives from the states ( ambassadors , civil servants etc . ) who meet each week to prepare the work and tasks of the Council . It monitors and co @-@ ordinates work and deals with the Parliament on co @-@ decision legislation . It is divided into two groups of the representatives ( Coreper II ) and their deputies ( Coreper I ) . Agriculture is dealt with separately by the Special Committee on Agriculture ( SCA ) . The numerous working groups submit their reports to the Council through Coreper or SCA . 
 = = = Voting system = = = 
 The Treaty of Lisbon mandates a change in voting system from 1 November 2014 for most cases to double majority Qualified Majority Voting , replacing the voting weights system . Decisions made by the council have to be taken by 55 % of member states representing at least 65 % of the EU 's population . 
 Almost all members of the Council are members of a political party at national level , and most of these are members of a European @-@ level political party . However the Council is composed to represent the EU 's states rather than political parties and the nature of coalition governments in a number of states means that individual configurations would vary on which domestic party was assigned the portfolio . However the broad ideological alignment of each state does have a bearing on the nature of the law the Council produces and the extent to which the link between domestic parties puts pressure on the members in the European Parliament to vote a certain way . 
 The dominant <unk> is the one holding the member state ’ s seat in the European Council . 
 Additional <unk> are the ones which also sit in ( some configurations of ) the Council of the European Union . 
 = = Location = = 
 By a decision of the European Council at Edinburgh in December 1992 , the Council has its seat in Brussels but in April , June , and October , it holds its meetings in Luxembourg . Between 1952 and 1967 the ECSC Council held its Luxembourg meetings in the Cercle Municipal on Place d ’ Armes . Its secretariat moved on numerous occasions but between 1955 and 1967 it was housed in the <unk> district of the city . In 1957 with the creation of two new Communities with their own Councils , discretion on location was given to the current President . In practice this was to be in the Château of Val @-@ Duchesse until the autumn of 1958 , at which point it moved to 2 Rue <unk> in Brussels . 
 The 1965 agreement ( finalised by the Edinburgh agreement and annexed to the treaties ) on the location of the newly merged institutions , the Council was to be in Brussels but would meet in Luxembourg during April , June , and October . The ECSC secretariat moved from Luxembourg to the merged body Council secretariat in the Ravenstein building of Brussels . In 1971 the Council and its secretariat moved into the Charlemagne building , next to the Commission 's Berlaymont , but the Council rapidly ran out of space and administrative branch of the Secretariat moved to a building at 76 Rue Joseph II / Jozef II @-@ <unk> and during the 1980s the language divisions moved out into the Nerviens , Frère Orban , and Guimard buildings . 
 In 1995 the Council moved once more , into the Justus Lipsius building , across the road from Charlemagne . However , its staff was still increasing , so it continued to rent the Frère Orban building to house the Finnish and Swedish language divisions . Staff continued to increase and the Council rented , in addition to owning Justus Lipsius , the <unk> , Froissart , Espace Rolin , and Woluwe Heights buildings . Since acquiring the Lex building , the three aforementioned buildings are not used by the Council services any more as of 2008 . <unk> Palace has been acquired and is currently being renovated ; it will house the new press centre of the European Council , which uses the same facilities as the Council . 
 When the Council is meeting in Luxembourg , it meets in the Kirchberg Conference Centre and its offices are based at the European Centre on the plateau du Kirchberg . The Council has also met occasionally in Strasbourg , in various other cities , and also outside the Union : for example in 1974 when it met in Tokyo and Washington while trade and energy talks were taking place . Under the Council 's present rules of procedures the Council can , in extraordinary circumstances , hold one of its meetings outside Brussels and Luxembourg . 
 Within the Council 's debates , delegates may speak in any of the 24 official EU languages . Official documents are also translated into Catalan / Valencian , Basque , and Galician . Prior to the Lisbon Treaty , only minutes and voting records were made available when the Council is acting as a legislator ( published in the Official Journal of the European Union ) . Since then all meetings where the Council is legislating are open to public viewing . 
 = Kevin Nolan = 
 Kevin Anthony <unk> Nolan ( born 24 June 1982 ) is an English professional footballer who last played as a midfielder for League Two club Leyton Orient . He has represented England at under @-@ 21 level . 
 After growing up in Toxteth , Liverpool , Nolan signed for Bolton Wanderers at the age of 16 . Part of the team that beat Preston North End in the 2001 Football League Championship play @-@ offs to gain promotion to the Premier League , he soon became a regular first @-@ team player for the club . He scored as Bolton beat Manchester United at Old Trafford in both of his first two seasons in the top tier of English football , as well as important goals that helped Bolton regularly finish in the top half of the Premier League table . 
 Nolan was also a first team regular as Bolton qualified for the UEFA Cup for the first time in the club 's history — where they reached the knockout stages . Following the departure of Jay @-@ Jay Okocha in 2006 , Nolan was appointed as the team captain , and he led the team again to UEFA Cup qualification and , again , eventual progression to the knockout round of the competition . 
 Following the arrival of Gary Megson as Bolton manager , the team 's and Nolan 's performances were criticised by a section of the club 's fans . This resulted in the midfielder completing a £ 4 million transfer to Newcastle United in the January 2009 transfer window . He formed part of the team who were relegated to the Football League Championship at the end of the season , but his performances the following season were widely praised , as he scored 18 goals — including the first hat @-@ trick of his career — to help the club gain promotion back to the Premier League as the division 's champions . Following promotion , Nolan was promoted to club captain . 
 In the summer of 2011 Nolan joined West Ham United on a five @-@ year contract , joining up again with Sam Allardyce , his former manager at Bolton and Newcastle . He was appointed captain soon after his arrival and led the team to an instant return to the Premier League . Nolan left West Ham United by mutual consent in August 2015 , and the following January he took over as player @-@ manager at Leyton Orient , losing his managerial role in April . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on 24 June 1982 in Liverpool , Merseyside , Nolan was brought up by a football @-@ playing family in Toxteth , and wanted to be a footballer from a young age . He attended Liverpool Blue Coat School and by the age of 14 , he was playing for the City of Liverpool 's schoolboys team . As a child , he supported Celtic and Liverpool , although conversely , his favourite players were Eric Cantona and Lee Sharpe of Manchester United . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Bolton Wanderers = = = 
 Nolan was invited to a Bolton Wanderers youth team training session by a friend , and was soon signed up to the club 's books . At the age of 16 , he was handed a year @-@ to @-@ year contract , coinciding with the opening of Bolton 's academy . A year later , he signed professional terms and made his first team debut . He played the whole match , as Bolton Wanderers beat Preston North End in the First Division play @-@ off , winning promotion to the FA Premier League . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , his first in the Premier League , Nolan scored eight league goals , including two at Leicester City on the opening day of the season . He also scored Bolton 's first goal as they beat Manchester United 2 – 1 at Old Trafford . The following season , he scored at Old Trafford again ; Nolan 's only goal of the season was the winner at Old Trafford in the game which saw Bolton record their second shock win at the ground in as many seasons , this time winning 1 – 0 . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson was reported to have been seen scouting Nolan . Despite that win early in the season , the club were only saved from relegation from the Premier League on the final day of the season with a win against Middlesbrough . 
 In the 2003 – 04 season , Nolan 's goals against Aston Villa and Tottenham Hotspur helped Bolton finish eighth in the league . He also scored as the club beat Villa 5 – 2 in the semi @-@ finals of the League Cup , and was part of the team that was defeated 2 – 1 by Middlesbrough in the final . Despite this defeat , Nolan 's goals — a career @-@ best 12 in all competitions — helped Bolton to their highest Premier League finishing position in over forty years . 
 The following season , Nolan was part of the team who reached the FA Cup quarter @-@ final , before being defeated by Arsenal at the Reebok Stadium . Bolton also progressed in the league , with a 1 – 1 draw with Portsmouth in the final game of the season , and Nolan 's four league goals helping to secure UEFA Cup qualification for the first time in their history . The club reached the last 32 of the UEFA Cup the following season , with Nolan 's goal in the first round defeat of Lokomotiv Plovdiv helping the club reach the group stages . He scored the winner as the club overcame Zenit St. Petersburg 1 – 0 in the group stages , and a further nine in the league to help Bolton finish eighth , missing out on European qualification . 
 The 2006 – 07 season saw Nolan take over from the departed Jay @-@ Jay Okocha as club captain . His three league goals helped Bolton to again qualify for the UEFA Cup . Nolan 's long throw @-@ in set up a goal , which helped Bolton achieve a 2 – 2 draw away against German champions Bayern Munich , who dominated the match . Despite reaching the first knockout round , Bolton 's league form suffered as they were pulled into a relegation fight , eventually finishing the season one point above the relegation zone in 16th . Nolan scored in the 2 – 0 win over Sunderland in May that virtually secured the club 's Premier League status . 
 Having made 323 league appearances for the club , in January 2009 , Nolan began talks with representatives of Newcastle United over a move to the north @-@ east club , following perceived criticism of his performances by some of the club 's supporters . 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 On 29 January 2009 , it was revealed that Newcastle had agreed a £ 4 million fee with Bolton Wanderers , which was confirmed the next day , with Nolan travelling to Tyneside to discuss terms and undergo a medical . Nolan completed his move on the same day , signing a four and a half @-@ year contract . On 22 February , Nolan received his first red card playing for Newcastle United in a home match against Everton for a two @-@ footed foul on Victor <unk> . At the end of the season , Newcastle were relegated to the English Championship . Nolan was noted as one of the more vocal Newcastle players over the summer , demanding an end to the off the field distractions at the club , and suggesting the club should be looking to acquire players for an immediate return to the Premier League . 
 Nolan played a key role in Newcastle 's push for promotion the following season ; he scored his first league goal for Newcastle on 22 August against Crystal Palace , and the first hat @-@ trick of his career , as part of a 4 – 0 away win against Ipswich Town on 26 September . Nolan captained Newcastle for the first time in a 5 – 1 win against Cardiff City taking over for the absent Nicky Butt and Alan Smith . After an 11 @-@ game goal drought , Nolan picked up his 11th league goal of the season on 20 February against Preston North End in a 3 – 0 win . He followed this up with the final goal in Newcastle 's 6 – 1 home drubbing of Barnsley two games later . He was voted as the Championship Player of the Year at the Football League Awards on 16 March . On 5 April 2010 , Newcastle United secured automatic promotion to the Premier League , after fellow contenders Nottingham Forest failed to beat Cardiff City . Newcastle took to the field hours later , in front of 48 @,@ 750 fans , and Nolan scored the winner with a scissor @-@ kick in the 2 – 1 win over Sheffield United . 
 Nolan was named as the new Newcastle United club captain for the 2010 – 11 season , succeeding the retired Nicky Butt . Nolan scored his first goals of the season as he netted a brace in Newcastle 's 6 – 0 win against Aston Villa in their first home game . On 31 October 2010 , Nolan scored his first Premier League hat @-@ trick , achieving the feat in the Tyne – Wear derby against Sunderland in a 5 – 1 home win . Nolan scored the opener against Liverpool in new manager Alan Pardew 's first game in charge on 11 December 2010 , which Newcastle went on to win 3 – 1 . Nolan scored the opening goal in the second derby of the season against Sunderland on 16 January , which finished 1 – 1 . On 26 February 2011 , Nolan scored his 50th Premier League goal , against his former club , Bolton Wanderers at St James ' Park , which finished 1 – 1 . 
 = = = West Ham United = = = 
 West Ham confirmed the signing of Nolan on 16 June 2011 for an undisclosed fee on a five @-@ year contract , taking over the vacant number 4 shirt . Due to the departure of the previous West Ham captain , Matthew Upson , who moved to Stoke City , Nolan was immediately made captain . His league debut came on 7 August 2011 in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Cardiff City . Nolan scored his first goal for West Ham on 13 August 2011 in a 1 – 0 away win against Doncaster Rovers ; his first home goal coming on 26 November , when scored a 25 @-@ yard volley in a 3 – 1 win against Derby County . On 7 May 2012 en route to the play @-@ off final at Wembley , Nolan scored his thirteenth goal for the club against Cardiff City in a 3 – 0 win , sealing West Ham 's Wembley appearance . On 19 May 2012 he captained West Ham in the 2012 Championship play @-@ off Final against Blackpool . West Ham won the match 2 – 1 with goals from Carlton Cole and Ricardo Vaz Tê sending them back to the Premier League after a one season absence . 
 Nolan continued his good form into the 2012 – 13 season and scored his first goal of the season on the opening day , scoring the only goal of the game in a 1 – 0 win against Aston Villa . On 1 September , he scored inside one minute during a 3 – 0 win at home to Fulham . He scored his third goal of the season on 22 September , rescuing a point for West Ham by scoring in added time in a 1 – 1 draw at home to Sunderland . On 20 April 2013 Nolan scored his 100th career goal , netting the second goal in a 2 – 0 home victory against Wigan Athletic . Nolan wrapped up the 2012 – 13 season by scoring his second Premier League hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 2 win against Reading on 19 May 2013 . This hat @-@ trick meant that Nolan had scored 10 league goals in a season for the fourth season in succession . 
 Nolan started the 2013 – 14 campaign by scoring in the first game of the season again , in a 2 – 0 home win against Cardiff City . West Ham struggled in the first half of the season and Nolan 's influence on games was described as " low key " . In December 2013 he was sent @-@ off at Anfield in a defeat by Liverpool for a foul on Jordan Henderson . After serving a three match ban he was dismissed again , in only his second match back , for a foul on Fulham 's Fernando <unk> in a 2 – 1 defeat at Craven Cottage . He was fined two weeks wages , £ 100 @,@ 000 , by West Ham with manager Sam Allardyce considering removing the captaincy of the club from Nolan . Nolan finished as top scorer for West Ham in the 2013 – 14 season . 
 At the start of the 2014 – 15 season he played in the first game , a 1 – 0 home defeat to Tottenham Hotspur but before their second game he fractured his shoulder in training , an injury which was expected to keep him out of football for at least six weeks . Nolan played 29 games for West Ham in the 2014 – 15 season , 10 after coming on as a substitute . Having been top scorer in the previous two seasons , he scored a single goal , in a 2 – 1 away win against West Bromwich Albion in December 2014 . Nolan received criticism for some of his performances during the season , notably from some West Ham supporters and from Jack Sullivan , the son of West Ham 's co @-@ chairman , David Sullivan . 
 His last game for the club came on 22 August 2015 against Bournemouth . Starting the game , Nolan was substituted for Matt Jarvis at half @-@ time with his side already 2 – 0 behind in an eventual 4 – 3 home loss . Five days later , Nolan left West Ham United by mutual consent after four years at the club . He had played 157 games for West Ham in all competitions , scoring 31 goals . 
 = = = Leyton Orient = = = 
 On 21 January 2016 , Nolan was announced as the player @-@ manager of Leyton Orient , signing a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year deal with the club . Two days later , he won his first match as manager in League Two , 2 – 0 at Wycombe Wanderers , with himself as an unused substitute . On 26 January , against Newport County at Brisbane Road , he made his debut in the 79th minute for <unk> <unk> @-@ Martin , and sent in the cross from which the O 's won a penalty kick which Jay Simpson converted for the only goal of the game . He made his first start for the club in the away game against Portsmouth on 6 February , where he played 70 minutes in a 1 @-@ 0 victory for Leyton Orient . 
 Nolan 's Orient team won three of the four league games in his first full month of management , only losing to league leaders , Northampton Town , and keeping three clean sheets . This led to him being nominated for February 's manager of the month award , which eventually went to Chris Wilder of Northampton . On 12 April 2016 , with the team two points off the play @-@ offs , Nolan was relieved of his duties as manager of Orient , the role transferring to Andy Hessenthaler . He left the club altogether on 6 July . 
 = = International career = = 
 Nolan has previously been called up to the England Under @-@ 18s and Under @-@ 21s and some commentators acknowledged that he could be a future candidate for the England squad . Reports have claimed that Nolan could be called up to the Republic of Ireland or Netherlands squads due to his ancestry . 
 On 12 November 2012 , Nolan was quoted saying he has been left hurt by being regularly over @-@ looked by England managers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nolan became engaged in 2005 , and married his fiancée Hayley in the summer of 2008 . The couple had their first child , a daughter , in November 2006 . Their second child , a son , was born in January 2010 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 9 April 2016 . 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 As of 12 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Bolton Wanderers 
 Football League First Division play @-@ offs : 2000 – 01 
 Newcastle United 
 Football League Championship : 2009 – 10 
 West Ham United 
 Football League Championship play @-@ offs : 2011 – 12 
 Individual 
 Premier League Player of the Month : February 2006 
 Football League Championship Player of the Year : 2009 – 10 . 
 Football League Championship Fans ' Player of the Month : October 2009 
 PFA Championship Team of the Year : 2009 – 10 
 Football League Championship Player of the Month : April 2010 
 Football League Championship Player of the Year 2011 – 12 nomination 
 Football League Reviewers Championship Team of the Year 2011 – 12 
 = Samuel Adams = 
 Samuel Adams ( September 27 [ O.S. September 16 ] 1722 – October 2 , 1803 ) was an American statesman , political philosopher , and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States . As a politician in colonial Massachusetts , Adams was a leader of the movement that became the American Revolution , and was one of the architects of the principles of American republicanism that shaped the political culture of the United States . He was a second cousin to President John Adams . 
 Born in Boston , Adams was brought up in a religious and politically active family . A graduate of Harvard College , he was an unsuccessful businessman and tax collector before concentrating on politics . As an influential official of the Massachusetts House of Representatives and the Boston Town Meeting in the 1760s , Adams was a part of a movement opposed to the British Parliament 's efforts to tax the British American colonies without their consent . His 1768 Massachusetts Circular Letter calling for colonial non @-@ cooperation prompted the occupation of Boston by British soldiers , eventually resulting in the Boston Massacre of 1770 . To help coordinate resistance to what he saw as the British government 's attempts to violate the British Constitution at the expense of the colonies , in 1772 Adams and his colleagues devised a committee of correspondence system , which linked like @-@ minded Patriots throughout the Thirteen Colonies . Continued resistance to British policy resulted in the 1773 Boston Tea Party and the coming of the American Revolution . 
 After Parliament passed the Coercive Acts in 1774 , Adams attended the Continental Congress in Philadelphia , which was convened to coordinate a colonial response . He helped guide Congress towards issuing the Continental Association in 1774 , the Declaration of Independence in 1776 , and helped draft the Articles of Confederation and the Massachusetts Constitution . Adams returned to Massachusetts after the American Revolution , where he served in the state senate and was eventually elected governor . 
 Samuel Adams later became a controversial figure in American history . Accounts written in the 19th century praised him as someone who had been steering his fellow colonists towards independence long before the outbreak of the Revolutionary War . This view gave way to negative assessments of Adams in the first half of the 20th century , in which he was portrayed as a master of propaganda who provoked mob violence to achieve his goals . Both of these interpretations have been challenged by some modern scholars , who argue that these traditional depictions of Adams are myths contradicted by the historical record . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Samuel Adams was born in Boston in the British colony of Massachusetts on September 16 , 1722 , an Old Style date that is sometimes converted to the New Style date of September 27 . Adams was one of twelve children born to Samuel Adams , Sr. , and Mary ( Fifield ) Adams ; in an age of high infant mortality , only three of these children would live past their third birthday . Adams 's parents were devout Puritans and members of the Old South Congregational Church . The family lived on Purchase Street in Boston . Adams was proud of his Puritan heritage , and emphasized Puritan values , especially virtue , in his political career . 
 Samuel Adams , Sr. ( 1689 – 1748 ) was a prosperous merchant and church deacon . Deacon Adams became a leading figure in Boston politics through an organization that became known as the Boston Caucus , which promoted candidates who supported popular causes . The Boston Caucus helped shape the agenda of the Boston Town Meeting . A New England town meeting is a form of local government with elected officials , and not just a gathering of citizens ; it was , according to historian William Fowler , " the most democratic institution in the British empire " . Deacon Adams rose through the political ranks , becoming a justice of the peace , a selectman , and a member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives . He worked closely with Elisha Cooke , Jr . ( 1678 – 1737 ) , the leader of the " popular party " , a faction that resisted any encroachment by royal officials on the colonial rights embodied in the Massachusetts Charter of 1691 . In the coming years , members of the " popular party " would become known as Whigs or Patriots . 
 The younger Samuel Adams attended Boston Latin School and then entered Harvard College in 1736 . His parents hoped that his schooling would prepare him for the ministry , but Adams gradually shifted his interest to politics . After graduating in 1740 , Adams continued his studies , earning a master 's degree in 1743 . His thesis , in which he argued that it was " lawful to resist the Supreme Magistrate , if the Commonwealth cannot otherwise be preserved " , indicated that his political views , like his father 's , were oriented towards colonial rights . 
 Adams 's life was greatly affected by his father 's involvement in a banking controversy . In 1739 , with Massachusetts facing a serious currency shortage , Deacon Adams and the Boston Caucus created a " land bank " , which issued paper money to borrowers who mortgaged their land as security . The land bank was generally supported by the citizenry and the popular party , which dominated the House of Representatives , the lower branch of the General Court . Opposition to the land bank came from the more aristocratic " court party " , who were supporters of the royal governor and controlled the Governor 's Council , the upper chamber of the General Court . The court party used its influence to have the British Parliament dissolve the land bank in 1741 . Directors of the land bank , including Deacon Adams , became personally liable for the currency still in circulation , payable in silver and gold . Lawsuits over the bank persisted for years , even after Deacon Adams 's death , and the younger Samuel Adams would often have to defend the family estate from seizure by the government . For Adams , these lawsuits " served as a constant personal reminder that Britain 's power over the colonies could be exercised in arbitrary and destructive ways " . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After leaving Harvard in 1743 , Adams was unsure about his future . He considered becoming a lawyer , but instead decided to go into business . He worked at Thomas Cushing 's counting house , but the job only lasted a few months because Cushing felt that Adams was too preoccupied with politics to become a good merchant . Adams 's father then loaned him £ 1 @,@ 000 to go into business for himself , a substantial amount for that time . Adams 's lack of business instincts were confirmed : he loaned half of this money to a friend , which was never repaid , and frittered away the other half . Adams would always remain , in the words of historian Pauline Maier , " a man utterly uninterested in either making or possessing money " . 
 After Adams had lost his money , his father made him a partner in the family 's malthouse , which was next to the family home on Purchase Street . Several generations of <unk> were maltsters , who produced the malt necessary for brewing beer . Years later , a poet would poke fun at Adams by calling him " Sam the maltster " . Adams has often been described as a brewer , but the extant evidence suggests that Adams worked as a maltster and not a brewer . 
 In January 1748 , Adams and some friends , inflamed by British impressment , launched The Independent Advertiser , a weekly newspaper that printed many political essays written by Adams . Drawing heavily upon English political theorist John Locke 's Second Treatise of Government , Adams 's essays emphasized many of the themes that would characterize his subsequent career . He argued that the people must resist any encroachment on their constitutional rights . He cited the decline of the Roman Empire as an example of what could happen to New England if it were to abandon its Puritan values . 
 When Deacon Adams died in 1748 , Adams was given the responsibility of managing the family 's affairs . In October 1749 , he married Elizabeth <unk> , his pastor 's daughter . Elizabeth gave birth to six children over the next seven years , but only two — Samuel ( born 1751 ) and Hannah ( born 1756 ) — would live to adulthood . In July 1757 , Elizabeth died soon after giving birth to a stillborn son . Adams would remarry in 1764 , to Elizabeth Wells , but would have no other children . 
 Like his father , Adams embarked on a political career with the support of the Boston Caucus . He was elected to his first political office in 1747 , serving as one of the clerks of the Boston market . In 1756 the Boston Town Meeting elected him to the post of tax collector , which provided a small income . Adams often failed to collect taxes from his fellow citizens , which increased his popularity among those who did not pay , but left him liable for the shortage . By 1765 , Adams 's account was more than £ 8 @,@ 000 in arrears . Because the town meeting was on the verge of bankruptcy , Adams was compelled to file suit against delinquent taxpayers , but many taxes went uncollected . In 1768 , Adams 's political opponents would use the situation to their advantage , obtaining a court judgment of £ 1 @,@ 463 against him . Adams 's friends paid off some of the deficit , and the town meeting wrote off the remainder . By then , Adams had emerged as a leader of the popular party , and the embarrassing situation did not lessen his influence . 
 = = Struggle with Great Britain = = 
 Samuel Adams emerged as an important public figure in Boston soon after the British Empire 's victory in the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) . Finding itself deep in debt and looking for new sources of revenue , the British Parliament sought , for the first time , to directly tax the colonies of British America . This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and the extent of Parliament 's authority in the colonies . 
 = = = Sugar Act = = = 
 The first step in the new program was the Sugar Act of 1764 . Adams saw the act as an infringement of longstanding colonial rights . Because colonists were not represented in Parliament , he argued , they could not be taxed by that body ; only the colonial assemblies , where the colonists were represented , could levy taxes upon the colonies . Adams expressed these views in May 1764 , when the Boston Town Meeting elected its representatives to the Massachusetts House . As was customary , the town meeting provided the representatives with a set of written instructions , which Adams was selected to write . Adams highlighted what he perceived to be the dangers of taxation without representation : 
 For if our Trade may be taxed , why not our Lands ? Why not the Produce of our Lands & everything we possess or make use of ? This we apprehend annihilates our Charter Right to govern & tax ourselves . It strikes at our British privileges , which as we have never forfeited them , we hold in common with our Fellow Subjects who are Natives of Britain . If Taxes are laid upon us in any shape without our having a legal Representation where they are laid , are we not reduced from the Character of free Subjects to the miserable State of tributary Slaves ? 
 " When the Boston Town Meeting approved the Adams instructions on May 24 , 1764 , " wrote historian John K. Alexander , " it became the first political body in America to go on record stating Parliament could not constitutionally tax the colonists . The directives also contained the first official recommendation that the colonies present a unified defense of their rights . " Adams 's instructions were published in newspapers and pamphlets . Adams soon became closely associated with James Otis , Jr . , a member of the Massachusetts House famous for his defense of colonial rights . Although Otis boldly challenged the constitutionality of certain acts of Parliament , he would not go as far as Adams , who was moving towards the conclusion that Parliament did not have sovereignty over the colonies . 
 = = = Stamp Act = = = 
 In 1765 , Parliament passed the Stamp Act , which required colonists to pay a new tax on most printed materials . News of the passage of the Stamp Act produced an uproar in the colonies . The colonial response echoed Adams 's 1764 instructions . In June 1765 , Otis called for a Stamp Act Congress to coordinate colonial resistance . The Virginia House of Burgesses passed a widely reprinted set of resolves against the Stamp Act that resembled Adams 's arguments against the Sugar Act . Not only did Adams argue that the Stamp Act was unconstitutional ; he also believed that it would hurt the economy of the British Empire . He supported calls for a boycott of British goods to put pressure on Parliament to repeal the tax . 
 In Boston , a group called the Loyal Nine , a precursor to the Sons of Liberty , organized protests of the Stamp Act . Adams was friendly with the Loyal Nine , but was not a member . On August 14 , stamp distributor Andrew Oliver was hanged in effigy from Boston 's Liberty Tree ; that night , his home was ransacked and his office demolished . On August 26 , lieutenant governor Thomas Hutchinson 's home was destroyed by an angry crowd . 
 Officials such as Governor Francis Bernard , believing that common people acted only under the direction of agitators , blamed the violence on Adams . This interpretation was revived by scholars in the early 20th century , who viewed Adams as a master of propaganda who manipulated mobs into doing his bidding . For example , in what became the standard biography of Adams , historian John C. Miller wrote in 1936 that Adams " controlled " Boston with his " trained mob " . Some modern scholars have argued that this interpretation is a myth , and that there 's no evidence that Adams had anything to do with the Stamp Act riots . After the fact , Adams did approve of the August 14 action because he saw no other legal options to resist what he viewed as an unconstitutional act by Parliament , but he condemned attacks on officials ' homes as " <unk> " . According to the modern scholarly interpretation of Adams , he supported legal methods of resisting parliamentary taxation — petitions , boycotts , and nonviolent demonstrations — but he opposed mob violence , which he saw as illegal , dangerous , and counterproductive . 
 In September 1765 , Adams was once again appointed by the Boston Town Meeting to write the instructions for Boston 's delegation to the Massachusetts House of Representatives . As it turned out , he wrote his own instructions : on September 27 , the town meeting selected him to replace the recently deceased Oxenbridge Thacher as one of Boston 's four representatives in the assembly . With James Otis attending the Stamp Act Congress in New York City , Adams was the primary author of a series of House resolutions against the Stamp Act , which were more radical than those passed by the Stamp Act Congress . Adams was one of the first colonial leaders to argue that mankind possessed certain natural rights that governments could not violate . 
 Although the Stamp Act was scheduled to go into effect on November 1 , 1765 , it was not enforced because protestors throughout the colonies had compelled stamp distributors to resign . Eventually , British merchants were able to convince Parliament to repeal the tax . By May 16 , 1766 , news of the repeal had reached Boston . There was celebration throughout the city , and Adams made a public statement of thanks to British merchants for helping their cause . 
 The Massachusetts popular party gained ground in the May 1766 elections . Adams was reelected to the House and selected as its clerk . In the coming years , Adams would use his position as clerk , in which he was responsible for official House papers , to promote his political message with great effect . Joining Adams in the House was John Hancock , a new representative from Boston . Hancock was a wealthy merchant — perhaps the richest man in Massachusetts — but a relative newcomer to politics . Initially a protégé of Adams , Hancock used his wealth to promote the Whig cause . 
 = = = Townshend Acts = = = 
 After the repeal of the Stamp Act , Parliament took a different approach to raising revenue , passing the Townshend Acts in 1767 , which established new duties on various goods imported into the colonies . These duties were relatively low , because the British ministry wanted to establish the precedent that Parliament had the right to impose tariffs on the colonies before raising them . Revenues from these duties were to be used to pay for governors and judges who would be independent of colonial control . To enforce compliance with the new laws , the Townshend Acts created a customs agency known as the American Board of Custom Commissioners , which was headquartered in Boston . 
 Resistance to the Townshend Acts grew slowly . When news of the acts reached Boston in October 1767 , the General Court was not in session . Adams therefore used the Boston Town Meeting to organize an economic boycott , and called for other towns to do the same . By February 1768 , towns in Massachusetts , Rhode Island , and Connecticut had joined the boycott . Opposition to the Townshend Acts was also encouraged by Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania , a series of popular essays by John Dickinson , which started appearing in December 1767 . Dickinson 's argument that the new taxes were unconstitutional had been made before by Adams , but never to such a wide audience . 
 In January 1768 , the Massachusetts House sent a petition to King George asking for his help . Adams and Otis requested that the House send the petition to the other colonies , along with what became known as the Massachusetts Circular Letter , which became " a significant milestone on the road to revolution " . The letter , written by Adams , called on the colonies to join with Massachusetts in resisting the Townshend Acts . The House initially voted against sending the letter and petition to the other colonies , but after some politicking by Adams and Otis , it was approved on February 11 . 
 Hoping to prevent a repeat of the Stamp Act Congress , Lord Hillsborough , the British colonial secretary , instructed the colonial governors in America to dissolve the assemblies if they responded to the Massachusetts Circular Letter . He also directed Massachusetts Governor Francis Bernard to have the Massachusetts House rescind the letter . On June 30 , the House refused to rescind the letter by a vote of 92 to 17 , with Adams citing their right to petition as justification . Far from complying with the governor 's order , Adams instead presented a new petition to the king asking that Governor Bernard be removed from office . Bernard responded by dissolving the legislature . 
 When the commissioners of the Customs Board found that they were unable to enforce trade regulations in Boston , they requested military assistance . Help came in the form of the HMS Romney , a fifty @-@ gun warship , which arrived in Boston Harbor in May 1768 . Tensions escalated after the captain of the Romney began to impress local sailors . The situation exploded on June 10 , when customs officials seized the Liberty , a sloop owned by John Hancock — a leading critic of the Customs Board — for alleged customs violations . When sailors and marines from the Romney came ashore to tow away the Liberty , a riot broke out . Things calmed down in the following days , but fearful customs officials packed up their families and fled to the Romney and eventually to Castle William , an island fort in the harbor , for protection . 
 In response to the Liberty incident and the struggle over the Circular Letter , Governor Bernard wrote to London , informing his superiors that troops were needed in Boston to restore order . Lord Hillsborough ordered four regiments of the British Army to Boston . 
 = = = Boston under occupation = = = 
 Learning that British troops were on the way , the Boston Town Meeting met on September 12 , 1768 , and requested that Governor Bernard convene the General Court . Bernard refused , and so the town meeting called on the other Massachusetts towns to send representatives to meet at Faneuil Hall beginning on September 22 . About 100 towns sent delegates to the convention , which was effectively an unofficial session of the Massachusetts House . Using language more moderate than what Adams desired , the convention issued a letter that insisted that Boston was not a lawless town , and that the impending military occupation violated Bostonians ' natural , constitutional , and charter rights . By the time the convention adjourned , British troop transports had arrived in Boston Harbor . Two regiments disembarked in October 1768 , followed by two more in November . 
 According to some accounts , the occupation of Boston was a turning point for Adams , after which he gave up hope of reconciliation and secretly began to work towards American independence . However , in 1928 historian Carl Becker wrote that " there is no clear evidence in his contemporary writings that such was the case . " Nevertheless , the notion that Adams desired independence before most of his contemporaries , and steadily worked towards this goal for years , became part of the standard view of Adams . Historian Pauline Maier challenged that idea in 1980 , arguing instead that Adams , like most of his peers , did not embrace independence until after the American Revolutionary War had begun in 1775 . According to Maier , Adams was at this time a reformer rather than a revolutionary ; he sought to have the British ministry change its policies , and warned Britain that independence would be the inevitable result of a failure to do so . 
 Adams wrote numerous letters and essays in opposition to the occupation , which he considered a violation of the 1689 Bill of Rights . The occupation was publicized throughout the colonies in the Journal of Occurrences , an unsigned series of newspaper articles that may have been written by Adams in collaboration with others . In an innovative approach for an era without professional newspaper reporters , the Journal presented what it claimed to be a factual daily account of events in Boston during the military occupation . Drawing upon the traditional Anglo @-@ American distrust of standing armies garrisoned among civilians , the Journal depicted a Boston besieged by unruly British soldiers , who assaulted men and raped women with regularity and impunity . The Journal ceased publication on August 1 , 1769 , which was a day of celebration in Boston : Governor Bernard had left Massachusetts , never to return . 
 Adams continued to work on getting the troops withdrawn , and keeping the boycott going until the Townshend duties were repealed . Two regiments were removed from Boston in 1769 , but the other two remained . Tensions between soldiers and civilians eventually resulted in the killing of five civilians in the so @-@ called Boston Massacre of March 1770 . According to the " propagandist interpretation " of Adams popularized by historian John Miller , Adams deliberately provoked the incident to promote his secret agenda of American independence . According to Pauline Maier , however , " There is no evidence that he prompted the Boston Massacre riot " . 
 After the Boston Massacre , Adams and other town leaders met with Bernard 's successor , Governor Thomas Hutchinson , and Colonel William Dalrymple , the army commander , to demand the withdrawal of the troops . The situation remained explosive , and so Dalrymple agreed to remove both regiments to Castle William . Adams wanted the soldiers to have a fair trial , because this would show that Boston was not controlled by a lawless mob , but was instead the victim of an unjust occupation . He convinced his cousins John Adams and Josiah Quincy to defend the soldiers , knowing that those Whigs would not slander Boston to gain an acquittal . However , Adams wrote essays condemning the outcome of the trials ; he thought the soldiers should have been convicted of murder . 
 = = = " Quiet period " = = = 
 After the Boston Massacre , politics in Massachusetts entered what is sometimes known as the " quiet period " . In April 1770 , Parliament repealed the Townshend duties , except for the tax on tea . Adams urged colonists to keep up the boycott of British goods , arguing that paying even one small tax allowed Parliament to establish the precedent of taxing the colonies , but the boycott faltered . As economic conditions improved , support for Adams 's causes waned . In 1770 first New York City then Philadelphia abandoned the non @-@ importation boycott of British goods . Faced with the risk of being economically ruined , Boston merchants agreed to generally end the non @-@ importation and effectively defeated Samuel Adams ' cause in Massachusetts . John Adams withdrew from politics , while John Hancock and James Otis appeared to become more moderate . Adams was reelected to the Massachusetts House in April 1772 , but he received far fewer votes than ever before . 
 A struggle over the power of the purse brought Adams back into the political limelight . Traditionally , the Massachusetts House of Representatives paid the salaries of the governor , lieutenant governor , and superior court judges . From the Whig perspective , this arrangement , by keeping royally appointed officials accountable to democratically elected representatives , was an important check on executive power . In 1772 , Massachusetts learned that the those officials would henceforth be paid by the British government rather than by the province . To protest this development , in November 1772 Adams and his colleagues devised a system of committees of correspondence ; the towns of Massachusetts would consult with each other concerning political matters via messages sent through a network of committees that recorded British activities and protested imperial policies . Committees of correspondence soon formed in other colonies as well . 
 Governor Hutchinson , concerned that the committees of correspondence were growing into an independence movement , convened the General Court in January 1773 . Addressing the legislature , Hutchinson argued that to deny the supremacy of Parliament , which some committees had done , came dangerously close to rebellion . " I know of no line that can be drawn " , he said , " between the supreme authority of Parliament and the total independence of the colonies . " Adams and the House responded that the Massachusetts Charter did not establish Parliament 's supremacy over the province , and so Parliament could not claim that authority now . Hutchinson soon realized that he had made a major blunder by initiating a public debate about independence and the extent of Parliament 's authority in the colonies . The Boston Committee of Correspondence published its statement of colonial rights , along with Hutchinson 's exchange with the Massachusetts House , in the widely distributed " Boston Pamphlet " . 
 The quiet period in Massachusetts was over . Adams was easily reelected to the Massachusetts House in May 1773 , and was also elected as moderator of the Boston Town Meeting . In June 1773 , Adams introduced in the Massachusetts House a set of private letters written by Hutchinson several years earlier . In one letter , Hutchinson appeared to recommend to London that there should be " an abridgement of what are called English liberties " in Massachusetts . Although Hutchinson denied that this is what he meant , his career in Massachusetts was effectively over . The House sent a petition to the king asking for his recall . 
 = = = Tea Party = = = 
 Adams took a leading role in the events that led up to the famous Boston Tea Party of December 16 , 1773 , although the precise nature of his involvement has been disputed . 
 In May 1773 , the British Parliament passed the Tea Act , a tax law to help the struggling East India Company , one of Great Britain 's most important commercial institutions . Because of the heavy taxes imposed on tea imported into Great Britain , Britons could buy smuggled Dutch tea more cheaply than the East India Company 's tea , and so the company amassed a huge surplus of tea that it could not sell . The British government 's solution to the problem was to sell the surplus in the colonies . The Tea Act permitted the East India Company , for the first time , to export tea directly to the colonies , bypassing most of the merchants who had previously acted as middlemen . This measure was a threat to the American colonial economy because it granted the Tea Company a significant cost advantage over local tea merchants and even local tea smugglers , driving them out of business . The act also reduced the taxes on tea paid by the company in Britain , but kept the controversial Townshend duty on tea imported in the colonies . A few merchants in New York , Philadelphia , Boston , and Charlestown were selected to receive the company 's tea for resale . In late 1773 , seven ships carrying East India Company tea were sent to the colonies , including four bound for Boston . 
 News of the Tea Act set off a firestorm of protest in the colonies . This was not a dispute about high taxes : the price of legally imported tea was actually reduced by the Tea Act . Protesters were instead concerned with a variety of other issues . The familiar " no taxation without representation " argument , along with the question of the extent of Parliament 's authority in the colonies , remained prominent . Some colonists worried that by buying the cheaper tea , they would be conceding that Parliament had the right to tax them . The " power of the purse " conflict was still at issue : The tea tax revenues were to be used to pay the salaries of certain royal officials , making them independent of the people . Colonial smugglers played a significant role in the protests , since the Tea Act made legally imported tea cheaper , which threatened to put smugglers of Dutch tea out of business . Legitimate tea importers who had not been named as consignees by the East India Company were also threatened with financial ruin by the Tea Act , and other merchants worried about the precedent of a government @-@ created monopoly . 
 Adams and the correspondence committees promoted opposition to the Tea Act . In every colony except Massachusetts , protesters were able to force the tea consignees to resign or to return the tea to England . In Boston , however , Governor Hutchinson was determined to hold his ground . He convinced the tea consignees , two of whom were his sons , not to back down . The Boston Caucus and then the Town Meeting attempted to compel the consignees to resign , but they refused . With the tea ships about to arrive , Adams and the Boston Committee of Correspondence contacted nearby committees to rally support . 
 When the tea ship Dartmouth arrived in the Boston Harbor in late November , Adams wrote a circular letter calling for a mass meeting to be held at Faneuil Hall on November 29 . Thousands of people arrived , so many that the meeting was moved to the larger Old South Meeting House . British law required the Dartmouth to unload and pay the duties within twenty days or customs officials could confiscate the cargo . The mass meeting passed a resolution , introduced by Adams , urging the captain of the Dartmouth to send the ship back without paying the import duty . Meanwhile , the meeting assigned twenty @-@ five men to watch the ship and prevent the tea from being unloaded . 
 Governor Hutchinson refused to grant permission for the Dartmouth to leave without paying the duty . Two more tea ships , the Eleanor and the Beaver , arrived in Boston Harbor . The fourth ship , the William was stranded near Cape Cod and never arrived to Boston . On December 16 — the last day of the Dartmouth 's deadline — about 7 @,@ 000 people had gathered around the Old South Meeting House . After receiving a report that Governor Hutchinson had again refused to let the ships leave , Adams announced that " This meeting can do nothing further to save the country . " According to a popular story , Adams 's statement was a prearranged signal for the " tea party " to begin . However , this claim did not appear in print until nearly a century after the event , in a biography of Adams written by his great @-@ grandson , who apparently misinterpreted the evidence . According to eyewitness accounts , people did not leave the meeting until ten or fifteen minutes after Adams 's alleged " signal " , and Adams in fact tried to stop people from leaving because the meeting was not yet over . 
 While Adams tried to reassert control of the meeting , people poured out of the Old South Meeting House and headed to Boston Harbor . That evening , a group of 30 to 130 men , some of them thinly disguised as Mohawk Indians , boarded the three vessels and , over the course of three hours , dumped all 342 chests of tea into the water . Adams never revealed if he went to the wharf to witness the destruction of the tea . Whether or not he helped plan the event is unknown , but Adams immediately worked to publicize and defend it . He argued that the Tea Party was not the act of a lawless mob , but was instead a principled protest and the only remaining option the people had to defend their constitutional rights . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 Great Britain responded to the Boston Tea Party in 1774 with the Coercive Acts . The first of these acts , the Boston Port Act , closed Boston 's commerce until the East India Company had been repaid for the destroyed tea . The Massachusetts Government Act rewrote the Massachusetts Charter , making many officials royally appointed rather than elected , and severely restricting the activities of town meetings . The Administration of Justice Act allowed colonists charged with crimes to be transported to another colony or to Great Britain for trial . A new royal governor was appointed to enforce the acts : General Thomas Gage , who was also commander of British military forces in North America . 
 Adams worked to coordinate resistance to the Coercive Acts . In May 1774 , with Adams serving as moderator , the Boston Town Meeting organized an economic boycott of British goods . In June , Adams headed a committee in the Massachusetts House which proposed that an inter @-@ colonial congress meet in Philadelphia in September . With the doors locked to prevent Gage from dissolving the legislature , Adams was one of five delegates chosen to attend the First Continental Congress . Because Adams was never fashionably dressed and had little money , friends bought him new clothes and paid his expenses for the journey to Philadelphia , his first trip outside of Massachusetts . 
 = = = First Continental Congress = = = 
 In Philadelphia , Adams promoted colonial unity while using his political skills to lobby other delegates . On September 16 , messenger Paul Revere brought Congress the Suffolk Resolves , one of many resolutions passed in Massachusetts that promised strident resistance to the Coercive Acts . Congress endorsed the Suffolk Resolves , issued a Declaration of Rights that denied Parliament 's right to legislate for the colonies , and organized a colonial boycott known as the Continental Association . 
 Adams returned to Massachusetts in November 1774 , where he served in the Massachusetts Provincial Congress , an extralegal legislative body independent of British control . The Provincial Congress created the first minutemen companies , consisting of militiamen who were to be ready for action on a moment 's notice . Adams also served as moderator of the Boston Town Meeting , which convened despite the Massachusetts Government Act , and was appointed to the Committee of Inspection to enforce the Continental Association . He was also selected to attend the Second Continental Congress , scheduled to meet in Philadelphia in May 1775 . 
 Before his journey to the second Congress , Adams and John Hancock , who had been added to the delegation , attended the Provincial Congress in Concord , Massachusetts . Deciding that it was not safe to return to Boston before leaving for Philadelphia , the two men stayed at Hancock 's childhood home in Lexington . On April 14 , 1775 , General Gage received a letter from Lord Dartmouth advising him " to arrest the principal actors and abettors in the Provincial Congress whose proceedings appear in every light to be acts of treason and rebellion " . On the night of April 18 , Gage sent out a detachment of soldiers on the fateful mission that would spark the American Revolutionary War . The purpose of the British expedition was to seize and destroy military supplies that the colonists had stored in Concord . According to many historical accounts , Gage also instructed his men to arrest Hancock and Adams , but the written orders issued by Gage made no mention of arresting the Patriot leaders . 
 Although Gage had evidently decided against seizing Adams and Hancock , Patriots initially believed otherwise , perhaps influenced by London newspapers that reached Boston with the news that the patriot leader would be hanged if he were caught . From Boston , Joseph Warren dispatched Paul Revere to warn the two that British troops were on the move and might attempt to arrest them . As Hancock and Adams made their escape , the first shots of the war began at Lexington and Concord . Soon after the battle , Gage issued a proclamation granting a general pardon to all who would " lay down their arms , and return to the duties of peaceable subjects " — with the exceptions of Hancock and Samuel Adams . Singling out Hancock and Adams in this manner only added to their renown among Patriots , and , according to Patriot historian Mercy Otis Warren , perhaps exaggerated the importance of the two men . 
 = = = Second Continental Congress = = = 
 Because the Continental Congress worked under a secrecy rule , Adams 's precise role in congressional deliberations is not fully documented . He appears to have had a major influence , working behind the scenes as a sort of " parliamentary whip " and Thomas Jefferson credits the lesser @-@ remembered Adams with steering the Congress toward independence , saying " If there was any Palinurus to the Revolution , Samuel Adams was the man . " He served on numerous committees , often dealing with military matters . 
 Adams was a cautious advocate for a declaration of independence , urging eager correspondents back in Massachusetts to wait for more moderate colonists to come around to supporting separation from Great Britain . He was pleased when , in 1775 , the colonies began to replace their old governments with independent republican governments . In early 1776 , writing as " Candidus " , he praised Thomas Paine 's popular pamphlet Common Sense and supported the call for American independence . On June 7 , Adams 's political ally Richard Henry Lee introduced a three @-@ part resolution calling for Congress to declare independence , create a colonial confederation , and seek foreign aid . After a delay to rally support , Congress approved the language of the United States Declaration of Independence on July 4 , 1776 , which Adams signed . 
 After the Declaration of Independence , Congress continued to manage the war effort . Adams served on military committees , including an appointment to the Board of War in 1777 . He advocated paying bonuses to Continental Army soldiers to encourage them to reenlist for the duration of the war . He called for harsh state legislation to punish Loyalists — Americans who continued to support the British crown — who Adams believed were as dangerous to American liberty as British soldiers . In Massachusetts , more than 300 Loyalists were banished and their property confiscated . After the war , Adams opposed allowing Loyalists to return to Massachusetts , fearing that they would work to undermine republican government . 
 Adams was the Massachusetts delegate appointed to the committee to draft the Articles of Confederation , the plan for the colonial confederation . With its emphasis on state sovereignty , the Articles reflected Congress 's wariness of a strong central government , a concern shared by Adams . Like others at the time , Adams considered himself a citizen of the United States while continuing to refer to Massachusetts as his " country " . After much debate , the Articles were sent to the states for ratification in November 1777 . From Philadelphia , Adams urged Massachusetts to ratify , which it did . Adams signed the Articles of Confederation with the other Massachusetts delegates in 1778 , but they were not ratified by all the states until 1781 . 
 Adams returned to Boston in 1779 to attend a state constitutional convention . The Massachusetts General Court had proposed a new constitution the previous year , but voters rejected it , and so a convention was held to try again . Adams was appointed to a three @-@ man drafting committee with his cousin John Adams and James Bowdoin . They drafted the Massachusetts Constitution , which was amended by the convention and approved by voters in 1780 . The new constitution established a republican form of government , with annual elections and a separation of powers . It reflected Adams 's belief that " a state is never free except when each citizen is bound by no law whatever that he has not approved of , either directly , or through his representatives " . By modern standards , the new constitution was not " democratic " ; Adams , like most of his peers , believed that only free males who owned property should be allowed to vote , and that the senate and the governor served to balance any excesses that might result from majority rule . 
 In 1781 , Adams retired from the Continental Congress . His health was one reason : he was approaching his sixtieth birthday , and suffered from tremors that made writing difficult . But he also wanted to return to Massachusetts to influence politics in the Commonwealth . He returned to Boston in 1781 , and was never to leave Massachusetts again . 
 = = Return to Massachusetts = = 
 Adams remained active in politics upon his return to Massachusetts . He frequently served as moderator of the Boston Town Meeting , and was elected to the state senate , where he often served as that body 's president . 
 Adams focused his political agenda on promoting virtue , which he considered essential in a republican government . If republican leaders lacked virtue , he believed , liberty was endangered . His major opponent in this campaign was his former protégé , John Hancock . The two men had had a falling out in the Continental Congress . Adams disapproved of what he viewed as Hancock 's vanity and extravagance , which Adams believed were inappropriate in a republican leader . When Hancock left Congress in 1777 , Adams and the other Massachusetts delegates voted against thanking Hancock for his service as president of Congress . The struggle continued in Massachusetts . Adams thought that Hancock , by acting like an aristocrat and courting popularity , was not acting the part of a virtuous republican leader . Adams favored James Bowdoin for governor , and was distressed when Hancock won annual landslide victories . 
 Adams 's promotion of public virtue took several forms . He played a major role in getting Boston to provide a free public education for children , even for girls , which was controversial . Adams was one of the charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780 . After the Revolutionary War , Adams joined others , including Thomas Jefferson , in denouncing the Society of the Cincinnati , an organization of former army officers . Adams worried that the Society was " a stride towards an hereditary military nobility " , and thus a threat to republicanism . Adams also believed that public theaters undermined civic virtue , and he joined an ultimately unsuccessful effort to keep theaters banned in Boston . Decades after Adams 's death , orator Edward Everett would call him " the last of the Puritans " . 
 Postwar economic troubles in western Massachusetts led to an uprising known as Shays 's Rebellion , which began in 1786 . Small farmers , angered by high taxes and debts , armed themselves and shut down debtor courts in two counties . Governor James Bowdoin sent four thousand militiamen to put down the uprising , an action supported by Adams . Although his old political ally James Warren thought that Adams had forsaken his principles , Adams saw no contradiction . He approved of rebellion against an unrepresentative government , as had happened during the American Revolution , but he opposed taking up arms against a republican government , where problems should be remedied through elections . He thought the leaders of Shays 's Rebellion should be hanged , reportedly saying that " the man who dares to rebel against the laws of a republic ought to suffer death " . 
 Shays 's Rebellion contributed to the belief that the Articles of Confederation needed to be revised . In 1787 , delegates to the Philadelphia Convention , instead of revising the Articles , created a new United States Constitution with a much stronger national government . When the Constitution was sent to the states for ratification , Adams expressed his displeasure . " I confess , " he wrote to Richard Henry Lee in 1787 , " as I enter the Building I stumble at the Threshold . I meet with a National Government , instead of a Federal Union of States . " Adams was one of those derisively labeled " Anti @-@ Federalists " by proponents of the new Constitution , who called themselves " Federalists " . Adams was elected to the Massachusetts ratifying convention , which met in January 1788 . Despite his reservations , Adams rarely spoke at the convention , and listened carefully to the arguments rather than raising objections . Adams and John Hancock , who had reconciled , finally agreed to give their support for the Constitution , with the proviso that some amendments be added later . Even with the support of Hancock and Adams , the Massachusetts convention narrowly ratified the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168 . 
 While Adams was attending the ratifying convention , his only son , Samuel Adams , Jr . , died at just thirty @-@ seven years of age . The younger Adams had served as surgeon in the Revolutionary War , but had fallen ill and never fully recovered . The death was a stunning blow to the elder Adams . The younger Adams left his father the certificates he had earned as a soldier , giving Adams and his wife unexpected financial security in their final years . Investments in land would make them relatively wealthy by the mid @-@ 1790s , but this did not alter their frugal lifestyle . 
 Concerned about the new Constitution , Adams made an attempt to reenter national politics . He allowed his name to be put forth as a candidate for the United States House of Representatives in the December 1788 election , but lost to Fisher Ames , apparently because Ames was a stronger supporter of the Constitution , a more popular position . Despite his defeat , Adams continued to work for amendments to the Constitution , a movement that ultimately resulted in the addition of a Bill of Rights in 1791 . With these amendments , and the possibility of more , Adams subsequently became a firm supporter of the Constitution . 
 In 1789 , Adams was elected Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts , and served in that office until Governor Hancock 's death in 1793 , when he became acting governor . The next year Adams was elected as governor in his own right , the first of four annual terms . He was generally regarded as the leader of his state 's Jeffersonian Republicans , who were opposed to the Federalist Party . Unlike some other Republicans , Adams supported the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794 for the same reasons that he had opposed Shays 's Rebellion . Like his fellow Republicans , he spoke out against the Jay Treaty in 1796 , a position that drew criticism in a state that was increasingly Federalist . In that year 's U. S. presidential election , Republicans in Virginia cast 15 electoral votes for Adams in an effort to make him Jefferson 's vice @-@ president , but Federalist John Adams won the election , with Jefferson becoming vice @-@ president . The Adams cousins remained friends , but Samuel was pleased when Jefferson defeated John Adams in the 1800 presidential election . 
 Taking a cue from President Washington , who declined to run for reelection in 1796 , Adams retired from politics at the end of his term as governor in 1797 . Adams suffered from what is now believed to have been essential tremor , a movement disorder that , in the final decade of his life , rendered him unable to write . He died at the age of 81 on October 2 , 1803 , and was interred at the Granary Burying Ground in Boston . Boston 's Republican newspaper , the Independent Chronicle , eulogized him as the " Father of the American Revolution " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Samuel Adams is a controversial figure in American history . Disagreement about his significance and reputation began before his death and continues to the present . 
 Adams 's contemporaries , both friends and foes , regarded him as one of the foremost leaders of the American Revolution . Thomas Jefferson , for example , characterized Adams as " truly the Man of the Revolution . " Leaders in other colonies were compared to him : Cornelius Harnett was called the " Samuel Adams of North Carolina " , Charles Thomson the " Samuel Adams of Philadelphia " , and Christopher Gadsden the " Sam Adams of the South " . When John Adams traveled to France during the Revolution , he had to explain that he was not Samuel , " the famous Adams " . 
 Although supporters of the Revolution praised Adams , Loyalists viewed him as a sinister figure . Peter Oliver , the exiled chief justice of Massachusetts , characterized Adams as devious Machiavellian with a " cloven Foot " . Thomas Hutchinson , Adams 's political foe , took his revenge in his History of Massachusetts Bay , in which he denounced Adams as a dishonest character assassin , emphasizing Adams 's failures as a businessman and tax collector . This hostile " Tory interpretation " of Adams was revived in the 20th century by historian Clifford K. Shipton in the Sibley 's Harvard Graduates reference series . Shipton wrote positive portraits of Hutchinson and Oliver and scathing sketches of Adams and Hancock ; his entry on Adams was characterized by historian Pauline Maier as " forty @-@ five pages of contempt " . 
 Whig historians challenged the " Tory interpretation " of Adams . William Gordon and Mercy Otis Warren , two historians who knew Adams , wrote of him as a man selflessly dedicated to the American Revolution . But in the early 19th century , Adams was often viewed as an old @-@ fashioned Puritan , and was consequently neglected by historians . Interest in Adams was revived in the mid @-@ 19th century . Historian George Bancroft portrayed Adams favorably in his monumental History of the United States from the Discovery of the American Continent ( 1852 ) . The first full biography of Adams appeared in 1865 , a three @-@ volume work written by William Wells , Adams 's great @-@ grandson . Although the Wells biography is still valuable for its wealth of information , Whig portrayals of Adams were uncritically pro @-@ American and had elements of hagiography , a view that influenced some later biographies written for general audiences . 
 In the late 19th century , many American historians , uncomfortable with contemporary revolutions , found it problematic to write approvingly about Adams . Relations between the United States and the United Kingdom had improved , and Adams 's role in dividing Americans from Britons was increasingly viewed with regret . In 1885 , James Hosmer wrote a biography that praised Adams , but also found some of his actions , such as the 1773 publication of Hutchinson 's private letters , to be troubling . Subsequent biographers became increasingly hostile towards Adams and the common people he represented . In 1923 , Ralph V. Harlow used a " Freudian " approach to characterize Adams as a " neurotic crank " driven by an " inferiority complex " . Harlow argued that because the masses were easily misled , Adams " manufactured public opinion " to produce the Revolution , a view that became the thesis of John C. Miller 's 1936 biography , Sam Adams : Pioneer in Propaganda . Consistently calling his subject " Sam " , despite the fact that Adams was almost always known as " Samuel " in his lifetime , Miller portrayed Adams more as an incendiary revolutionary than an adroit political operative , attributing all acts of Boston 's " body of the people " to this one man . 
 Miller 's influential book became , in the words of historian Charles Akers , the " scholarly enshrinement " of " the myth of Sam Adams as the Boston dictator who almost single @-@ handedly led his colony into rebellion " . According to Akers , Miller and others historians used " Sam did it " to explain crowd actions and other developments without citing any evidence that Adams directed those events . In 1974 , Akers called on historians to critically reexamine the sources rather than simply repeating the myth . By then , scholars were increasingly rejecting the notion that Adams and others used " propaganda " to incite " ignorant mobs " , and were instead portraying a revolutionary Massachusetts too complex to have been controlled by one man . Historian Pauline Maier argued that Adams , far from being a radical mob leader , took a moderate position based on the English revolutionary tradition that imposed strict constraints on resistance to authority . That belief justified force only against threats to the constitutional rights so grave that the " body of the people " recognized the danger , and only after all peaceful means of redress had failed . Within that revolutionary tradition , resistance was essentially conservative . In 2004 , Ray Raphael 's Founding Myths continued Maier 's line by deconstructing several of the " Sam " Adams myths that are still repeated in many textbooks and popular histories . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the 2015 miniseries Sons of Liberty , Adams , the main protagonist , is portrayed by Ben Barnes . 
 Samuel Adams 's name has been appropriated by commercial and non @-@ profit ventures since his death . Drawing upon the tradition that Adams had been a brewer , the Boston Beer Company created Samuel Adams Boston Lager in 1985 , which became a popular award @-@ winning brand . Adams 's name is also used by a pair of non @-@ profit organizations , the Sam Adams Alliance and the Sam Adams Foundation . These groups take their names from Adams in homage of his ability to organize citizens at the local level in order to achieve a national goal . 
 = Tea Leaves ( Mad Men ) = 
 " Tea Leaves " is the third episode of the fifth season of the American television drama series Mad Men and overall the 55th episode of the series . It was written by series creator and executive producer Matthew Weiner and writer Erin Levy , and directed by series leading man Jon Hamm . It originally aired on the AMC channel in the United States on April 1 , 2012 . 
 The episode takes place on and around Independence Day 1966 and re @-@ introduces the Betty Francis character into the narrative . Betty finds herself in a state of depression and experiences a health scare following an unsettling weight gain . Meanwhile , Don and Harry collide with Baby Boomers while trying to meet with The Rolling Stones for a client . The rivalry between old guard Roger and an ascending Pete continues as Peggy hires a new copywriter with a questionable personality but high talent . 
 Ratings for the episode fell from the season premiere , but were still stronger than the fourth season average . " Tea Leaves " received 2 @.@ 9 million overall viewers and a 1 @.@ 0 in the coveted 18 @-@ 49 demographic . The episode received enthusiastic response from television critics . The main theme of the episode was seen by many television writers as the growing generation gap , and the increasing irrelevance of the main characters in culture and business as a result . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Betty has gained weight over the past few months , causing her self @-@ worth to drop and her sex life with Henry to flatline . This prompts an intervention of sorts from Henry 's mother , Pauline , who suggests diet pills . When Betty goes to the doctor 's office in an attempt to obtain diet pills , the doctor refuses . After a routine examination , he finds a possibly cancerous lump in Betty 's throat . Betty returns home in a hysteric fever . She calls Don , who reassures her . Betty begins to confront the legacy of her life and the effect her death would have on her loved ones . Several days later , the doctor calls back to tell her the tumor is benign . Henry holds a despondent Betty in his arms . She ponders her life as simply a sad , fat housewife . 
 The Heinz executive speaks with Don about his daughters ' obsession with The Rolling Stones , and floats an idea about getting The Rolling Stones to do a commercial for Heinz . Don agrees , though he is unimpressed with the idea . Harry and Don make a Saturday night trip to a Rolling Stones concert to meet with Stones manager Allen Klein . They end up making conversation backstage with two pot @-@ smoking female fans . When Harry leaves with one of the girls to talk with Klein , Don waxes poetic with one over her love for the band . She makes an insulting comment about the older generation . Don responds that the older generation is simply worried for youth . Harry fails miserably at his attempt to meet with The Rolling Stones , but Don is indifferent . 
 Pete is in talks with Mohawk Airlines for their return to the agency . The arrangement calls for Roger to handle the day @-@ to @-@ day business . Roger puts Peggy in charge of hiring a new male copywriter for Mohawk . Stan advises her to hire a mediocre employee to make her competition lighter . Peggy , however , chooses to interview a talented young Jewish man named Michael Ginsberg whose work impresses her . When Peggy interviews Michael , he is over @-@ the @-@ top in his disposition . However , Roger forces her to bring Michael to Don . During his interview with Don , Michael is more upstanding and professional , which puzzles Peggy . Michael is hired . He returns home to find his domineering father reading the paper . Michael 's personality changes yet again , this time more shy and reserved . When he learns of his son 's success , Michael 's father blesses his son with a Jewish prayer . 
 Pete makes a puffed @-@ up speech to the SCDP employees regarding his success in landing the Mohawk account . Roger walks out of the speech in anger , loathing his apparent descent in value to the agency . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Tea Leaves " was written by Matthew Weiner and Erin Levy and directed by series star Jon Hamm . This is the first episode of the series that Jon Hamm had directed , with Hamm saying that he owes thanks to John Slattery for paving the way . As preparation for directing the Rolling Stones concert , Hamm looked over archival photographs of the original concert . " They were kids . The Rolling Stones . It was them and The Beatles . These huge pop explosions . People were really excited about it and it was a really big deal . And , in a larger sense , gave us a sense of where advertising is going . " Reflecting on his directing job , Hamm noted that he tried not to put much distracting style into the show , explaining that " My job was not to go in there and muck it up and say , " I 'm gonna put my stamp on this . " My job was to go in there and keep the train on the tracks , basically . We have a very firmly established tone and look to our show that people respond to , and that I love . " Although the third episode of the season , it was actually the first episode produced for season , prior to the two @-@ part season premiere , " A Little Kiss " . 
 Weiner said that the episode is " about the children . It 's about who is going to take care of the children . Youth is a big part of our lives in general . Now and then . But when you think of the sixties and the youth culture and the way it sort of takes over . What you 're looking at is Don 's fear of the children being cut loose . At the same time , the children come back and eat you . " Weiner commented that the Michael Ginsberg character was " of the next wave " as a youthful employee who is " unfamiliar with social rules " , with Weiner also declaring that " there is no reason that the concerns of older people are different than younger people " . 
 Of the storyline with Betty , Weiner said , " I don 't think there 's any mystery as to how that could happen . She is happy with Henry but on some level it 's not enough . " Jon Hamm and Matthew Weiner both commented that the episode showcases the strong connection between Betty and Don that still exists despite the divorce . 
 = = = George Romney controversy = = = 
 " Tea Leaves " features a scene in which the Henry Francis character , a Republican political aide , insults George Romney , who was a political figure during the time the episode was set in . The Francis character characterized George Romney as a " clown " during the episode . Tagg Romney , eldest son of 2012 Presidential hopeful Mitt Romney , tweeted disgust for the mention , calling Mad Men the " lib media " , and accused the series of mocking his grandfather . The Hollywood Reporter noted that the dig at Romney was based in historical fact , with the Francis character working for John Lindsay , who had actual disdain for Romney . The Reporter also noted that , " Mad Men 's formula for success comes from its careful duality : it revels in pinpoint accurate details from its 1960s setting , while playing with themes that are timeless . Sometimes that means a fortuitous opportunity to use news and names that have reappeared in the cycle of American history . " 
 = = = January Jones ' pregnancy = = = 
 January Jones became pregnant in between the fourth and fifth season of the series . Instead of writing in a pregnancy for the Betty Francis character , the writers opted to write in a weight gain . January Jones wore a fat suit during the filming of this episode , the same technique used by Elizabeth Moss during the first season when her character encountered a similar weight gain ( though in that instance , the character was actually pregnant ) . Make @-@ up tricks and clever camera angles were also used to create the dramatic impression of Betty 's weight gain . A body double was used for the scene in which Betty rises from the bathtub . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The ratings for " Tea Leaves " were down slightly from the premiere 's record @-@ making number . It pulled in 2 @.@ 9 million viewers , which was still stronger than all of the fourth season episodes except for the fourth season premiere , " Public Relations " . " Tea Leaves " also received a 1 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . It built on its lead @-@ in , the second season premiere of The Killing . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critics were complimentary towards the episode , praising the acting talent of January Jones and the ensemble cast as well as Jon Hamm 's debut in the director 's chair . Some , however , were not as impressed by the fat suit techniques used on January Jones to both hide her pregnancy and convey the character 's weight gain . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + . He felt that some of the scenes were too on @-@ the @-@ nose and that some of the symbolism was a little overt . VanDerWerff specifically cited the scenes where Don talks with the young girl at the concert as on @-@ the @-@ nose , comparing Don in this scene to Joe Friday . He did , however , praise the subplot involving Betty 's weight gain as well as the final scene . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said that all of the stories were linked by the threat of replacement and liked the interaction between Roger and Peggy , which he felt was a rare occurrence . He said that it was too soon to judge the Ginsberg character and that the Betty storyline was the weakest of the main plots . Writer Myles McNutt found January Jones " highly compelling " and the storyline offering a " decidedly human turn for the character , with her lunch with Joyce offering insight that we are robbed of without Betty having any friends to confide in normally . " 
 Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post praised Jon Hamm 's direction and his " adherence to the Mad Men style " of " subtlety and economy " . She said that it was not " one of the more profound episodes the show has ever done " , but that it was full of " Mad Men @-@ esque meditations on mortality and feeling left behind by changing times . " Bonnie Stiernberg , writing for Paste Magazine , said that based on this episode and the premiere , season five will be about how " characters must learn to adapt to their changing surroundings or find themselves becoming irrelevant , relics of a bygone era " . She praised the creative solution to January Jones ' pregnancy and the new African @-@ American secretary , who she saw as an extension of Don , who was " also hired by the agency as a way to save face " . Tim Goodman , writing for The Hollywood Reporter , focused on the " key part " Roger Sterling plays in the season , saying that " since change is the ongoing issue of Mad Men , what has Roger been but unchanged for too long now " . He also called the introduction of the Ginsberg character a " breath of fresh air . " 
 = Norton Priory = 
 Norton Priory is a historic site in Norton , Runcorn , Cheshire , England , comprising the remains of an abbey complex dating from the 12th to 16th centuries , and an 18th @-@ century country house ; it is now a museum . The remains are a scheduled ancient monument and are recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building . They are considered to be the most important monastic remains in Cheshire . 
 The priory was established as an Augustinian foundation in the 12th century , and was raised to the status of an abbey in 1391 . The abbey was closed in 1536 , as part of the dissolution of the monasteries . Nine years later the surviving structures , together with the manor of Norton , were purchased by Sir Richard Brooke , who built a Tudor house on the site , incorporating part of the abbey . This was replaced in the 18th century by a Georgian house . The Brooke family left the house in 1921 , and it was partially demolished in 1928 . In 1966 the site was given in trust for the use of the general public . 
 Excavation of the site began in 1971 , and became the largest to be carried out by modern methods on any European monastic site . It revealed the foundations and lower parts of the walls of the monastery buildings and the abbey church . Important finds included : a Norman doorway ; a finely carved arcade ; a floor of mosaic tiles , the largest floor area of this type to be found in any modern excavation ; the remains of the kiln where the tiles were fired ; a bell casting pit used for casting the bell ; and a large medieval statue of Saint Christopher . 
 The site was opened to the public in the 1970s . It includes a museum , the excavated ruins , and the surrounding garden and woodland . In 1984 the separate walled garden was redesigned and opened to the public . Norton Priory is now a visitor attraction , and the museum trust organises a programme of events , exhibitions , educational courses , and outreach projects . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Priory = = = 
 In 1115 a community of Augustinian canons was founded in the burh of Runcorn by William fitz Nigel , the second Baron of Halton and Constable of Chester , on the south bank of the River Mersey where it narrows to form the Runcorn Gap . This was the only practical site where the Mersey could be crossed between Warrington and Birkenhead , and the archaeologists Fraser Brown and Christine Howard @-@ Davis consider it likely that the canons cared for travellers and pilgrims crossing the river . They also speculate that William may have sought to profit from the tolls paid by these travellers . The priory was the second religious house to be founded in the Earldom of Chester ; the first was the Benedictine St Werburgh 's Abbey at Chester , founded in 1093 by Hugh Lupus , the first Earl of Chester . The priory at Runcorn had a double dedication , to Saint Bertelin and to Saint Mary . The authors of the Victoria County History suggest that the dedication to St Bertelin was taken from a Saxon church already existing on the site . In 1134 William fitz William , the third Baron of Halton , moved the priory to a site in Norton , a village 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the east of Runcorn . The reasons for the move are uncertain . It may have been that fitz William wanted greater control of the strategic crossing of the Mersey at Runcorn Gap , or it may have been because the canons wanted a more secluded site . Nothing remains of the site of the original priory in Runcorn . 
 The site for the new priory was in damp , scrubby woodland . There is no evidence that it was agricultural land , or that it contained any earlier buildings . The first priority was to clear and drain the land . There were freshwater springs near the site , and these would have provided fresh running water for latrines and domestic purposes . They would also have been used to create watercourses and moated enclosures , some of which might have been used for orchards and herb gardens . Sandstone for building the priory was available at an outcrop nearby , sand for mortar could be obtained from the shores of the River Mersey , and boulder clay on the site provided material for floor and roof tiles . Excavation has revealed remnants of oak , some of it from trees hundreds of years old . It is likely that this came from various sources ; some from nearby , and some donated from the forests at Delamere and Macclesfield . The church and monastic buildings were constructed in Romanesque style . 
 The priory was endowed by William fitz Nigel with properties in Cheshire , Lancashire , Nottinghamshire , Lincolnshire and Oxfordshire , including the churches of St Mary , Great Budworth and St Michael , Chester . By 1195 the priory owned eight churches , five houses , the tithe of at least eight mills , the rights of common in four townships , and one @-@ tenth of the profits from the Runcorn ferry . The prior supplied the chaplain to the hereditary Constables of Chester and to the Barons of Halton . 
 During the 12th century , the main benefactors of the priory were the Barons of Halton , but after 1200 their gifts reduced , mainly because they transferred their interests to the Cistercian abbey at Stanlow , which had been founded in 1178 by John fitz Richard , the sixth baron . Archaeologist J. Patrick Greene states that it is unlikely that any of the Barons of Halton were buried in Norton Priory . The only members of the family known to be buried there are Richard , brother of Roger de Lacy , the seventh baron , and a female named Alice . The identity of Alice has not been confirmed , but Greene considers that she was the niece of William , Earl Warenne , the 5th Earl of Surrey and therefore a relative of the <unk> family , who were at that time the Barons of Halton . The earl made a grant to the priory of 30 shillings a year in order to " maintain a pittance for her soul " . As the role played by the Barons of Halton declined , so the importance of members of the Dutton family increased . The Duttons had been benefactors since the priory 's foundation , and from the 13th century they became the principal benefactors . There were two main branches of the family , one in Dutton and the other in Sutton Weaver . The Dutton family had their own burial chapel in the priory , and burial in the chapel is specified in three wills made by members of the family . The Aston family of Aston were also important benefactors . 
 The priory buildings , including the church , were extended during the late 12th and early 13th centuries . It has been estimated that the original community would have consisted of 12 canons and the prior ; this increased to around 26 members in the later part of the 12th century , making it one of the largest houses in the Augustinian order . By the end of the century the church had been lengthened , a new and larger chapter house had been built ( I * on the plan ) , and a large chapel had been added to the east end of the church ( N ) . In about 1200 the west front of the church was enlarged ( M ) , a bell tower was built and guest quarters were constructed . It is possible that the chapel at the east end was built to accommodate the holy cross of Norton , a relic which was reputed to have miraculous healing powers . A fire in 1236 destroyed the timber @-@ built kitchen ( Q ) and damaged the west range of the monastic buildings and the roof of the church . The kitchen was rebuilt and the other damage was rapidly repaired . 
 = = = Abbey = = = 
 During the first half of the 14th century , the priory suffered from financial mismanagement and disputes with the Dutton family , exacerbated by a severe flood in 1331 that reduced the income from the priory 's lands . The direct effects of the Black Death are not known , but during the 1350s financial problems continued . These were party mitigated with the selling of the advowson of the church at Ratcliffe @-@ on @-@ Soar . Matters further improved from 1366 with the appointment of Richard Wyche as prior . He was active in the governance of the wider Augustinian order and in political affairs , and in 1391 was involved in raising the priory 's status to that of a mitred abbey . A mitred abbey was one in which the abbot was given permission to use pontifical insignia , including the mitre , ring and pontifical staff , and to give the solemn benediction provided a bishop was not present . It was rare for an Augustinian house to be elevated to this status . Out of about 200 Augustinian houses in England and Wales , 28 were abbeys and only seven of these became mitred . The only other mitred abbey in Cheshire was that of St Werburgh in Chester . In 1379 and in 1381 there were 15 canons at Norton and in 1401 there were 16 , making it the largest Augustinian community in the northwest of England . By this time the barony of Halton had passed by a series of marriages to the duchy of Lancaster . John of Gaunt , the 1st Duke of Lancaster and 14th Baron of Halton , agreed to be the patron of the newly formed abbey . At this date the church was 287 feet ( 87 m ) long ; it was the second longest Augustinian church in northwest England , exceeded only by the 328 feet ( 100 m ) long church at Carlisle . Towards the end of the 14th century , the abbey acquired a " giant " statue of Saint Christopher . Three wills from members of the Dutton family from this period survive ; they are dated 1392 , 1442 and 1527 , and in each will money was bequeathed to the foundation . 
 The abbey 's fortunes went into decline after the death of Richard Wyche in 1400 . Wyche was succeeded by his prior , John Shrewsbury , who " does not seem to have done more than keep the house in order " . Frequent floods had reduced its income , and in 1429 the church and other abbey buildings were described as being " ruinous " . Problems continued through the rest of the 15th century , resulting in the sale of more advowsons . By 1496 the number of canons had been reduced to nine , and to seven in 1524 . In 1522 there were reports of disputes between the abbot and the prior . The abbot was accused of " wasting the house 's resources , nepotism , relations with women " and other matters , while the prior admitted to " fornication and lapses in the observation of the Rule " . The prior threatened the abbot with a knife , but then left the abbey . The physical state of the buildings continued to deteriorate . 
 The records of the priory and abbey have not survived , but the excavations and the study of other documents have produced evidence of how the monastic lands were managed . The principal source of income came from farming . This income was required not only for the building and upkeep of the property , but also for feeding the canons , their guests , and visiting pilgrims . The priory also had an obligation from its foundation to house travellers fording the Mersey . It has been estimated that nearly half of the demesne lands were used for arable farming . The grain grown on priory lands was ground by a local windmill and by a watermill outside the priory lands . Excavations revealed part of a stone <unk> in the area used in the monastic kitchen . In addition to orchards and herb gardens in the moated enclosures , it is likely that beehives were maintained for the production of honey . There is evidence from bone fragments that cattle , sheep , pigs , geese and chickens were reared and consumed , but few bone fragments from deer , rabbits or hares have been discovered . <unk> was not eaten . Although few fish bones have been discovered , it is known from documentary evidence that the canons owned a number of local fisheries . The fuel used consisted of wood and charcoal , and turf from marshes over which the priory had rights of <unk> ( to cut turf ) . 
 The events in 1536 surrounding the fate of the abbey at the dissolution of the monasteries are complicated , and included a dispute between Sir Piers Dutton , who was in a powerful position as the Sheriff of Cheshire , and Sir William Brereton , the deputy @-@ chamberlain of Chester . Dutton 's estate was next to that of the abbey , and Dutton plotted to gain some of its land from the Crown after the dissolution ; while Brereton supported the abbot against Dutton and held the lucrative position of steward of the abbey . A campaign of vilification was directed at the canons , asserting that they were guilty of " debauched conduct " . Then , in 1535 , Dutton falsely accused the abbot and Brereton of issuing counterfeit coins . This charge was dismissed mainly because one of Dutton 's witnesses was considered to be " unconvincing " . Playing into Duttons ' hands was the gross undervaluation of the abbey 's assets as reported to the royal commissioners of the Valor Ecclesiasticus of 1535 ; as a result of which the net annual income of the abbey was recorded , falsely , as falling below the £ 200 threshold that would subsequently be chosen for the first round of dissolutions in 1536 , although whether this subterfuge was due to the machinations of Dutton or the abbot ( or both ) remains unclear . Brereton and the abbot appear to have attempted to have the dissolution cancelled subject to the payment of a fine , as was the case in large numbers of other houses in similar circumstances ; but in the abbot 's absence dissolution commissioners arrived <unk> at the abbey in early October 1536 . There was considerable opposition , the commissioners being menaced by around 300 local people ; for whom the abbot , rushing back , threw an impromptu feast complete with roasted ox . According to Dutton 's account , after barricading themselves in a tower the commissioners managed to send a letter to Dutton , who arrived with a force of men in the middle of the night . Most of the rioters fled , but Dutton arrested the abbot and four of the canons , who were sent to Halton Castle and then to prison in Chester . Dutton sent a report of the events to Henry VIII ; who demanded that if the abbot and canons had behaved as Dutton reported , they should be immediately executed as traitors . However , because the kings instructions had been conveyed by the Lord Chancellor in the form of letters to both Dutton and Brereton , the two faction leaders would be required to act together to effect them ; with the consequence that Brereton was temporarily able to stall any such action by refusing to meet with Dutton . Events elsewhere in the country further delayed the execution and , following an intercession to Thomas Cromwell ( whose own informal contacts had cast doubt on the reliability of Dutton 's reports ) , the abbot and canons were discharged and awarded pensions . The abbey was made uninhabitable , the lead from the roof , the bell metal , and other valuable materials were confiscated for the king , and the building lay empty for nine years . The estate came into the ownership of the Crown , and it was managed by Brereton . From the evidence of damage to the tiled floor of the church , Brown and Howard @-@ Davis conclude it is likely that the church was demolished at an early stage , but otherwise the archaeological evidence for this period is sparse and largely negative . 
 = = = Country house = = = 
 In 1545 the abbey and the manor of Norton were sold to Sir Richard Brooke for a little over £ 1 @,@ 512 ( equivalent to £ 660 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Brooke built a house in Tudor style , which became known as Norton Hall , using as its core the former abbot 's lodgings and the west range of the monastic buildings . It is not certain which other monastic buildings remained when the abbey was bought by the Brookes ; excavations suggest that the cloisters were still present . A 17th @-@ century sketch plan by one of the Randle Holme family shows that the gatehouse remained at that time , although almost all the church had been demolished . An engraving by the Buck brothers dated 1727 shows that little changed by the next century . 
 During the Civil War the house was attacked by a force of Royalists . The Brookes were the first family in north Cheshire to declare allegiance to the Parliamentary side . Halton Castle was a short distance away , and was held by Earl Rivers for the Royalists . In February 1643 a large force from the castle armed with cannon attacked the house , which was defended by only 80 men . Henry Brooke successfully defended the house , with only one man wounded , while the Royalists lost 16 men including their <unk> ( gunner ) . They burnt two barns and plundered Brooke 's tenants , but " returned home with shame and the hatred of the country " . 
 At some time between 1727 and 1757 the Tudor house was demolished and replaced by a new house in Georgian style . The house had an L @-@ plan , the main wing facing west standing on the footprint of the Tudor house , with a south wing at right @-@ angles to it . The ground floor of the west wing retained the former vaulted undercroft of the west range of the medieval abbey , and contained the kitchens and areas for the storage of wines and beers . The first floor was the piano nobile , containing the main reception rooms . The west front was symmetrical , in three storeys , with a double flight of stairs leading up to the main entrance . Clearance of the other surviving remnants of the monastic buildings had started but the moated enclosures were still in existence at that time . A drawing dated 1770 shows that by then all these buildings and the moats had been cleared away , and the former fishponds were being used for pleasure boating . Between 1757 and the early 1770s modifications were made to the house , the main one being the addition of a north wing . According to the authors of the Buildings of England series , the architect responsible for this was James Wyatt . Also between 1757 and 1770 , the Brooke family built a walled garden at a distance from the house to provide fruit , vegetables and flowers . The family also developed the woodland around the house , creating pathways , a stream @-@ glade and a rock garden . Brick @-@ built wine bins were added to the undercroft , developing it into a wine cellar , and barrel vaulting was added to the former entrance hall to the abbey ( which was known as the outer parlour ) , obscuring its arcade . 
 During the mid @-@ 18th century , Sir Richard Brooke was involved in a campaign to prevent the Bridgewater Canal from being built through his estate . The Bridgewater Canal Extension Act had been passed in 1762 , and it made allowances for limited disturbance to the Norton estate . However Sir Richard did not see the necessity for the canal and opposed its passing though his estate . In 1773 the canal was opened from Manchester to Runcorn , except for 1 mile ( 2 km ) across the estate , which meant that goods had to be unloaded and carted around it . Eventually Sir Richard capitulated , and the canal was completed throughout its length by March 1776 . 
 By 1853 a service range had been added to the south wing of the house . In 1868 the external flight of stairs was removed from the west front and a new porch entrance was added to its ground floor . The entrance featured a Norman doorway that had been moved from elsewhere in the monastery ; Greene believes that it probably formed the entrance from the west cloister walk into the nave of the church . An exact replica of this doorway was built and placed to the north of the Norman doorway , making a double entrance . The whole of the undercroft was radically restored , giving it a Gothic theme , adding stained glass windows and a medieval @-@ style fireplace . The ground to the south of the house was levelled and formal gardens were established . 
 During the 19th century the estate was again affected by transport projects . In 1804 the Runcorn to Latchford Canal was opened , replacing the Mersey and Irwell Navigation ; this cut off the northern part of the estate , making it only accessible by a bridge . The Grand Junction Railway was built across the estate in 1837 , followed by the Warrington and Chester Railway , which opened in 1850 ; both of these lines affected the southeast part of the estate . In 1894 , the Runcorn to Latchford Canal was replaced by the Manchester Ship Canal , and the northern part of the estate could only be accessed by a swing bridge . The Brooke family left the house in 1921 , and it was almost completely demolished in 1928 . Rubble from the house was used in the foundations of a new chemical works . During the demolition , the undercroft was retained and roofed with a cap of concrete . In 1966 the current Sir Richard Brooke gave Norton Priory in trust for the benefit of the public . 
 = = = Excavations and museum = = = 
 In 1971 J. Patrick Greene was given a contract to carry out a six @-@ month excavation for Runcorn Development Corporation as part of a plan to develop a park in the centre of Runcorn New Town . The site consisted of a 500 @-@ acre ( 202 ha ) area of fields and woods to the north of the Bridgewater Canal . Greene 's initial findings led to his being employed for a further 12 years to supervise a major excavation of the site . The buildings found included the Norman doorway with its Victorian addition and three medieval rooms . Specialists were employed and local volunteers were recruited to assist with the excavation , while teams of supervised prisoners were used to perform some of the heavier work . The area excavated exceeded that at any European monastic site that used modern methods . The Development Corporation decided to create a museum on the site , and in 1975 Norton Priory Museum Trust was established . 
 In 1989 Greene published his book about the excavations entitled Norton Priory : The Archaeology of a Medieval Religious House . Further work has been carried out , recording and analysing the archaeological findings . In 2008 Fraser Brown and Christine Howard @-@ Davis published Norton Priory : Monastery to Museum , in which the findings are described in more detail . Howard @-@ Davis was largely responsible for the post @-@ excavation assessment and for compiling a database for the artefacts and , with Brown , for their analysis . 
 = = Findings from excavations = = 
 = = = Priory 1134 – 1236 = = = 
 The excavations have revealed information about the original priory buildings and grounds , and how they were subsequently modified . A series of ditches was found that would have provided a supply of fresh water and also a means for drainage of a relatively wet site . Evidence of the earliest temporary timber buildings in which the canons were originally housed was found in the form of 12th @-@ century post pits . Norton Priory is one of few monastic sites to have produced evidence of temporary quarters . The remains of at least seven temporary buildings have been discovered . It is considered that the largest of these , because it had more substantial foundations than the others , was probably the timber @-@ framed church ; another was most likely the gatehouse , and the other buildings provided accommodation for the canons and the senior secular craftsmen . 
 The earliest masonry building was the church , which was constructed on shallow foundations of sandstone rubble and pebbles on boulder clay . The walls were built in local red sandstone with ashlar faces and a rubble and mortar core . The ground plan of the original church was cruciform , and consisted of a nave without aisles , a choir at the crossing with a tower above it , a square @-@ ended chancel , and north and south transepts , each with an eastern chapel . The total length of the church was 148 feet ( 45 @.@ 1 m ) and the total length across the transepts was 74 feet ( 22 @.@ 6 m ) , giving a ratio of 2 : 1 . The walls of the church were 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) wide at the base , and the crossing tower was supported on four piers . 
 The other early buildings were built surrounding a cloister to the south of the church . The east range incorporated the chapter house and also contained the sacristy , the canons ' dormitory and the reredorter . The upper storey of the west range provided living accommodation for the prior and an area where secular visitors could be received . In the lower storey was the undercroft where food and fuel were stored . The south range contained the refectory , and at a distance from the south range stood the kitchen . Evidence of a bell foundry dating from this period was found 55 yards ( 50 m ) to the north of the church . It is likely that this was used for casting a tenor bell . A few moulded stones from this early period were found . These included nine blocks that probably formed part of a corbel table . There were also two beak @-@ head voussoirs ; this type of <unk> is rare in Cheshire , and has been found in only one other church in the county . 
 Considerable expansion occurred during the last two decades of the 12th century and the first two or three decades of the 13th century . The south and west ranges were demolished and rebuilt , enlarging the cloister from about 36 feet ( 11 m ) by 32 feet ( 10 m ) to about 56 feet ( 17 m ) by 52 feet ( 16 m ) . This meant that a door in the south wall of the church had to be blocked off and a new highly decorated doorway was built at the northeast corner of the cloister ; this doorway has survived . The lower storey of the west range , the other standing remains of the priory , also dates from this period ; it comprises the cellarer 's undercroft and a passage to its north , known as the outer parlour . The outer parlour had been the entrance to the priory from the outside world , and was " sumptuously decorated " so that " the power and wealth of the priory could be displayed in tangible fashion to those coming from the secular world " . The undercroft , used for storage , was divided into two chambers , and its decoration was much plainer . The upper floor has been lost ; it is considered that this contained the prior 's living quarters and , possibly , a chapel over the outer parlour . A new and larger reredorter was built at the end of the east range , and it is believed that work might have started on a new chapter house . A system of stone drains was constructed to replace the previous open ditches . The west wall of the church was demolished and replaced by a more massive structure , 10 feet ( 3 m ) thick at the base . The east wall was also demolished and the chancel was extended , forming an additional area measuring approximately 27 feet ( 8 m ) by 23 feet ( 7 m ) . 
 = = = Priory and abbey 1236 – 1536 = = = 
 The excavation revealed evidence of the fire of 1236 , including ash , charcoal , burnt planks and a burnt wooden bowl . It is thought that the fire probably started in the timber @-@ built kitchens at the junction of the west and south ranges , and then spread to the monastic buildings and church . Most of the wood in the buildings , including the furnishings and roofs , would have been destroyed , although the masonry walls remained largely intact . The major repairs required gave an opportunity for the extension of the church by the addition of new chapels to both of the transepts , and its refurbishment in a manner even grander than previously . The cloister had been badly damaged in the fire and its arcade was rebuilt on the previous foundations . The new arcade was of " very high quality and finely wrought construction " . Brown and Howard @-@ Davis state that the kitchens were rebuilt on the same site and it appears that they were rebuilt in timber yet again . Excavations have found evidence of a second bell foundry in the northwest of the priory grounds . The date of this is uncertain but Greene suggests that it was built to cast a new bell to replace the original one that was damaged in the fire . Later in the 13th century another chapel was added to the north transept . Accommodation for guests was constructed to the southwest of the monastic buildings . 
 In the later part of the 13th century and during the following century the chapel in the south transept was replaced by a grander two @-@ chambered chapel . This balanced the enlarged chapels in the north transept , restoring the church 's cruciform plan . Around this time the east end of the church was further extended when a reliquary chapel was added measuring about 42 feet ( 13 m ) by 24 feet ( 7 m ) . A guest hall was built to the west of the earlier guest quarters . After the status of the foundation was elevated from a priory to an abbey , a tower house was added to the west range . This is shown on the engraving by the Buck brothers , but it has left little in the way of archaeological remains . The church was extended by the addition of a north aisle . There is little evidence of later major alterations before the dissolution . There is evidence to suggest that the cloister was rebuilt , and that alterations were made to the east range . 
 = = = Burials = = = 
 The excavations revealed information about the burials carried out within the church and the monastic buildings , and in the surrounding grounds . They are considered to be " either those of Augustinian canons , privileged members of their lay household , or of important members of the Dutton family " . Most burials were in stone coffins or in wooden coffins with stone lids , and had been carried out from the late 12th century up to the time of the dissolution . The site of the burial depended on the status of the individual , whether they were clerical or lay , and their degree of importance . Priors , abbots , and high @-@ ranking canons were buried within the church , with those towards the east end of the church being the most important . Other canons were buried in a graveyard outside the church , in an area to the south and east of the chancel . Members of the laity were buried either in the church , towards the west end of the nave or in the north aisle , or outside the church around its west end . It is possible that there was a lay cemetery to the north and west of the church . The addition of the chapels to the north transept , and their expansion , was carried out for the Dutton family , making it their burial chapel , or family mausoleum , and the highest concentration of burials was found in this part of the church . It is considered that the north aisle , built after the priory became an abbey , was added to provide a burial place for members of the laity . 
 The excavations revealed 49 stone coffins , 30 coffin lids , and five headstones . Twelve of the lids were carved in high relief , with designs including flowers or foliage . One lid depicts an oak tree issuing from a human head in the style of a green man , another has a cross , a dragon and a female effigy , while others have shield and sword motifs . Two contain inscriptions in Norman @-@ French , identifying the deceased . The remaining lids have simpler incised patterns , mainly decorated crosses . The headstones contain crosses . Most of the coffins were sunk into the ground , with the lid at the level of the floor , although a few were found within the walls . Only three stone coffins for children were discovered . These lay in a group , together with a coffin containing a male skeleton , in the vestibule leading to the enlarged chapter house . The most prestigious type of coffin was tapered towards the feet , with the head end carved externally to a hemi @-@ hexagonal shape . Another sign of higher status was the provision of an internal " pillow " for the head . 
 A total of 144 graves was excavated ; they contained 130 articulated skeletons in a suitable condition for examination . Of these , 36 were well @-@ preserved , 48 were in a fair condition and 46 were poorly preserved . Males out @-@ numbered females by a ratio of three to one , an expected ratio in a monastic site . Most of the males had survived into middle age ( 36 – 45 years ) to old age ( 46 years or older ) , while equal numbers of females died before and after the age of about 45 years . One female death was presumably due to a complication of pregnancy as she had been carrying a 34 @-@ week foetus . The average height of the adult males was 5 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) and that of the adult females was 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) . 
 The bones show a variety of diseases and degenerative processes . Six skeletons showed evidence of Paget 's disease of bone ( <unk> <unk> ) . The most severe case of Paget 's disease was in a body buried in the nave in a stone coffin . The lid was carved with two shields , indicating that the occupant had been a knight . One skeleton showed signs of leprosy affecting bones in the face , hands and feet . No definite cases of tuberculosis directly affecting bones were found but in two individuals there were changes in the ribs consistent with their having suffered from tuberculosis of the lungs . The only major congenital abnormality found consisted of bony changes resulting from a possible case of Down 's syndrome . Relatively minor congenital abnormalities of the spine were found in 19 skeletons , ten of which were cases of spina bifida occulta . Other spinal abnormalities included fused vertebrae , <unk> and transitional vertebrae . Definite evidence of fractured bones was found in ten skeletons , and evidence of possible fractures was found in three other cases . One cranium contained a large circular lesion which may have been the consequence of trepanning . Other diseases specific to bones and joints were osteoarthritis , diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis ( DISH ) , and possible cases of <unk> . Three skeletons showed possible evidence of rickets , two had changes of osteoporosis , and three crania had features of hyperostosis frontalis <unk> , a metabolic condition affecting post @-@ menopausal women . <unk> ( benign tumours of bone ) were found in three cases . 
 Examination of the jaws and teeth gave information about the dental health of those buried in the priory . The degree of wear of teeth was greater than it is at present , while the incidence of dental caries was much lower than it is now , as was the incidence of periodontal disease . A consequence of the wear of the teeth was " compensatory eruption " of the teeth in order to keep contact with the opposing teeth . It was concluded that the people buried in the priory had few problems with their teeth or jaws . Loss of teeth was due to wear of the teeth , rather than from caries or periodontal disease . 
 = = = Country house = = = 
 Little archaeological evidence relates to the period immediately after the dissolution , or to the Tudor house built on part of the site . A <unk> was found in the outer courtyard . It is considered that this might date from the early period of the Brookes ' house , or it may have been constructed during the later years of the abbey . The kitchens to the south of the Tudor house and their drainage systems appear to have been used by the Brookes , and according to Brown and Howard @-@ Davis , were possibly rebuilt by the family . The areas previously occupied by the cloisters and the guest quarters were probably used as middens . Few archaeological findings remain from the Georgian house , apart from a fragment of a wall from the south front , and the foundations of the north wing . The much @-@ altered medieval undercroft still stands , with its Norman doorway and Victorian replica , barrel vaulting , wine bins , and blind arcading in the former outer parlour . 
 = = = Artefacts from the buildings = = = 
 A large number of tiles and tile fragments that had lined the floor of the church and some of the monastic buildings were found in the excavations . The oldest tiles date from the early 14th century . The total area of tiles discovered was about 80 square metres ( 860 sq ft ) , and is " the largest area of a floor of this type to be found in any modern excavation " . The site has " the largest , and most varied , excavated collection of medieval tiles in the North West " and " the greatest variety of individual mosaic shapes found anywhere in Britain " . The tiles found made a pavement forming the floor of the choir of the church and the transepts . The chancel floor was probably also tiled ; these tiles have not survived because the chancel was at a higher level than the rest of the church , and the tiles would have been removed during subsequent gardening . A dump of tiles to the south of the site of the chapter house suggests that this was also tiled . In the 15th century a second tile floor was laid on top of the original floor in the choir where it had become worn . The tiles on the original floor were of various shapes , forming a mosaic . The tiles were all glazed and coloured , the main colours being black , green and yellow . Many of them had been decorated by impressing a wooden stamp into the moist clay before it was fired ; these are known as line @-@ impressed tiles . The line @-@ impressed designs included masks of lions or other animals , rosettes , and trefoils . Other tiles or tile fragments showed portions of trees , foliage , birds and inscriptions . In the chapels of the north transept , the burial place of the Dutton family , were tiles depicting mail , thought to be part of a military effigy , and tiles bearing fragments of heraldic designs . The tiles from the upper ( later ) pavement were all square , and again were line @-@ inscribed with patterns forming parts of larger designs . A related discovery at the excavation was the kiln in which most of the tiles on the site were fired . 
 The excavations also revealed stones or fragments of carved stone dating from the 12th to the 16th centuries . The earliest are in Romanesque style and include two voussoirs decorated with <unk> ( grotesque animal heads with long pointed bird @-@ like beaks ) . Other stones dating from the 12th century are in Gothic style ; they include a capital decorated with leaves and a portion of the tracery from a rose window . Many of the stones from the 13th century were originally part of the cloister arcade , and had been re @-@ used to form the core of a later cloister arcade . They include stones sculpted with depictions of humans and animals . The best preserved of these are the heads of two canons , each wearing a cowl with the tonsure visible , the head of a woman with shoulder @-@ length hair , parts of a seated figure holding an open book , and a creature that might represent a serpent or an otter . There are numerous fragments dating from the 14th and 15th centuries . These include portions of string courses , tracery , corbels , window jambs , and arch heads . At least three of the corbels were carved in the form of human heads . Over 1 @,@ 500 fragments of painted medieval glass were found , most of it in a poor condition . These show that the glazing scheme used in the priory was mainly in grisaille ( monochrome ) style . Almost 1 @,@ 300 fragments of glass from later periods , and nearly 1 @,@ 150 sherds of ceramic roof tiles were also found . 
 = = = Artefacts from daily life = = = 
 Some 500 fragments of pottery were found dating from the medieval period . Most of these were parts of jars , jugs or <unk> and were found in the area of the kitchen range . Most of it was produced locally , although 13 sherds of Stamford Ware , fragments of two jugs from North France , and two small pieces of Saintonge pottery have been identified . Only a few wooden bowls were recovered . Much more pottery was found dating from the post @-@ medieval period and later . Again most of this had been manufactured in England , especially in Staffordshire . Fragments of pottery from abroad included pieces from a Westerwald mug , a jug from Cologne and items of Chinese porcelain . The excavations produced over 4 @,@ 000 sherds of glass , dating from the 12th to the 20th centuries , but only 16 of these came from the period before the dissolution . A total of 1 @,@ 170 fragments from clay tobacco pipes were found , dating from about 1580 to the early 20th century . 
 Six medieval coins were recovered , the earliest of which was a silver penny of John from the early 13th century . Coins from later periods were a silver threepence from the reign of Elizabeth I and a silver penny from Charles I. Only low @-@ denomination coins were found from the 18th century and later , including a 10 @-@ pfennig piece from Germany dated 1901 . Two silver spoons were recovered , one of which was dated 1846 from the hallmark . Objects made from copper alloy were found , many of which were associated with personal adornment and dress including brooches , buckles , and buttons . Also found from this period was a small simple <unk> ( scabbard tip ) , and part of a skimmer that had been used in the kitchen . Artefacts made from iron , other than nails , were again mainly items of personal adornment and dress . Other identifiable iron items from this period included keys , two possible <unk> spurs ( spurs with revolving pointed wheels ) , and about 12 horseshoes . 
 Nearly 2 @,@ 000 fragments of lead were found , 940 of which were droplets of melted metal , some of these being a consequence of the fire in 1236 . One of the earliest artefacts was a papal bulla dating from the rule of Pope Clement III ( 1187 – 91 ) . Two other possible seals were discovered . A total of 15 lead discs were recovered , some of which were inscribed with crosses . Two of these were found in graves , but the purpose of the discs has not been reliably explained . The other lead artefacts from this period were associated with the structure of the buildings and include fragments of <unk> ( the lead used in leaded windows ) , ventilator grills , and water pipes . Leather fragments almost all came from shoes , and included an almost complete child 's shoe dating from the late 16th or the 17th century . Another find was a small gemstone , a cabochon ( polished ) sardonyx . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Norton Priory is considered to be " a monastic site of international importance " and is " the most extensively excavated monastic site in Britain , if not Western Europe " . It is open to the public and run by a charitable trust , the Norton Priory Museum Trust . The Trust was founded in 1975 and the museum was opened in 1982 . The Trust owns and maintains many of the artefacts found during the excavations , and has created an electronic database to record all the acquisitions . In addition , it holds records relating to the excavations , including site notebooks and photographs . The area open to the public consists of a museum , the standing archaeological remains , an area of garden and woodland , and the walled garden of the former house . 
 = = = Museum = = = 
 The museum contains information relating to the history of the site and some of the artefacts discovered during the excavations . These include a model of the church and the monastic buildings as they are thought to have appeared in their final form , carved coffin lids , mosaic tiles , and domestic items such as buttons . In a coffin lies one of the skeletons showing signs of Paget 's disease of bone . Standing in the museum is a reconstruction of the cloister arcade as it had been built following the fire of 1236 . It consists of moulded pointed arches with springer blocks , voussoirs and apex stones , supported on triple shafts with foliate capitals and moulded bases . Above the capitals , at the bases of the arches , are sculptures that include depictions of human and animal heads . The human heads consist of two canons with hoods and protruding <unk> , other males , and females with shoulder @-@ length hair . In one spandrel is a seated figure with an outstretched arm holding a book . Other carvings depict such subjects as fabulous beasts , and an otter or a snake . 
 A separate purpose @-@ built gallery contains the medieval sandstone statue of Saint Christopher , which is considered to be " a work of national and even international importance " . Saint Christopher was associated with the abbey because of its proximity to the River Mersey and the dangers associated with crossing the river . The statue shows the saint wading through fish @-@ filled water carrying the Christ @-@ child on his shoulder . It has been dated to about 1390 , it is 3 @.@ 37 metres ( 11 @.@ 1 ft ) tall , and was once painted in bright colours . The gallery also contains a three @-@ dimensional representation of the statue as it is believed it would have originally appeared . 
 = = = Archaeological remains = = = 
 The archaeological remains are recognised as a Grade I listed building and a scheduled ancient monument , and are considered to be the most important monastic remains in Cheshire . They consist of the former undercroft and the foundations of the church and monastic buildings that were exposed during the excavations . The undercroft stands outside the museum building . It is a single @-@ storey structure consisting of seven pairs of bays divided into two compartments , one of four and the other of three bays . It is entered through the portico added to the west front of the country house in 1886 by way of a pair of arched doorways in Norman style . The doorway to the right ( south ) is original , dating from the late 12th century , while the other doorway is a replica dated 1886 . The older doorway has been described as " the finest decorated Norman doorway in Cheshire " . It is in good condition with little evidence of erosion and Greene considers that this is because it has always been protected from the weather . The portico leads into the four @-@ bay compartment . This has a tiled floor and contains a medieval @-@ style fireplace . The roof is ribbed vaulted . On the east wall is a two @-@ arched doorway leading to the former cloisters . To the north another archway leads to the three @-@ bay compartment . This also has a tile floor and contains the brick wine bins added in the 1780s . The roof of this compartment has groined vaults . The undercroft also contains a bell mould , reconstructed from the fragments of the original mould found in the excavations . 
 At the northern end of the undercroft is the passage known as the outer parlour . This has stone benches on each side and elaborately carved blind arcades above them . The arcades each consist of two groups of four round @-@ headed arches with capitals , free @-@ standing columns and bases that are set on the benches . The capitals and mouldings of the arches are decorated with a variety of carvings , the capitals being predominantly late Romanesque in style and the arches early Gothic . The carvings include depictions of human heads , stiff @-@ leaf foliage and animals . 
 = = = Grounds = = = 
 The 38 acres ( 15 ha ) of grounds surrounding the house have been largely restored to include the 18th @-@ century pathways , the stream @-@ glade and the 19th @-@ century rock garden . The foundations exposed in the excavations show the plan of the former church and monastic buildings . In the grounds is a Grade II listed garden loggia in yellow sandstone , possibly designed by James Wyatt . At its front are two Doric columns and two antae , and above these is a cornice with a fluted frieze . The side walls are built in stone , and the back wall is constructed internally of stone and externally of brickwork . Also in the grounds are several modern sculptures , and a sculpture trail has been designed in conjunction with these . In the 1970s the fragments of the mould found in the bell pit were re @-@ assembled and used to create a replica of the bell , which was cast in Widnes and now stands in a frame in the grounds . This was opened at a ceremony performed by Sir Bernard Lovell in 1977 . A herb garden was developed as part of the BBC 's Hidden Garden programme . This seeks to re @-@ create a herb garden as it would have been during the medieval period , and its plan is based on herb gardens in other monastic sites . The plants grown are those reputed to be of value in treating the diseases revealed in the excavated skeletons . 
 The gardens also include a woodland gardens with summer house , a stream glade , a wild @-@ flower meadow and an orchard . The gardens are promoted by the Campaign to Protect Rural England . 
 = = = Walled gardens = = = 
 The 3 @.@ 5 acre ( 1 ha ) walled garden was restored in the 1980s . It includes an orchard , fruit and vegetable gardens , ornamental borders and a rose walk , as well as the national collection of tree quince ( Cydonia <unk> ) , with 20 different varieties . Close to the walled garden is a Grade II listed ice house , probably dating from the 18th century , which is constructed in brick covered with a mound of earth . The entrance is surrounded by stone walls , from which a tunnel leads to a circular domed chamber . 
 = = = Current activities = = = 
 The museum is a visitor attraction . It arranges a series of events for the general public throughout the year , including guided tours , family fun days and concerts . Temporary exhibitions are held in its gallery , which may include art works or displays of historical material . Its educational programme is aimed at all ages ; it includes workshops for the general public , and courses focusing on formal and informal aspects of children 's education . An outreach programme is intended for individuals and groups in the community . Since its opening , the museum has won awards for its work in tourism , education , outreach and gardening . In 2004 the museum 's Positive Partnerships project , in which people with learning disabilities worked alongside museum staff , was a finalist in the Gulbenkian Prize for museums and galleries . In August 2014 the museum received a grant of £ 3 @.@ 7 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund to develop its facilities . 
 = Nihil = 
 Nihil is the eighth studio album by industrial rock group KMFDM , released on April 4 , 1995 on Wax Trax ! / TVT . Nihil was recorded in 1994 in Seattle , Washington , and featured the return of former band member Raymond Watts and the first appearance of journeyman drummer Bill Rieflin . The album was mostly written by band leader Sascha Konietzko , who emphasized a less guitar @-@ driven sound for the release . Nihil 's first single , " Juke Joint Jezebel " , is the band 's most widely known song of all time , with millions of copies sold over various releases . Widely praised by critics , Nihil is one of the band 's best @-@ selling albums . After the original release went out of print , a remastered version was released in 2007 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 1993 , Sascha Konietzko and fellow multi @-@ instrumentalist En Esch both left Chicago , moving to Seattle and New Orleans , respectively . Lead guitarist Günter Schulz left the country , moving to Kelowna , British Columbia . In early 1994 , Konietzko started working on new material , and Schulz came to Seattle to begin adding guitars to the tracks . Later that year , the group assembled in Los Angeles to rehearse for the upcoming <unk> tour in support of Angst , which spanned April and May . Konietzko , Schulz , Esch , and guitarist Mark Durante were joined by another guitarist , Mike Jensen , for a live show that featured up to four guitarists playing at once . Konietzko and Schulz , along with Dutch singer Dorona Alberti , returned to Seattle to begin recording vocals for Nihil . Konietzko later said he was not happy with the sessions , explaining that nothing was coming together , and only two songs from the upcoming album , " Trust " and " Brute " , had been completed to his satisfaction . 
 Former KMFDM member Raymond Watts , last seen contributing vocals , programming , and production to 1988 's Don 't Blow Your Top before starting his own band , Pig , called Konietzko and asked if he would be interested in working on a small musical collaboration . Konietzko agreed , and Watts flew to Seattle , where the pair , along with Schulz , worked on an EP entitled Sin Sex & Salvation . Konietzko said of the trio 's working together , " It was the breath of fresh air I had been hoping and waiting for . This short project took my mind off the problems with the KMFDM album and gave me a welcome change of perspective . " Watts then stayed on with the group to begin work on Nihil , which featured a core group of Konietzko , Schulz , Watts , and Esch , along with some input from steel guitar specialist Durante and drummer Bill Rieflin . 
 = = Production = = 
 Discussing the change in songwriting from Angst , Konietzko said : " I wasn 't comfortable with the band scenario on that album , where everybody had input . It allowed for too many compromises . Angst seems not organic to me . " In another interview , he explained : " Contrary to the past , I wrote all the songs for Nihil , " adding that doing things that way caused " minimal problems " . 
 Konietzko stated that the band overused guitars on their previous album , Angst , saying it sounded " like guitarists jacking off " . On Nihil , the guitars were mixed in last . Durante had recently purchased a triple @-@ neck Fender steel guitar in Houston , and used it during recording sessions , but added a significant amount of distortion to it , making it sound like a " regular " guitar but giving it what he called a " sliding " sound . Konietzko also brought in a trio of horn players to perform on " Disobedience " , saying he had always wanted a horn section in a KMFDM song , but that he had never been able to afford it before . 
 Konietzko originally wrote thirty songs over a period of eight or nine months for Nihil before settling on ten final tracks . Watts came into the studio after the songs were mostly complete and added lyrics to a handful of songs , which he said was " actually quite liberating " in contrast to writing his own music from scratch . Konietzko described the album as being entirely foreplay , without any resolution , and said it was the band 's best album to date , a statement he believed he would be standing by for years . He also said its poppier sound was more his style . Konietzko produced the album with sound engineer Chris Shepard , who had also engineered the band 's previous album . 
 = = Release = = 
 Nihil was originally released on April 4 , 1995 . A digitally remastered re @-@ release of Nihil was released on March 6 , 2007 , along with a similar re @-@ release of KMFDM 's 1996 album Xtort . The band toured twice in 1995 in support of the album , first doing the Beat by Beat tour shortly after the album 's release , and then the In Your Face tour later in the year . The album , which had " major buzz " , had an initial shipment of 75 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The song 's first track , " Ultra " , was featured in the U.S. release of Street Fighter II : The Animated Movie , and was the theme song for Manga Entertainment 's anime catalog trailer . " Juke Joint Jezebel " , the band 's biggest hit , was featured in the film Bad Boys and in an episode of Beverly Hills 90210 . " Juke Joint Jezebel ( Metropolis Mix ) " was featured in the film Mortal Kombat . The video for " Juke Joint Jezebel " includes footage from the Patlabor 1 manga movie . More than two million copies of the song sold in 1995 alone . KMFDM went on two tours , Beat by Beat and In Your Face , in support of the album in 1995 . 
 Nihil is one of only two KMFDM studio albums ( Opium being the other ) that does not feature cover artwork by pop @-@ artist Brute ! . Instead , the cover was designed by Rieflin 's wife Francesca Sundsten . The band would return to using Brute ! ' s work on the next album , Xtort . The text which reads " Nihil " was changed from white to green on the album 's 2007 remastered reissue . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nihil received very favorable reviews from music critics . Heidi MacDonald of CMJ New Music Monthly called Nihil " a superb album that takes no prisoners from beginning to end , " saying that the first three tracks are " nearly flawless " and calling " Disobedience " a " real standout . " Andy Hinds of AllMusic also praised the album , calling " Juke @-@ Joint Jezebel " " an enduring and indispensable dancefloor favorite at goth / industrial clubs around the world . " He further said that the production on Nihil was " state of the art " and that KMFDM 's sound was " quite polished and tight . " Mark Jenkins of the Washington Post said the album " manages to stay fresh through the use of assorted sonic spices , " adding that the album has " some canny accents . " 
 Keyboard praised the album , describing " milky organ pads " on " Disobedience " and " snarling guitars [ wrapped ] in spiky synth barbed wire " on " Juke Joint Jezebel " , and saying of band leader Konietzko , " You won 't find a more imaginative or effective keyboardist on the hard @-@ core scene . " Chris Gill of Guitar Player , conversely , said " the most interesting parts are Durante 's steel guitar lines , which howl like revving engines " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that " Juke Joint Jezebel " " <unk> like a Bourbon Street hooker , with crunching guitars and a swooping , <unk> chorus " at the time of the album 's release , and in 2011 , said the album put " a polished pop spin on industrial 's characteristic harshness " . Gill had similar praise , saying " few have succeeded in making the combination [ of techno rhythms and thrash guitars ] sound as natural as this " . 
 Nihil was Wax Trax ! ' s best @-@ selling album to date by the end of 1995 , and went on to sell over 120 @,@ 000 copies by August 1996 . Nihil reached No. 16 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart , and was later labelled one of Wax Trax ! ' s commercial high points . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information from 1995 release booklet except where noted . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Sascha Konietzko – synthesizers , vocals ( 1 – 7 , 9 – 10 ) , bass ( 6 ) , drums ( 10 ) , production , mixing 
 Günter Schulz – guitars , vocals ( 2 , 6 ) , bass ( 5 ) , pre @-@ production 
 En Esch – vocals ( 1 – 3 , 5 – 8 ) , guitar ( 1 , 3 , 6 ) , drums ( 6 , 9 ) , hi hat ( 2 ) , cymbals ( 3 ) , backing vocals ( 3 , 5 ) , harmonica ( 5 ) 
 Raymond Watts – vocals ( 1 – 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 ) , bass ( 5 ) , drum programming ( 5 ) 
 Mark Durante – steel guitar ( 1 , 7 ) , guitars ( 5 , 7 , 9 ) 
 = = = = Additional personnel = = = = 
 Dorona Alberti – vocals ( 4 , 8 , 10 ) 
 Jim Christiansen – trombone ( 7 ) 
 Jennifer Ginsberg – vocals ( 2 ) 
 Jeff Olson – trumpet ( 7 ) 
 Bill Rieflin – drums ( 1 , 3 , 7 ) 
 Fritz Whitney – <unk> sax ( 7 ) 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Chris Shepard – engineering , production , mixing 
 Sam <unk> – assistant engineering 
 David Collins – mastering 
 Francesca Sundsten – cover art 
 Chris Z – type ( 1995 release ) 
 Justin Gammon – layout ( 2007 release ) 
 = Friedrich Wilhelm , Fürst zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg = 
 Friedrich William , Fürst zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg was born in Kirchberg , Hohenlohe , ( now part of Baden @-@ Württemberg , Germany ) on 2 December 1732 . He was a member of an old comital and , subsequently , princely ( <unk> ) family of Hohenlohe , with extensive properties on the plateau south of the Main river , between the Imperial City of <unk> Hall and the old Franconian city of Rothenburg ob der Tauber . 
 He served a distinguished career in Austrian military in the Seven Years ' War , the War of Bavarian Succession , and the French Revolutionary Wars . An experienced , if old @-@ fashioned , general , he was chosen to mentor the young Archduke Charles , who was assigned to his staff during the 1792 campaign in France . From 1780 until his death , he was the Colonel @-@ Proprietor of the 17th Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg began his military career in 1756 , when he joined the Habsburg regiment , the 29th Infantry Regiment Braunschweig @-@ Wolfenbüttel as a young man . He served as a captain of grenadiers in the Seven Years ' War . He was twice wounded , first at the famous Battle of Leuthen , and later at the Battle of Landshut , during the storming of Prussian redoubts . In 1758 , he was promoted to major , in 1761 , to lieutenant colonel , and in 1764 , to colonel . 
 He served under Gideon von Laudon in the short War of the Bavarian Succession , also called the Potato War for its lack of battles but its intense raiding of the enemy 's food supplies . After this conflict , which took place in Bohemia ( present @-@ day Czech Republic ) , he was promoted to Lieutenant Field Marshal ( <unk> @-@ Leutnant ) and served in the Austro @-@ Turkish War , again under the command of von Laudon . He orchestrated the Austrian victory over the Turks at <unk> . After the <unk> campaign , he received the Commander 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa and was appointed as Colonel @-@ Proprietor ( Inhaber ) of the 17th Infantry Regiment , a position he held until his death in 1796 . On 15 October 1789 , he was promoted again , to general of infantry , or Feldzeugmeister , and appointed as Commanding General in Transylvania , in the so @-@ called Siebenbürgen . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 In 1792 , he was initially placed in command of the 50 @,@ 000 Austrian forces in the Upper Rhine Valley . In August , his forces crossed the Rhine by Mannheim , and participated in the bombardment of Thionville , on the Moselle , in early September . Although the invading forces of the allies readily captured Longwy on 23 August and slowly marched on to Verdun , which was even less defensible than Longwy . The Duke of Brunswick now began his march on Paris and approached the defiles of the Argonne . In combination with the Army of Condé and Hessian troops , a portion of his force , 15 @,@ 000 , covered the left ( southern ) flank of the Prussian advance on Valmy . 
 As a seasoned and experienced officer , he had been chosen as a mentor for the young Archduke Charles , and the archduke was assigned to his force ; they were not at Valmy , but could hear the cannonade . The Duke of Brunswick 's force was to engage the northern flank of the French army , called the Army of the Sedan , while Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg 's force engaged the southern flank ( Army of the Metz ) . 
 In December of 1792 , Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg 's forces defended Trier from the Army of the Moselle so well that its commander , General of Division Pierre de Ruel , marquis de Beurnonville , was removed from his command by his superiors in Paris . On 31 December , Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg was awarded the Grand Cross of Military Order of Maria Theresa for his success at Trier . 
 In May 1793 , his forces played a decisive role in the victory at the Battle of <unk> . He was appointed as General Quarter Master and Chief of Staff to the Coalition 's main army in Flanders , succeeding General Karl Mack . As part of the Belgian Corps under Field Marshal Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld he played a decisive role in the action at Avesnes @-@ le @-@ Sec and later at the Battle of Fleurus ( 1794 ) . Subsequently , Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg commanded a corps on the upper Rhine and was responsible for the recapture of Speyer from the French on 17 September 1794 . This was his final military action ; he retired from service in early 1795 because of his failing health and died in 1796 . 
 = = Family = = 
 Born in the family county of Hohenlohe , Friedrich Wilhelm ( William ) was the first son of Karl August , Fürst zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg and his second wife , Susanne Margarete Louisa , Gräfin von Auersperg . Eight other children followed until her death 12 September 1748 . His father remarried ( 21 January 1749 ) and had four more children . In 1770 , Friedrich Wilhelm married the divorced <unk> , Countess of Reuss zu Greiz ( Greiz 9 July 1750 – Prague 14 June 1816 ) ; they had no children . He died in Prague , Bohemia , 10 August 1796 . 
 = = = Sibling connections = = = 
 Seven of his 12 siblings died before the age of ten . The surviving siblings were : 
 Christian Friedrich Karl , Fürst zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg ( 19 October 1729 Kirchberg – 18 August 1819 Kirchberg ) 
 August Ludwig , Prinz zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg ( 3 September 1735 Kirchberg – 19 January or June 1780 Kirchberg 
 Friedrich Eberhard , Prinz zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg ( 21 October 1737 Kirchberg – 21 January 1804 Kirchberg ) ( married Albertina Renata <unk> @-@ <unk> ) 
 Friedrich Karl Ludwig , Prinz zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg ( 19 March / November 1751 Kirchberg – 12 September 1791 <unk> ) 
 Friedrich Karl Ludwig was an amateur artist . He had started a career in cavalry but an accident during a review caused him to abandon the military . He studied first under Valentine <unk> and later under Oeser in Leipzig . His artistic pursuits included drawing , miniature painting ( at which he was apparently quite good ) , and ivory carving . 
 Christiane Friederike Sophie zu Hohenlohe @-@ Kirchberg ( 1 April 1731 – 15 March 1787 ) 
 = Australian weasel shark = 
 The Australian weasel shark ( Hemigaleus australiensis ) is an uncommon species of ground shark in the family <unk> . It inhabits shallow waters off northern Australia to a depth of 170 m ( 560 ft ) ; smaller sharks frequent sand and seagrass habitat and shift to coral reefs as they grow older . A slim , drab species reaching a length of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) , it has sickle @-@ shaped fins with dark tips on the second dorsal fin and caudal fin upper lobe . Its upper teeth are broad with strong serrations only on the trailing edge . The lateral line along each side is prominent and exhibits a downward curve below the second dorsal fin . 
 Feeding almost exclusively on octopuses and other cephalopods , the Australian weasel shark mostly hunts near the sea floor . It is viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished through a placental connection and born after a six @-@ month gestation period . This species is productive for a shark , with females bearing litters of 1 – 19 pups usually twice per year . The Australian weasel shark is caught by trawl and to a lesser extent gillnet and longline fisheries , though not in such numbers that its population is threatened . Thus , it has been listed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Originally regarded as conspecific with the sicklefin weasel shark ( H. microstoma ) , the Australian weasel shark was first documented as a potentially distinct species by John Stevens and Glen Cuthbert in 1983 . Its scientific description was authored by William White , Peter Last , and Leonard Compagno in a 2005 volume of the scientific journal <unk> . They gave it the specific epithet australiensis on the basis of its range , and designated as the type specimen an adult male 92 cm ( 36 in ) long caught at a depth of 41 m ( 135 ft ) off Geraldton , Western Australia . 
 = = Description = = 
 Reaching 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , the Australian weasel shark has a slender , spindle @-@ shaped body and a moderately long head with a thick , rounded snout . The large , oval eyes possess nictitating membranes and have notched posterior rims . Tiny spiracles are located behind and above the eyes . The large nostrils are preceded by fairly long , triangular flaps of skin . The short , curved mouth bears prominent furrows at the corners . There are 28 – 30 upper and 46 – 52 lower tooth rows , which are not visible when the mouth is closed ; the upper teeth are broad and angled with large serrations on the trailing edge only , whereas the lower teeth are thin and upright with smooth edges . There are five pairs of fairly short gill slits . 
 All of the fins , particularly the narrow pectoral fins , are falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) to some degree . The medium @-@ sized first dorsal fin originates just behind the pectoral fin rear tips . The second dorsal fin is about two @-@ thirds as tall as the first , and there is no midline ridge running between them . The pelvic fins are broad and slightly larger than the anal fin . The anal fin has a strong notch in the trailing margin and is positioned slightly behind the second dorsal fin . The caudal peduncle bears a crescent @-@ shaped notch at the upper origin of the caudal fin . The asymmetrical caudal fin has a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a long , narrow upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The prominent lateral line curves downward below the second dorsal fin . The skin is densely covered by small , overlapping dermal denticles ; each bears five horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth . This species is light grey to bronze above , darkening at the tips of the second dorsal fin and upper caudal fin lobe ( though this may be indistinct in larger sharks ) , and pale below . The underside is off @-@ white , and the first dorsal fin has a pale trailing margin . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Australian weasel shark inhabits continental and insular shelves off northern Australia , from Geraldton in Western Australia to Brunswick Heads in New South Wales . Additional records from Papua New Guinea are as yet unconfirmed . It seems to be naturally rather uncommon . This species tends to swim close to the sea floor and can be found from inshore waters down to 170 m ( 560 ft ) deep . Juveniles and small adults are generally found in sandy areas with seagrass cover , while large adults occur more around coral reefs . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The Australian weasel shark feeds predominantly on octopuses such as <unk> spp . , either swallowing them whole or removing the arms first . Octopuses become increasingly important to its diet with age , such that sharks over 90 cm ( 35 in ) long eat almost nothing else ; this increasing dietary specialisation is accompanied by a habitat shift toward coral reefs , which may serve to reduce competition between older and younger individuals . <unk> squids represent a minor secondary food source , particularly for smaller sharks . In addition , other cephalopods , mud lobsters , crabs , and echinoderms are rarely consumed . This species probably hunts mostly at dawn and dusk ; it typically seeks bottom @-@ dwelling prey but will also rise into the water column if opportunity presents , such as during seasonal aggregations of broad squid ( <unk> <unk> ) . Known parasites of the Australian weasel shark include the tapeworms Nybelinia <unk> , Paraorygmatobothrium <unk> , and P. taylori , and the copepods Perissopus dentatus and Pseudopandarus australis . 
 Like other members of its family , the Australian weasel shark is viviparous with the developing embryos sustained through a placental connection with the mother . Mature females have a single functional ovary and two functional uteruses . The gestation period is six months long and typically two litters are produced annually , one around February and the other around September . Litter size varies from 1 to 19 pups ( average 8 ) . The embryos lose their external gills at a length of 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) , have developed colouration by a length of 23 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) , and are born at a length of 30 cm ( 12 in ) . Males and females reach sexual maturity at approximately 60 cm ( 24 in ) and 65 cm ( 26 in ) long respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the Australian weasel shark is commonly caught by prawn and fish trawlers operating off northern Australia . Smaller numbers are also captured in gillnets and on longlines . As this species has a relatively high reproductive rate and losses to fisheries are not severe enough to affect its population , it has been assessed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = French ironclad Reine Blanche = 
 The French ironclad Reine Blanche was a wooden @-@ hulled armored corvette built for the French Navy in the late 1860s as an improvement over the Belliqueuse armored <unk> . She played a minor role in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 and was accidentally rammed by one of her sisters in 1877 . The ship bombarded the port of Sfax during the French occupation of Tunisia in 1881 before being sent to the Pacific in 1884 . She quickly returned to port with worn @-@ out boilers and was condemned later that year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Alma @-@ class ironclads were designed as improved versions of the armored corvette Belliqueuse , suited for foreign deployments . Unlike their predecessor , the Alma @-@ class ships were true central battery ironclads as they were fitted with armored transverse bulkheads . Like most ironclads of their era , they were equipped with a metal @-@ reinforced ram . 
 Reine Blanche measured 69 @.@ 02 meters ( 226 ft 5 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 13 @.@ 94 meters ( 45 ft 9 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 48 meters ( 21 ft 3 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 768 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 708 long tons ) . Her crew numbered 316 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . On sea trials the engine produced 1 @,@ 860 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 390 kW ) and the ship reached 11 @.@ 72 knots ( 21 @.@ 71 km / h ; 13 @.@ 49 mph ) . Reine Blanche carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal , allowing the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 610 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 980 km ; 1 @,@ 850 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 454 square meters ( 15 @,@ 650 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Reine Blanche mounted her four 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 breech @-@ loading guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 194 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship . The four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were also mounted on the upper deck . She may have exchanged her Mle 1864 guns for Mle 1870 guns . The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 20 @-@ caliber Mle 1870 gun weighed 165 @.@ 3 pounds ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Reine Blanche had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , backed by 240 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of wood . The unarmored portions of her sides were protected by 15 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Reine Blanche was laid down at Lorient in 1865 and launched on 10 March 1868 . The ship began her sea trials on 15 April 1869 and was put into reserve at Brest after they were completed . She was commissioned on 20 July 1870 and made one cruise to the Shetland Islands during the Franco @-@ Prussian War before she was placed in reserve again on 20 September . Reine Blanche was recommissioned in July 1871 as flagship of the second division of the Evolutionary Squadron . During the Cantonal Revolution Reine Blanche and her sister Thétis spent much of September – October 1873 in the port of Cartagena , Spain , where they could protect French citizens . She was reduced to reserve on 1 February 1876 and recommissioned in April 1877 . 
 On 3 July 1877 she was accidentally rammed by Thétis and had to be run ashore to prevent her from sinking . Reine Blanche was placed back into reserve in 1878 . She was recommissioned on 15 April 1879 for service with the Levant Squadron . From 5 – 16 July 1881 Reine Blanche bombarded the Tunisian port of Sfax as part of the French occupation of Tunisia . The ship was named as the flagship of the Pacific Squadron on 20 January 1884 under command of Rear Admiral <unk> , but she returned to Cherbourg on 22 May 1884 with worn @-@ out boilers and her hull in poor shape . Reine Blanche was paid off and condemned on 12 November 1884 . 
 = Rock Steady ( album ) = 
 Rock Steady is the fifth studio album by American rock band No Doubt , released on December 11 , 2001 by Interscope Records . The band began writing the album with initial recording sessions in Los Angeles and San Francisco , then traveled to London and Jamaica to work with various performers , songwriters , and producers . Sly & Robbie , The Neptunes , and William Orbit were among the many artists the band collaborated with on the album . 
 As a result of these collaborations , Rock Steady touches on many musical styles , focusing on dub , synthpop , and dance styles more so than in the past . The band attempted to capture the vibe of Jamaican dancehall music , and experimented with writing songs without its standard instrumentation . Singer Gwen Stefani wrote her lyrics quickly in comparison to previous records , and dealt with topics ranging from partying to ruminations on her relationship with Gavin Rossdale . 
 Rock Steady received mostly positive reviews from music critics , and it was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 2003 Grammy Awards . The album was a commercial comeback for the band , surpassing sales of their previous offering , Return of Saturn , released in 2000 . Rock Steady spawned four singles , two of which won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . Rolling Stone ranked Rock Steady number 316 on its 2003 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Every night on the tour to support their 2000 album Return of Saturn , No Doubt threw after @-@ show parties where people danced to Jamaican dancehall music . During a discussion over dinner in late 2000 , the band members decided they wanted to explore dancehall @-@ style rhythms for their next album . Drawing inspiration from artists such as Bounty Killer , Cutty Ranks , and Mr. Vegas , the band began work on the album in January 2001 by creating beats on Pro Tools at guitarist Tom Dumont 's apartment . The group often tried recreating beats from other song files on the computer , which resulted in modified versions of the original rhythms . They worked with producer Philip Steir at Toast Studios in San Francisco during this time , where the beginnings of " Hey Baby " emerged . When writing lyrics for previous albums , Stefani typically read works by Sylvia Plath that would make her depressed " or find different words that inspire me . " In contrast , for Rock Steady she wrote the lyrics quicker and on the spot to meet the goal of writing a song a day . Many of the demos recorded during these early sessions were used in the final tracks , rather than completely reworking the songs . The band saw this as a way to preserve the " initial spark " from when the songs were conceived . 
 The next month , Stefani left Los Angeles for London to visit boyfriend Gavin Rossdale , and the band traveled with her to finish recording " Detective " . There , they worked with Eurythmics member David A. Stewart and wrote the song " Underneath It All " in only ten minutes . In March , No Doubt traveled to Jamaica , staying at the Blue Lagoon in Port Antonio . The band " spent most of the time swimming and getting sunburned and drinking and smoking and recording a little music " , according to Dumont . The group would often have Red Stripe beers or rum and <unk> with jerk food for breakfast ; on one occasion , Dumont passed out from heavy drinking while recording a track . They began work in the mid @-@ afternoon and worked into the night , with an after @-@ party following the session . The group collaborated with Sly & Robbie , who produced " Underneath It All " and " Hey Baby " and brought in dancehall toasters Lady Saw and Bounty Killer , and Steely & Clevie , who produced " Start the Fire " . 
 The band returned from Jamaica and resumed work in June 2001 , collaborating with producers Nellee Hooper and Timbaland . The Timbaland track , titled " It 's a Fight " , and a Dr. Dre @-@ produced song titled " Wicked Day " were excluded from the album because their hip hop sounds did not work well on the album . The band then worked with producer and former Cars frontman Ric Ocasek in late June . Stefani commented that No Doubt worked with so many people for the record because none were available for the time needed to make an LP , but that she would have liked to work with Ocasek longer . The band and its A & R manager Mark Williams chose collaborators based on how well they thought the person would fit the personality of the song that No Doubt had written . In late August , the band returned to London for Mark " Spike " Stent to polish off the songs with audio mixing . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The band members often did not play their standard instruments when working on the songs for Rock Steady . As a result , the album 's instrumentation contains less guitar and bass guitar than the band 's previous work . Many of the album 's sounds come from electronic keyboard effects , which bassist Tony Kanal called " Devo @-@ y bleeps and Star Wars noises " . Dumont commented that many of the effects came from being unfamiliar with the equipment and " just twiddling knobs " . Dumont created an effect similar to that of an echo chamber by placing a microphone inside a metal garbage can with the can 's open end facing a drum kit . Richard B. Simon of MTV News asserted that the sound of Rock Steady was part of the decade nostalgia of the 1980s retro movement . 
 Stefani 's vocals range from innocent to seductive , sometimes transitioning from one to the other within a song . Her lyrics are based on her relationship with Rossdale , whom she married less than a year after the album 's release . Stefani is openhearted and unreserved as on Return of Saturn , but her approach becomes more immediate and instinctive . The lyrics are more youthful than those on Return of Saturn and detail partying and feelings of lust . An overarching theme on the album is Stefani 's impatience in the couple 's long @-@ distance relationship . She discusses wanting to see Rossdale on " Making Out " and " Waiting Room " , and she reveals her distrust in Rossdale on " In My Head " . On " Hey Baby " she gives an innocuous account of the debauchery between her bandmates and their groupies during parties , as she observes the party . The lyrics of " Underneath It All " question whether or not Rossdale is a good match for her , an issue resolved in the chorus , which was written based on a journal entry where Stefani wrote the line " You 're lovely underneath it all " about Rossdale . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Rock Steady maintains many of the styles present in No Doubt 's previous work , while introducing influences from the music of Jamaica . " Hey Baby " , " Underneath It All " and " Start the Fire " all feature dancehall and ragga , an electronic @-@ oriented subgenre , as well as guest toasters . The latter , written using backward string samples , also contains the band 's traditional ska and reggae sounds . Ocasek produced the New Wave @-@ influenced tracks " Don 't Let Me Down " and " Platinum Blonde Life " , the former of which was described as sounding " more like the Cars than the Cars " . " Platinum Blonde Life " was so strongly influenced by The Cars ' work that Kanal apologized to Ocasek , though Ocasek apologized back that he hadn 't seen the similarity . The synthpop ballad " Running " was composed on a Yamaha keyboard purchased for Kanal in the 1980s and drew inspiration from the Thompson Twins . Its simple keyboard riff drew comparisons to the work of Depeche Mode , Erasure , and Yazoo . 
 Because of the number of collaborations , the album touches on several other styles . " Waiting Room " , a song written and sung with Prince for Return of Saturn , evokes his R & B style over a drum and bass beat . " Hella Good " , an electro rock song co @-@ written with hip hop production duo The Neptunes , is inspired by the funk songs of the late 1970s such as Queen 's " Another One Bites the Dust " and the Commodores ' " Brick House " . William Orbit , best known for his work on Madonna 's electronica @-@ oriented Ray of Light , incorporates trance music in the production of " Making Out " . " Detective " , one of the five tracks produced by Hooper , takes slight influence from pop music . The album 's title track closes the album by tying together the many musical themes . It is a slow dub song , with acid house @-@ style bleeps and moans . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rock Steady received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 69 , based on 15 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Rolling Stone 's Rob Sheffield said it was " impressive to hear No Doubt summon the musical imagination to transcend the formula that used to imprison them " and ranked Rock Steady number 316 on its 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic referred to the album as " a good , hooky , stylish mainstream pop record " . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly remarked that there was " something oddly flimsy " about No Doubt that prevented it from becoming a milestone in pop music , but that the band 's " party @-@ throwing skills improve with each new gathering . " Stylus Magazine commented that the band sounded like it had " growing pains " and was unsure of its place in mainstream rock , predicting that No Doubt would either become a singles band " or go all Radiohead on us and make an album of avant @-@ jazz @-@ electro @-@ acid @-@ funk @-@ polka . " 
 Many reviewers focused on the large number of styles that Rock Steady incorporates . PopMatters , noting that Rock Steady maintains the introspection of Return of Saturn without the latter 's " longing and wistfulness " , stated that " it is to No Doubt 's credit ... that they manage to keep the album together with little more than their collective personalities . " Blender , however , called it " an intermittently engaging but overall shapeless collection ... the product of happy @-@ go @-@ lucky musicians who once cavorted in bad track suits but now spend their days commuting between London , Jamaica and Los Angeles seeking the wisdom of expensive studio geeks . " Nevertheless , Blender included the album on its 2003 list of " 500 CDs You Must Own Before You Die ! " . The NME viewed the album 's " enormous waterfront of styles " positively , noting that it had many strong potential singles , but found that some of the " empty @-@ headed guitar pop " on the second half of the album spoiled the listening experience . Time stated that Rock Steady was able to integrate ska , pop , New Wave , and dancehall " without sounding contrived or chaotic " . It added that though the album lacked the energy and sales of No Doubt 's 1995 breakthrough album Tragic Kingdom , Rock Steady was " their greatest effort to date ... the sound of band dropping pretense to realize its potential . " Slant Magazine included Rock Steady on its list of 50 Essential Pop Albums , commenting that " not since Blondie ... has a rock act so effortlessly , irreverently , and fashionably skidded across so many different genre boundaries at one time . " LAUNCHcast said that " even with so many producers attempting to steer this bus along the superstar highway , they end up in a better @-@ than @-@ most parking lot " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Rock Steady sold approximately three million copies . NME reviewer Alex Needham compared the album 's revival of No Doubt 's popularity to the performance of Madonna 's 1998 album Ray of Light . The album debuted at number nine on the Billboard 200 , selling 254 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Rock Steady was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on October 11 , 2002 , and by July 2012 , it had sold 2 @,@ 842 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . At the 2003 Grammy Awards , the album was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album but lost to Norah Jones ' Come Away with Me . The lead single " Hey Baby " and third single " Underneath It All " won the award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 2003 and 2004 Grammy Awards , respectively . 
 The album did not perform as strongly outside the US . In September 2002 , Rock Steady was certified platinum in Canada , and in the United Kingdom , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on July 22 , 2013 . It peaked at number fifteen on the ARIA Albums Chart and spent nine non @-@ consecutive weeks in the top forty . The album was listed at number ninety @-@ seven on the 2002 Australian Recording Industry Association end @-@ of @-@ year chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 = = Legacy and impact = = 
 Following the success of the regular edition , Rock Steady had two special edition re @-@ releases in October 2002 , each of which had a bonus CD . The two @-@ song CD features acoustic live performances of " Underneath It All " and " Just a Girl " recorded at <unk> in Cologne , Germany in June 2002 as well as the music video for " Underneath It All " . The four @-@ song CD includes a remix of " Hey Baby " featuring Outkast and Killer Mike ; another remix by <unk> ; Roger Sanchez 's remix of " Hella Good " , which won a Grammy Award for Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical in 2003 ; and a remix of Return of Saturn 's lead single " Ex @-@ Girlfriend " made by Philip Steir , who helped produce " Hey Baby " . The songs from the two @-@ song bonus disc were released in North American iTunes Stores , and those from the four @-@ song bonus disc were released in other countries . Rock Steady Live , a live DVD of No Doubt performing in 2002 in support of Rock Steady , was released in November 2003 . 
 Rock Steady produced the band 's most successful singles . " Hey Baby " preceded the album with an October 2001 release . It set a record for the band when it reached number five on the Billboard Hot 100 . The positive response to " Hey Baby " from radio stations and video channels prompted the band to push forward the release of Rock Steady from December 18 to December 11 . The next single , " Hella Good " , was released in April 2002 . It was somewhat less successful and peaked at number thirteen . It was followed by " Underneath It All " , which was released that August . The single is No Doubt 's most successful American single to date , peaking at number three on the Hot 100 , and like " Hey Baby " , it managed to top the Billboard Top 40 Mainstream chart . The fourth and final single was " Running " in April 2003 . Peaking at number sixty @-@ two , " Running " became No Doubt 's lowest position on the Hot 100 to date . 
 When singer @-@ songwriter Jewel released her fifth album 0304 in June 2003 , reinventing and sexualizing her public image , music critics identified Rock Steady and Ray of Light as influences on the album . Slant Magazine compared 0304 's retro tribute to new wave music with that on Rock Steady . Blender commented that Jewel had " brushed up on two sacred pop texts , the Manual of Madonna and the Gospel According to Gwen " . The magazine compared her use of a more restrained , throaty purr to Stefani 's vocals and noted 0304 's use of " jumpy bubblegum choruses and <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ beeping keyboards " as descendants of No Doubt 's production . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Enhanced content 
 " Hey Baby " video 
 Rock Steady screensaver 
 " The Making of Rock Steady " documentary 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rock Steady . 
 No Doubt 
 No Doubt – production 
 Gwen Stefani – vocals ( all tracks ) ; additional programming ( tracks 4 , 13 ) ; album art concept 
 Tony Kanal – bass , keyboards ( all tracks ) ; additional engineering ( tracks 3 , 6 – 9 , 11 , 13 ) ; programming ( tracks 3 , 7 , 8 , 11 ) ; additional programming ( tracks 4 , 6 , 9 , 13 ) ; saxophone ( track 5 ) 
 Tom Dumont – guitar , keyboards ( all tracks ) ; additional engineering ( tracks 3 , 6 – 9 , 11 , 13 ) ; programming ( tracks 3 , 7 , 8 , 11 ) ; additional programming ( tracks 4 , 6 , 9 , 13 ) 
 Adrian Young – drums 
 Additional personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = History of the Cleveland Browns = 
 The history of the Cleveland Browns American football team began in 1944 when taxi @-@ cab magnate Arthur B. " Mickey " McBride secured a Cleveland , Ohio franchise in the newly formed All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Paul Brown , who coach Bill Walsh once called the " father of modern football " , was the team 's namesake and first coach . From the beginning of play in 1946 at Cleveland Municipal Stadium , the Browns were a great success . Cleveland won each of the AAFC 's four championship games before the league dissolved in 1949 . The team then moved to the more established National Football League ( NFL ) , where it continued to dominate . Between 1950 and 1955 , Cleveland reached the NFL championship game every year , winning three times . 
 McBride and his partners sold the team to a group of Cleveland businessmen in 1953 for a then @-@ unheard @-@ of $ 600 @,@ 000 . Eight years later , the team was sold again , this time to a group led by New York advertising executive Art Modell . Modell fired Brown before the 1963 season , but the team continued to win behind running back Jim Brown . The Browns won the championship in 1964 and reached the title game the following season , losing to the Green Bay Packers . The team subsequently reached the playoffs three times in the late 1960s , but fell short of playing in the Super Bowl , the inter @-@ league championship game between the NFL and the rival American Football League ( AFL ) that started in 1966 . 
 When the AFL and NFL merged before the 1970 season , Cleveland became part of the new American Football Conference ( AFC ) . While the Browns made it back to the playoffs in 1971 and 1972 , they fell into mediocrity through the mid @-@ 1970s . A revival of sorts took place in 1979 and 1980 , when quarterback Brian Sipe engineered a series of last @-@ minute wins and the Browns came to be called the " Kardiac Kids " . Under Sipe , however , the Browns did not make it past the first round of the playoffs . Quarterback Bernie Kosar , who the Browns drafted in 1985 , led the team to three AFC Championship games in the late 1980s but lost each time . In 1995 , Modell announced he was relocating the Browns to Baltimore , sowing a mix of outrage and bitterness among Cleveland 's dedicated fan base . Negotiations and legal battles led to an agreement where Modell was allowed to move the team , but Cleveland kept the Browns ' name , colors and history . After three years of suspension while the old municipal stadium was demolished and Cleveland Browns Stadium took its place , the Browns started play again in 1999 under new owner Al Lerner . Since resuming operations , the Browns have made the playoffs only once , as a wild @-@ card team in 2002 . 
 The Browns are only one of 12 NFL franchises to predate the 1960 launch of the American Football League , and only one of three such teams in the AFC . 
 = = Founding and dominance in the AAFC ( 1946 – 1949 ) = = 
 In 1944 Arch Ward , the influential sports editor of the Chicago Tribune , proposed a new professional football league called the All @-@ America Football Conference . The AAFC was to challenge the dominant National Football League once it began operations at the end of World War II , which had forced many professional teams to curtail activity , merge or go on hiatus as their players served in the U.S. military . It was a bold proposition , given the failure of three previous NFL competitors and the dominance of college football , which was more popular than the professional game at the time . Ward , who had gained fame and respect for starting all @-@ star games for baseball and college football , lined up deep @-@ pocketed owners for the new league 's eight teams in hopes of giving it a better chance against the NFL . One of them was Arthur B. " Mickey " McBride , a Cleveland businessman who grew up in Chicago and knew Ward from his involvement in the newspaper business . McBride spent his early career as a circulation manager for the Cleveland News , and went into business for himself in the 1930s , buying a pair of Cleveland taxi companies and running a wire service that supplied bookies with information about the results of horse races . He had connections to organized crime in Chicago and Cleveland arising from the wire service . 
 McBride developed a passion for football attending games at Notre Dame , where his son went to college . In the early 1940s he tried to buy the NFL 's Cleveland Rams , owned by millionaire supermarket heir Dan Reeves , but was rebuffed . Having been awarded the Cleveland franchise in the AAFC , McBride asked Cleveland Plain Dealer sportswriter John Dietrich for head coaching suggestions . Dietrich recommended Paul Brown , the 36 @-@ year @-@ old Ohio State Buckeyes coach . After consulting with Ward , McBride followed Dietrich 's advice in early 1945 , naming Brown head coach and giving him an ownership stake in the team and full control over player personnel . Brown , who had built an impressive record as coach of a Massillon , Ohio high school team and brought the Buckeyes their first national championship , at the time was serving in the U.S. Navy and coached the football team at Great Lakes Naval Station near Chicago . 
 The name of the team was at first left up to Brown , who rejected calls for it to be christened the Browns . McBride then held a contest to name the team in May 1945 ; " Cleveland Panthers " was the most popular choice , but Brown rejected it because it was the name of an earlier failed football team . " That old Panthers team failed , " Brown said . " I want no part of that name . " In August , McBride gave in to popular demand and named the team the Browns , despite Paul Brown 's objections . 
 As the war began to wind down with Germany 's surrender in May 1945 , the team parlayed Brown 's ties to college football and the military to build its roster . The first signing was Otto Graham , a former star quarterback at Northwestern University who was then serving in the Navy . The Browns later signed kicker and offensive tackle Lou Groza and wide receivers Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie . Fullback Marion Motley and nose tackle Bill Willis , two of the earliest African @-@ Americans to play professional football , also joined the team in 1946 . Cleveland 's first training camp took place at Bowling Green University in northwestern Ohio . Brown 's reputation for winning notwithstanding , joining the team was a risk ; the Browns and the AAFC were nascent entities and faced tough competition from the NFL . " I just went up there to see what would happen , " center Frank Gatski said many years later . 
 Cleveland 's first regular @-@ season game took place September 6 , 1946 at Cleveland Municipal Stadium against the Miami Seahawks before a then @-@ record crowd of 60 @,@ 135 . That contest , which the Browns won 44 – 0 , kicked off an era of dominance . With Brown at the helm , the team won all four of the AAFC 's championships from 1946 until its dissolution in 1949 , amassing a record of 52 wins , four losses and three ties . This included the 1948 season , in which the Browns became the first unbeaten and untied team in professional football history . The Browns had few worthy rivals among the AAFC 's eight teams , but the New York Yankees and San Francisco 49ers were their closest competition . 
 While the Browns excelled on defense , Cleveland 's winning ways were driven by an offense that employed Brown 's version of the T formation , which emphasized speed , timing and execution over set plays . Brown liked his players " lean and hungry , " and championed quickness over bulk . Graham became a star under Brown 's system , leading all passers in each of the AAFC 's seasons and racking up 10 @,@ 085 passing yards . Motley , who Brown in 1948 called " the greatest fullback that ever lived " , was the AAFC 's all @-@ time leading rusher . Brown and six players from the Browns ' AAFC years were later elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame : Graham , Motley , Groza , Lavelli , Willis and Gatski . 
 The Cleveland area showered support on the Browns from the outset . Meanwhile , the Browns unexpectedly had Cleveland to themselves ; the NFL 's Cleveland Rams , who had continually lost money despite winning the 1945 NFL championship , moved to Los Angeles after that season . The Browns ' on @-@ field feats only amplified their popularity , and the team saw average attendance of 57 @,@ 000 per game in its first season . The Browns , however , became victims of their own success . Cleveland 's dominance exposed a lack of balance among AAFC teams , which the league tried to correct by sending Browns players including quarterback Y.A. Tittle to the Baltimore Colts in 1948 . Attendance at Browns games fell in later years as fans lost interest in lopsided victories , while attendance for less successful teams fell even more precipitously . The Browns led all of football during the undefeated season in 1948 with an average crowd of 45 @,@ 517 , but that was more than 10 @,@ 000 less than the average per game the previous year . These factors – combined with a war for players between the two leagues that raised salaries and ate into owners ' profits – ultimately led to the dissolution of the AAFC and the merger of three of its teams , including the Browns , into the NFL in 1949 . The NFL does not acknowledge AAFC statistics and records because these achievements – including the Browns ' perfect season – did not take place in the NFL or against NFL teams , and not in a league fully absorbed by the NFL . 
 = = Success and challenges in the NFL ( 1950 – 1956 ) = = 
 The AAFC proposed match @-@ ups with NFL teams numerous times during its four @-@ year existence , but no inter @-@ league game ever materialized . That made Cleveland 's entry into the NFL in the 1950 season the first test of whether its early supremacy could continue into a more established league . The proof came quickly : Cleveland 's NFL regular @-@ season opener was against the two @-@ time defending champion Philadelphia Eagles on September 16 in Philadelphia . The Browns lit up the Eagles ' vaunted defense for 487 total yards — including 246 passing yards from Graham and his receivers — in a 35 – 10 win before a crowd of 71 @,@ 237 . This decisive win quashed any doubts about the Browns ' prowess . Behind an offense that featured Graham , Groza , Motley , Lavelli and running back Dub Jones , Cleveland finished the 1950 season with a 10 – 2 record , tied for first place in the Eastern Conference . After winning a playoff game against the New York Giants , the Browns advanced to the NFL championship match against the Los Angeles Rams in Cleveland . The Browns won 30 – 28 on a last @-@ minute Groza field goal . Fans stormed the field after the victory , carting off the goalposts , ripping off one player 's jersey and setting a bonfire in the bleachers . " It was the greatest game I ever saw , " Brown later said . 
 After five straight championship wins in the AAFC and NFL , the Browns appeared poised to bring another trophy home in 1951 . The team finished the regular season with 11 wins and a single loss in the first game of the season . Cleveland faced the Rams on December 23 in a rematch of the previous year 's title game . The score was deadlocked 17 – 17 in the final period , but a 73 @-@ yard touchdown pass by Rams quarterback Norm van Brocklin to wide receiver Tom Fears broke the tie and gave Los Angeles the lead for good . The 24 – 17 loss was the Browns ' first in a championship game . 
 The 1952 and 1953 seasons followed a similar pattern : Cleveland reached the championship game but lost both times to the Detroit Lions . In 1952 's championship game , Detroit won 17 – 7 after a muffed punt by the Browns , several Lions defensive stands and a 67 @-@ yard touchdown run by Doak Walker scuttled Cleveland 's chances . The team finished 11 – 1 in 1953 , but lost the championship to the Lions 17 – 16 on a 33 @-@ yard Bobby Layne touchdown pass to Jim Doran with just over two minutes left . While the championship losses disappointed Cleveland fans who had grown accustomed to winning , the team continued to make progress . Len Ford , who the Browns picked up from the defunct AAFC 's Los Angeles Dons team , emerged as a force on the defensive line , making the Pro Bowl each year between 1951 and 1953 . Second @-@ year wideout Ray Renfro became a star in 1953 , also reaching the Pro Bowl . 
 During the summer before the 1953 season , the Browns ' original owners sold the team for a then @-@ unheard @-@ of $ 600 @,@ 000 . The buyers were a group of prominent Cleveland men : Dave R. Jones , a businessman and former Cleveland Indians director , Ellis Ryan , a former Indians president , Homer Marshman , an attorney , and Saul Silberman , owner of the Randall Park race track . McBride had been called in 1950 to testify before the Kefauver Committee , a congressional body investigating organized crime , which partly exposed his ties to mafia figures but did not result in any charges . While McBride never said so , the Kefauver hearings and the growing public association between him and the mafia may have played a role in his decision to get out of football . 
 While the Browns came into 1954 as one of the top teams in the NFL , the future was far from certain . Graham , whose leadership and throwing skills were instrumental in the Browns ' championship runs , said he planned to retire after the season . Motley , the team 's best rusher and blocker , retired at the beginning of the season with a bad knee . Star defensive lineman Bill Willis also retired before the season . Still , Cleveland finished the regular season 9 – 3 and met Detroit the day after Christmas in the championship game for a third consecutive time . This time Cleveland dominated on both sides of the ball , intercepting Bobby Layne six times while Graham threw three touchdowns and ran for three more . The Browns , who lost the last game of the regular season to the Lions only a week before , won their second NFL championship 56 – 10 . " I saw it , but still hardly can believe it , " Lions coach Buddy Parker said after the game . " It has me dazed . " 
 Cleveland 's success continued in 1955 after Brown convinced Graham to come back , arguing that the team lacked a solid alternative . Cleveland finished the regular season 9 – 2 – 1 and went on to win its third NFL championship , beating the Los Angeles Rams 38 – 14 . It was Graham 's last game ; the win capped a 10 @-@ year run in which he led his team to the league championship every year , winning four in the AAFC and three in the NFL . Rams fans gave Graham a standing ovation when Brown pulled him from the game in the final minutes . 
 Without Graham , the Browns floundered in 1956 . Injuries to two Browns quarterbacks left relative unknown Tommy O 'Connell as the starter , and Cleveland finished with a 5 – 7 record , its first losing season . Dante Lavelli and Frank Gatski retired at the end of the season , leaving Groza as the only original Browns player still on the team . While the Browns ' on @-@ field play in 1956 was uninspiring , off @-@ the @-@ field drama developed after a Cleveland @-@ based inventor let Brown test a helmet with a radio transmitter inside . After trying it out in training camp , Brown used the helmet to call plays during the pre @-@ season with long @-@ time backup George Ratterman behind center . The device allowed the coach to direct his quarterback on the fly , giving him an advantage over franchises who had to use messenger players to relay instructions . The Browns used the device off and on into the regular season , and other teams began to experiment with their own radio helmets . Bert Bell , the NFL commissioner , banned the device in October 1956 . Today , however , all NFL teams use in @-@ helmet radios to communicate with players . 
 = = Jim Brown era and new ownership ( 1957 – 1965 ) = = 
 With Otto Graham and most of the other original Browns in retirement , by 1957 the team was struggling to replenish its ranks . In the first round of that year 's draft , Cleveland took fullback Jim Brown out of Syracuse University . In his first season , Brown led the NFL with 942 yards of rushing and was voted rookie of the year in a United Press poll . Cleveland finished 9 – 2 – 1 and again advanced to the championship game against Detroit . The Lions dominated the game , forcing six turnovers and allowing only 112 yards passing in a 59 – 14 rout . 
 Before the 1958 season , O 'Connell , who lacked the stature and durability Paul Brown wanted in a starter , retired to take a coaching job in Illinois , and Milt Plum was named as his replacement . Cleveland , however , was relying increasingly on the running game , in contrast to its pass @-@ happy early years under Graham . As the team built up a 9 – 3 regular @-@ season record , Brown in 1958 ran for 1 @,@ 527 yards – almost twice as much as any other back and a league record at the time . 
 Entering the final game of the 1958 season , Cleveland needed to either win or tie against the New York Giants to clinch the Eastern Conference title and the right to host the championship game . Cleveland lost that game under snowy conditions on a 49 @-@ yard field goal by Pat Summerall as time expired , and then lost a playoff game against the Giants the following week to end the season . The Giants went on to play the Baltimore Colts in the championship , a game often cited as the seed of professional football 's popularity surge in the U.S. 
 Cleveland 's campaigns in 1959 and 1960 were unremarkable , aside from Brown 's league @-@ leading rushing totals in both seasons . Plum , meanwhile , became the established starting quarterback , bringing a measure of stability to the squad not seen since Graham 's retirement . He led the team to a 7 – 5 record in 1959 and an 8 – 3 – 1 record in 1960 , but neither was good enough to win the Eastern Conference and advance to the championship . Behind the scenes , however , all was not well . A conflict took shape between Paul Brown and Jim Brown ; emboldened by his success , the fullback began to question his coach 's disciplinarian methods . He called the coach " Little Caesar " behind his back . At halftime during a game in 1959 , Paul Brown questioned the severity of an injury Jim Brown was sidelined for , which further inflamed tensions between the two . 
 = = = Art Modell takes ownership = = = 
 Fred " Curly " Morrison , a former Browns running back who worked as an advertising executive for CBS television , learned in 1960 that Dave Jones was looking to sell the Browns and told the story to Art Modell , a 35 @-@ year @-@ old advertising and television executive from Brooklyn . Modell was intrigued , partly because of the potentially lucrative television rights that one of the NFL 's most successful franchises could bring as football began to challenge baseball as America 's biggest sport . Having borrowed as much money as he could , Modell completed the purchase in March 1961 for $ 3 @.@ 925 million . Bob Gries , who had a share in the Browns from the beginning , agreed to buy in again at the new valuation and take a stake of almost 40 % , defraying Modell 's costs substantially . As the previous owners did when they took over , Modell quickly assured Cleveland fans that Brown would " have a free hand " in running the organization and awarded him a new eight @-@ year contract . " As far as I 'm concerned Paul Brown can send [ plays ] in by carrier pigeon , " Modell said . " In my opinion he has no peer as a football coach . His record speaks for itself . I view our relationship as a working partnership . " 
 The 1961 season was typical on the field : Jim Brown led the league in rushing for the fifth straight season and the team ended with an 8 – 5 – 1 record . That left Cleveland two games out of a berth in the championship . During that year , however , players began to question Paul Brown 's strict and often overbearing demeanor , while many challenged his control over the team 's strategy . Milt Plum spoke out against Brown calling all the team 's offensive plays , and Jim Brown said on a weekly radio broadcast that the coach 's play @-@ calling and handling of Plum were undermining the quarterback 's confidence . They found a willing listener in Modell , a bachelor who was closer to their age than the coach 's . 
 Further cracks appeared in the " working partnership " between Paul Brown and Modell before the 1962 season . Brown made a trade without informing Modell , giving up star halfback Bobby Mitchell to acquire the rights to Syracuse running back Ernie Davis , the first African @-@ American to win the Heisman Trophy . Davis was chosen by the Washington Redskins with the first overall pick in the 1962 draft , but while Davis was the first black player ever selected by Washington , team owner George Preston Marshall made the move only after being given an ultimatum to add an African @-@ American player or risk losing his stadium lease . Davis demanded a trade , leaving the door open to the Browns , who signed him to a three @-@ year contract worth $ 80 @,@ 000 . As Davis was preparing for the College All @-@ Star Game , however , he came down with a mystery illness and was later diagnosed with leukemia . Brown ruled Davis out for the season , but the running back returned to Cleveland and began a conditioning program after one of his doctors said playing football would not exacerbate his condition . Modell thought Davis could be prepared to play , and Davis , who by then knew he was dying , wanted to be part of the team . Brown , however , continued to insist that he sit out , driving a deeper wedge between him and Modell . Davis died the following May . 
 The rift between Brown and Modell only widened as the 1962 season progressed . Frank Ryan took Milt Plum 's place as the team 's starting quarterback by the end of the season , and the Browns finished with a 7 – 6 – 1 record . Jim Brown was not the NFL 's leading rusher for the only time in his career . 
 = = = Paul Brown is fired = = = 
 On January 9 , 1963 , Art Modell sent a statement to the <unk> : " Paul E. Brown , head coach and general manager , will no longer serve the team in those capacities , " it said . Immediate reaction to the decision was muted due to a newspaper strike that kept the Cleveland Plain Dealer and Cleveland Press off the newsstands until April . A printing company executive , however , got together a group of sportswriters and published a 32 @-@ page magazine fielding players ' views on the firing . Opinions were mixed ; Modell came in for his share of criticism , but tackle and team captain Mike McCormack said he did not think the team could win under Brown . Nonetheless , it was a shocking end to the 17 @-@ year Cleveland career of a coach who was already a seminal figure in the city 's sports history . Among many innovations , Brown was the first coach to call plays for his quarterback , give players IQ and personality tests and use game film to evaluate opponents . Even Jim Brown lauded his pioneering role in integrating the game : 
 Paul Brown integrated pro football without uttering a single word about integration . He just went out , signed a bunch of great black athletes , and started kicking butt . That 's how you do it . You don 't talk about it . ... [ I ] n his own way , the man integrated football the right way – and no one was going to stop him . 
 Modell named Brown 's chief assistant , Blanton Collier , as the team 's new head coach . Collier was a friendly , studious man who became a player favorite as an assistant on both offense and defense under Brown . He installed an open offense and allowed Ryan to call his own plays . In Collier 's first season , the Browns finished with a 10 – 4 record but fell short of a division title . Jim Brown won the MVP award in 1963 with a record 1 @,@ 863 yards rushing . Dominant blocking from the Browns ' offensive line , which included guard Gene Hickerson and left tackle Dick Schafrath , helped boost his totals . 
 = = = 1964 championship = = = 
 Cleveland climbed back to the top of the eastern division in 1964 with a 10 – 3 – 1 record behind Jim Brown 's league @-@ leading 1 @,@ 446 yards of rushing . Rookie wide receiver Paul Warfield led the team with 52 catches , and Frank Ryan cemented his place as the team 's starting quarterback , recording the best game of his career in the season closer against the New York Giants , a game the Browns needed to win to advance to the championship . Yet despite Cleveland 's prowess , the Browns went into the championship game as heavy underdogs against the Baltimore Colts . Most sportswriters predicted an easy win for the Colts , who led the league in scoring behind quarterback Johnny Unitas and halfback Lenny Moore . The Browns ' defense , moreover , was suspect . The team gave up 20 more first downs than any other in the league . The teams , however , had not faced each other for three years . Before the game , Collier and Colts coach Don Shula agreed to give each other full access to video of regular @-@ season games . Ever the student , Collier took full advantage of the opportunity . The Browns had run what was dubbed a " rubber band " pass defense , allowing short throws while trying to prevent big plays . The Colts ' top receivers , however , Raymond Berry and Jimmy Orr , were not fast . They tended to pick apart defenses with short , tactical completions , which led Collier to institute a man @-@ to @-@ man pass defense for the game . This , he figured , would buy more time for the defensive line and force Unitas to scramble — not his forte . 
 The strategy paid off , and in the wind @-@ whipped Cleveland Municipal Stadium two days after Christmas , the Browns beat the Colts 27 – 0 . Neither team scored in the first half , prompting New York Times columnist Red Smith to quip , " Never have so many paid so dearly – $ 10 , $ 8 , and $ 6 – and suffered so sorely to see so little . " In the second half , the Browns ' defense held on and the offense kicked into gear . Baltimore 's cornerbacks were double @-@ teaming Warfield , which Ryan exploited by throwing three touchdowns to his second wideout , Gary Collins . The Browns scored 10 points in the third quarter and a further 17 in the fourth , clinching the first title since Otto Graham 's departure after the 1955 season . Collins was named the game 's MVP . To date , this is the most recent league championship that the Browns have won , as well as the most recent time that any professional sports team from Cleveland has won a league title . 
 The following year was a strong one as Jim Brown gritted out another league @-@ leading rushing season . The Browns ended with an 11 – 3 record and comfortably won the eastern division . That set up a second straight appearance in the NFL Championship game against the Packers on a slippery , mucky Lambeau Field on January 2 , 1966 . While the score was close early on , Vince Lombardi 's team held the Browns scoreless in the second half , winning 23 – 12 in an upset on a Paul Hornung touchdown . After the season , the NFL and the competing American Football League agreed to merge starting in 1970 , but would play an inter @-@ league championship from the 1966 season onward . The 1965 championship thus became the NFL 's last before the Super Bowl era , which ushered in a new age of popularity and prosperity for professional football . 
 In time , this game would be nearly forgotten , lost in the middle of Lombardi 's great triumphs . ... This was both unfair and fitting in a sense , because the game was best considered on its own , a faded dream played in the mist and slop , a transitory moment between football past and future . 
 = = Playoff disappointments ( 1966 – 1973 ) = = 
 In early 1966 Jim Brown , who had begun an acting career two years before , was shooting for his second film in London . The Dirty Dozen cast Brown as Robert Jefferson , a convict sent to France during World War II to assassinate German officers meeting at a castle near Rennes in Brittany . Production delays due to bad weather meant he would miss at least the first part of training camp on the campus of Hiram College , which annoyed Modell , who threatened to fine Brown $ 1 @,@ 500 for every week of camp he missed . Brown , who had previously said that 1966 would be his last season , announced his retirement instead . At the end of his nine @-@ year career , Brown held records for most rushing yards in a game , a season and a career . He also owned the record for all @-@ purpose yards in a career and best average per carry for a running back at 5 @.@ 22 yards , a mark that still stands . 
 With Brown gone , halfback Leroy Kelly became the team 's primary rusher in 1966 . Kelly , an eighth @-@ round draft choice who saw limited playing time in two years as a backup , ably filled his predecessor 's shoes . Cleveland missed the playoffs in 1966 , but made it to the postseason the following year after a realignment of the NFL 's divisions that placed the Browns in the new Century Division . The Browns , however , lost the 1967 eastern conference championship to the Dallas Cowboys . After a year in which he made just 11 of 23 field goal attempts , placekicker Lou Groza , the last remaining player from the inaugural 1946 Browns team , retired before the start of the 1968 season . Groza , who had been on the roster for 21 seasons and was 44 years old when he hung up his spikes , said in his memoir that retiring was " the saddest day of my football life . " 
 Further playoff defeats followed . In 1968 , as a 32 @-@ year @-@ old Ryan was benched in favor of Bill Nelsen , the Browns finished with a 10 – 4 record but lost to the Colts in the playoffs . Another playoff loss ended the Browns ' season in 1969 , this time to the Minnesota Vikings . After the American Football League 's merger with the NFL was finalized in early 1970 , the Browns , Pittsburgh Steelers and Baltimore Colts moved to the new American Football Conference along with the 10 teams of the former AFL . The Browns were slotted in the AFC Central in the 26 @-@ team league , alongside the Steelers , the Houston Oilers and the Cincinnati Bengals , a team Paul Brown founded in 1968 in the AFL . Cleveland 's first big move under the new league structure was to trade star receiver Paul Warfield in January 1970 to the Miami Dolphins for the rights to draft Purdue University quarterback Mike Phipps as a replacement for Bill Nelsen , who had a pair of bad knees . 
 The Browns opened the 1970 season by beating Joe Namath and the New York Jets in the first @-@ ever broadcast of Monday Night Football on September 21 . The following month , Cleveland faced Paul Brown 's Bengals for the first time in a regular @-@ season game , winning 30 – 27 . That game was a highlight in an otherwise unsuccessful season . The Browns lost their second match against the Bengals 14 – 10 in November , when Phipps made his first start — Brown called it " my greatest victory " — and finished 7 – 7 . 
 Plagued by hearing problems , the 64 @-@ year @-@ old Collier announced his retirement before the end of the 1970 season . In eight years as coach , Collier led Cleveland to a championship and a 74 – 33 – 2 record . Nick Skorich was named as his replacement the following year . Skorich came to the Browns as offensive coordinator in 1964 , when the team won the championship . In Cleveland 's first year under Skorich , the team improved to 9 – 5 but lost to the Colts in a divisional playoff . Mike Phipps was promoted to starting quarterback over Nelsen before the 1972 season . After a sluggish start , the Browns went on tear and finished with a 10 – 4 record . That put Cleveland in a playoff against the undefeated Miami Dolphins . The Browns took a lead in the fourth quarter on a touchdown catch by wide receiver Fair Hooker , but the Dolphins responded with a long drive of their own , aided by a pair of Paul Warfield receptions . Running back Jim <unk> ran for a touchdown , sealing a 20 – 14 win and preserving the Dolphins ' perfect season . The following year , Phipps threw 20 interceptions and completed less than half of his passes . After winning four of the first six games , the Browns slumped and placed third in the division with a 7 – 5 – 2 record . 
 = = Brian Sipe era and the Kardiac Kids ( 1974 – 1984 ) = = 
 Transition and poor play marked the mid- to late @-@ 1970s . Though Collier agreed to come back to the Browns as a quarterbacks coach on an informal basis , his retirement severed the last direct link to Brown and the team 's early years . Meanwhile , a new generation of players began to replace the old hands who kept Cleveland in playoff contention through most of the 1960s . Gene Hickerson , an anchor on the offensive line in the 1960s , retired at the end of the 1973 season . An aging Leroy Kelly left the same year to play in the short @-@ lived World Football League . Offensive lineman Dick Schafrath , a six @-@ time Pro Bowl selection , retired in 1971 . 
 Against that backdrop , the Browns finished the 1974 season with a 4 – 10 record , only the second losing season in the team 's history . Phipps ' woes persisted , and he shared playing time with rookie quarterback Brian Sipe , who Cleveland selected in the 13th round of the 1972 draft out of San Diego State . Modell fired Skorich after the season . " You 've got to be a winner in this game , and I just didn 't produce , " Skorich said at the time . After pursuing Dolphins offensive line coach Monte Clark , Modell hired Forrest Gregg as <unk> 's replacement . Gregg , an assistant coach and former Green Bay Packers offensive lineman , preached a hard @-@ nosed , physical brand of football , learned as an offensive lineman on Green Bay 's dynastic 1960s teams under Lombardi . His success as a player , however , did not immediately translate into success as a coach . The regular season began with the worst losing streak in Cleveland 's history . Gregg 's first win did not come until November 23 against Paul Brown 's Cincinnati Bengals , and Cleveland finished with a 3 – 11 record . 
 The team improved the following year , ending with a 9 – 5 record but missing the playoffs . The highlight of that season was an 18 – 16 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers on October 10 . Kicker Don Cockroft booted four field goals , while defensive end Joe " Turkey " Jones ' pile @-@ driving sack of quarterback Terry Bradshaw added fuel to the heated rivalry between the teams . While Gregg won the NFL 's Coach of the Year award for turning the Browns around as Sipe became the starting quarterback , by the beginning of the 1977 season the same kind of friction that dogged Paul Brown 's relationship with Modell was surfacing between the owner and the hotheaded Gregg . Cleveland got off to a strong start that year , but Sipe hurt his shoulder and elbow in a November 13 game against the Steelers , and backup Dave Mays took the reins . With Mays as the quarterback – Modell traded Phipps to the Chicago Bears for a couple of draft picks – Cleveland slipped to 6 – 7 going into the final game of the season and Modell asked Gregg to resign . 
 Modell said he would look outside the Browns organization for a new coach , a break from past hirings that drew from the team 's own ranks . Peter Hadhazy , who Modell had hired as the Browns ' first general manager , recommended a 45 @-@ year @-@ old New Orleans Saints receivers coach named Sam Rutigliano . After an interview before Christmas in which Modell and Rutigliano spent hours talking and watching game film in Modell 's basement , the owner named him head coach on December 27 , 1977 . An affable , charismatic man with an even temper , Rutigliano was a stark contrast to Gregg . Sipe immediately flourished under Rutigliano , racking up 21 touchdowns and 2 @,@ 906 passing yards during the 1978 season , when the NFL moved to a 16 @-@ game schedule . His prime targets were Reggie Rucker , a veteran receiver the Browns signed in 1975 , and Ozzie Newsome , a rookie tight end out of Alabama who the Browns drafted with a pick acquired in the Phipps trade . Cleveland won its first three games , but poor defense dashed the team 's playoff chances and the Browns finished with an 8 – 8 record . 
 = = = Kardiac Kids = = = 
 Rutigliano was a gambler : he tinkered with offenses , took chances on trick plays and was not afraid to break with the play @-@ calling conventions of his time . The coach , who earned the nickname " Riverboat Sam " for his risk @-@ taking approach , once said that security was " for cowards " . " I believe in gambling , " he said . " No successful man ever got anywhere without gambling . " This seat @-@ of @-@ your @-@ pants philosophy began to manifest itself on the field in 1979 . The campaign started with a nail @-@ biter against the New York Jets that the Browns won in overtime on a Cockroft field goal as time expired . " If we continue to play ' em that way all year , I 'll be gone before the 10th game because my heart just won 't take it , " Rutigliano said after the game . In the second week , Cleveland beat the Kansas City Chiefs 27 – 24 on a Sipe touchdown to Rucker with 52 seconds left . The third game was an equally improbable 13 – 10 win against the Baltimore Colts . Cleveland Plain Dealer sports editor Hal Lebovitz wrote after the game that these " Kardiac Kids " were lucky to have pulled off the win after Colts kicker Toni <unk> missed three field goals . 
 After a string of four wins and three losses , the late @-@ game heroics returned in an overtime victory on November 18 against the Miami Dolphins . " You should never pipe Browns games into an intensive care unit , expose them to anyone weak of pulse , " wrote Toledo Blade columnist Jim Taylor . " They 're one of those teams that stands 8 – 4 , and could easily be 1 – 11 . " While the Browns ' 9 – 7 record did not get the team into the playoffs – the defense struggled all year , forcing Sipe and the offense to compensate with late @-@ game comebacks – a sense of optimism and excitement took hold . 
 The Kardiac Kids magic returned in the third game of the next season against the Chiefs , when the Browns scored a touchdown in the fourth quarter to win 20 – 13 . More down @-@ to @-@ the @-@ wire games followed , including one against Green Bay on October 19 in which the team won on a touchdown to receiver Dave Logan on the last play of the game . After a close win over the Steelers and a victory over the Bears in which Sipe broke Otto Graham 's club record for career passing yards , the Browns met the Colts and eked out a 28 – 27 win . The team ended with an 11 – 5 record . 
 = = = Red Right 88 = = = 
 That was good for first place in the AFC Central and a trip to the postseason for the first time since 1972 . The Browns began their playoff run against the Oakland Raiders on January 4 , 1981 in a bitterly cold Cleveland Municipal Stadium . The game started slowly : each team scored only a touchdown in the first half , although Cockroft missed Cleveland 's extra point because of a bad snap . In the third quarter , Cleveland went ahead 12 – 7 on a pair of Cockroft field goals , but the Raiders came back in the final period , driving 80 yards down the field for a touchdown . That put Oakland ahead 14 – 12 . The ball changed hands five times with no scoring from either side , and with 2 : 22 on the clock , Cleveland had a final shot to win the game . Sipe and the offense took over at the Browns ' 15 @-@ yard line . In eight plays , Cleveland drove down to Oakland 's 14 , leaving 56 seconds on the clock . 
 After a one @-@ yard Mike Pruitt run , Rutigliano called a timeout . A short field goal would have been the safe bet — that was all Cleveland needed to win . Rutigliano , ever the risk @-@ taker , decided to go for a touchdown . The coach was reluctant to stake the game 's outcome on the usually sure @-@ footed Cockroft , who had missed two field goals and an extra point earlier in the game . The play he called was Red Right 88 , a passing formation in which a slanting Logan would be Sipe 's primary target , while Newsome was insurance . If everyone was covered , Rutigliano told Sipe on the sidelines , " if you feel you have to force the ball , throw it into Lake Erie , throw it into some blonde 's lap in the bleachers . " Sipe took the snap , dropped back and threw to Newsome as he crossed to the left . But Oakland safety Mike Davis leaped in front and intercepted the ball , cementing the Oakland win . The Raiders went on to win Super Bowl XV , while Red Right 88 became an enduring symbol of Cleveland 's postseason stumbles . 
 Despite 1980 's playoff defeat , the Browns were widely expected to be even better the following year . But 1981 came with none of the comebacks or late @-@ game magic the Kardiac Kids were known for . Several games were close , but most were losses . Sipe threw only 17 touchdowns and was intercepted 25 times . The team finished 5 – 11 . The 1982 NFL strike , which began in September and lasted until mid @-@ November , shortened the regular season the following year to nine games . Coming off a poor year , Sipe split starts with his backup , Paul McDonald , and neither was able to bring back the old Kardiac Kids spark . The team ended with a 4 – 5 record , which qualified for an expanded Super Bowl playoff tournament created to accommodate the shorter season . The Browns faced the Raiders in a rematch of 1980 's playoff thriller . This time , though , McDonald was the starter and the ending was far from tense . The Raiders won 27 – 10 . 
 The following two years brought the Sipe era and the short @-@ lived success of the Kardiac Kids to an end . Sipe returned to form in 1983 , and the team narrowly missed a spot in the playoffs after a loss to the Houston Oilers in the second @-@ to @-@ last game of the regular season . Sipe signed before the end of the season to play for the New Jersey Generals , a team owned by real estate mogul Donald Trump in the upstart United States Football League . 
 In training camp before the 1984 season , cornerback Hanford Dixon tried to motivate the team 's defensive linemen by barking at them between plays in practice and calling them " the Dogs " . " You need guys who play like dogs up front , like dogs chasing a cat , " Dixon said . The media picked up on the name , which gained traction in part because of the improvement of the Browns ' defense during the regular season . Fans put on face paint and dog masks , and the phenomenon coalesced in rowdy fans in Cleveland Stadium 's cheap bleachers section close to the field . The Dawg Pound , as the section was eventually nicknamed , is a continuing symbol of Cleveland 's dedicated fan base . 
 Despite the defensive improvement , Sipe 's departure left Cleveland 's offense in disarray in 1984 . Browns began the season 1 – 7 with McDonald at quarterback , and fans ' frustration with the team and Rutigliano boiled over . The breaking point came in an October 7 game against the New England Patriots that bore an eerie resemblance to Cleveland 's 1980 playoff loss to the Raiders . The Browns were down 17 – 16 in the fourth quarter , and lost on an interception in New England 's end zone as time expired . Chants of " Goodbye Sam " rung out from the stands after the New England game . Modell called the play @-@ calling " inexcusable " and fired Rutigliano two weeks later . Defensive coordinator Marty Schottenheimer took over , and the Browns ended with a 5 – 11 record . 
 = = Bernie Kosar years , The Drive and The Fumble ( 1985 – 1990 ) = = 
 The selection of University of Miami quarterback Bernie Kosar in 1985 's supplemental draft ushered in a new , largely successful era for Cleveland . With Schottenheimer , Kosar and a cast of talented players on offense and defense , the team reached greater heights than Rutigliano and Sipe ever did . Though they became consistent playoff contenders in this era , the Browns did not reach the Super Bowl , falling one win short three times in the late 1980s . 
 Kosar , who wanted to play for Cleveland because his family lived in a suburb of nearby Youngstown , Ohio , signed a five @-@ year contract worth nearly $ 6 million in 1985 and was immediately embraced by the Browns organization and the team 's fans . " It 's not an everyday occurrence that somebody wants to play in Cleveland , " Modell said . " This has lent such an aura to Bernie . " Kosar saw his first action in the fifth week of the 1985 season against the New England Patriots , when he substituted before halftime for Gary Danielson , a 34 @-@ year @-@ old veteran who the Browns had acquired in the offseason from the Lions . Kosar fumbled his first @-@ ever NFL snap , but rebounded and led the team to a 24 – 20 win . A mix of success and failure followed , but Kosar progressed a bit more each Sunday and led the team to an 8 – 8 record . Two young running backs , Earnest Byner and Kevin Mack , complemented Kosar 's aerial attack with more than 1 @,@ 000 yards rushing each . 
 While not stellar , the Browns ' record won first place in a weak AFC Central , and the team looked poised to shock the heavily favored Miami Dolphins in a divisional playoff game on January 4 , 1986 . Cleveland surged to a 21 – 3 halftime lead , and it took a spirited second @-@ half comeback by Dan Marino and the Dolphins to win it 24 – 21 and end the Browns ' season . Despite the loss , many people expected Cleveland to be back the following year . " The Browns ' days , the good days , are here and ahead of us , " radio personality Pete Franklin said . 
 Prior to the 1986 season the Browns lost standout safety and former defensive rookie of the year Don Rogers . Rogers died of a cocaine overdose leaving the team without one of its best defenders in the secondary for the 1986 season . Despite the tumultuous off season , 1986 marked Cleveland 's entry into the ranks of the NFL 's elite as Kosar 's play improved and the defensive unit came together . Kosar threw for 3 @,@ 854 yards to a corps of receivers that included Brian Brennan , Newsome and rookie Webster Slaughter . On defense , cornerbacks Frank Minnifield and Hanford Dixon emerged as one of the NFL 's premiere pass @-@ defending duos . After a slow start , the Browns rose to the top of the divisional standings , twice beating the Pittsburgh Steelers and ending a 16 @-@ game losing streak at Three Rivers Stadium . A 12 – 4 record earned Cleveland home @-@ field advantage throughout the playoffs . 
 The Browns ' first opponents in the 1986 playoffs were the New York Jets . The Jets were ahead for most of the game and held a 20 – 10 lead as time wound down in the final quarter . But Cleveland took over and began a march down the field , ending with a Kevin Mack touchdown . The defense forced the Jets to punt after the ensuing kickoff , leaving the offense with less than a minute to get within field goal range and even the score at 20 – 20 . A pass interference penalty and a completion to Slaughter put the ball at the Jets ' five @-@ yard line , and kicker Mark Moseley booted through the tying score with 11 seconds left . In an initial 15 @-@ minute overtime period , Moseley missed a short field goal and neither team scored , sending the game into double overtime . This time , Moseley made a field goal and won the game for the Browns 23 – 20 . It was the team 's first playoff victory in 17 years . 
 = = = The Drive = = = 
 The following week , the Browns matched up against the Denver Broncos in the AFC Championship game in Cleveland . Denver got out to an early lead , but Cleveland tied the game and then went ahead 20 – 13 in the fourth quarter . After the ensuing kickoff , the Broncos were pinned at their own 2 @-@ yard line with 5 : 32 remaining . Denver quarterback John Elway then engineered a 98 @-@ yard drive for a touchdown with the cold , whipping wind in his face . " The Drive " , as the series came to be known , tied the score and sent the game into overtime . Cleveland received the ball first in the sudden @-@ death period but was stopped by the Denver defense . On Denver 's first possession , Elway again led the Broncos on a long drive ending with a Rich Karlis field goal that sailed just inside the left upright and won the game . The drive that tied the game has since come to be seen as one of the best in playoff history , and is remembered by Cleveland fans as an historic meltdown . Denver went on to lose Super Bowl XXI to the New York Giants . 
 The drive , one of the finest ever engineered in a championship game , had been performed directly in the Browns ' faces . There was no <unk> about it ; John Elway had simply shown what a man with all the tools could do . It was what everybody who had watched him enter the league as perhaps the most heralded quarterback since Joe Namath knew he could do . One was left with the distinct feeling that Elway would have marched his team down a 200 @-@ yard @-@ or 300 @-@ yard @-@ or five @-@ mile @-@ long field to pay dirt . 
 Although downtrodden by 1986 's playoff defeat , Cleveland continued to win the following season . Minnifield and Dixon excelled defending the pass , while Matthews and defensive tackle Bob <unk> kept runners in check . The Browns finished with a 10 – 5 record in 1987 and won the AFC Central for the third year in a row . In the divisional playoff round , the Browns faced the Indianapolis Colts and won 38 – 21 . 
 = = = The Fumble = = = 
 The win set up a rematch with the Broncos in the AFC Championship in Denver . The Broncos held a 21 – 3 lead at halftime , but a pair of rushing touchdowns and another by receiver Reggie Langhorne brought Cleveland to within seven points . Cleveland scored again in the fourth quarter , but the Broncos went ahead again by seven points on a touchdown with four minutes left . After Denver 's kickoff , Kosar and the offense reached the <unk> ' eight @-@ yard line with 1 : 12 remaining . Kosar handed the ball to Earnest Byner on a second down . Byner ran left and broke inside with a clear path to the end zone , but was stripped by Denver 's Jeremiah Castille just before crossing the goal line . The Broncos ran down the clock before intentionally taking a safety and winning 38 – 33 . " The Fumble " quickly entered the lexicon of the Browns ' modern @-@ era disappointment , just as The Drive had a year before . 
 The 1988 season was marred by injuries to the Browns ' quarterbacks . Kosar was injured in the opener against Kansas City Chiefs and two backups were subsequently injured , leaving Don <unk> , who the Browns signed as an emergency fill @-@ in , to start before Kosar 's return . Kosar came back but was hurt again at the end of the regular season . Despite the rotating cast of quarterbacks , Cleveland managed to finish with a 10 – 6 record and made the playoffs as a wild @-@ card team . Cleveland met the Houston Oilers in the wild @-@ card playoff round at home , but lost the game 24 – 23 . Four days after the Oilers loss , Schottenheimer and Modell announced that the coach would leave the team by mutual consent . Modell felt hiring an offensive coordinator was necessary to keep pace with the Oilers and the Bengals , a pair of divisional opponents then on the rise , but Schottenheimer said it " became evident that some of the differences we had , we weren 't going to be able to resolve . " Modell named Bud Carson as his replacement . 
 Carson , an architect of Pittsburgh 's 1970s " Steel Curtain " defenses , made several changes to Cleveland 's lineup . Byner was traded to the Washington Redskins in April , while the Browns moved up in the draft to acquire Eric Metcalf . Kevin Mack , meanwhile , was suspended for the first four games of the 1989 season after pleading guilty to cocaine possession . Despite these changes , Kosar led Cleveland to a division @-@ winning 9 – 6 – 1 record in 1989 , including a season @-@ opening 51 – 0 shutout of the rival Pittsburgh Steelers and the team 's first victory over the Denver Broncos in 15 years . Cleveland narrowly survived a scare from the Buffalo Bills in the first playoff game , staving off a comeback thanks to an interception in the Browns ' end zone by Clay Matthews with 14 seconds on the clock . The victory set up the third AFC championship matchup in four years between the Browns and Broncos . The Broncos led from start to finish , and a long Elway touchdown pass to Sammy Winder put the game way in the fourth quarter . Denver won 37 – 21 . 
 The defeat in Mile High Stadium proved to be the last of Cleveland 's streak of playoff appearances in the mid- to late @-@ 1980s . Kosar played through numerous injuries in 1989 , including bruising on his right arm and a bad knee . Strong defense had carried the Browns to the playoffs even when the offense faltered , but that all crumbled in 1990 . Kosar threw more interceptions than touchdowns for the first time in his career , and the defense allowed more points than any other in the league . The Browns ' 2 – 7 start cost Carson his job . Jim <unk> was named interim head coach , and the team finished 3 – 13 . After the season Bill Belichick , the defensive coordinator of the then @-@ Super Bowl champion New York Giants , was named head coach . 
 = = Bill Belichick and Modell 's move ( 1991 – 1995 ) = = 
 = = = Belichick era = = = 
 Belichick , who came to the Browns after 12 years mostly with the Giants under Bill Parcells , quickly made his mark by restricting media access to the team . He acted gruff or bored at press conferences , shrugging , rolling his eyes and often giving short answers to long questions . This bred the perception that the new coach was not a good communicator and lacked a vision for the team . Behind the scenes , however , he was trying to remake the Browns . He reformed Cleveland 's scouting methods and , in conjunction with player personnel director Mike Lombardi , tried to form a coherent identity : a big and strong cold @-@ weather team . Belichick 's new way forward , however , did not immediately translate to on @-@ field success . Cleveland 's record only improved slightly in 1991 to 6 – 10 as the offense struggled to produce scoring drives and the defense was plagued by injuries . Kosar was a rare bright spot , passing for almost 3 @,@ 500 yards and 18 touchdowns . Bridging the end of the 1990 season and the beginning of 1991 , the quarterback threw a then @-@ record 307 straight passes without an interception . Kosar broke his ankle twice and sat out for most of the 1992 season , leaving quarterback Mike Tomczak under center . The team finished with a 7 – 9 record and did not make the playoffs . 
 By the end of 1992 , Kosar 's physical decline had long been apparent to Belichick , which left the coach with a difficult choice . Kosar was Cleveland 's most popular athlete , a hometown boy who had forgone big money and a bigger profile to lead a struggling team back to the top . While he recognized it would be an unpopular decision , Belichick wanted to bench Kosar , and in 1992 the team picked up a potential replacement in Vinny Testaverde from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . Belichick named Kosar the starter before the 1993 season , but in the third game against the Raiders , Belichick pulled Kosar after he threw his third interception of the night . Taking over with Los Angeles ahead 13 – 0 , Testaverde led two touchdown drives to win the game . Two weeks later , Belichick named Testaverde the starter . On the verge of tears after a loss to the Dolphins , Kosar said he was disappointed with the decision and felt he had done what he could with what was at his disposal . 
 Kosar returned after Testaverde suffered a separated right shoulder in a win against the Steelers on October 24 , but it was only temporary . The day after a loss against the Broncos the following week , the team cut him . Belichick cited his declining skills , while Modell said it was the right move and asked fans to " bear with us . " Fans brought out grills and set fire to their season tickets . A 20 @-@ year @-@ old student at Baldwin @-@ Wallace College picketed outside the team 's training facilities with a sign that read , " Cut Belichick , Not Bernie . " Cleveland won only two of the eight games after Kosar 's release , finishing with a 7 – 9 record for the second year in a row . 
 Cleveland managed to right the ship in 1994 . While the quarterback situation had not stabilized , the defense led the league in fewest points allowed . The Browns finished 11 – 5 , making the playoffs for the first time in five years . The Browns beat the Patriots in a wild @-@ card game , but arch @-@ rival Pittsburgh won a 29 – 9 victory in the divisional playoff , ending the Browns ' season . 
 = = = Modell 's Move to Baltimore = = = 
 As the Browns recaptured a hint of past success in 1994 , all was not well behind the scenes . Modell was in financial trouble . The origins of Modell 's woes dated to 1973 , when he worked out a deal to lease Cleveland Municipal Stadium from the city for a pittance : only enough to service the facility 's debt and pay property taxes . Cleveland Browns Stadium Corporation , or Stadium Corp. , a company Modell and a business associate created and owned , held the 25 @-@ year lease . Stadium Corp. then subleased the stadium to the Browns and the Cleveland Indians , and rented it out for concerts and other events . While the deal worked fine for the city and Modell early on , the owner was later dogged by excessive borrowing and lawsuits . 
 When the stadium was profitable , Modell had used Stadium Corp. to buy land in <unk> that he had previously acquired as the potential site for a future new stadium . Modell originally paid $ 625 @,@ 000 for the land , but sold it to his own Stadium Corp. for more than $ 3 million . Then , when the stadium was taking losses in 1981 , he sold Stadium Corp. itself to the Browns for $ 6 million . This led to a fight the following year with Bob Gries , whose family had been part of the Browns ' ownership group since its founding and had 43 % of the team to Modell 's 53 % . Gries 's complaint was that Modell treated the Browns and Stadium Corp. as his own fiefdom , rarely consulting him about the team 's business . The sale of Stadium Corp. to the Browns , he argued , enriched Modell at the team 's expense . Gries 's case went to the Ohio Supreme Court , where he won . In 1986 , Modell had to reverse the Browns ' purchase of Stadium Corp. and pay $ 1 million in Gries 's legal fees . This left Modell in need of financial help , and it came in the form of Al Lerner , a banking and real estate executive who bought half of Stadium Corp. and 5 % of the Browns in 1986 . 
 His reputation damaged by the lawsuits , Modell was eager to get out of Cleveland . He met with Baltimore officials about selling the Browns to Lerner and buying an expansion team to replace the Colts , who had left for Indianapolis in 1984 . He also discussed moving the Browns . Proposals were made to spend $ 175 million on a stadium renovation after the Indians and Cleveland Cavaliers got new facilities in downtown Cleveland , but it was not enough . As the Browns started the 1995 season with a 4 – 4 record , word leaked that Modell was moving the team . Beset by rising player salaries and political indifference to the team 's financial plight , he said he was forced to move . The day after Modell formally announced the move , Cleveland voters overwhelmingly approved the $ 175 million of stadium renovations . Modell ruled out a reversal of his decision , saying his relationship with Cleveland had been irrevocably severed . " The bridge is down , burned , disappeared , " he said . " There 's not even a canoe there for me . " 
 The city immediately sued to prevent the move , on the basis that the lease of the stadium was active until 1998 . Fans were in an uproar , staging protests , signing petitions , filing lawsuits and appealing to other NFL owners to block the relocation . Advertisers pulled out of the stadium , fearing fans ' ire . Talks between the city , Modell and the NFL continued as the Browns finished the season with a 5 – 11 record . At the team 's final home game against the Bengals , unruly fans in the Dawg Pound bleachers section rained debris , beer bottles and entire sections of seats onto the field , forcing officials to move play to the opposite end to ensure players ' safety . Cleveland won the game , its only victory after the announcement of the move . 
 The following February , the warring parties reached a compromise . Under its terms , Modell would be allowed to take his personnel to Baltimore , but would leave Cleveland the Browns ' colors , logos and heritage for a reactivated Browns franchise that would take the field no later than 1999 . The $ 175 million earmarked for stadium improvements was to be used instead build a new stadium , with up to $ 48 million of additional financial assistance from the NFL . Further , Modell was ordered to pay Cleveland $ 9 @.@ 3 million to compensate for lost revenues and taxes during the Browns ' three years of inactivity , plus up to $ 2 @.@ 25 million of the city 's legal fees . As a result of the deal Modell 's team was technically an expansion franchise , called the Baltimore Ravens . 
 = = Inactivity ( 1996 – 1998 ) = = 
 Preparations for a reactivated franchise began shortly after Modell , the city and the NFL struck their compromise . The NFL established the Cleveland Browns Trust to direct the Browns ' return in early 1996 , and in June appointed Bill <unk> as its president . <unk> , who had helped bring the Carolina Panthers and Charlotte Hornets expansion teams to North Carolina , was charged with marketing the team , selling season tickets and representing the NFL 's interests in the construction of a new stadium . The trust also leased suites , sold personal seat licenses in the new stadium and reorganized Browns Backers fan clubs . By September 1996 , architects were finalizing the design of a new stadium to be built following the destruction of Cleveland Municipal Stadium . Demolition work began on the old stadium in November , and the ground @-@ breaking for the new stadium took place the following May . 
 As the stadium 's construction got underway , the NFL began to search for an owner for the team , which the league decided would be an expansion franchise . A litany of potential owners lined up , including Kosar and a group backed partly by HBO founder Charles Dolan , comedian Bill Cosby and former Miami coach Don Shula . The ultimate winner was Al Lerner , the Baltimore man who had helped Modell in 1986 by buying a small stake in the Browns . A seven @-@ member NFL expansion committee awarded the team to Lerner for $ 530 million in September 1998 . Lerner , then 65 years old , had a majority share , while Carmen Policy , who helped build the 49ers dynasty of the 1980s , owned 10 % of the team and was to run football operations . 
 As the Browns geared up to reactivate , the Browns Trust set up a countdown clock for the team 's return and used Hall of Famers such as Lou Groza and Jim Brown extensively to promote the team , alongside celebrity fans including Drew Carey . Lerner and Policy hired Dwight Clark , a former 49ers wide receiver , as the team 's operations director in December 1998 . The owners then signed Jacksonville Jaguars offensive coordinator Chris Palmer in January 1999 as the reactivated team 's first head coach . The NFL then conducted an expansion draft the following month to stock the new Browns team with players . The team added to its roster through free agency , and was also given the first pick in the draft in April 1999 , which it used to draft quarterback Tim Couch . 
 Construction on the new stadium finished on time in August 1999 , paving the way for Cleveland to host a football game for the first time in more than three years . During the years after Modell 's move and the Browns ' suspension , a dozen new stadiums were built for NFL teams . Citing the precedent set by the Browns ' relocation , NFL owners used the threat of a move to convince their cities to build new stadiums with public funds . 
 = = Rejoining the NFL ( 1999 – 2004 ) = = 
 Cleveland fans ' hopes were high upon the arrival of the new team . Having made poor choices in both the expansion draft and the regular NFL draft , however , the Browns floundered . The Steelers shut out the Browns 43 – 0 in the season opener at Cleveland Browns Stadium on September 12 , 1999 , the first of seven straight losses . A 2 – 14 season in 1999 was followed by a 3 – 13 record in 2000 after Couch suffered a season @-@ ending thumb injury . Early in 2001 , Policy and Lerner fired Palmer . The coach and the team , Policy said , were not headed in the right direction . 
 Mike McCarthy , New Orleans ' offensive coordinator , Herman Edwards , a Tampa Bay assistant coach , and Marvin Lewis , Baltimore 's defensive coordinator , were mentioned as possible replacements for Palmer . Policy also met with Butch Davis , the head coach of the University of Miami 's football team . After rejecting an initial offer in December , Davis accepted the job the following month . Davis had turned around Miami 's football program and put the team back in championship contention ; Policy and Lerner hoped he could do the same in Cleveland . 
 = = = Butch Davis era : 2001 @-@ 2004 = = = 
 The Browns improved under Davis , and contended for a spot in the 2001 playoffs until a loss in the 15th week against Jacksonville that featured one of the most controversial calls in team history . As time expired in the fourth quarter with the Jaguars ahead 15 – 10 , Couch led a drive into Jacksonville territory . On a fourth @-@ down play that the team needed to convert to stay in the game , Couch threw to receiver Quincy Morgan over the middle . Morgan appeared to bobble the ball before grasping it firmly as he hit the ground . After the pass was ruled complete and Couch spiked the ball to stop the clock , officials reversed Morgan 's catch on a Jacksonville challenge . As Davis pleaded his case that the play could not be reviewed because another play had been run , frustrated fans began throwing plastic beer bottles onto the field . Amid the bedlam , later named " <unk> " , officials ended the game with 48 seconds on the clock and left the field as objects rained down on them from the stands . After most of the fans had left , NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue called and ordered the game to be completed . Jacksonville ran down the clock for the win , and the Browns finished the season at 7 – 9 . 
 Cleveland improved again in 2002 , but Lerner did not live to see his team make the playoffs . He died in October 2002 at 69 of brain cancer . Browns players wore a patch with the initials " AL " for the remainder of the season . Ownership of the team , meanwhile , passed to his son Randy . Cleveland finished the season with a 9 – 7 record , earning a spot in the playoffs as a wild @-@ card team . Couch suffered a broken leg in the final game of the season , however , and backup Kelly Holcomb started in the Browns ' first playoff game versus the Steelers . Cleveland held the lead for most of the game as Holcomb passed for 429 yards . But a defensive collapse helped Pittsburgh come charging back in the fourth quarter and win 36 – 33 to end the Browns ' season . To date , this is the only postseason appearance for the Browns since resuming operations in 1999 . 
 The team 's progress under Davis screeched to a halt in 2003 . The Browns finished 5 – 11 , and Randy Lerner embarked upon a major front @-@ office reshuffling . Policy resigned unexpectedly as president and chief executive of the Browns in April 2004 , saying things had changed after Al Lerner 's death . " I opened the door and it was like someone sucked the air and the life out of Berea , " he said . " He was a major presence for the organization . I 'm talking about the aura , and the inner power of the man . " John Collins was named as his replacement . Several other front @-@ office executives also stepped down , including chief contract negotiator Lal Heneghan and lead spokesman Todd Stewart . 
 The 2004 season was little better , and Davis resigned in November with the team at 3 – 8 . Lerner had given him a contract extension through 2007 that January , but Davis said " intense pressure and scrutiny " made the move necessary . Offensive coordinator Terry <unk> was named head coach for the remainder of the season , which the Browns finished 4 – 12 . 
 = = Struggles and Change ( 2005 – present ) = = 
 = = = Romeo Crennel years : 2005 @-@ 2008 = = = 
 On January 6 , 2005 , while the Browns were still searching for a new head coach , the team announced Phil Savage 's appointment as general manager . Savage , who was director of player personnel for the Baltimore Ravens for two years , had a hand in drafting Ed Reed , Jamal Lewis , Ray Lewis and other stars for the Ravens . 
 A month later , Cleveland brought in Romeo Crennel as the head coach , signing him to a five @-@ year deal worth $ 11 million . Crennel was the defensive coordinator for the New England Patriots , who had just won the Super Bowl . His style was described as " quiet , reserved and gentlemanly , " but he said he wanted to stock the team with tough , physical players . Before the start of training camp , the Browns acquired veteran quarterback Trent Dilfer from the Seattle Seahawks . In the draft that year the Browns took wide receiver Braylon Edwards with the third pick in the first round . 
 Dilfer was the starting quarterback to begin the 2005 season . The team started 2 – 2 , but had two three @-@ game losing streaks later in the season and finished with a 6 – 10 record . In the team 's final five games , rookie Charlie Frye took over as the starting quarterback , winning two of those contests . Before the Browns ' final regular @-@ season game , the front office was embroiled in a controversy that threatened to send the team into rebuilding mode . Citing sources , ESPN reported that president John Collins was going to fire general manager Phil Savage over " philosophical differences " in managing the salary cap . The resulting uproar from fans and local media was so strong that it was Collins who resigned on January 3 , 2006 . A replacement for Collins was not immediately named , and Randy Lerner assumed his responsibilities . 
 Cleveland regressed in the ensuing season , finishing with a 4 – 12 record . Edwards and tight end Kellen Winslow Jr . , who the Browns had drafted in 2004 , put up respectable numbers , but the Browns were close to the bottom of the league in points scored and offensive yards gained . Frye injured his wrist toward the end of the season and shared starts with quarterback Derek Anderson , who showed promise in the five games he played in . During the season , the team produced a series of articles on its website called 60th Moments . The series commemorated the establishment of the Browns 60 years before in 1946 , recapturing the 60 greatest moments in franchise history . Beginning on September 6 , 2006 , the Browns ' site ran articles covering those 60 moments ; the final article ran on December 31 , 2006 . 
 After two losing seasons , the Browns made it back to contention in 2007 . After opening with a 34 – 7 loss to the Steelers , the Browns traded Frye to the Seahawks and put Anderson in as the starter . In his first start , Anderson led the Browns to a surprise 51 – 45 win over the Cincinnati Bengals , throwing five touchdown passes and tying the franchise record . More success followed , and the Browns finished the regular season with a 10 – 6 record , the team 's best mark since finishing 11 – 5 in 1994 . While the Browns tied with the Steelers for first place in the AFC North , the team missed the playoffs because of two tie @-@ breaking losses to Pittsburgh earlier in the season . Still , six players were selected for the Pro Bowl , including Anderson , Winslow , Edwards , kick returner Josh Cribbs and rookie left tackle Joe Thomas . Crennel agreed to a two @-@ year contract extension until 2011 , and the team hired Mike Keenan as team president , filling a position left vacant upon the departure of Collins two years before . 
 Expectations were high for the 2008 season , but Cleveland finished last in the AFC North with a 4 – 12 record . Anderson shared starts with Ken Dorsey , who the Browns had acquired by trading away Trent Dilfer , and Brady Quinn , a young quarterback the team drafted in 2007 . The Browns never contended during 2008 and failed to score a touchdown in the final six games . Near the end of the season , two scandals shook the team . It was revealed that several Browns players , including Winslow , were suffering from staph infections , which raised questions about sanitation in the Browns ' Berea practice facilities . In November , Savage found himself in the center of a media storm after an angry e @-@ mail exchange with a fan was published on Deadspin , a sports blog . Shortly after the final game , a 31 – 0 loss to the Steelers , Lerner fired Savage and , a day later , Crennel . 
 = = = Eric Mangini and the Holmgren @-@ Heckert era : 2009 @-@ 2011 = = = 
