 In this example , two numerals are being added together : <unk> ( 1310 ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) . The top row shows the carry bits used . Starting in the rightmost column , 1 + 1 = 
 102 . The 1 is carried to the left , and the 0 is written at the bottom of the rightmost column . The second column from the right is added : 1 + 0 + 1 
 = 102 again ; the 1 is carried , and 0 is written at the bottom . The third column : 1 + 1 + 1 = 
 112 . This time , a 1 is carried , and a 1 is written in the bottom row . Proceeding like this gives the final answer <unk> ( 36 decimal ) . 
 = = = Computers = = = 
 Analog computers work directly with physical quantities , so their addition mechanisms depend on the form of the addends . A mechanical adder might represent two addends as the positions of sliding blocks , in which case they can be added with an averaging lever . If the addends are the rotation speeds of two shafts , they can be added with a differential . A hydraulic adder can add the pressures in two chambers by exploiting Newton 's second law to balance forces on an assembly of pistons . The most common situation for a general @-@ purpose analog computer is to add two voltages ( referenced to ground ) ; this can be accomplished roughly with a resistor network , but a better design exploits an operational amplifier . 
 Addition is also fundamental to the operation of digital computers , where the efficiency of addition , in particular the carry mechanism , is an important limitation to overall performance . 
 The abacus , also called a counting frame , is a calculating tool that was in use centuries before the adoption of the written modern numeral system and is still widely used by merchants , traders and clerks in Asia , Africa , and elsewhere ; it dates back to at least 2700 – 2300 BC , when it was used in Sumer . 
 Blaise Pascal invented the mechanical calculator in 1642 ; it was the first operational adding machine . It made use of a gravity @-@ assisted carry mechanism . It was the only operational mechanical calculator in the 17th century and the earliest automatic , digital computers . Pascal 's calculator was limited by its carry mechanism , which forced its wheels to only turn one way so it could add . To subtract , the operator had to use the Pascal 's calculator 's complement , which required as many steps as an addition . Giovanni <unk> followed Pascal , building the second functional mechanical calculator in 1709 , a calculating clock made of wood that , once setup , could multiply two numbers automatically . 
 Adders execute integer addition in electronic digital computers , usually using binary arithmetic . The simplest architecture is the ripple carry adder , which follows the standard multi @-@ digit algorithm . One slight improvement is the carry skip design , again following human intuition ; one does not perform all the carries in computing 999 + 1 , but one bypasses the group of 9s and skips to the answer . 
 In practice , <unk> addition may achieved via XOR and AND bitwise logical operations in conjunction with <unk> operations as shown in the pseudocode below . Both XOR and AND gates are straightforward to realize in digital logic allowing the realization of full adder circuits which in turn may be combined into more complex logical operations . In modern digital computers , integer addition is typically the fastest arithmetic instruction , yet it has the largest impact on performance , since it underlies all floating @-@ point operations as well as such basic tasks as address generation during memory access and fetching instructions during branching . To increase speed , modern designs calculate digits in parallel ; these schemes go by such names as carry select , carry <unk> , and the Ling <unk> . Many implementations are , in fact , hybrids of these last three designs . Unlike addition on paper , addition on a computer often changes the addends . On the ancient abacus and adding board , both addends are destroyed , leaving only the sum . The influence of the abacus on mathematical thinking was strong enough that early Latin texts often claimed that in the process of adding " a number to a number " , both numbers vanish . In modern times , the ADD instruction of a microprocessor replaces the augend with the sum but preserves the addend . In a high @-@ level programming language , evaluating a + b does not change either a or b ; if the goal is to replace a with the sum this must be explicitly requested , typically with the statement a = a + b . Some languages such as C or C + + allow this to be abbreviated as a + = b . 
 On a computer , if the result of an addition is too large to store , an arithmetic overflow occurs , resulting in an incorrect answer . Unanticipated arithmetic overflow is a fairly common cause of program errors . Such overflow bugs may be hard to discover and diagnose because they may manifest themselves only for very large input data sets , which are less likely to be used in validation tests . One especially notable such error was the Y2K bug , where overflow errors due to using a 2 @-@ digit format for years caused significant computer problems in 2000 . 
 = = Addition of numbers = = 
 To prove the usual properties of addition , one must first define addition for the context in question . Addition is first defined on the natural numbers . In set theory , addition is then extended to progressively larger sets that include the natural numbers : the integers , the rational numbers , and the real numbers . ( In mathematics education , positive fractions are added before negative numbers are even considered ; this is also the historical route . ) 
 = = = Natural numbers = = = 
 There are two popular ways to define the sum of two natural numbers a and b . If one defines natural numbers to be the <unk> of finite sets , ( the cardinality of a set is the number of elements in the set ) , then it is appropriate to define their sum as follows : 
 Let N ( S ) be the cardinality of a set S. Take two disjoint sets A and B , with N ( A ) 
 = a and N ( B ) = 
 b . Then a + b is defined as <formula> . 
 Here , A U B is the union of A and B. An alternate version of this definition allows A and B to possibly overlap and then takes their disjoint union , a mechanism that allows common elements to be separated out and therefore counted twice . 
 The other popular definition is recursive : 
 Let n + be the successor of n , that is the number following n in the natural numbers , so 0 + = 1 , 1 + = 2 . Define a + 0 
 = a . Define the general sum recursively by a + ( b + ) = 
 ( a + b ) + . Hence 1 + 1 
 = 1 + 0 + = 
 ( 1 + 0 ) + 
 = 1 + = 
 2 . 
 Again , there are minor variations upon this definition in the literature . Taken literally , the above definition is an application of the Recursion Theorem on the partially ordered set N2 . On the other hand , some sources prefer to use a restricted Recursion Theorem that applies only to the set of natural numbers . One then considers a to be temporarily " fixed " , applies recursion on b to define a function " a + " , and pastes these unary operations for all a together to form the full binary operation . 
 This recursive formulation of addition was developed by Dedekind as early as 1854 , and he would expand upon it in the following decades . He proved the associative and commutative properties , among others , through mathematical induction . 
 = = = Integers = = = 
 The simplest conception of an integer is that it consists of an absolute value ( which is a natural number ) and a sign ( generally either positive or negative ) . The integer zero is a special third case , being neither positive nor negative . The corresponding definition of addition must proceed by cases : 
 For an integer n , let | n | be its absolute value . Let a and b be integers . If either a or b is zero , treat it as an identity . If a and b are both positive , define a + b 
 = | a | + | b | . If a and b are both negative , define a + b = 
 − ( | a | + | b | ) . If a and b have different signs , define a + b to be the difference between | a | and | b | , with the sign of the term whose absolute value is larger . As an example , -6 + 4 
 = -2 ; because -6 and 4 have different signs , their absolute values are subtracted , and since the negative term is larger , the answer is negative . 
 Although this definition can be useful for concrete problems , it is far too complicated to produce elegant general proofs ; there are too many cases to consider . 
 A much more convenient conception of the integers is the <unk> group construction . The essential observation is that every integer can be expressed ( not uniquely ) as the difference of two natural numbers , so we may as well define an integer as the difference of two natural numbers . Addition is then defined to be compatible with subtraction : 
 Given two integers a − b and c − d , where a , b , c , and d are natural numbers , define ( a − b ) + ( c − d ) = 
 ( a + c ) − ( b + d ) . 
 = = = Rational numbers ( fractions ) = = = 
 Addition of rational numbers can be computed using the least common denominator , but a conceptually simpler definition involves only integer addition and multiplication : 
 Define <formula> 
 As an example , the sum <formula> . 
 Addition of fractions is much simpler when the denominators are the same ; in this case , one can simply add the <unk> while leaving the denominator the same : <formula> , so <formula> . 
 The commutativity and associativity of rational addition is an easy consequence of the laws of integer arithmetic . For a more rigorous and general discussion , see field of fractions . 
 = = = Real numbers = = = 
 A common construction of the set of real numbers is the Dedekind completion of the set of rational numbers . A real number is defined to be a Dedekind cut of rationals : a non @-@ empty set of rationals that is closed downward and has no greatest element . The sum of real numbers a and b is defined element by element : 
 Define <formula> 
 This definition was first published , in a slightly modified form , by Richard Dedekind in 1872 . The commutativity and associativity of real addition are immediate ; defining the real number 0 to be the set of negative rationals , it is easily seen to be the additive identity . Probably the trickiest part of this construction pertaining to addition is the definition of additive inverses . 
 Unfortunately , dealing with multiplication of Dedekind cuts is a time @-@ consuming case @-@ by @-@ case process similar to the addition of signed integers . Another approach is the metric completion of the rational numbers . A real number is essentially defined to be the a limit of a Cauchy sequence of rationals , lim an . Addition is defined term by term : 
 Define <formula> 
 This definition was first published by Georg Cantor , also in 1872 , although his formalism was slightly different . One must prove that this operation is well @-@ defined , dealing with co @-@ Cauchy sequences . Once that task is done , all the properties of real addition follow immediately from the properties of rational numbers . Furthermore , the other arithmetic operations , including multiplication , have straightforward , analogous definitions . 
 = = = Complex numbers = = = 
 Complex numbers are added by adding the real and imaginary parts of the summands . That is to say : 
 <formula> 
 Using the visualization of complex numbers in the complex plane , the addition has the following geometric interpretation : the sum of two complex numbers A and B , interpreted as points of the complex plane , is the point X obtained by building a parallelogram three of whose vertices are O , A and B. Equivalently , X is the point such that the triangles with vertices O , A , B , and X , B , A , are congruent . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 There are many binary operations that can be viewed as generalizations of the addition operation on the real numbers . The field of abstract algebra is centrally concerned with such generalized operations , and they also appear in set theory and category theory . 
 = = = Addition in abstract algebra = = = 
 = = = = Vector addition = = = = 
 In linear algebra , a vector space is an algebraic structure that allows for adding any two vectors and for scaling vectors . A familiar vector space is the set of all ordered pairs of real numbers ; the ordered pair ( a , b ) is interpreted as a vector from the origin in the Euclidean plane to the point ( a , b ) in the plane . The sum of two vectors is obtained by adding their individual coordinates : 
 ( a , b ) + ( c , d ) = ( a + c , b + d ) . 
 This addition operation is central to classical mechanics , in which vectors are interpreted as forces . 
 = = = = Matrix addition = = = = 
 Matrix addition is defined for two matrices of the same dimensions . The sum of two m × n ( pronounced " m by n " ) matrices A and B , denoted by A + B , is again an m × n matrix computed by adding corresponding elements : 
 <formula> 
 For example : 
 <formula> 
 = = = = Modular arithmetic = = = = 
 In modular arithmetic , the set of integers modulo 12 has twelve elements ; it inherits an addition operation from the integers that is central to musical set theory . The set of integers modulo 2 has just two elements ; the addition operation it inherits is known in Boolean logic as the " exclusive or " function . In geometry , the sum of two angle measures is often taken to be their sum as real numbers modulo 2π . This amounts to an addition operation on the circle , which in turn generalizes to addition operations on many @-@ dimensional tori . 
 = = = = General addition = = = = 
 The general theory of abstract algebra allows an " addition " operation to be any associative and commutative operation on a set . Basic algebraic structures with such an addition operation include commutative <unk> and abelian groups . 
 = = = Addition in set theory and category theory = = = 
 A far @-@ reaching generalization of addition of natural numbers is the addition of ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers in set theory . These give two different generalizations of addition of natural numbers to the transfinite . Unlike most addition operations , addition of ordinal numbers is not commutative . Addition of cardinal numbers , however , is a commutative operation closely related to the disjoint union operation . 
 In category theory , disjoint union is seen as a particular case of the <unk> operation , and general <unk> are perhaps the most abstract of all the generalizations of addition . Some <unk> , such as Direct sum and Wedge sum , are named to evoke their connection with addition . 
 = = Related operations = = 
 Addition , along with subtraction , multiplication and division , is considered one of the basic operations and is used in elementary arithmetic . 
 = = = Arithmetic = = = 
 Subtraction can be thought of as a kind of addition — that is , the addition of an additive inverse . Subtraction is itself a sort of inverse to addition , in that adding x and subtracting x are inverse functions . 
 Given a set with an addition operation , one cannot always define a corresponding subtraction operation on that set ; the set of natural numbers is a simple example . On the other hand , a subtraction operation uniquely determines an addition operation , an additive inverse operation , and an additive identity ; for this reason , an additive group can be described as a set that is closed under subtraction . 
 Multiplication can be thought of as repeated addition . If a single term x appears in a sum n times , then the sum is the product of n and x . If n is not a natural number , the product may still make sense ; for example , multiplication by − 1 yields the additive inverse of a number . 
 In the real and complex numbers , addition and multiplication can be interchanged by the exponential function : 
 ea + b 
 = ea <unk> . 
 This identity allows multiplication to be carried out by consulting a table of logarithms and computing addition by hand ; it also enables multiplication on a slide rule . The formula is still a good first @-@ order approximation in the broad context of Lie groups , where it relates multiplication of infinitesimal group elements with addition of vectors in the associated Lie algebra . 
 There are even more generalizations of multiplication than addition . In general , multiplication operations always distribute over addition ; this requirement is formalized in the definition of a ring . In some contexts , such as the integers , distributivity over addition and the existence of a multiplicative identity is enough to uniquely determine the multiplication operation . The distributive property also provides information about addition ; by expanding the product ( 1 + 1 ) ( a + b ) in both ways , one concludes that addition is forced to be commutative . For this reason , ring addition is commutative in general . 
 Division is an arithmetic operation remotely related to addition . Since a / b = 
 a ( b − 1 ) , division is right distributive over addition : ( a + b ) / c = a / c + b / c . However , division is not left distributive over addition ; 1 / ( 2 + 2 ) is not the same as 1 / 2 + 1 / 2 . 
 = = = Ordering = = = 
 The maximum operation " max ( a , b ) " is a binary operation similar to addition . In fact , if two nonnegative numbers a and b are of different orders of magnitude , then their sum is approximately equal to their maximum . This approximation is extremely useful in the applications of mathematics , for example in truncating Taylor series . However , it presents a perpetual difficulty in numerical analysis , essentially since " max " is not invertible . If b is much greater than a , then a straightforward calculation of ( a + b ) − b can accumulate an unacceptable round @-@ off error , perhaps even returning zero . See also Loss of significance . 
 The approximation becomes exact in a kind of infinite limit ; if either a or b is an infinite cardinal number , their cardinal sum is exactly equal to the greater of the two . Accordingly , there is no subtraction operation for infinite cardinals . 
 <unk> is commutative and associative , like addition . Furthermore , since addition preserves the ordering of real numbers , addition distributes over " max " in the same way that multiplication distributes over addition : 
 a + max ( b , c ) = max ( a + b , a + c ) . 
 For these reasons , in tropical geometry one replaces multiplication with addition and addition with maximization . In this context , addition is called " tropical multiplication " , maximization is called " tropical addition " , and the tropical " additive identity " is negative infinity . Some authors prefer to replace addition with minimization ; then the additive identity is positive infinity . 
 Tying these observations together , tropical addition is approximately related to regular addition through the logarithm : 
 log ( a + b ) ≈ max ( log a , log b ) , 
 which becomes more accurate as the base of the logarithm increases . The approximation can be made exact by extracting a constant h , named by analogy with Planck 's constant from quantum mechanics , and taking the " classical limit " as h tends to zero : 
 <formula> 
 In this sense , the maximum operation is a <unk> version of addition . 
 = = = Other ways to add = = = 
 <unk> , also known as the successor operation , is the addition of 1 to a number . 
 <unk> describes the addition of arbitrarily many numbers , usually more than just two . It includes the idea of the sum of a single number , which is itself , and the empty sum , which is zero . An infinite summation is a delicate procedure known as a series . 
 Counting a finite set is equivalent to summing 1 over the set . 
 Integration is a kind of " summation " over a continuum , or more precisely and generally , over a differentiable manifold . Integration over a zero @-@ dimensional manifold reduces to summation . 
 Linear combinations combine multiplication and summation ; they are sums in which each term has a multiplier , usually a real or complex number . Linear combinations are especially useful in contexts where straightforward addition would violate some normalization rule , such as mixing of strategies in game theory or superposition of states in quantum mechanics . 
 Convolution is used to add two independent random variables defined by distribution functions . Its usual definition combines integration , subtraction , and multiplication . In general , convolution is useful as a kind of domain @-@ side addition ; by contrast , vector addition is a kind of range @-@ side addition . 
 = Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration = 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration ( TWHNC ) , sometimes known as the Celebration , is the largest horse show for the Tennessee Walking Horse breed , and has been held annually in or near Shelbyville , Tennessee since its inception in 1939 . The Celebration was conceived by Henry Davis , a horse trainer who along with several other horsemen , felt the Shelbyville area should have a festival or annual event . Although the Celebration was originally held in Wartrace , Tennessee , it moved to Shelbyville , the county seat , a few years later . The Celebration spans 11 days and nights in late August and early September annually , and finishes with the crowning of the World Grand Champion Tennessee Walker on the Saturday night before Labor Day . The TWHNC draws an estimated 2 @,@ 000 horses and 250 @,@ 000 spectators to Shelbyville each year . 
 = = History = = 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration was founded in 1939 . A Wartrace resident , Henry Davis , went to Winchester , Tennessee to buy hay and while there observed the Crimson Clover Festival being held . He felt that Wartrace should have a similar festival , and proposed the idea to a group of fellow horsemen , who accepted it . The first Celebration was held in 1939 . It began with a parade and elaborate pageant that depicted the evolution of the Tennessee Walking Horse breed from its original use as a plow and utility horse , to its present use as a show horse . The first Celebration attracted over 40 @,@ 000 people . The Celebration later moved to Shelbyville , which is located about 60 miles southeast of Nashville , due to space issues , as small Wartrace was unable to cope with the volume of visitors and horses the show attracted . Shelbyville is now known as the Walking Horse Capital of the World . 
 The modern Celebration spans 11 days in late August and early September prior to Labor Day every year , and finishes with the crowning of the World Grand Champion Tennessee Walking Horse on the Saturday night before Labor Day . The TWHNC draws an estimated 2 @,@ 000 horses , 250 @,@ 000 spectators and US $ 41 million in revenue to Shelbyville every year . 
 = = = Notable winners = = = 
 The first horse to be named World Grand Champion was Strolling Jim in 1939 . Strolling Jim was a former plow horse retrained for show by Floyd Carothers , and was only three years old at the time of his win . Although Strolling Jim was a gelding , many World Grand Champions were stallions who became notable sires . Midnight Sun , winner in 1945 and 1946 , sired over 2 @,@ 600 foals , of which five became World Grand Champions . The World Grand Champion in 1947 and 1948 , Merry Go Boy , was known for producing the most desirable Tennessee Walker conformation type in his offspring . The stake is traditionally a stallions ' class , and has not been won by a mare or gelding since 1954 , when the gray mare Garnier 's White Star , owned by W.V. Garnier and ridden by Percy Moss , was crowned as the World Grand Champion . Incidentally , 23 @-@ year @-@ old Moss was also the youngest rider to win the stake . The first female rider to win the World Grand Championship was Betty Sain on Shaker 's Shocker in 1966 , and the oldest rider to win was 81 @-@ year @-@ old Bud Dunn on RPM in 1999 . Although there have been six horses who won the stake two years consecutively , there have been only two three @-@ time winners in the history of the Celebration : The Talk of the Town in 1951 , 1952 and 1953 , and I Am Jose in 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The Celebration has often been criticized with allegations of soring of horses at the event , an abusive practice designed to make horses step higher and illegal under federal law by the Horse Protection Act of 1970 . The sponsors of the Celebration have consistently denied the allegations . Every horse entered in the Celebration must undergo an inspection designed to detect sored horses conducted by an APHIS @-@ employed inspector before the horse is allowed to show . Inspectors may use hoof testers ( <unk> @-@ like tools which direct pressure on an area of the foot to find any source of pain ) , leg swabs and other tools such as <unk> to detect signs of horses being sored . In 2006 , the concerns escalated between trainers and inspectors from APHIS . Initially , trainers refused to submit their horses for inspection , creating a stand @-@ off that required law enforcement intervention . Then , prior to the World Grand Championship finals , inspectors disqualified all but three of the finalists . A group of approximately 150 people gathered , demanding that the disqualified horses be allowed to show . However , citing safety concerns , the show management cancelled the class altogether and no World Grand Champion was crowned that year . 
 = = Venue and classes = = 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration is held in Shelbyville at the 105 @-@ acre Celebration Grounds , which encompasses <unk> Arena . The facility contains 60 barns and two arenas , with warm @-@ up areas . The outdoor arena has seating for 30 @,@ 000 , including box seats , and is the one used for most classes . The indoor arena has seating for 4 @,@ 500 and is used for small classes , or in case of rain . 
 The TWHNC features a wide variety of classes in both in @-@ hand and performance , including divisions for youth , amateurs , and professionals . Horses may shod with keg shoes or performance stacks ; flat @-@ shod classes are particularly popular among amateur owners who train their own horses . <unk> classes , for children under six , are a crowd favorite . All horses entered must be registered with the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders ' and Exhibitors ' Association , although some may be registered with the Spotted Saddle Horse and Racking Horse associations as well . Double registration does not affect a horse 's ability to enter the Celebration . The only exception to this rule are ponies competing in lead line classes . Over 20 World Championships are awarded in different classes throughout the course of the Celebration . The most anticipated class , however , is the World Grand Championship , the largest honor in the Tennessee Walking Horse breed . Competition at the Celebration is traditionally opened each night by a white or gray Tennessee Walking Horse and rider carrying the American flag , during the singing of the American national anthem . Over the course of the Celebration , over $ 650 @,@ 000 in prizes is given out . The Celebration also includes attractions such as a dog show , barbecue cookout , and barn decorating contest . 
 = = = World Grand Championship = = = 
 The World Grand Championship , also known as the " Big Stake " or " Rider 's Cup , Canter " is the final class of the Celebration . It is held late on the Saturday night before Labor Day , or more often , very early Sunday morning . To compete in the stake , horses must qualify by showing in a class on the first Saturday night of the show . Previous World Grand Champions are automatically eligible to compete again . The competing horses enter the arena to the song " Flat Walk Boogie " which was composed and is played by official TWHNC organist Larry Bright . Horses are required to perform the flat walk , running walk and canter twice each in two separate workouts . Between workouts , riders dismount and <unk> their horses so the judges can evaluate their conformation . The winner is announced by a spotlight sweeping back and forth along the line @-@ up of horses and then settling on the World Grand Champion . The winner is awarded $ 15 @,@ 000 in prize money . 
 = May Revolution = 
 The May Revolution ( Spanish : Revolución de Mayo ) was a week @-@ long series of events that took place from May 18 to 25 , 1810 , in Buenos Aires , capital of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . This Spanish colony included roughly the territories of present @-@ day Argentina , Bolivia , Paraguay and Uruguay . The result was the removal of Viceroy Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros and the establishment of a local government , the Primera Junta ( First Junta ) , on May 25 . It was the first successful revolution in South American Independence process . 
 The May Revolution was a direct reaction to Spain 's Peninsular War . In 1808 , King Ferdinand VII of Spain abdicated in favor of Napoleon , who granted the throne to his brother , Joseph Bonaparte . A Supreme Central Junta led resistance to Joseph 's government and the French occupation of Spain , but eventually suffered a series of reversals that resulted in the Spanish loss of the northern half of the country . On February 1 , 1810 , French troops took Seville and gained control of most of Andalusia . The Supreme Junta retreated to Cadiz and dissolved itself , and the Council of Regency of Spain and the Indies replaced it . News of these events arrived in Buenos Aires on May 18 , brought by British ships . 
 Viceroy Cisneros tried to maintain the political status quo , but a group of criollo lawyers and military officials organized an open cabildo ( a special meeting of notables of the city ) on May 22 to decide the future of the Viceroyalty . Delegates denied recognition to the Council of Regency in Spain and established a junta to govern in place of Cisneros , since the government that had appointed him Viceroy no longer existed . To maintain a sense of continuity , Cisneros was initially appointed president of the Junta . However , this caused much popular unrest , so he resigned under pressure on May 25 . The newly formed government , the Primera Junta , included only representatives from Buenos Aires and invited other cities of the Viceroyalty to send delegates to join them . This resulted in the outbreak of war between the regions that accepted the outcome of the events at Buenos Aires and those that did not . 
 The May Revolution began the Argentine War of Independence , although no formal declaration of independence was issued at the time and the Primera Junta continued to govern in the name of the deposed king , Ferdinand VII . As similar events occurred in many other cities of the continent , the May Revolution is also considered one of the early events of the Spanish American wars of independence . Historians today debate whether the revolutionaries were truly loyal to the Spanish crown or whether the declaration of fidelity to the king was a necessary ruse to conceal the true objective — to achieve independence — from a population that was not yet ready to accept such a radical change . A formal declaration of independence was finally issued at the Congress of Tucumán on July 9 , 1816 . 
 = = Causes = = 
 = = = International causes = = = 
 The United States ' declaration of independence from Great Britain in 1776 led criollos ( Spanish peoples born in the Americas ) to believe that revolution and independence from Spain were feasible . Between 1775 and 1783 , the American patriots of the Thirteen Colonies waged the American Revolutionary War against both the local loyalists and the Kingdom of Great Britain , eventually establishing a popular government in the place of the British monarchy . The fact that Spain aided the colonies in their struggle against Britain weakened the idea that it would be a crime to end one 's allegiance to the parent state . 
 The ideals of the French Revolution of 1789 spread across Europe and the Americas as well . The overthrow and execution of King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette ended centuries of monarchy and removed the privileges of the nobility . Liberal ideals in the political and economic fields developed and spread through the Atlantic Revolutions across most of the Western world . The concept of the divine right of kings was questioned by the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen , by the oft @-@ quoted statement that " all men are created equal " in the United States Declaration of Independence and even by the Spanish church . 
 However , the spread of such ideas was forbidden in the Spanish territories , as was the sale of related books or their unauthorized possession . Spain instituted those bans when it declared war on France after the execution of Louis XVI and retained them after the peace treaty of 1796 . News of the events of 1789 and copies of the publications of the French Revolution spread around Spain despite efforts to keep them at bay . Many enlightened criollos came into contact with liberal authors and their works during their university studies , either in Europe or at the University of Chuquisaca ( modern Sucre ) . Books from the United States found their way into the Spanish colonies through Caracas , owing to the proximity of Venezuela to the United States and the West Indies . 
 The Industrial Revolution started in Britain , with the use of <unk> , canals and steam power . This led to dramatic increases in the productive capabilities of Britain , and created a need for new markets to sell its products . The Napoleonic Wars with France made this a difficult task , after Napoleon imposed the Continental System , which forbade his allies and conquests to trade with Britain . Thus Britain needed to be able to trade with the Spanish colonies , but could not do so because the colonies were restricted to trade only with their parent state . To achieve their economic objectives , Britain initially tried to invade Rio de la Plata and conquer key cities in Spanish America . When that failed , they chose to promote the Spanish @-@ American aspirations of emancipation from Spain . 
 The mutiny of Aranjuez in 1808 led King Charles IV of Spain to abdicate in favor of his son , Ferdinand VII . Charles IV requested that Napoleon restore him to the throne ; instead , Napoleon crowned his own brother , Joseph Bonaparte , as the new Spanish King . These events are known as the <unk> of Bayonne . Joseph 's coronation was met with severe resistance in Spain , which started the Peninsular War , and the Supreme Central Junta took power in the name of the absent king . This also led to Spain switching allegiances from France to Britain . France eventually invaded Sevilla , and a Council of Regency based in Cadiz replaced the disbanded Supreme Central Junta . 
 = = = National causes = = = 
 Spain forbade its American colonies to trade with other nations or foreign colonies , and imposed itself as the only buyer and vendor for their international trade . This situation damaged the viceroyalty , as Spain 's economy was not powerful enough to produce the huge supply of goods that the numerous colonies would need . This caused economic shortages and recession . The Spanish trade routes favored the ports of Mexico and Lima , to the detriment of Buenos Aires . As a result , Buenos Aires smuggled those products that could not be obtained legitimately . Most local authorities allowed this smuggling as a lesser evil , even though it was illegal , and it occasionally equalled in volume the legal commerce with Spain . Two antagonistic factions emerged : the landowners wanted free trade so they could sell their products abroad , while the merchants , who benefited from the high prices of smuggled imports , opposed free trade because prices would come down . 
 The Spanish monarchy appointed their own candidates to most of the political offices in the viceroyalty , usually favoring Spaniards from Europe . In most cases , the appointees had little knowledge of or interest in local issues . Consequently , there was a growing rivalry between criollos and peninsulars ( those born in Spain ) . Most criollos thought that peninsulars had undeserved advantages and received preferential treatment in politics and society . The lower clergy had a similar sentiment about the higher echelons of the religious hierarchy . Events developed at a slower pace than in the United States independence movement . This was in part because the clergy controlled the entire educational system in Spanish America , which led the population to hold the same conservative ideas and follow the same customs as in Spain . 
 Buenos Aires and Montevideo successfully resisted two British invasions . In 1806 , a small British army led by William Carr Beresford seized Buenos Aires for a brief time ; a Montevidean army led by Santiago de Liniers liberated the city . The following year , a larger army seized Montevideo , but was overwhelmed by the forces of Buenos Aires ; the invaders capitulated and returned Montevideo to the viceroyalty . There was no aid from Spain during either invasion . Liniers organized criollo militias during the preparations for the second invasion , in spite of the prohibition against them . The <unk> Regiment , led by Cornelio Saavedra , was the biggest criollo army . These events gave criollos military power and political influence that they did not have before and , since the victory was achieved without any help from Spain , it boosted criollo confidence in their independent capabilities . 
 The Portuguese royal family left Europe and settled in colonial Brazil in 1808 , after their escape from the Napoleonic invasion of Portugal . Carlota Joaquina , sister of Ferdinand VII , was the wife of the Portuguese prince regent , but had her own political projects . As she avoided the later capture of the Spanish royal family , she attempted to take charge of the viceroyalty as regent . This political project , known as Carlotism , sought to prevent a French invasion of the Americas . A small secret society of criollos , composed of politicians such as Manuel Belgrano and Juan José Castelli , and military leaders such as Antonio Beruti and Hipólito Vieytes , supported this project . They considered it an opportunity to get a local government instead of a European one , or a step towards a potential declaration of independence . The project was resisted by Viceroy Liniers , most peninsulars , and some criollos , including Cornelio Saavedra and the lawyers Mariano Moreno and Juan José Paso . They suspected that it concealed Portuguese expansionist ambitions over the region . The supporters of Carlota Joaquina intended her to head a constitutional monarchy , whereas she wanted to govern an absolute monarchy ; these conflicting goals undermined the project and led to its failure . Britain , which had a strong influence in the politics of the Portuguese Empire , opposed the project as well : they did not want Spain split into several kingdoms , and considered Carlota Joaquina unable to prevent this . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Liniers government = = = 
 After the British invasion of 1806 , Santiago de Liniers successfully reconquered Buenos Aires . The population did not allow Rafael de Sobremonte to continue as Viceroy . He had escaped to Cordoba with the public treasury while the battle was still in progress . A law enacted in 1778 required the treasury to be moved to a safe location in the case of a foreign attack , but Sobremonte was still seen as a coward by the population . The Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires did not allow his return to Buenos Aires and elected Liniers , acclaimed as a popular hero , as an interim Viceroy . This was an unprecedented action , the first time that a Spanish viceroy was deposed by local government institutions , and not by the King of Spain himself ; King Charles IV ratified the appointment at a later time . Liniers armed the entire population of Buenos Aires , including criollos and slaves , and defeated a second British invasion attempt in 1807 . 
 The Liniers administration was popular among criollos , but not among peninsulars such as the merchant Martín de Álzaga and the Governor of Montevideo , Francisco Javier de Elío . They requested the Spanish authorities appoint a new viceroy . In the wake of the outbreak of the Peninsular War , de Elío created the Junta of Montevideo , which would scrutinise all the orders from Buenos Aires and reserve the right to ignore them , but did not openly deny the authority of the Viceroy or declare Montevideo independent . 
 Martín de Álzaga began a mutiny to remove Liniers . On January 1 , 1809 , an open cabildo ( an extraordinary meeting of <unk> , prominent people of the city ) chaired by Álzaga demanded the resignation of Liniers and the appointment of a local junta . The Spanish militia and a group of people summoned by the meeting gathered to support the rebellion . A small number of criollos , notably Mariano Moreno , supported the mutiny , but most of them did not . They felt that Álzaga wanted to remove the Viceroy to avoid his political authority while keeping the social differences between criollos and peninsulars unchanged . The riot was quickly routed when criollo militias led by Cornelio Saavedra surrounded the plaza and dispersed the insurgents . As a result of the failed mutiny , the rebel militias were disarmed . This included all peninsular militias , and the power of the criollos increased as a result . The leaders of the plot , with the exception of Moreno , were exiled to Carmen de Patagones . Javier de Elío freed them and gave them political asylum at Montevideo . 
 = = = Cisneros government = = = 
 The Supreme Central Junta replaced Liniers with the naval officer Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros , a veteran of the Battle of Trafalgar , to end the political turmoil in the Río de la Plata . He arrived in Montevideo in June 1809 for the handover . Manuel Belgrano proposed that Liniers should resist on the grounds that he had been confirmed as Viceroy by a King of Spain , whereas Cisneros lacked such legitimacy . The criollo militias shared Belgrano 's proposal , but Liniers handed over the government to Cisneros without resistance . Javier de Elío accepted the authority of the new Viceroy , and dissolved the Junta of Montevideo . Cisneros rearmed the disbanded peninsular militias , and pardoned those responsible for the mutiny . Álzaga was not freed , but his sentence was commuted to house arrest . 
 There was concern about events in Spain and about the legitimacy of local governors in Upper Peru as well . On May 25 , 1809 , the Chuquisaca Revolution deposed Ramón García de León y Pizarro as Governor of Chuquisaca and replaced him with Juan Antonio Alvarez de Arenales . On July 16 , the La Paz revolution , led by Colonel Pedro Domingo Murillo , deposed the Governor of La Paz and elected a new junta . A swift reaction from the Spanish authorities defeated those rebellions . An army of 1 @,@ 000 men sent from Buenos Aires found no resistance at Chuquisaca , took control of the city and overthrew the Junta . Murillo tried to defend La Paz , but his 800 militiamen were completely outnumbered by the more than 5 @,@ 000 soldiers sent from Lima . He and the other leaders were later beheaded , and their heads were exhibited as a deterrent . These measures contrasted sharply with the pardon that Martín de Álzaga and others had received after a short time in prison , and the resentment of criollos against the peninsulars deepened . Juan José Castelli was present at the deliberations of the University of Chuquisaca , where Bernardo Monteagudo developed the <unk> of Chuquisaca , a legal explanation to justify self @-@ governance . This influenced his ideas during the " May Week " . 
 On November 25 , 1809 , Cisneros created the Political Surveillance Court to persecute afrancesados ( supporters of Joseph Bonaparte ) and <unk> . However , he rejected economist José María Romero 's proposal to banish a number of people considered dangerous to the Spanish regime , such as Saavedra , Paso , Vieytes , Castelli and Moreno , among others . Romero warned Cisneros against spreading news that might be considered subversive . Criollos felt that soon any pretext would be enough to lead to the outbreak of revolution . In April 1810 , Cornelio Saavedra advised to his friends : " it 's not time yet , let the figs ripen and then we 'll eat them " . He meant that he would not support rushed actions against the Viceroy , but would do so at a strategically favorable moment , such as when Napoleon 's forces gained a decisive advantage in their war against Spain . 
 = = May Week = = 
 The May Week was the period of time in Buenos Aires which began with the confirmation of the fall of the Supreme Central Junta and ended with the dismissal of Cisneros and the establishment of the Primera Junta . 
 On May 14 , 1810 , the British war schooner HMS Mistletoe arrived at Buenos Aires with European newspapers that reported the dissolution of the Supreme Central Junta the previous January . The city of Seville had been invaded by French armies , which were already dominating most of the Iberian Peninsula . The newspapers reported that some of the former members of the Junta had taken refuge on the Isla de León in Cadiz . This was confirmed in Buenos Aires on May 17 , when the British frigate HMS John Paris arrived in Montevideo ; the most recent newspapers reported that members of the Supreme Central Junta had been dismissed . The Council of Regency of Cadiz was not seen as a successor of the Spanish resistance but as an attempt to restore absolutism in Spain . The Supreme Central Junta was seen as sympathetic to the new ideas . South American patriots feared both a complete French victory in the peninsula and an absolutist restoration . Cisneros monitored the British warships and seized their newspapers , to conceal the news , but a newspaper came into the hands of Belgrano and Castelli . They spread the news among other patriots and challenged the legitimacy of the Viceroy , who had been appointed by the fallen junta . When Cornelio Saavedra , head of the regiment of Patricians , was informed of this news , he decided that it was finally the ideal time to take action against Cisneros . Martín Rodríguez proposed to overthrow the Viceroy by force , but Castelli and Saavedra rejected this idea and proposed the convening of an open cabildo . 
 = = = Friday , May 18 and Saturday , May 19 = = = 
 Although Viceroy Cisneros attempted to conceal the news of the Spanish defeat , the rumor had already spread throughout Buenos Aires . Most of the population was uneasy ; there was high activity at the barracks and in the Plaza , and most shops were closed . The " Café de Catalanes " and the " Fonda de las <unk> " , frequent criollo meeting places , became venues for political discussions and radical proclamations ; Francisco José Planes shouted that Cisneros should be hanged in the Plaza as retribution for the execution of the leaders of the ill @-@ fated La Paz revolution . People who sympathized with the absolutist government were harassed , but the fights were of little consequence because nobody was allowed to take muskets or swords out of the barracks . 
 The Viceroy , trying to calm the criollos , gave his own version of events in a proclamation . He asked for allegiance to King Ferdinand VII , but popular unrest continued to intensify . He was aware of the news , but only said that the situation on the Iberian Peninsula was delicate ; he did not confirm the fall of the Junta . His proposal was to make a government body that would rule on behalf of Ferdinand VII , together with Viceroy of Peru José Fernando de <unk> y Sousa , Governor of Potosí Francisco de Paula Sanz and President of the Royal Audiencia of Charcas Vicente Nieto . 
 Not fooled by the Viceroy 's communiqué , some criollos met at the houses of Nicolás Rodríguez Peña and Martín Rodríguez . During these secret meetings , they appointed a representative commission composed of Juan José Castelli and Martín Rodríguez to request that Cisneros convene an open cabildo to decide the future of the Viceroyalty . 
 During the night of May 19 there were further discussions at Rodríguez Peña 's house . Saavedra , called by Viamonte , joined the meeting , which involved military and civilian leaders . They arranged that Belgrano and Saavedra would meet with Juan José de Lezica , the senior alcalde ( municipal magistrate ) , while Castelli would meet with the procurator Julián de Leiva , to ask for their support . They asked the Viceroy to allow an open cabildo , and said that if it was not freely granted the people and the criollo troops would march to the Plaza , force the Viceroy to resign by any means necessary , and replace him with a patriot government . Saavedra commented to Lezica that he was suspected of betrayal because of his constant requests for cautious and measured steps . This comment was designed to pressure Lezica into speeding up the legal system to allow the people to express themselves , or otherwise risk a major rebellion . Lezica asked for patience and time to persuade the Viceroy , and leave a massive demonstration as a last resort . He argued that if the Viceroy was deposed in that way , it would constitute a rebellion , which would turn the revolutionaries into outlaws . Manuel Belgrano gave the following Monday as the deadline to confirm the open cabildo before taking direct action . Leiva would later act as a mediator , being both a confidante of Cisneros and a trusted negotiator for the more moderate revolutionaries . 
 = = = Sunday , May 20 = = = 
 Lezica informed Cisneros of the request for an open cabildo and the Viceroy consulted Leiva , who spoke in favor of it . The Viceroy summoned military commanders to come to the fort at 7 pm , to demand military support . There were rumors that it could be a trap to capture them and take control of the barracks . To prevent this , they took command of the grenadiers that guarded the Fort and seized the keys of all entrances while meeting with the Viceroy . Colonel Cornelio Saavedra , head of the Regiment of <unk> , responded on behalf of all the criollo regiments . He compared the current international situation with that prevailing at the time of the mutiny of Álzaga over a year earlier , pointed out that Spain was now almost entirely under Napoleonic control and that the undefeated Spanish provinces were very small in comparison with the Americas . He rejected the claim of sovereignty of Cadiz over the Americas , and concluded that the local armies wanted to look after themselves , rather than following the fate of Spain . Finally , he pointed out that the Supreme Central Junta that appointed Cisneros as Viceroy no longer existed , so he rejected Cisneros ' legitimacy as Viceroy and denied him the protection of the troops under his command . 
 Castelli and Martín Rodríguez moved to the Fort for an interview with Cisneros . Juan Florencio <unk> , commander of the Infantry Grenadiers , joined them , because their barracks were located under Cisneros ' window , and his presence would not allow the Viceroy to request military aid to take Castelli and Martín Rodríguez prisoners . The guards let them pass unannounced , and they found Cisneros playing cards with Brigadier Quintana , prosecutor Caspe and aide <unk> . Castelli and Rodríguez demanded once again the convening of an open cabildo , and Cisneros reacted angrily , considering their request an outrage . Rodríguez interrupted him and forced him to give a definitive answer . After a short private discussion with Caspe , Cisneros reluctantly gave his consent . 
 That night , many of the revolutionaries attended a theatre production on the theme of tyranny , called Rome Saved . The lead actor was Morante , playing Cicero . The police chief requested Morante to feign illness and not appear , so that the play could be replaced with <unk> and Repentance by the German novelist and playwright August von Kotzebue . Rumors of police censorship spread quickly ; Morante ignored the request and performed the play as planned . In the fourth act , Morante made a patriotic speech , about the Gaul threat to Rome ( the Gauls are ancestors of the French people ) and the need for strong leadership to resist the danger . This scene lifted the revolutionaries ' spirits and led to frenzied applause . Juan José Paso stood up and cried out for the freedom of Buenos Aires , and a small fight ensued . 
 After the play , the revolutionaries returned to Peña 's house . They learned the result of the meeting with Cisneros , but were unsure as to whether Cisneros intended to keep his word . They organized a demonstration for the following day to ensure that the open cabildo would be held as decided . 
 = = = Monday , May 21 = = = 
 At 3 pm , the Cabildo began its routine work , but was interrupted by 600 armed men named the Infernal Legion , who occupied the Plaza de la Victoria and loudly demanded the convening of an open cabildo and the resignation of Viceroy Cisneros . They carried a portrait of Ferdinand VII and the lapels of their jackets bore a white ribbon that symbolized criollo – Spanish unity . Domingo French , the mail carrier of the city , and Antonio Beruti , an employee of the treasury , led the rioters . It was rumored that Cisneros had been killed , and that Saavedra would take control of the government . Saavedra was at the barracks at that moment , concerned about the demonstration . He thought the violence should be stopped and that radical measures such as the assassination of Cisneros should be prevented , but he also thought that the troops would mutiny if the demonstrations were suppressed . The people in the Plaza did not believe that Cisneros would allow the open cabildo the next day . Leiva left the Cabildo , and Belgrano , who was representing the crowd , requested a definitive commitment . Leiva explained that everything would go ahead as planned , but the Cabildo needed time to prepare . He asked Belgrano to help the Cabildo with the work , as his intervention would be seen by the crowd as a guarantee that their demands would not be ignored . The crowd left the main hall but stayed in the Plaza . Belgrano protested about the guest list , which consisted of the wealthiest citizens , and thought that if the poor people were left outside there would be further unrest . The members of the Cabildo tried to convince him to give his support , but he left . 
 Belgrano 's departure enraged the crowd , as he did not explain what had happened , and the people feared a betrayal . Demands for Cisneros ' immediate resignation replaced those for an open cabildo . The people finally settled down and dispersed when Saavedra intervened to say that the claims of the Infernal Legion were supported by the military . 
 The invitations were distributed among 450 leading citizens and officials in the capital . The Cabildo compiled the guest list , and tried to guarantee the result , inviting people that would be likely to support the Viceroy . The revolutionaries countered this move with a similar one , so that most people would be against Cisneros instead . The printer Agustín Donado , supporting the revolutionaries , printed nearly 600 invitations instead of the 450 requested , and distributed the surplus among the criollos . During the night , Castelli , Rodríguez , French and Beruti visited all the barracks to harangue the troops and prepare them for the following day . 
 = = = Tuesday , May 22 = = = 
 According to the minutes , only about 251 out of the 450 officially invited guests attended the open cabildo . French and Beruti , in command of 600 men armed with knives , shotguns and rifles , controlled access to the square to ensure that the open cabildo had a majority of criollos . All noteworthy religious and civilian people were present , as well as militia commanders and many prominent residents . The only notable absence was that of Martín de Álzaga , who was still under house arrest . 
 A merchant , José Ignacio <unk> , attended the open cabildo but , in a letter to the priest Julián S. de Agüero , said that he had some doubts which were shared by other people close to him . He feared that , no matter which party prevailed in the open cabildo , it would take revenge against the other , the Mutiny of Álzaga being a recent precedent . He felt that the open cabildo would lack legitimacy if too many criollos were allowed to take part in it as a result of the aforementioned manipulation of the guest list . 
 The meeting lasted from morning to midnight , including the reading of the proclamation , the debate and the vote . There was no secret ballot ; votes were heard one at a time and recorded in the minutes . The main themes of the debate were the legitimacy of the government and the authority of the Viceroy . The principle of retroversion of the sovereignty to the people stated that , in the absence of the legitimate monarch , power returned to the people ; they were entitled to form a new government . This principle was commonplace in Spanish scholasticism and rationalist philosophy , but had never been applied in case law . Its validity divided the assembly into two main groups : one group rejected it and argued that the situation should remain unchanged ; this group supported Cisneros as Viceroy . The other group supported change , and considered that they should establish a junta , like the ones established in Spain to replace the Viceroy . There was also a third position , taking the middle ground . The promoters of change did not recognize the authority of the Council of Regency , and argued that the colonies in America were not consulted in its formation . The debate tangentially discussed the rivalry between criollos and peninsulars ; the Viceroy supporters felt that the will of peninsulars should prevail over that of criollos . 
 One of the speakers for the first position was the bishop of Buenos Aires , Benito Lue y Riega , leader of the local church , who said : 
 Not only is there no reason to get rid of the Viceroy , but even if no part of Spain remained <unk> , the Spaniards in America ought to take it back and resume command over it . America should only be ruled by the natives when there is no longer a Spaniard there . If even a single member of the Central Junta of Seville were to land on our shores , we should receive him as the Sovereign . 
 Juan José Castelli was the main speaker for the revolutionaries . He based his speech on two key ideas : the government 's lapsed legitimacy — he stated that the Supreme Central Junta was dissolved and had no rights to designate a Regency — and the principle of retroversion of sovereignty . He spoke after Riega , and replied that the American people should assume control of their government until Ferdinand VII could return to the throne . 
 Nobody could call the whole nation a criminal , nor the individuals that have aired their political views . If the right of conquest belongs by right to the conquering country , it would be fair for Spain to quit resisting the French and submit to them , by the same principles for which it is expected that the Americans submit themselves to the peoples of <unk> . The reason and the rule must be equal for everybody . Here there are no conquerors or conquered ; here there are only Spaniards . The Spaniards of Spain have lost their land . The Spaniards of America are trying to save theirs . Let the ones from Spain deal with themselves as they can ; do not worry , we American Spaniards know what we want and where we go . So I suggest we vote : that we replace the Viceroy with a new authority that will be subject to the parent state if it is saved from the French , and independent if Spain is finally subjugated . 
 Pascual Ruiz Huidobro stated that , since the authority that appointed Cisneros had expired , Cisneros should no longer have a place in the government . Huidobro felt that the Cabildo should be in government , as it was the representative of the people . Melchor Fernández , Juan León <unk> and Joaquín <unk> supported his vote , among others . 
 Attorney Manuel Genaro <unk> , representative of the conservative Spanish , said that the city of Buenos Aires had no right to make unilateral decisions about the legitimacy of the Viceroy or the Council of Regency without the participation of other cities of the Viceroyalty . He argued that such an action would break the unity of the country and establish as many sovereignties as there were cities . His intention was to keep Cisneros in power by delaying any possible action . Juan José Paso accepted his first point , but argued that the situation in Europe and the possibility that Napoleon 's forces could conquer the American colonies demanded an urgent resolution . He then expounded the " argument of the elder sister " , reasoning that Buenos Aires should take the initiative and make the changes deemed necessary and appropriate , on the express condition that the other cities would be invited to comment as soon as possible . The rhetorical device of the " elder sister " , comparable to <unk> <unk> , makes an analogy between the relationship of Buenos Aires and other cities of the viceroyalty with a sibling relationship . 
 The priest Juan Nepomuceno Solá then proposed that the Cabildo should receive the provisional command , until the formation of a governing junta made up of representatives from all populations of the Viceroyalty . Manuel Alberti , Miguel de Azcuénaga ( who would be members of the Primera Junta some days later ) , Escalada and <unk> ( or Aguirre ) supported his vote , among others . 
 Cornelio Saavedra suggested that the Cabildo should receive the provisional command until the formation of a governing junta in the manner and form that the Cabildo would deem as appropriate . He said " ... there shall be no doubt that it is the people that create authority or command . " At the time of the vote , Castelli 's position coincided with that of Saavedra . 
 Manuel Belgrano stood near a window and , in the event of a problematic development , he would give a signal by waiving a white cloth , upon which the people gathered in the Plaza would force their way into the Cabildo . However , there were no problems and this emergency plan was not implemented . The historian Vicente Fidel López revealed that his father , Vicente López y Planes , who was present at the event , saw that Mariano Moreno was worried near the end in spite of the majority achieved . Moreno told Planes that the Cabildo was about to betray them . 
 = = = Wednesday , May 23 = = = 
 The debate took all day , and the votes were counted very late that night . After the presentations , people voted for the continuation of the Viceroy , alone or at the head of a junta , or his dismissal . The ideas explained were divided into a small number of proposals , designated with the names of their main supporters , and the people then voted for one of those proposals . The voting lasted for a long time , and the result was to dismiss the Viceroy by a large majority : 155 votes to 69 . 
 Manuel José Reyes stated that he found no reason to depose the Viceroy , and that it would be enough to appoint a junta headed by Cisneros . His proposal had nearly 30 votes . Another 30 votes supported Cisneros , with no change to the political system . A small group supported the proposal of Martín José de <unk> , who also supported Cisneros . 
 There were also many different proposals involving the removal of Cisneros . Many of them required the new authorities to be elected by the Cabildo . Pascual Ruiz Huidobro proposed that the Cabildo should rule in the interim and appoint a new government , but this proposal made no reference to popular sovereignty or the creation of a junta . This proposal received 35 votes , and sought simply to replace Cisneros with Huidobro : Huidobro was the most senior military officer , and thus the natural candidate under current laws to replace the viceroy in the lack of a new appointment from Spain . Juan Nepomuceno Solá proposed a junta composed of delegates from all the provinces of the viceroyalty , while the Cabildo should govern in the interim ; this proposal received nearly 20 votes . Cornelio Saavedra , whose <unk> proposal was that the Cabildo should appoint a Junta and rule in the interim , got the largest number of votes . A number of other proposals received only a few votes each . 
 At dawn on May 23 , the Cabildo informed the population that the Viceroy would end his mandate . The highest authority would be transferred temporarily to the Cabildo until the appointment of a governing junta . Notices were placed at various points throughout the city , which announced the imminent creation of a junta and the summoning of representatives from the provinces . The notices also called for the public to refrain from actions contrary to public policy . 
 = = = Thursday , May 24 = = = 
 The Cabildo interpreted the decision of the open cabildo in its own way . When it formed the new Junta to govern until the arrival of representatives from other cities , Leiva arranged for former viceroy Cisneros to be appointed president of the Junta and commander of the armed forces . There are many interpretations of his motives for departing from the decision of the open cabildo in this way . Four other members were appointed to the Junta : criollos Cornelio Saavedra and Juan José Castelli , and peninsulars Juan Nepomuceno Solá and José Santos Inchaurregui . 
 Leiva wrote a constitutional code to regulate the actions of the Junta . It stipulated that the Junta could not exercise judicial power , which was reserved for the Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires ; that Cisneros could not act without the support of the other members of the Junta ; that the Cabildo could dismiss anyone who neglected his duty ; that the Cabildo 's consent would be required to create new taxes ; that the Junta would sanction a general amnesty for those who had aired opinions at the open cabildo ; and that the Junta would invite the other cities to send delegates . The commanders of the armed forces , including Saavedra and Pedro Andrés García , agreed to this code . The Junta swore the oath of office that afternoon . 
 These developments shocked the revolutionaries . Unsure of what to do next , they feared that they would be punished , like the revolutionaries of Chuquisaca and La Paz . Moreno abjured relations with the others and shut himself in his home . There was a meeting at Rodríguez Peña 's house . They felt that the Cabildo would not pursue such a plot without the blessing of Saavedra and that Castelli should resign from the Junta . Tagle took a different view : he thought that Saavedra may have accepted out of weakness or naivety and that Castelli should stay in the Junta to counter the others ' influence on him . Meanwhile , a mob led by Domingo French and Antonio Beruti filled the Plaza . The stability of Cisneros in power , albeit in an office other than Viceroy , was seen as an insult to the will of the open cabildo . Colonel Martín Rodriguez warned that , if the army were to commit support to a government that kept Cisneros , they would soon have to fire on the people , and that they would revolt . He said that " everyone without exception " demanded the removal of Cisneros . 
 That night , Castelli and Saavedra informed Cisneros of their resignation from the newly formed Junta . They explained that the population was on the verge of violent revolution and would remove Cisneros by force if he did not resign as well . They warned that they did not have the power to stop that : neither Castelli to stop his friends , nor Saavedra to prevent the Regiment of Patricians from mutiny . Cisneros wanted to wait for the following day , but they said that there was no time for further delays , so he finally agreed to resign . He sent a resignation letter to the Cabildo for consideration on the following day . Chiclana felt encouraged when Saavedra resigned , and started to request signatures for a manifesto about the will of the people . Moreno refused any further involvement , but Castelli and Peña trusted that he would eventually join them if events unfolded as they expected . 
 = = = Friday , May 25 = = = 
 On the morning of May 25 , in spite of bad weather , a crowd gathered in the Plaza de la Victoria , as did the militia led by Domingo French and Antonio Beruti . They demanded the recall of the Junta elected the previous day , the final resignation of Cisneros , and the appointment of a new junta that did not include him . Historian Bartolomé Mitre stated that French and Beruti distributed blue and white ribbons , similar to the modern cockade of Argentina , among those present . Later historians doubt it , but consider it possible that the revolutionaries used distinctive marks of some kind for identification . It was rumored that the Cabildo might reject Cisneros ' resignation . Because of delays in issuing an official resolution , the crowd became agitated , clamoring that " the people want to know what is going on ! " . 
 The Cabildo met at 9 am and rejected Cisneros ' resignation . They considered that the crowd had no legitimate right to influence something that the Cabildo had already decided and implemented . They considered that , as the Junta was in command , the demonstration should be suppressed by force , and made the members responsible for any changes to the resolution of the previous day . To enforce those orders , they summoned the chief commanders , but these did not obey . Many of them , including Saavedra , did not appear . Those that did stated that they could not support the government order , and that the commanders would be disobeyed if they ordered the troops to repress the demonstrators . 
 The crowd 's agitation increased , and they overran the chapter house . Leiva and Lezica requested that someone who could act as spokesman for the people should join them inside the hall and explain the people 's desires . Beruti , Chiclana , French and Grela were allowed to pass . Leiva attempted to discourage the rioter Pancho Planes , but he entered the hall as well . The Cabildo argued that Buenos Aires had no right to break the political system of the viceroyalty without discussing it with the other provinces ; French and Chiclana replied that the call for a Congress had already been considered . The Cabildo called the commanders to deliberate with them . As had happened several times in the last few days , Romero explained that the soldiers would mutiny if forced to fight against the rioters on behalf of Cisneros . The Cabildo still refused to give up , until the noise of the demonstration was heard in the hall . They feared that the demonstrators could overrun the building and reach them . Martín Rodríguez pointed out that the only way to calm the demonstrators was to accept Cisneros ' resignation . Leiva agreed , convinced the other members , and the people returned to the Plaza . Rodríguez headed to <unk> 's house to meet the other revolutionaries to plan the final stages of the revolution . The demonstration overran the Cabildo again , and reached the hall of deliberations . Beruti spoke on behalf of the people , and said that the new Junta should be elected by the people and not by the Cabildo . He said that , besides the nearly 400 people already gathered , the barracks were full of people who supported them , and he threatened that they would take control , by force if necessary . The Cabildo replied by requesting their demands in writing . 
 After a long interval , a document containing 411 signatures was delivered to the Cabildo . This paper proposed a new composition for the governing Junta , and a 500 @-@ man expedition to assist the provinces . The document — still preserved — listed most army commanders and many well @-@ known residents , and contained many illegible signatures . French and Beruti signed the document , stating " for me and for six hundred more " . However , there is no unanimous view among historians about the authorship of the document . Meanwhile , the weather improved and the sun broke through the clouds . The people in the plaza saw it as a favorable omen for the revolution . The Sun of May was created a few years later with reference to this event . 
 The Cabildo accepted the document and moved to the balcony to submit it directly to the people for ratification . But , because of the late hour and the weather , the number of people in the plaza had declined . Leiva ridiculed the claim of the remaining representatives to speak on behalf of the people . This wore the patience of the few who were still in the plaza in the rain . Beruti did not accept any further delays , and threatened to call people to arms . Facing the prospect of further violence , the popular request was read aloud and immediately ratified by those present . 
 The Primera Junta was finally established . It was composed by president Cornelio Saavedra , members Manuel Alberti , Miguel de Azcuénaga , Manuel Belgrano , Juan José Castelli , Domingo Matheu and Juan Larrea , and secretaries Juan José Paso and Mariano Moreno . The rules governing it were roughly the same as those issued the day before , with the additional provisions that the Cabildo would watch over the members of the Junta and that the Junta itself would appoint replacements in case of vacancies . Saavedra spoke to the crowd , and then moved on to the Fort , among salvos of artillery and the ringing of bells . Meanwhile , Cisneros dispatched a post rider to Córdoba , Argentina , to warn Santiago de Liniers about what had happened in Buenos Aires and to request military action against the Junta . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Buenos Aires endured the whole Spanish American Wars of independence without being reconquered by royalist armies or successful royalist counter @-@ revolutions . However , it faced several internal conflicts . The May Revolution lacked a clear leader as other regions of Latin America ; the secretary Mariano Moreno led the initial phase of the government , but he was removed shortly afterwards . 
 The Council of Regency , the Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires and the peninsulars opposed the new situation . The Royal Audiencia secretly swore allegiance to the Council of Regency a month later and sent communiqués to the other cities of the Viceroyalty , to request them to deny recognition to the new government . To put an end to these activities , the Junta assembled Cisneros and all the members of the Royal Audiencia on the pretext that their lives were in danger , and sent them into exile aboard the British ship Dart . Captain Mark <unk> Larrea was instructed to avoid American ports and deliver all of them directly to the Canary Islands . The Junta then appointed a new Audiencia composed entirely of criollos loyal to the revolution . 
 Every city in the territory of modern Argentina other than Córdoba endorsed the Primera Junta . The cities of the Upper Peru , however , did not take a position , owing to the recent outcomes of the Chuquisaca and La Paz Revolutions . Asunción del Paraguay rejected the Junta and swore loyalty to the Council of Regency . The Banda Oriental , under Francisco Javier de Elío , remained a royalist stronghold . 
 Former Viceroy Santiago de Liniers organized a counter @-@ revolution in Córdoba , and this became the first military campaign of the independent government . Despite the importance of Liniers himself , and his prestige as a popular hero for his role when the British invaded , the population of Córdoba preferred to support the revolution . This reduced the power of the counter @-@ revolutionary army by means of desertions and sabotage . Liniers 's troops were quickly defeated by the forces led by Francisco Ortiz de Ocampo . Ocampo refused to shoot the captive Liniers ; hence the execution ordered by the Junta was carried out by Juan José Castelli . After the victory , the Primera Junta sent military expeditions to many other cities , to demand support and the election of representatives to it . 
 Montevideo , which had a historical rivalry with Buenos Aires , opposed the Primera Junta and the Council of Regency declared it the new capital of the Viceroyalty , along with Francisco Javier de Elío as the new Viceroy . The city was well defended , so it could easily resist an invasion . Peripheral cities in the Banda Oriental acted contrary to Montevideo 's will and supported the Buenos Aires Junta . José Gervasio Artigas led them , and kept Montevideo under siege . The final defeat of the Montevidean royalists was carried out by Carlos María de Alvear and William Brown . 
 The Captaincy General of Chile followed a process analogous to that of the May Revolution , and elected a Government Junta that inaugurated the brief period known as Patria Vieja . The Junta was defeated in 1814 at the Battle of Rancagua , and the subsequent Reconquista of Chile would make it a royalist stronghold once more . The Andes provided an effective natural barrier between the Argentine revolutionaries and Chile , so there was no military confrontation between them until the Crossing of the Andes , led by José de San Martín in 1817 , a campaign that resulted in the defeat of the Chilean royalists . 
 The Primera Junta increased in size when it incorporated the representatives sent by the provinces . From then on , the Junta was renamed the Junta Grande . It was dissolved shortly after the June 1811 defeat of the Argentine troops at the Battle of Huaqui , and two successive <unk> exercised executive power over the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata . In 1814 , the second triumvirate was replaced by the authority of the Supreme Director . Meanwhile , Martín Miguel de Güemes contained the royalist armies sent from the Viceroyalty of Peru at Salta , while San Martín advanced towards the royalist stronghold of Lima by sea , on a Chilean – Argentine campaign . The war for independence gradually shifted towards northern South America . From 1814 , Argentina descended into civil war . 
 = = = Consequences = = = 
 According to historian Félix Luna 's Breve historia de los Argentinos ( Spanish : Brief history of the Argentines ) , one of the most important societal consequences of the May Revolution was the shift in the way the people and its rulers related . Until then , the conception of the common good prevailed : while royal authority was fully respected , if an instruction from the crown of Spain was considered detrimental to the common good of the local population , it was half @-@ met or simply ignored . With the revolution , the concept of common good gave way to that of popular sovereignty , as theorized by Moreno , Castelli and Monteagudo , among others . This idea held that , in the absence of a legitimate authority , the people had the right to appoint their own leaders . Over time , popular sovereignty would give way to the idea of majority rule . This maturation of ideas was gradual , taking many decades to crystallize into stable electoral and political systems , but it was what ultimately led to the adoption of the republican system as the form of government for Argentina . Domingo Faustino Sarmiento stated similar views in his Facundo , and noted that cities were more receptive to republican ideas , while rural areas were more resistant to them , which led to the surge of caudillos . 
 Another consequence , also according to Luna , was the dissolution of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata into several different units . Most of the cities and provinces had distinctive populations , economies , attitudes , contexts , and interests . Until the revolution , all of these peoples were held together by the authority of the Spanish government , but with its disappearance , people from Montevideo , Paraguay and the Upper Peru began to distance themselves from Buenos Aires . The brief existence of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata , which had lasted barely 38 years , impeded the consolidation of a patriotic feeling and failed to bring a sense of community to all of the population . The new country of Argentina lacked an established concept of national identity capable to unite the population under a common idea of statehood . Juan Bautista Alberdi sees the May Revolution as one of the early manifestations of the power struggles between the city of Buenos Aires and the provinces — one of the axial conflicts at play in the Argentine civil wars . Alberdi wrote in his book " <unk> <unk> " : 
 The revolution of May 1810 in Buenos Aires , intended to win the independence of Argentina from Spain , also had the consequence of emancipating the province of Buenos Aires from Argentina or , rather , of imposing the authority of this province upon the whole nation emancipated from Spain . That day , Spanish power over the Argentine provinces ended and that of Buenos Aires was established . 
 = = Historical perspectives = = 
 Historiographical studies of the May Revolution do not face many doubts or unknown details . Most of the information was properly recorded at the time and was made available to the public by the Primera Junta as patriotic propaganda . Because of this , historical views on the topic differ in their interpretations of the meanings , causes and consequences of the events , rather than in the accuracy of their depiction of the events themselves . The modern version of events does not differ significantly from the contemporary one . 
 The first people to write about the May Revolution were participants who wrote memoirs , biographies and diaries . However , their works were motivated by purposes other than historiographic ones , such as to explain the reasons for their actions , clean their public images , or express their support or rejection of the public figures and ideas of the time . For example , Manuel Moreno wrote the biography of his brother Mariano as propaganda for the revolutions in Europe , and Cornelio Saavedra wrote his autobiography at a moment when his image was highly questioned , to justify himself to his sons . 
 The first remarkable historiographical school of interpretation of the history of Argentina was founded by members of the 1837 generation , including Bartolomé Mitre . Mitre regarded the May Revolution as an iconic expression of political egalitarianism : a conflict between modern freedoms and oppression represented by the Spanish monarchy , and an attempt to establish a national organization on constitutional principles as opposed to the charismatic authority of the caudillos . These authors ' views were treated as canonical until the end of the 19th century , when the proximity of the centennial encouraged authors to seek new perspectives . The newer authors would differ about the relative weight of the causes of the May Revolution and about whose intervention in the events was more decisive , but the main views expressed by Mitre were kept , such as to consider the revolution to be the birth of modern Argentina and an unavoidable event . These authors introduced the idea of popular intervention as another key element . By the time of the World Wars , liberal authors attempted to impose an ultimate and unquestionable historical perspective ; Ricardo Levene and the Academia Nacional de la Historia were exponents of this tendency , which still kept most perspectives of Mitre . Left @-@ wing authors took a revisionist view based on nationalism and anti @-@ imperialism ; they minimized the dispute between criollos and peninsulars and portrayed events as a dispute between enlightenment and absolutism . However , most of their work was focused on other historical periods . 
 The May Revolution was not the product of the actions of a single political party with a clear and defined agenda , but a convergence of sectors with varying interests . Thus , there are a number of conflicting perspectives about it , because different authors highlight different aspects . Mitre , for example , referred to The Representation of the Landowners ( an 1809 economic report by Mariano Moreno ) and the role of the merchants to support the view that the May Revolution intended to obtain free trade and economic integration with Europe ; right @-@ wing revisionists center around Saavedra and the social customs of the time to describe the revolution under conservative principles ; and left @-@ wing revisionists use the example of Moreno , Castelli and the rioters led by French and Beruti to describe it as a radical revolution . 
 = = = Revolutionary purposes = = = 
 The government created on May 25 pronounced itself loyal to the deposed King of Spain Ferdinand VII , but historians disagree on whether this was sincere or not . Since Mitre , many historians think that this professed loyalty was merely a political deception to gain autonomy . The Primera Junta did not pledge allegiance to the Council of Regency , which was still in operation , and in 1810 it still seemed unlikely that Napoleon would be defeated and Ferdinand returned to the throne ( which finally happened on December 11 , 1813 , with the Treaty of <unk> ) . The purpose of such a deception would have been to gain time to strengthen the position of the patriotic cause and avoid reactions that may have led to a counter @-@ revolution , by making it appear that monarchical authority was still respected and that no revolution had taken place . The ruse is known as the " Mask of Ferdinand VII " . It was upheld by the Primera Junta , the Junta Grande and the First Triumvirate . The Assembly of Year XIII was intended to declare independence , but failed to do so because of other political conflicts between its members . However , it suppressed mention of Ferdinand VII in official documents . Before the declaration of independence of 1816 , the supreme directors considered other options , such as to negotiate with Spain or become a British protectorate . 
 The change was potentially favorable for Britain , as trade with the cities of the area was facilitated , without the monopoly that Spain had maintained over their colonies for centuries . However , Britain 's first priority was the war against France in Europe , and they could not appear to support American independence movements or allow the military attention of Spain to be divided onto two different fronts . Consequently , they pushed to avoid explicit independence demonstrations . This pressure was exerted by Lord Strangford , the British ambassador at the court of Rio de Janeiro ; he expressed support for the Junta , but under the condition that " ... the behavior is consistent , and that [ the ] Capital [ is ] retained on behalf of Mr. <unk> . Ferdinand VII and his legitimate successors " . Later conflicts between Buenos Aires , Montevideo and Artigas led to internal conflicts on the British front , between Strangford and the Portuguese regent John VI of Portugal . 
 Juan Bautista Alberdi and later historians such as Norberto Galasso , Luis Romero and José Carlos <unk> doubted Mitre 's interpretation and put forward different ones . Alberdi thought that " the Argentine revolution is a chapter of the <unk> revolution , as also of the Spanish one , as also of the French and European one " . They did not consider it a dispute between independentism and colonialism , but instead a dispute between new libertarian ideas and absolutism . The intention was not to cut ties with Spain , but to reformulate the relationship ; similarly , the American Revolution was not separatist at its initial steps either . Thus , it would have the characteristics of a civil war instead . Some points that would justify the idea would be the inclusion of Larrea , Matheu , and Belgrano in the Junta and the later appearance of José de San Martín : Larrea and Matheu were Spanish , Belgrano studied for many years in Spain , and San Martín had spent most of his adult life waging war in Spain against the French . When San Martín talked about enemies , he called them " royalists " or " Goths " , but never " Spanish " . 
 According to those historians , the Spanish revolution against absolutism got mixed up with the Peninsular War . When Ferdinand VII stood against his father Charles IV , who was seen as an absolutist king , many Spaniards got the mistaken impression that he sympathized with the new enlightened ideas . Thus , the revolutions made in the Americas in the name of Ferdinand VII ( such as the May Revolution , the Chuquisaca Revolution , or the one in Chile ) would have sought to replace absolutist power with power formulated under the new ideas . Even if Spain was at war with France , the ideals of the French Revolution ( liberty , equality and fraternity ) were still respected . Those revolutions pronounced themselves enemies of Napoleon , but did not face any active French military attack ; they promoted instead fights between Spanish armies for keeping either the old or new order . This situation would change with the final defeat of Napoleon and the return of Ferdinand VII to the throne , as he began the Absolutist Restoration and persecuted the supporters of the new libertarian ideas within Spain . For people in South America , to stay as a part of the Spanish Empire , but with a new relationship with the mother country , was no longer a feasible option : the only remaining options at this point were to return to absolutism or to adopt independentism . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 May 25 is a national day in Argentina , known as First Patriotic Government , with the character of a public holiday . The public holiday is set by law 21 @.@ 329 and is always celebrated on May 25 , regardless of the day of the week . The Argentina Centennial and the Argentina Bicentennial were celebrated in 1910 and 2010 . 
 May 25 was designated as a patriotic date in 1813 , but the Argentine Declaration of Independence suggests July 9 as an alternative national day . At first this added to the conflicts between Buenos Aires and the provinces during the Argentine Civil War , because the date in May related to Buenos Aires and the date of July 9 related to the whole country . Thus the unitarian Bernardino Rivadavia canceled the celebration of July 9 , and the federalist Juan Manuel de Rosas allowed it again , but maintained the May celebrations . By 1880 , the federalization of Buenos Aires removed the local connotations and the May Revolution was considered the birth of the nation . 
 The date , as well as a generic image of the Buenos Aires Cabildo , are used in different variants to honor the May Revolution . Two of the most notable are the Avenida de Mayo and the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires , near the location of the Cabildo . The May Pyramid was erected in the Plaza a year after the revolution , and was rebuilt in its present form in 1856 . Veinticinco de Mayo ( " May 25 " ) is the name of several administrative divisions , cities , public spaces and landforms of Argentina . There are departments of this name in the provinces of Chaco , Misiones , San Juan , Rio Negro and Buenos Aires , the latter holding the town of Veinticinco de Mayo . The cities of Rosario ( Santa Fe ) , Junín ( Buenos Aires ) and <unk> ( Chaco ) have eponymous squares . King George Island , which is claimed by Argentina , Britain and Chile , as part of the Argentine Antarctica , the British Antarctic Territory and the Chilean Antarctic Territory respectively , is referred to as Isla 25 de Mayo in Argentina . 
 A representation of a cabildo is used on Argentine 25 @-@ cent coins , and an image of the Sun of May appears on the 5 @-@ cent coin . An image of the Cabildo during the Revolution appeared on the back of the 5 @-@ peso banknote of the former peso <unk> nacional . 
 = Cortinarius vanduzerensis = 
 Cortinarius vanduzerensis is a species of mushroom in the family Cortinariaceae . Described as new to science in 1972 , it is known only from the Pacific Northwest region of North America , where it grows under conifers such as spruce , hemlock , and Douglas @-@ fir . The fruit bodies of the fungus , or mushrooms , have a slimy dark chestnut @-@ brown cap that becomes deeply radially grooved or corrugated in maturity , and reaches diameters of up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The gills on the underside of the cap are initially pinkish @-@ buff before becoming pale brown when the spores mature . The stem is lavender , measuring 10 – 18 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long and 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The mushroom produces a rusty @-@ brown spore print , with individual spores measuring 12 – 14 by 7 – 8 micrometers . The edibility of the mushroom has not been determined , and it has been described as " much too slippery to be of value " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described in 1972 by mycologists Alexander H. Smith and James M. Trappe , based on specimens they found in Cascade Head in Tillamook County , Oregon , in October and November 1970 . The species had also been called Cortinarius elatior , but that name refers to a European species . Within the genus Cortinarius , C. vanduzerensis is classified in the subgenus <unk> . This subgenus includes species in which both the cap and stem are sticky as a result of a glutinous universal veil . Based on the nucleic acid sequence similarity in the internal transcribed spacer region , C. vanduzerensis is closely related to the European and North American C. <unk> and the Costa Rican species C. costaricensis . 
 A common name for the species is the " pointed Cortinarius " , while the specific epithet vanduzerensis refers to the H.B. van <unk> Forest where the species was originally collected . 
 = = Description = = 
 Young fruit bodies of C. vanduzerensis are covered with a slimy universal veil ; the slime layer persists on the cap of young mushrooms , or in moist weather . The shape of the cap is oval to conical with the margin initially appressed , expanding to broadly conic or somewhat flattened in maturity , eventually reaching diameters of 4 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The cap color is initially chestnut @-@ brown to black , but becomes paler brown as it matures . The surface is radially wrinkled or corrugated , especially near the margin . The flesh is pallid but soon pale cinnamon @-@ buff . The odor and taste are not distinctive . A drop of FeSO4 solution ( a reagent commonly used in mushroom identification ) applied to the surface of the cap will turn olive @-@ green . 
 The gills are pinkish @-@ buff when young ( in unopened caps ) , dull cinnamon @-@ brown at maturity when the spores mature . They are packed close together , and are adnate or adnexed . The stem is 10 – 18 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , narrowed slightly to the base . It is pallid within but slowly cinnamon buff at least near the base . The stem surface has a thick slime @-@ veil , and is lavender to light purple on the upper portion , but darker on the lower portion . Sometimes the universal veil breaks up into concentric zones over the lower third of the stem . 
 The edibility of the mushroom is not known . David Arora notes that it is " much too slippery to be of value " . 
 The spore print is a rusty @-@ brown color . In face view , the spores are broadly elliptic to ovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) , while in profile they appear broadly inequilateral ; they have dimensions of 12 – 14 by 7 – 8 μm . The spore surface is roughened with warts , and they lack an apical pore . The spores contain two nuclei . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are four @-@ spored , broadly club @-@ shaped , and have contents that are often in the form of yellow masses or granules when stained in Melzer 's reagent . The <unk> ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are club @-@ shaped , sometimes with an abruptly tapering point , and measure 17 – 26 by 9 – 15 μm . There are no pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) . The gill tissue is made of hyphae that are arranged in a roughly parallel fashion ( subparallel ) ; there are also brownish to orange @-@ brown fat @-@ containing hyphae present . The epicutis ( outer layer of tissue ) of the cap is made of a turf of gelatinous hyphae that measure 2 @.@ 5 – 6 μm wide ; clamp connections are absent to rare in the hyphae . The veil hyphae are 4 – 8 μm wide , and hyaline ( translucent ) to yellow when mounted in a dilute solution of KOH . The hyphae of the cortex of the stem are subparallel , and clamps are present . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Smith and Trappe noted a similarity to the European Cortinarius elatior , but this species has violet gills at first . C. <unk> has a lighter brown slimy cap , with glutinous bands on the stem that are rarely tinged purple . A third species in this group , C. <unk> has a lighter colored , sometimes wrinkled cap , and gills that are pale purple when young with fringed edges . C. <unk> is a related European species found in coniferous ( sometimes in mixed ) forests . Another glutinous , dark @-@ brown capped species with which C. vanduzerensis might be confused is Phaeocollybia <unk> , but this species has pseudorhiza ( a subterranean elongation of the stem ) at the stem base and gills that are free from attachment to the stem . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Cortinarius vanduzerensis is a mycorrhizal mushroom that grows in association with conifer trees . The fruit bodies grow solitarily , scattered , in rings or in groups under spruce , hemlock , and Douglas @-@ fir . The mushroom is known only from the Pacific Northwest region of North America , including the Queen Charlotte Islands on the north Coast of British Columbia , Canada . It fruits in the autumn and early winter , or in the late summer in western Canada . Its frequency of occurrence has been described variously as " very common " , to " fairly common " , or " rare " everywhere except Oregon " . 
 = Barrington Civic Center Historic District = 
 Barrington Civic Center Historic District is a historic district in Barrington , Rhode Island on County Road . The district , which consists of the Barrington Town Hall , Leander R. Peck School and Prince 's Hill Cemetery , is located on Prince 's Hill near the center of Barrington . In 1728 , Prince 's Hill Cemetery was purchased and later expanded to its present size by 1898 . The one @-@ and @-@ half story Barrington Town Hall was completed in 1888 and originally served as the seat of the town 's government , library and high school . With the completion of the Leander R. Peck School in 1917 , the high school moved into the adjacent building and the library used its space . The two @-@ story Elizabethan Revival style Peck School is designed with a T @-@ shaped plan and features a stairway to access the main entrance on the second story . The Peck School was later used by the fifth and sixth grade elementary students before becoming the public library . Also located within the district is Wood 's Pond . The Barrington Civic Center Historic District was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1976 , and serves as historically significant example of civic and natural environment planning of the late nineteenth @-@ century . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Located in Barrington , Rhode Island on County Road , the Barrington Civic Center Historic District includes the Barrington Town Hall , the Peck School , sports field and tennis court , Wood 's pond and Prince 's Hill Cemetery . The cemetery dates to the early 18th @-@ century with stones dating from 1728 . Bicknell 's A History of Barrington , Rhode Island notes under April 7 , 1886 that the town voted and approved an appropriation of $ 2000 for the land to build a town hall . The town hall was completed in 1888 and was originally used as the town 's government offices , library and school . In 1917 , the high school students transferred to the newly completed and adjacent Peck School . 
 = = Barrington Town Hall = = 
 The one @-@ and @-@ half story Barrington Town Hall was designed and constructed between 1887 and 1888 by Stone , Carpenter & Willson of Providence , Rhode Island with an appropriation of $ 15 @,@ 000 . The town hall was officially dedicated on December 12 , 1888 . Constructed on the north @-@ south axis of a ridge Prince 's Hill , the town hall 's design was self @-@ described as medieval by the architects . Morgan describes the town hall as having " three flank gable units of varying height and depth " and [ it ] has two circular towers on the front facade of varying height . Morgan notes that " [ in the Town Hall , ] institutional functions are given something of a domestic architectural character , for the building suggests an expansive house in a half @-@ timbered manorial style . " The basement , first and portions of the second story of the Town Hall are constructed of fieldstone . Some of the stones are inscribed as memorials and one stone is claimed to have originated from Plymouth Rock . The second story , below the eaves , is half @-@ timbered . The center of the building features planned irregularity with two large projecting dormer @-@ gables , a chimney to the left of a projecting entrance porch . The southern gable , facing the front , also has two projecting dormers . The southern tower is topped by a copper weather vane with an elaborate three @-@ mast ship . 
 According to Morgan , the town hall was designed for multiple uses and this is evident from the plans and the exterior of the building . The largest section , the center section , serves as the government function and has municipal offices on the first floor . A stairwell to the right leads to the second floor , which functions as a town meeting room . A secondary entrance on the western facade accesses the northern section of the building , previously a library . The southern section of the building was previously a high school with separate entrances for boys and girls . The second floor of the southern section was used by the Antiquarian Society for meetings and its collections . In 1917 , the original library was moved to the southern section following the completion of the Leander R. Peck School . Two additions to the town hall were made to expand the library . The two additions consisted of two parallel gable units that matched the original material and form of the town hall , the first addition was made in 1938 by Howe & Church and the second in 1963 by Michael <unk> . 
 = = School and library = = 
 The Leander R. Peck School was donated to the Town of Barrington by Sarah Gould Peck in memory of her husband , Leader Remington Peck . A committee was formed to oversee the project and construction began in the spring of 1916 . It was designed by Martin & Hall of Providence , Rhode Island and constructed by <unk> and Mackillop of Pawtucket , Rhode Island . The two @-@ story Elizabethan Revival school is made of red Barrington brick with Indiana limestone trim and topped with a gable roof . Designed with a T @-@ shaped plan , the main entrance at the top of the " T " is accessed on a second story terrace reached via a large double stairway . The flanks have large projecting gable pavilions which include offices for the principal and superintendent . The central hallway is 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) in width and is lined with class rooms on the first floor and the second floor has an assembly room and two recitation rooms . The full basement of the school includes the gymnasium and locker rooms . The building was opened on September 14 , 1917 . Additions to the school were made in 1924 and 1935 on the east . In the 1970s , these additions were used as a cafeteria and stage . By 1976 , the Peck School was used as an elementary school for fifth and sixth graders . Later the school was renamed and re @-@ purposed as the Barrington Public Library . The Barrington Preservation Society uses the lower level as a museum and for the storage of records . 
 = = Prince 's Hill Cemetery = = 
 Located in the northwest half of the historic district is the Prince 's Hill Cemetery . According to Morgan , " [ a ] t a town meeting on January 18 , 1728 @-@ 29 , a committee of Timothy Wadsworth , Lieutenant Peck , Zachariah Bicknell , and James Smith was empowered to purchase land on Prince 's Hill from Ebenezer Allen to lay out a burying ground for the recently erected Congregational Church ... " The earliest stones are located in the narrow northern end of the cemetery and date to 1728 . The cemetery was first expanded on December 31 , 1729 with the purchase of a half acre for five pounds sterling . It would expand four more times by 1898 to encompass more than four acres . In 1849 , the cemetery was fenced in and Morgan describes it as " presently exemplifies the " rural cemetery " tradition of the nineteenth century with meandering drives and natural landscape planting . " Markers of note include the Ward family marker , consisting of a " large rugged cross and an ethereal angel " , a 1903 stone marker dedicated to the slaves of the Barrington families and a Classical Revival crypt dating to 1909 . 
 = = Importance = = 
 According to the National Register of Historic Places , the Barrington Civic Center Historic District is significant as it represents the " historical concentration of public and governmental functions in the Prince 's Hill area of Barrington ... [ and as ] a unit , the cemetery , town hall and school , and Wood 's Pond , epitomize the late nineteenth @-@ century interest in a planned natural environment . " Barrington was transformed by a tripling of its population from 1840 to 1900 , going from a rural to suburban environment . From 1881 , the development of the land was regulated by the Barrington Rural Improvement Society , and the historic district serves as evidence of its planning . Morgan notes that a train station just south of Prince 's Hill influenced the decision for construction of civic buildings . The historic district still " show [ s ] the imprint of early civic pride and planning " . It was added to the register in 1976 . 
 = Wolf 359 = 
 Wolf 359 is a red dwarf that is located in the constellation Leo , near the ecliptic . At a distance of approximately 7 @.@ 8 light years from Earth , it has an apparent magnitude of 13 @.@ 5 and can only be seen with a large telescope . Wolf 359 is one of the nearest stars to the Sun ; only the Alpha Centauri system ( including Proxima Centauri ) , Barnard 's Star and the brown dwarfs Luhman 16 and WISE 0855 − 0714 are known to be closer . Its proximity to Earth has led to its mention in several works of fiction . 
 Wolf 359 is one of the faintest and lowest @-@ mass stars known . At the light @-@ emitting layer called the photosphere , it has a temperature of about 2 @,@ 800 K , which is low enough for chemical compounds to form and survive . The absorption lines of compounds such as water and titanium ( II ) oxide have been observed in the spectrum . The surface has a magnetic field that is stronger than the average magnetic field on the Sun . As a result of magnetic activity caused by convection , Wolf 359 is a flare star that can undergo sudden increases in luminosity for several minutes . These flares emit strong bursts of X @-@ ray and gamma ray radiation that have been observed by space telescopes . Wolf 359 is a relatively young star with an age of less than a billion years . No companions or disks of debris have been detected in orbit around it . 
 = = Observation history and name = = 
 Wolf 359 first came to the attention of astronomers because of the relatively high rate of transverse motion against the background , known as the proper motion . A high rate of proper motion can indicate that a star is located nearby , as more distant stars must move at higher velocities in order to achieve the same rate of angular travel across the celestial sphere . The proper motion of Wolf 359 was first measured in 1917 by German astronomer Max Wolf , with the aid of astrophotography . In 1919 he published a catalog of over one thousand stars with high proper motions , including this one , that are still identified by his name . He listed this star as entry number 359 , and the star has since been referred to as Wolf 359 in reference to Max Wolf 's catalogue . 
 The first parallax measurement of Wolf 359 was reported in 1928 from the Mount Wilson Observatory , yielding an annual shift in the star 's position of 0 @.@ 407 ± 0 @.@ 009 arcseconds . From this position change , and the known size of the Earth 's orbit , the distance to the star could be estimated . It was the lowest @-@ mass and faintest star known until the discovery of VB 10 in 1944 . The infrared magnitude of the star was measured in 1957 . In 1969 , a brief flare in the luminosity of Wolf 359 was observed , linking it to the class of variable stars known as flare stars . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Wolf 359 has a stellar classification of M6.5 , although various sources list a spectral class of <unk> , M6 or M8 . An M @-@ type star is known as a red dwarf : it is called red because the energy emission of the star reaches a peak in the red and infrared parts of the spectrum . Wolf 359 has a very low luminosity , emitting about 0 @.@ 1 % of the Sun 's energy . If it were moved to the location of the Sun , it would appear ten times as bright as the full Moon . 
 At an estimated 9 % of the Sun 's mass , Wolf 359 is just above the lowest limit at which a star can perform hydrogen fusion through the proton – proton chain reaction : 8 % of the Sun 's mass . ( Substellar objects below this limit are known as brown dwarfs . ) The radius of Wolf 359 is an estimated 16 % of the Sun 's radius , or about 110 @,@ 000 km . For comparison , the equatorial radius of the planet Jupiter is 71 @,@ 492 km , which is 65 % as large as Wolf 359 's . 
 The entire star is undergoing convection , whereby the energy generated at the core is being transported toward the surface by the convective motion of plasma , rather than by transmission through radiation . This circulation redistributes any accumulation of helium that is generated through stellar nucleosynthesis at the core throughout the star . This process will allow the star to remain on the main sequence as a hydrogen fusing star proportionately longer than a star such as the Sun where helium steadily accumulates at the core . In combination with a lower rate of hydrogen consumption due to its low mass , the convection will allow Wolf 359 to remain a main @-@ sequence star for about eight trillion years . 
 A search of this star by the Hubble Space Telescope revealed no stellar companions , although this does not preclude the presence of smaller companions that are below the telescope 's detection limit , such as a planet orbiting within one astronomical unit of the star . No excess infrared emission has been detected , which may indicate the lack of a debris disk in orbit around it . Radial velocity measurements of this star using the Near Infrared Spectrometer ( <unk> ) instrument at the Keck II observatory have not revealed any variations that might otherwise indicate the presence of an orbiting companion . This instrumentation is sensitive enough to detect the gravitational perturbations massive , short period companions with the mass of Neptune or greater . 
 = = = Outer atmosphere = = = 
 The outer , light @-@ emitting layer of a star is known as the photosphere . Temperature estimates of the photosphere of Wolf 359 range from 2 @,@ 500 K to 2 @,@ 900 K , which is sufficiently cool for equilibrium chemistry to occur . The resulting chemical compounds survive long enough to be observed through their spectral lines . Numerous molecular bands appear in the spectrum of Wolf 359 , including those of carbon monoxide ( CO ) , iron hydride ( <unk> ) , chromium hydride ( <unk> ) , water ( H2O ) , magnesium hydride ( <unk> ) , vanadium ( II ) oxide ( VO ) , titanium ( II ) oxide ( TiO ) and possibly the molecule <unk> . Since there are no lines of lithium in the spectrum , this element must have already been consumed by fusion at the core . This indicates the star must be at least 100 million years old . 
 Beyond the photosphere lies a nebulous , high temperature region known as the corona . In 2001 , Wolf 359 became the first star other than the Sun to have the spectrum of its corona observed from a ground @-@ based telescope . The spectrum showed emission lines of Fe XIII , which is heavily ionized iron that has been stripped of twelve of its electrons . The strength of this line can vary over a time period of several hours , which may be evidence of <unk> heating . 
 Wolf 359 is classified as a UV Ceti @-@ type flare star , which is a star that undergoes brief , energetic increases in luminosity because of magnetic activity in the photosphere . Its variable star designation is CN Leonis . Wolf 359 has a relatively high flare rate . Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope detected 32 flare events within a two @-@ hour period , with energies of 1027 ergs ( 1020 joules ) and higher . The mean magnetic field at the surface of Wolf 359 has a strength of about 2 @.@ 2 <unk> ( 0 @.@ 22 teslas ) , but this varies significantly on time scales as short as six hours . By comparison , the magnetic field of the Sun averages 1 gauss ( 100 µT ) , although it can rise as high as 3 <unk> ( 0 @.@ 3 T ) in active sunspot regions . During flare activity , Wolf 359 has been observed emitting X @-@ rays and gamma rays . 
 = = = Motion = = = 
 The rotation of a star causes a Doppler shift to the spectrum . On average , this results in a broadening of the absorption lines in its spectrum , with the lines increasing in width with higher rates of rotation . However , only the rotational motion in the direction of the observer can be measured by this means , so the resulting data provides a lower limit on the star 's rotation . This projected rotational velocity of Wolf 359 's equator is less than 3 km / s , which is below the threshold of detection through spectral line broadening . This low rate of rotation may have been caused by loss of angular momentum through a stellar wind . Typically , the time scale for the spin down of a star at spectral class M6 is roughly 10 billion years , because fully convective stars like this lose their rotation more slowly than other stars . However , evolutionary models suggest that Wolf 359 is a relatively young star with an age of less than a billion years . 
 The proper motion Wolf 359 against the background is 4 @.@ 696 arcseconds per year , and it is moving away from the Sun at a velocity of 19 km / s . When translated into the galactic coordinate system , this motion corresponds to a space velocity of ( U , V , W ) = ( − 26 , − 44 , − 18 ) km / s . The space velocity of Wolf 359 implies that it belongs to the population of old @-@ disk stars . It follows an orbit through the Milky Way that will bring it as close as 20 @.@ 5 kly ( 6 @.@ 3 kpc ) and as distant as 28 kly ( 8 @.@ 6 kpc ) from the Galactic Center . The galactic orbit has an eccentricity of 0 @.@ 156 , and the star can travel as far as 444 light @-@ years ( 136 pc ) away from the galactic plane . The closest stellar neighbor to Wolf 359 is the red dwarf Ross 128 at 3 @.@ 79 ly ( 1 @.@ 16 pc ) away . Approximately 13 @,@ 850 years ago , Wolf 359 was at its minimal distance of about 7 @.@ 35 ly ( 2 @.@ 25 pc ) from the Sun . 
 = Pilot ( Awake ) = 
 " Pilot " is the pilot episode of the American television police procedural fantasy drama Awake , which originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) on March 1 , 2012 . Written by series creator Kyle Killen , " Pilot " earned a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 0 , being watched by 6 @.@ 247 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . Directed by David Slade , it became the highest @-@ rated non @-@ sports program in its respective time slot on NBC in over a year . The episode has generally received positive reviews , with many critics commenting on the episode 's unique script , and the cast members , particularly Jason Isaacs ' performance as Michael Britten , who they felt effectively embodied the characteristics of the lead role . It was one of eight honorees at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards . 
 The pilot introduced the main character , Michael Britten , a detective who works for the Los Angeles Police Department . He is involved in a fatal accident with his family . Michael is conflicted with two parallel realities ; in one reality , in which he wears a red wristband , his wife Hannah Britten ( Laura Allen ) survived the accident , and in another reality , in which he wears a green wristband , his son Rex Britten ( Dylan Minnette ) survived . Michael does not know which reality is real , and sees two separate therapists : Dr. John Lee ( BD Wong ) in the " red reality " , and Dr. Judith Evans ( Cherry Jones ) in the " green reality " . Michael deals with a kidnapping in the " green reality " , and a murder in the " red reality " . 
 The concept of Awake was devised by Killen , who previously created the American television drama Lone Star for the Fox network . NBC encouraged Killen to conceive a concept for a future television series after Lone Star 's cancellation . Although it was inspired by the processes of dreaming , its script was cited as potentially being too complex for mainstream American television . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Detective Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) is at therapy sessions with Dr. John Lee ( BD Wong ) and Dr. Judith Evans ( Cherry Jones ) . Having fully recovered from his injuries , Michael recalls the night that he and his family were involved in a serious car accident . He reveals that every time he goes to sleep , he is conflicted between two realities ; In one reality , his wife Hannah Britten ( Laura Allen ) survived the accident , but his son Rex Britten ( Dylan Minnette ) is pronounced dead at the scene , while in the second reality , Hannah died in the accident instead of Rex . 
 Michael is trying to juggle his lives in the two realities , and wears a red wristband on his wrist in the reality where Hannah is alive and a green one in the reality where Rex is alive . In the Rex , or green , reality , Michael has noticed that Rex has focused a lot on tennis lately , as it was his mother 's sport . Rex 's tennis coach Tara ( Michaela McManus ) has been talking with Rex lately about his feelings . In the Hannah , or red , reality , Hannah is trying to write the late Rex out of their lives , wanting to move and try for another child . 
 Michael has a different partner in each reality . In the " green reality " , his partner is Isaiah " Bird " Freeman ( Steve Harris ) , while Efrem Vega ( Wilmer Valderrama ) is a uniformed officer . In the " red reality " , Efrem is his newly promoted partner , while Isaiah has been transferred to a different precinct . Michael starts to realize that things can transfer from reality to reality , as the clue " 611 Waverly , " pertaining to a case , is shown to Michael in one reality before it helps him save a girl from being murdered by a quick change serial killer in the other . 
 Both Dr. Lee and Dr. Evans attempt to diagnose what is going on with Michael . They both see it as a coping mechanism , and both insist that the other reality is a dream . To try to prove this to Michael , Dr. Evans has Michael read a part of the United States Constitution , as if that reality was a dream , Michael could not have done so , unless he had memorized the Constitution . Michael learned that he had alcohol in his system the night of the car accident , with Dr. Lee hypothesizing that Michael has this dream because he feels guilty for killing his son . 
 At the end of the episode , Michael comes to the conclusion that he wants to live with both of his family members . As he goes to sleep in the red reality , Hannah ( who Michael has told about the " green reality " ) tells Michael to enjoy Rex , and to tell him she loves him for her . Then , Michael goes to sleep , transferring to the " green reality " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Kyle Killen , the series ' creator , devised the concept of the series , which was originally titled REM until the episode was green @-@ lit by the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) , in May 2011 . It was described as a procedural mixture that is based on the life of a detective experiencing a parallel universe after a car accident with his family . NBC picked up the pilot episode of Awake in February 2011 . Killen previously created the American television drama Lone Star ( 2010 ) for the Fox network , which was canceled shortly after airing two episodes due to low ratings . Killen stated that the cancellation of Lone Star was a good platform to explore new ideas for a potential television show . He felt that Awake had a similar concept to Lone Star , and he wanted to continue the idea of living in " two spaces " . In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter , he further elaborated on the conception of the series : 
 My wife is an ER doctor and she once had a patient whose chief complaint was that they were covered in worms . And she went in to to [ sic ] see him [ and ] it was a 23 @-@ year @-@ old guy who seemed completely sane , who remembered his name , what year it was but was totally convinced he was covered in worms and couldn 't understand why other people weren 't reacting to that . It stuck with me how reliant you are on this little piece of material between your ears and what it tells you is real is what you think is real . I had the idea and been interested in someone who couldn 't tell the difference between their dreams and reality . And I think I had a lot of stuff I was still playing with when Lone Star went down . 
 Killen sought inspiration from the dreaming process , adding : " The concept of the way your dreams feel real , the way you seem to experience them as something that you don 't blink at until something crazy happens that sort of bursts that balloon . I think I became interested in the question of what if nothing ever popped that balloon ? What if you couldn 't tell the difference between when you were awake and when you were asleep ? And then I started looking for a way to marry those two ideas up , and a few months later we had Awake . " 
 Jennifer Salke , the president of the entertainment division of NBC , encouraged Killen to conceive a concept for a future television series after the cancellation of Lone Star . Within a few weeks , Killen sent a rough draft of the script to his agent Marc Korman . Korman was so impressed by the script that , though it was after midnight , he went into the room where his sick wife was sleeping , and got into bed with her . Korman phoned Salke , and stated that the script was " remarkable " , and praised Killen claiming that " for a guy who has never written a procedural show in his life " , he is " making two cases work " . Initially , Salke and Korman looked to sell acquisition rights to the Fox Broadcasting Company . Although it successfully made its way into the lower executive branches of the company , the script was declined by entertainment president Kevin Reilly , who felt apprehensive upon reading it . Gary Newman , chairman of 20th Century Fox Television , opted not to develop a deal with cable television networks . Newman believed that it should be a network show , and did not accept that the difference between cable and network dramas was their degree of intelligence . 
 Gordon was chosen as the showrunner for the series by Killen . Gordon commended the pilot script at first glance . Gordon originally read the script on a flight to New York . " I read the pilot , and once I got past my envy , I was struck by the voice , " he stated . " So few writers have real voices . Kyle is disarmingly self @-@ effacing ; and at the same time , he 's disarmingly confident . It 's that duality thing : On the one hand , he 's open ; on the other , he 's closed . " Gordon later compared the television series to The Good Wife . He said that The Good Wife has so many procedural aspects that you have to decide which format to use each week . He compared it to Awake , saying , then , " What makes an Awake episode ? " " Pilot " was written by Killen , and directed by David Slade . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In February 2011 , Jason Isaacs obtained the role of Michael Britten , the central character of the series . Gordon summated the premise of the character : " He 's a guy who goes to sleep , wakes up , he 's with his wife , goes to sleep , wakes up , and he 's with his son . And so — and he 's a cop who sees clues and details that crossover from one world to the next , and he uses that insight to solve crimes . " Killen thought that the premise behind the series would be relatable to audiences , making it easier to expand his fanbase . " I think there were aspects of Lone Star that were more difficult to get a wider , broader audience interested in , " he articulated . " [ The main character ] was somebody that you couldn 't decide if you liked or hated , and I think that Britten 's dilemma is something that we 're not only sympathetic for , but somehow we want him to win . " The following month , producers approached Laura Allen to play Hannah Britten . Michaela McManus initially received the role of Hannah , but later received the role of Tara instead , whom Allen originally auditioned to play . 
 In March 2011 , Dylan Minnette was cast as Rex Britten , the son of Michael Britten , alongside five other cast members . Minnette commended the series ' script , and noted the auditioning sequence was fast . He stated , " The process of getting the job actually went by really fast because the first audition Kyle Killen [ ... ] was in the room , Jason [ Isaacs ] was in the room , the cast director was in the room and the director was in the room . David Slade . And they were all there , for the first audition and I was like ' Wow ! Okay . ' " Minnette received the role two weeks after his audition . Other cast members include Wilmer Valderrama and Steve Harris , who each play Britten 's partner in one reality , while Cherry Jones and BD Wong each serve as his therapist in one reality . Wong chose the role in lieu of his position on the police procedural television drama Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Killen avouched that writing the episode 's script was one of the more difficult processes of creating the series . He and his writing team would often get confused with exchanging and executing ideas for the script ; as a result , they created outlines and distinguished them in green and red ink . Slade edited the language to better separate the ideas . " So the things that are initially confusing to us when we are just trying to break story , I think by the time they reach an audience , so much attention has been paid to how to make it clear where you are that all of the little tricks that we needed sort of go away . And hopefully when you see it on the screen , you are pretty instantly oriented as to which world you are in . " 
 The complexity of the script of the pilot episode and the show 's concept was cited as a potential issue for the series . Salke evaluated that viewers will enjoy the " clever mythology that overlap and affect each other in very interesting ways " , despite the series ' Sliding Doors @-@ like script . Upon reading the script , Isaacs felt that it was " incredibly hard " and complicated to comprehend . " Do you always know what reality you 're in ? [ ... ] That 's become a [ gift ] . It was hard but I quite like hard work . " Isaacs later suggested that it might be too brooding for mainstream American television , and that it could potentially be the " U @-@ bend of scripts " . He stated that every pilot comes from people who have " amazing prestige " , and that there are lots of " talented people , but the head of the network chooses only one . " Despite such concerns , Gordon asserted that the concept of Awake was a concept that you could understand if you sat down and paid attention to it properly . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Pilot " originally aired on NBC on March 1 , 2012 . It debuted as a midseason replacement for The Firm , which moved to Saturdays shortly before Awake 's premiere . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 247 million viewers . " Pilot " earned a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 0 , with a 5 share , meaning that roughly 2 @.@ 0 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 5 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . 
 The episode debuted on the Global network in Canada simultaneously with the NBC broadcast . It garnered 1 @.@ 2 million viewers , making it the twenty @-@ eighth most watching program of the week , according to BBM Canada . In the United Kingdom , the episode was first broadcast on Sky Atlantic on May 4 , 2012 , and obtained 334 @,@ 000 million viewers , making it the third most @-@ viewed program for the channel behind Game of Thrones and Blue Bloods . In June 2011 , Awake 's pilot was one of eight honorees in the " Most Exciting New Series " category at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards , voted by journalists who had seen the pilots . 
 The pilot episode has generally received positive reviews from television critics , who praised its storylines . Rachel Ray of The Telegraph called the premiere episode " impressive " , while Tierney Bricker of E ! Online commented that he " instantly fell in love with the storyline of one man living in two realities in order to stay with the people he loves . " NPR 's Linda Holmes asserted that " Pilot " laid the foundation for several emotional storylines , ultimately evaluating it as amongst the strongest showings in recent memory ; " This is a richly interesting narrative , and it 's worth watching closely , and if you do that , it 's entirely digestible . It 's also beautifully acted and written , packed with genuinely vexing questions about grief and dreaming , and — of all things — thoughtful . " Holmes added that it was very engaging in contrast to similar television shows . James Poniewozik of Time noted that while its concept seemed melodramatic , the episode " focuses unflinchingly on the subject of loss , yet manages to be not a downer or painful to watch , but moving , absorbing and even hopeful . " Poniewozik affirmed that the telecast effectively solved the issues that were raised about the series . He wrote , " Awake handles the confusion problem well : yes , it takes more concentration than a Law & Order , but it 's no Inception in its <unk> . Michael himself needs to hold on to markers to anchor his sense of reality — for instance , he wears a red and a green wristband in the existences in which his wife and his son are alive , respectively — and those help us follow along too . " Reuters ' Tim Molloy avouched that the episode was the " best new show of the season " : " Despite the most complicated narrative since ABC 's Lost kept skipping through time , Awake makes a fast , emotional connection that gives viewers an almost immediate stake in the lives of its compelling characters . " 
 RedEye journalist Curt Wagner stated that the series was " well acted and smartly written " . BuddyTV writer Laurel Brown called the pilot a " great episode " . In his " A " grade review , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club said that the episode was a " great piece of televised art " , describing the script as " witty , warm , and soulful " . He wrote , " David Slade 's direction conveys the emotional world of the show so well that you could watch it on mute and grasp most of what 's going on , " " At the end of the episode , you 'll leave feeling like you 've seen something unique and wonderful , something worth watching every week in an increasingly crowded television landscape . " " Pilot " was highly anticipated by Los Angeles Times journalist Robert Lloyd , who observed that " it promised to be one of the year 's best and most interesting new series . " In a pre @-@ broadcast review , Matt Fowler from IGN gave the pilot a " 10 out of 10 " classifying it as a " masterpiece " . Some commentators were less enthusiastic than the general consensus . Writing for The Washington Post , Hank Stuever felt that despite having high ambitions , the pilot episode was slow and drowsy . 
 Critics lauded the cast 's acting , specifically Isaacs ' performance . VanDerWerff concluded that the cast 's performances were " delicate and almost perfect " , while Wagner felt that Isaacs was well @-@ suited to the lead role and could easily captivate the audience ; " his touching , solid work grounds everything . He shows viewers what lengths one man in pain might go to hold onto those he loves . And it 's heartbreaking . " Denise Duguay of the Montreal Gazette thought that Isaacs evoked a " <unk> " and ambiguity that attracted viewers to his character . Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter echoed analogous sentiment , writing , " He perfectly conveys a man struggling with two horrible options . " Poniewozik iterated : " Isaacs is utterly compelling : mature , soulful and wearied . Literally , he never gets a rest , and must deal in one reality with a son acting out from rage , in other other with a spouse who is moving on at a different pace , and in different ways , from him . " Although Stuever opined that Isaacs failed to engage the audience , he praised the performances of Wong and Jones ; " Jones and Wong [ ... ] are excellent and even vaguely sinister as the dueling shrinks . " 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly was keen to Isaacs ' acting in the series . " It helps enormously to have Isaacs playing the lead . This actor knows how to convey a gravity that contrasts well with the series ' airy concept , but he avoids becoming heavy and morose . " Fowler stated that Isaacs ' performance " delivers a graceful and subdued performance as a man who , on a daily basis , must taste both heaven and hell . A man full of guilt , but also gratitude . " Fowler noted than Allen and Minnette 's performances in the series " deserve some praise for having to play characters who are also dealing with loss , but without the benefit of being able to see their lost loved one like Britten can . " 
 = French battleship Justice = 
 Justice was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Liberté class built by the French Navy . She had three sister ships : Liberté , Vérité , and Démocratie . Justice was laid down in April 1903 , launched in October 1904 , and completed in February 1908 , over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought made ships like Justice obsolete . She was armed with a main battery of four 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , compared to the ten guns of the same caliber mounted on Dreadnought . 
 After her commissioning , Justice was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet . In September 1909 , she traveled to the United States for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was assigned to the 2nd Division of the 2nd Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet . She covered troop convoys from North Africa to France in the first days of the war , and spent the rest based at Corfu and Mudros without seeing any action . After the war ended , she participated in the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War , though a mutiny in the French fleet in April 1919 led to the fleet 's withdrawal . Justice was sold for scrapping in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Justice was laid down at the La Seyne shipyard in Toulon in April 1903 , launched on 27 October 1904 , and completed in February 1908 , over a year after the revolutionary British battleship HMS Dreadnought , which rendered the pre @-@ dreadnoughts like Justice outdated before they were completed . The ship was 133 @.@ 81 meters ( 439 ft 0 in ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 24 @.@ 26 m ( 79 ft 7 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 8 @.@ 41 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) . She displaced up to 14 @,@ 860 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 630 long tons ; 16 @,@ 380 short tons ) at full load . Justice had a crew of between 739 and 769 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by three vertical triple expansion engines with twenty @-@ four Niclausse boilers . They were rated at 18 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 800 kW ) and provided a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 1 @,@ 800 t ( 1 @,@ 800 long tons ; 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) . 
 Justice 's main battery consisted of four Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 / 96 guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of ten Canon de 194 mm Modèle 1902 guns ; six were mounted in single turrets , and four in casemates in the hull . She also carried thirteen 9 @-@ pounder guns and ten 3 @-@ pounders . The ship was also armed with two 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . The ship 's main belt was 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 350 mm ( 13 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower had 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In September 1909 , Justice , Liberté , and Vérité visited the United States for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . The three battleships , commanded by Admiral Jules le Pord , were the first foreign contingent to arrive . The ships departed from Brest and arrived New York seven days later , having run at an average of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) ; the performance of the ships ' propulsion systems was regarded as satisfactory by contemporary naval experts , including the United States Naval Institute . In early 1911 , the French Navy conducted experiments with wireless telegraphy , and used Vérité and Justice for the tests . The wireless transmitters could pick up messages as far as 72 miles ( 116 km ) away . On 11 October 1911 , an accidental fire aboard Justice threatened to destroy the ship in a way similar to the explosion that destroyed her sister ship Liberté the month before . The fire was believed to have been started by a short circuit in the electrical system near the forward magazines . The fire nearly reached the ammunition in the magazines when the ship 's commander ordered the magazines to be flooded , averting a catastrophic explosion . This occurred just days after the battleship Suffren had to flood her magazines to put out another accidental fire . Later that year , the ship was featured in the film A Day on the French battleship " Justice " . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Justice was assigned to the 1st Division of the 2nd Squadron in the Mediterranean , along with Démocratie . The French fleet was initially used to cover the movement of French troops — the XIX Corps — from Algeria to metropolitan France . As a result , the fleet was far out of position to catch the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . For the majority of the war , the French used their main fleet to keep the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet bottled up in the Adriatic Sea . In 1914 she participated in the Battle of Antivari , where the battle line caught the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser SMS Zenta by surprise and sank her . The French battleships then bombarded Austrian fortifications at Cattaro in an attempt to draw out the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , which refused to take the bait . 
 The French operations in the area were hampered by a lack of a suitable base close to the mouth of the Adriatic ; the British had given the French free access to Malta , but it was hundreds of miles away . The Austrians also possessed several submarines , one of which torpedoed the dreadnought Jean Bart in December 1914 . The threat from underwater weapons greatly limited French naval activities in the Adriatic . As the war progressed , the French eventually settled on the Greek island of Corfu as their primary naval base in the area . Later in the war , Justice was sent to Mudros along with her sister ships . 
 In 1919 , after the end of the war , Justice participated in the French naval intervention in the Russian Civil War in the Black Sea , and was based in Sevastopol . On 19 April , a mutiny gripped the French fleet , starting on the battleship France , the squadron flagship . At one point during the mutiny , the crew of Justice briefly flew the red flag , though they remained relatively calm . The situation worsened after a group of Greek soldiers fired into a crowd of demonstrators ashore ; one French sailor was killed and another five were injured . Justice 's crew was enraged , and began discussing opening fire on the Greek battleship Kilkis , moored nearby . Justice 's captain ordered his ship 's guns disabled by removing their breech blocks to prevent an attack . The situation was eventually defused by returning the French squadron back to France , one of the mutineers ' primary demands . Ultimately , Justice was stricken from the naval register in 1922 and sold for scrap . 
 = X @-@ Men ( film ) = 
 X @-@ Men is a 2000 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name , distributed by 20th Century Fox . It is the first installment in the X @-@ Men film series , followed by X2 in 2003 and X @-@ Men : The Last Stand in 2006 respectively . The film , directed by Bryan Singer and written by David Hayter , features an ensemble cast that includes Patrick Stewart , Hugh Jackman , Ian McKellen , Halle Berry , Famke Janssen , James Marsden , Bruce Davison , Rebecca Romijn @-@ Stamos , Ray Park , and Anna Paquin . It depicts a world in which a small proportion of people are mutants , whose possession of superhuman powers makes them distrusted by normal humans . The film focuses on the mutants Wolverine and Rogue as they are brought into a conflict between two groups that have radically different approaches to bringing about the acceptance of mutant @-@ kind : Professor Xavier 's X @-@ Men , and the Brotherhood of Mutants , led by Magneto . 
 Development for X @-@ Men began as far back as 1984 with Orion Pictures . At one point James Cameron and Kathryn Bigelow were in discussions . The film rights went to 20th Century Fox in 1994 and various scripts and film treatments were commissioned from Andrew Kevin Walker , John Logan , Joss Whedon and Michael Chabon . Singer signed to direct in 1996 , with further rewrites by Ed Solomon , Singer , Tom DeSanto , Christopher McQuarrie and Hayter in which Beast and Nightcrawler were deleted over budget concerns from Fox . X @-@ Men marks the Hollywood debut of actor Hugh Jackman , who was a last @-@ second choice for Wolverine , cast three weeks into filming . Filming took place from September 22 , 1999 to March 3 , 2000 , primarily in Toronto . X @-@ Men was released to positive reviews and was a financial success , starting the X @-@ Men film franchise and spawning a reemergence of superhero films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1944 German @-@ occupied Poland , the child Erik Lehnsherr is separated from his parents upon entering a concentration camp . While trying to reach them , he causes a set of metal gates to bend towards him , as though attracted by a magnetic force , before being knocked out by guards . Decades later , U.S. Senator Robert Kelly attempts to pass a " Mutant Registration Act " in Congress , which would force mutants to publicly reveal their identities and abilities . Present are Lehnsherr , now known as Magneto , and the telepathic Professor Charles Xavier , who privately discuss their differing views on the relationship between humans and mutants . 
 In Meridian , Mississippi , 17 @-@ year @-@ old Marie D <unk> accidentally puts her boyfriend into a coma upon kissing him , which is caused by her superhuman ability to absorb the life force and mutant abilities of anyone she touches . In fear , Marie , now going by the name Rogue , runs away to Laughlin City , Alberta . While at a bar , she meets Logan , also known as Wolverine , who possesses superhuman healing abilities , heightened senses , and metal claws that protrude from his knuckles . While on the road together , they are attacked by Victor Creed / Sabretooth , another mutant and an associate of Magneto . Cyclops and Storm arrive and save Wolverine and Rogue and bring them to the X @-@ Mansion in Westchester County , New York . They are introduced to Xavier , who leads a group of mutants called the X @-@ Men , who are trying to educate young mutants on their powers , and stop Magneto from escalating the war with humanity . 
 Senator Kelly is abducted by Magneto 's allies Toad and the shapeshifter Mystique and brought to their lair , where Magneto uses Kelly as a test subject for a machine that artificially induces mutation . Kelly uses his new mutant abilities to escape imprisonment . After Rogue uses her powers on Wolverine , she is convinced by Mystique ( disguised as classmate Bobby Drake ) that Xavier is angry with her and she should leave the school . Xavier uses his mutant @-@ locating machine Cerebro to find Rogue at a train station . Mystique later infiltrates Cerebro and sabotages the machine . 
 At the train station , Wolverine convinces Rogue to stay with Xavier , but a fight ensues when Magneto , Toad and Sabretooth arrive and kidnap Rogue . Kelly arrives at Xavier 's school , but dies shortly after due to the instability of his artificial mutation , which causes his cells to break down into a puddle of water . The X @-@ Men learn that Magneto was severely weakened while testing the machine on Kelly , and realize that he intends to use Rogue 's power @-@ transferring ability so that she can power the machine in his place , which will kill her . Xavier attempts to use Cerebro to locate Rogue , but Mystique 's sabotage causes him to fall into a coma . Fellow telekinetic / telepath Jean Grey fixes Cerebro and uses it , learning that Magneto plans to place his mutation @-@ inducing machine on Liberty Island and use it to mutate the world leaders meeting for a summit on nearby Ellis Island . 
 The X @-@ Men scale the Statue of Liberty . Storm electrocutes Toad , and Wolverine stabs Mystique . Magneto transfers his powers to Rogue , and forces her to use them to start the machine . Cyclops dispatches Sabretooth with the help of Jean , who levitates his battle visor . Storm uses her weather @-@ controlling powers and Jean uses her telekinesis to lift Wolverine up to Magneto 's machine . Wolverine saves Rogue when Cyclops blasts Magneto out of the way , and destroys the machine . Wolverine touches the dying Rogue 's face , and his healing abilities are transferred to her , causing her to recover . 
 Professor Xavier recovers from his coma . The group learns that Mystique is still alive , and impersonating Senator Kelly . Xavier tells Wolverine that near where he was found in Canada is an abandoned military base at Alkali Lake that might contain information about his past . Xavier visits Magneto in a prison cell constructed entirely of plastic , and the two play chess . Magneto warns him that he will continue his fight , to which Xavier promises that he and the X @-@ Men will always be there to stop him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Patrick Stewart as Charles Xavier / Professor X 
 The mutant founder of the X @-@ Men and the Xavier School for Gifted Youngsters , who hopes for peaceful coexistence between mutantkind and mankind and is regarded as an authority on genetic mutation . Although restricted to a wheelchair , his mutant powers include vast telepathy , which is amplified by the Cerebro supercomputer that he invented with Magneto 's help . 
 Hugh Jackman as Logan / Wolverine 
 A Canadian mutant who makes a living in cage fights and has lived for fifteen years without memory of who he is , apart from his tags marked " Wolverine " and an adamantium @-@ encased skeleton ( as well as adamantium claws ) . His mutant powers include enhanced , animal @-@ like senses ( enabling him to sense other people ) and the ability to heal rapidly from numerous injuries , including the surgery that bonded the metal to his skeleton , which makes his age impossible to determine . 
 Ian McKellen as Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto 
 A mutant Holocaust survivor who was once friends with Xavier ( with whom he helped to build Cerebro ) , until his belief that humans and mutants could never co @-@ exist led to their separation . His mutant powers include powerful magnetic fields , metal manipulation , and a sophisticated knowledge in matters of genetic manipulation , which he uses to plan a mutation of the world leaders to allow mutant prosperity . 
 Brett Morris as young Erik Lehnsherr 
 Halle Berry as Ororo Munroe / Storm 
 A white @-@ haired mutant who teaches at Xavier 's school . Although calm and caring , Storm has become bitter with other people 's hatred for mutants , and while comforting a dying Senator Kelly , reveals that she sometimes hates humans because she is afraid of them . Her mutant power allows her to control the weather with her mind . 
 Famke Janssen as Dr. Jean Grey : 
 The mutant doctor of the X @-@ Mansion who is Cyclops 's fiancée . Her powers include telekinesis and telepathy . 
 James Marsden as Scott Summers / Cyclops 
 A mutant who is Xavier 's second @-@ in @-@ command and the X @-@ Men 's field leader , as well as an instructor at the Institute . He is engaged to Jean Grey . His powers include a strong red beam of force shooting from his eyes , which is only held in check by sunglasses or a specialized ruby @-@ quartz visor , which also enables him to control the strength of the beam to fire when in combat . 
 Bruce Davison as Senator Robert Kelly 
 An anti @-@ mutant politician who wishes to ban mutant children from schools using a Mutant Registration Act . He is kidnapped by Magneto in a test of his mutation machine , which causes his body to turn into a liquid @-@ like substance . He dies before Jean could save him . 
 Rebecca Romijn @-@ Stamos as Raven Darkhölme / Mystique 
 Magneto 's mutant loyal second @-@ in @-@ command , who seems completely facile with respect to modern technology . Her powers include altering her shape , voice and mimicking any human being , which is almost secondary to her role as " the perfect soldier " . 
 Ray Park as Mortimer Toynbee / Toad 
 A very agile mutant and henchman of Magneto . His powers include a prehensile tongue , a slimy substance that he spits onto others , and enhanced agility . 
 Tyler Mane as Victor Creed / Sabretooth 
 A brutal and sadistic Canadian mutant mercenary and henchman of Magneto . His powers include a ferocious , feline @-@ like nature , enhanced animal @-@ like senses , fangs and healing abilities similar to Wolverine 's , and claws extending past each finger . 
 Anna Paquin as Marie / Rogue 
 A mutant seventeen @-@ year @-@ old girl forced to leave her home in Mississippi when she puts her boyfriend into a coma by kissing him . Her powers include absorbing anyone 's memories , life force , and in the case of mutants - powers through physical touch . 
 Additionally , Shawn Ashmore appeared in a minor role as Bobby Drake / Iceman , a mutant student at Xavier 's School for Gifted Youngsters who takes a liking to Rogue . His powers include generating ice . David Hayter , Stan Lee , and Tom DeSanto make cameo appearances . George <unk> , the voice of Beast in X @-@ Men : The Animated Series , appeared as the truck driver who drops Rogue off at the bar at which Wolverine fights . Other cameo appearances include <unk> Kay as Kitty Pryde , Katrina <unk> as Jubilee and Donald MacKinnon as a young Colossus sketching a picture in one scene . Gambit was considered for one of the students at the X @-@ Mansion . Singer remembered , " We thought about Gambit as the young boy on the basketball field , but the feeling was that if he has the basketball and then releases it and it exploded , [ then ] people would be like ' What 's wrong with those basketballs ? ' " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Marvel Comics writers and chief editors Gerry Conway and Roy Thomas wrote an X @-@ Men screenplay in 1984 when Orion Pictures held an option on the film rights , but development stalled when Orion began facing financial troubles . Throughout 1989 and 1990 , Stan Lee and Chris Claremont were in discussions with Carolco Pictures for an X @-@ Men film adaptation , with James Cameron as producer and Kathryn Bigelow directing . A story treatment was written by Bigelow , with Bob Hoskins being considered for Wolverine and Angela Bassett being considered for the role of Storm . The deal fell apart when Stan Lee piqued Cameron 's interest on a Spider @-@ Man film , Carolco going bankrupt , and the film rights reverting to Marvel . In December 1992 , Marvel discussed selling the property to Columbia Pictures to no avail . Meanwhile , Avi Arad produced the animated X @-@ Men TV series for Fox Kids . 20th Century Fox was impressed by the success of the TV show , and producer Lauren Shuler Donner purchased the film rights for them in 1994 , bringing Andrew Kevin Walker to write the script . 
 Walker 's draft involved Professor Xavier recruiting Wolverine into the X @-@ Men , which consists of Cyclops , Jean Grey , Iceman , Beast , and Angel . The Brotherhood of Mutants , which consisted of Magneto , Sabretooth , Toad , Juggernaut and the Blob , try to conquer New York City , while Henry Peter <unk> and Bolivar Trask attack the X @-@ Men with three 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall Sentinels . The script focused on the rivalry between Wolverine and Cyclops , as well as the latter 's self @-@ doubt as a field leader . Part of the backstory invented for Magneto made him the cause of the Chernobyl disaster . The script also featured the X @-@ Copter and the Danger Room . Walker turned in his second draft in June 1994 . <unk> <unk> , John Logan , James Schamus , and Joss Whedon were brought on for subsequent rewrites . One of these scripts kept the idea of Magneto turning Manhattan into a " mutant homeland " , while another hinged on a romance between Wolverine and Storm . Whedon 's draft featured the Danger Room , and concluded with Jean Grey dressed as the Phoenix . According to Entertainment Weekly , this screenplay was rejected because of its " quick @-@ witted pop culture @-@ referencing tone " , and the finished film contained only two dialogue exchanges that Whedon had contributed . Michael Chabon pitched a six @-@ page film treatment to Fox in 1996 . It focused heavily on character development between Wolverine and Jubilee and included Professor X , Cyclops , Jean Grey , Nightcrawler , Beast , Iceman , and Storm . Under Chabon 's plan , the villains would not have been introduced until the second film . 
 Fox considered Brett Ratner as director , and offered the position to Robert Rodriguez , but he turned it down . Following the release of The Usual Suspects , Bryan Singer was looking to do a science fiction film and Fox offered him Alien Resurrection , but producer Tom DeSanto felt he would be more appropriate for X @-@ Men . The themes of prejudice in the comic resonated with Singer . By December 1996 , Singer was in the director 's position , while Ed Solomon was hired to write the script in April 1997 , and Singer went to film Apt Pupil . Fox then announced a Christmas 1998 release date . In late 1997 , the budget was projected at $ 60 million . In late 1998 , Singer and DeSanto sent a treatment to Fox , which they believed was " perfect " because it took " seriously " the themes and the comparisons between Xavier and Magneto and Martin Luther King and Malcolm X , unlike the other scripts . They made Rogue an important character because Singer recognized that her mutation , which renders her unable to touch anyone , was the most symbolic of alienation . Singer merged attributes of Kitty Pryde and Jubilee into the film 's depiction of Rogue . Magneto 's plot to mutate the world leaders into accepting his people is reminiscent of how Constantine I 's conversion to Christianity ended the persecution of early Christians in the Roman Empire ; the analogy was emphasized in a deleted scene in which Storm teaches history . Senator Kelly 's claim that he has a list of mutants living in the United States recalls Joseph McCarthy 's similar claim regarding communists . 
 Fox , who had projected the budget at $ 75 million , rejected the treatment which they estimated would have cost $ 5 million more . Beast , Nightcrawler , Pyro , and the Danger Room had to be deleted before the studio greenlighted X @-@ Men . Fox head Thomas Rothman argued that this would enhance the story , and Singer concurred that removing the Danger Room allowed him to focus on other scenes he preferred . Elements of Beast , particularly his medical expertise , were transferred to Jean Grey . Singer and DeSanto brought Christopher McQuarrie from The Usual Suspects , and together did another rewrite . David Hayter simultaneously rewrote the screenplay , receiving solo screenplay credit from the Writers Guild of America , while Singer and DeSanto were given story credit . The WGA offered McQuarrie a credit , but he voluntarily took his name off when the final version was more in line with Hayter 's script than his . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Russell Crowe was Singer 's first choice to play Wolverine , but he turned it down , instead recommending his friend , actor Hugh Jackman for the part . Jackman was an unknown actor at the time , while a number of more established actors offered their services for the role , with Singer casting Dougray Scott . Part of Scott 's contract included a sequel , but Scott backed out due to scheduling conflicts with Mission : Impossible II in early October 1999 . Jackman was then cast three weeks into filming , based on a successful audition . 
 Patrick Stewart was first approached by Singer to play Xavier on the set of 1997 's Conspiracy Theory , which was directed by X @-@ Men executive producer Richard Donner . James Caviezel was originally cast as Cyclops , but backed out due to scheduling conflicts with Frequency . James Marsden was unfamiliar with his character , but soon became accustomed after reading various comic books . Marsden modeled his performance similar to a Boy Scout . Eric Mabius expressed interest for the role of Cyclops . Angela Bassett was approached to portray Storm in late 1997 , as was Janet Jackson . Anna Paquin dropped out of the lead role in Tart in favor of X @-@ Men . Terence Stamp was considered for Magneto before Singer cast Ian McKellen , who acted in his previous film , Apt Pupil . McKellen responded to the gay allegory of the film , " the allegory of the mutants as outsiders , disenfranchised and alone and coming to all of that at puberty when their difference manifests , " Singer explained . " Ian is an activist and he really responded to the potential of that allegory . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The original start date was mid @-@ 1999 , with the release date set for Christmas 2000 , but Fox moved X @-@ Men to June . Steven Spielberg had been scheduled to film Minority Report for release in June 2000 , but he had chosen to film A.I. Artificial Intelligence , and Fox needed a film to fill the void . This meant that Singer had to finish X @-@ Men six months ahead of schedule , although filming had been pushed back . The release date was then moved to July 14 . 
 Filming took place from September 22 , 1999 to March 3 , 2000 in Toronto and in Hamilton , Ontario . Locations included Central Commerce Collegiate , Distillery District and Canadian Warplane Heritage Museum . Casa Loma , Roy Thomson Hall and Metro Hall were used for X @-@ Mansion interiors , while Parkwood Estate ( located in Oshawa , east of Toronto ) was chosen for exteriors . Spencer Smith Park ( in Burlington , Ontario ) doubled for Liberty Island . Post @-@ production was hectic , with Shuler Donner saying that " we had to lock picture and score and edit , sometimes at the same time . " 
 = = = Design and effects = = = 
 The filmmakers decided not to replicate the X @-@ Men costumes as seen in the comic book . Stan Lee and Chris Claremont supported this decision . Claremont joked , " you can do that on a drawing , but when you put it on people it 's disturbing ! " Producer / co @-@ writer Tom DeSanto had been supportive of using the blue and yellow color scheme of the comics , but came to conclude that they would not work onscreen . To acknowledge the fan complaints , Singer added Cyclops ' line " What would you prefer , yellow spandex ? " – when Wolverine complains about wearing their uniforms – during filming . Singer noted that durable black leather made more sense for the X @-@ Men to wear as protective clothing , and Shuler Donner added that the costumes helped them " blend into the night " . 
 Oakley , Inc. provided the red @-@ lensed glasses worn by Cyclops , a customized version of the company 's own X @-@ Metal Juliet . Wolverine 's claws required a full silicone cast of Hugh Jackman 's arm , and over 700 pairs for Jackman and his stunt doubles . It took nine hours to apply Rebecca Romijn 's prosthetic makeup . She could not drink wine , use skin creams , or fly the day before filming , because it could have caused her body chemistry to change slightly , causing the 110 prosthetics applied to her skin to fall off . Between takes , the makeup department kept Romijn isolated in a windowless room to ensure secrecy . Romijn reflected , " I had almost no contact with the rest of the cast ; it was like I was making a different movie from everyone else . It was hell . " 
 In the late 1990s , computer @-@ generated imagery was becoming more commonly used . Singer visited the sets of Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace and Titanic to understand practical and digital effects . Filming had started without a special effects company hired . Digital Domain , Cinesite , Kleiser @-@ Walczak Construction Co . , Hammerhead Production , Matte World Digital , CORE and POP were all hired in December 1999 . Visual effects supervisor Mike Fink admitted to have been dissatisfied with his work on X @-@ Men in 2003 , despite nearly being nominated for an Academy Award . 
 Digital Domain 's technical director Sean C. Cunningham and lead compositor Claas Henke morphed Bruce Davison into a liquid figure for Kelly 's mutation scene . Cunningham said , " There were many digital layers : water without refraction , water with murkiness , skin with and without highlights , skin with goo in it . When rendered together , it took 39 hours per frame . " They considered showing Kelly 's internal organs during the transformation , " but that seemed too gruesome " , according to Cunningham . 
 = = Music = = 
 Singer approached John Williams to compose the film score , but Williams turned down the offer because of scheduling conflicts . Then Singer set on his usual composer , John Ottman . However , once Fox pushed X @-@ Men from December to July , Ottman 's commitment to direct Urban Legends : Final Cut made him unable to work with Singer . Michael Kamen was eventually hired . Given the film was only completed shortly before its premiere , Kamen wrote the score to the finished scenes , which were sent to him just as work was done on them . Singer asked him not to use any songs in the soundtrack as he " didn 't want to date the movie " . Due to Kamen 's unfamiliarity with the comics , he only tried to " represent Bryan Singer 's filmic tone that he 's made , for a comic book , a quite serious movie , which is about the capacity of humanity to categorize people by race , religion or type , and prejudice people against them based on their innate characteristics " . Character @-@ specific themes were written to " identify these characters , as you go through the film , because they 're not always clear . " For instance , Mystique 's motif , focused on the cello as Kamen found it " a very erotic @-@ sounding instrument " , played in the soundtrack as she was disguised as Wolverine . Due to time restrictions , the producers scrapped their original plan to record the score in London and did it in Los Angeles . 
 = = Release = = 
 X @-@ Men had its premiere at Ellis Island on July 12 , 2000 , two days before a wide opening in 3 @,@ 025 theaters in North America . It would also debut in Australia that weekend to take advantage of the school holidays , while most other territories would get the film in August . Marvel Studios was depending on X @-@ Men 's success to ignite other franchise properties ( Spider @-@ Man , Fantastic Four , Hulk , and Daredevil ) . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On June 1 , 2000 , Marvel published a comic book prequel to X @-@ Men , entitled X @-@ Men : Beginnings , revealing the backstories of Magneto , Rogue and Wolverine . There was also a comic book adaptation based on the film . A console video game , X @-@ Men : Mutant Academy , was released on July 6 , 2000 to take advantage of the film 's release , featuring costumes and other materials from the film . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 On its opening weekend in North America , X @-@ Men earned $ 54 @,@ 471 @,@ 475 in its opening weekend , a record for comic book films that far . The film eventually grossed $ 157 @,@ 299 @,@ 717 and made $ 139 @,@ 039 @,@ 810 in other countries , coming to a worldwide total of $ 296 @,@ 339 @,@ 527 . X @-@ Men was the ninth highest @-@ grossing film of 2000 . It is the lowest @-@ grossing film in the series . The success of X @-@ Men ( alongside Blade ) started a reemergence for the comic book and superhero film genre . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received positive reviews . Based on 166 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 81 % were positive . The site 's critical consensus reads : " Faithful to the comics and filled with action , X @-@ Men brings a crowded slate of classic Marvel characters to the screen with a talented ensemble cast and surprisingly sharp narrative focus . " Metacritic collected an average score of 64 / 100 from 33 reviews indicating generally favorable reviews . 
 Kenneth Turan found " so much is happening you feel the immediate need of a sequel just as a reward for absorbing it all . While X @-@ Men doesn 't take your breath away wire @-@ to @-@ wire the way The Matrix did , it 's an accomplished piece of work with considerable pulp watchability to it . " <unk> 's James Berardinelli , an X @-@ Men comic book fan , believed , " the film is effectively paced with a good balance of exposition , character development , and special effects @-@ enhanced action . Neither the plot nor the character relationships are difficult to follow , and the movie avoids the trap of spending too much time explaining things that don 't need to be explained . X @-@ Men fandom is likely to be divided over whether the picture is a success or a failure " . Desson Thomson of The Washington Post commented , " [ T ] he movie 's enjoyable on the surface , but I suspect many people , even die @-@ hards , will be less enthusiastic about what lies , or doesn 't , underneath " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said he " started out liking this movie , while waiting for something really interesting to happen . When nothing did , I still didn 't dislike it ; I assume the X @-@ Men will further develop their personalities if there is a sequel , and maybe find time to get involved in a story . No doubt fans of the comics will understand subtle allusions and fine points of behavior ; they should linger in the lobby after each screening to answer questions . " He also gave it a " thumbs down " on Ebert & Roeper . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone noted , " Since it 's Wolverine 's movie , any X @-@ Men or Women who don 't hinge directly on his story get short shrift . As Storm , Halle Berry can do neat tricks with weather , but her role is gone with the wind . It sucks that Stewart and McKellen , two superb actors , are underused . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The film was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , but lost to Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon . X @-@ Men was successful at the Saturn Awards . It won categories for Best Science Fiction Film , direction ( Singer ) , writing ( David Hayter ) , costume design , Best Actor ( Hugh Jackman ) and Supporting Actress ( Rebecca Romijn ) . Nominations included Performance by a Younger Actor ( Anna Paquin ) , Supporting Actor ( Patrick Stewart ) , Special Effects and Make @-@ up . Empire readers voted Singer Best Director . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 X @-@ Men was originally released on VHS and DVD in November 2000 , to take advantage of Thanksgiving in the United States . In its initial home video weekend , the film earned $ 60 million in rentals and direct sales , making it earn more than all films in theaters outside from leader How the Grinch Stole Christmas . X @-@ Men finished 2000 as the seventh highest @-@ grossing home release of the year with $ 141 million , with 78 % being earned through sales . A new two @-@ disc DVD version was issued in 2003 in anticipation to the theatrical release of sequel X2 , titled X @-@ Men 1 @.@ 5 . The DVD includes the theatrical version of the film along with the option to add deleted scenes , and several new additional features . 
 X @-@ Men was released on Blu @-@ ray in April 2009 , with bonus features reproduced from the X @-@ Men 1 @.@ 5 DVD release . Unlike the US edition , the UK release of the Blu @-@ ray includes a picture @-@ in @-@ picture mode called " <unk> " , and an in @-@ feature photo gallery . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 After the film 's critical and financial success , a series of films followed starting with , X2 in 2003 . 
 = Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII = 
 Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> -ファイナルファンタジーVII- , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> -Fainaru Fantajī Sebun- ) is an action role @-@ playing video game developed by Square Enix and originally released for the FOMA mobile service on September 24 , 2004 . It was later released for SoftBank Mobile and EZweb in 2007 . Before Crisis is a prequel to the 1997 video game Final Fantasy VII and forms part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , a metaseries expanding on and continuing the story established in Final Fantasy VII . It takes place six years prior to the events of Final Fantasy VII and focuses on the adventures of the Turks , a group of covert operatives working for the Shinra Electric Power Company , and their fights against both rebel group AVALANCHE and their corrupt employers . 
 As the first major Final Fantasy game for mobile devices , Before Crisis was designed as a gameplay and multiplayer experience unique to the platform . It is the first major project directed by Hajime Tabata , who created the initial concept at the request of Tetsuya Nomura for a game that had the Turks as protagonists . The music was composed by Takeharu Ishimoto , originally a sound arranger at Square Enix . It was highly successful upon release , registering 200 @,@ 000 users and being accessed over one million times . Western critics have generally praised the title , but due to issues involving the capacity of mobile devices in the west , it has not been released outside Japan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Before Crisis is a real @-@ time action role @-@ playing game featuring 2D graphics as the player moves along in a side @-@ scrolling manner . The player begins the game by selecting their character , which can be a man or a woman , along with their name . Gameplay is divided up between several modes of play . " Episode Mode " involves the player playing through the game 's main storyline , completing various objectives in order to continue on in the game . " Free Mode " allows players to roam towns and speak with the population . Players can also play extra missions to gain Experience points and items , some of which are exclusive to " Free Mode " . Characters have hit points and magic points , and can level up upon acquisition of experience , at which point they can equip new weapons and armor . Players can choose to manually attack an enemy during combat or press the action key to automatically attack the nearest enemy . 
 The " Materia Generation System " allows players to acquire Materia , objects tied to the game 's magic system , by taking a picture with their camera phone . The game synthesizes the picture down to its base color . Depending upon the dominant color , lighting , and other factors , the game produces a Materia of a certain type . For example , a dark green picture results in a Bio Materia , while a blue picture results in a Cure Materia . Once acquired , Materia can be leveled up as in Final Fantasy VII . Under certain circumstances , assistance in the form of summoned monsters , recurring figures in the Final Fantasy series , can be called in via the Materia system to deal damage to multiple enemies . Rank Points are awarded during the completion of objectives in all three modes of play . After a certain amount of Rank Points have been acquired , special bonuses are unlocked , such as stronger armor and weapons , and extra Materia slots . The player is also given a rank , based upon how long they have been playing the game . The higher their rank , the better the bonuses the player gets . 
 The game uses an ad @-@ hoc online multiplayer feature that enables various actions between players , including trading Materia via email . Players can summon a friend to cast magic by filling the " Materia aid " meter . Up to three players can team up at any one time . " Rescue Mode " is activated if the player is defeated during " Episode Mode " , at which point they have the option to restart and lose points , or allow themselves to be imprisoned and wait for other players to rescue them . The player can be rescued while their phone is powered down . 
 Additions were made after the initial release . In 2006 , a fighting arena dubbed " Battle Square " was added . In the " Battle Square " , players can either fight other players or AI @-@ controlled enemy units . Victory is determined by which side defeated the other and damage taken during combat . In " Battle Tournament " mode , players can choose to use a handicap : the handicap is determined randomly by a materia slot . Two extra difficulty settings were also added , with players able to switch between these and the normal difficulty in the game menu . " Easy Mode " was released in 2006 and allows the player to auto @-@ evade incoming attacks and reduce damage taken , while " Hard Mode " , released in 2007 and meant for advanced users , increases the damage dealt by enemy attacks . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Before Crisis is set six years prior to the events of Final Fantasy VII . The world on which Before Crisis is set , called " the Planet " in @-@ game and " Gaia " by game staff , is divided into multiple regions run by a megacorporation called the Shinra Electric Power Company . Shinra uses the energy of the Planet , known as the Lifestream , to power the world , and as such is endangering the Planet and its people . The events of Before Crisis frequently overlap with those of Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . The exact setting is shortly after the end of a war between Shinra and the people of Wutai . With Wutai defeated , and the people of the world now dependent on Shinra 's energy , the company becomes the dominant economic , military and political power in the world . Rising against them is AVALANCHE , a rebel group who rightly believe that Shinra 's energy extraction is slowly killing the planet . 
 The playable characters and main protagonists are the Turks , a group of covert operatives working for Shinra . The playable characters in @-@ game are eleven new Turks : ten of them are designated by their weapon or fighting style and their gender , while the eleventh is known as Legend ( Male ) . Their true name can be selected by the player . One of the characters , <unk> ( Female ) , later turns up in Crisis Core under the name " <unk> " . The Turks are led by Veld , a veteran of the group , and later Tseng , a character who plays an important role in other VII stories . Their primary antagonists all belong to AVALANCHE . The three important AVALANCHE characters are Elfé , the leader of AVALANCHE and Veld 's daughter ; Fuhito , a scientist who acts as the planner for the group ; and Shears , AVALANCHE 's second @-@ in @-@ command . Multiple characters from VII make appearances either as cameos or supporting characters , such as protagonists Cloud Strife , Tifa Lockhart , Aerith Gainsborough , and Zack Fair ; and originals antagonists Rufus Shinra , son of the company president ; and Sephiroth , a SOLDIER who would go rogue . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Before Crisis opens with the trainee Turks on a mission in the city of Midgar to investigate AVALANCHE activities . With help from Reno , AVALANCHE retreat . However , the attack proves to be a diversion for a greater strike at the town of Junon , where President Shinra is set to give a speech . President Shinra is shot , but survives , and calls in Sephiroth . However , it transpires that even the attack on the President was a diversion , and AVALANCHE 's real target was a weapon called the Mako Cannon , which they planned to fire at Midgar , destroying the city . Elfé and Sephiroth do battle at the cannon , but the fight ends inconclusively , and AVALANCHE withdraw . AVALANCHE next target Rayleigh a professor carrying data on the SOLDIER members and their creation . The Turks are sent to protect Rayleigh , accompanied by several Shinra guards , including Cloud . Fuhito , a scientist working for AVALANCHE , is able to corrupt Rayleigh 's data when the Turks disobey orders and save Rayleigh instead of protecting the information . Using the SOLDIER data , Fuhito develops an elite unit known as the Ravens , using them to capture two SOLDIERs , Essai and Sebastian . The Turks succeed in rescuing the pair , and are then sent to destroy AVALANCHE , accompanied by Zack . Essai and Sebastian , however , are captured once again , and turned into Ravens . Even though Zack is able to bring them back to their senses , he is unable to save them . 
 Meanwhile , President Shinra becomes suspicious of the Turks activities , believing that someone within the organization is leaking sensitive information . He concludes that it must be Veld , and removes him from command , instead placing the company 's security leader Heidegger in charge . In his first operation however , Heidegger nearly destroys Junon , and the President reinstates Veld . In his first mission back in command , Veld plans to defeat AVALANCHE . An assault is launched at a Mako Reactor , during which Rufus Shinra is revealed to be the traitor supporting AVALANCHE . He is captured by the Turks and placed under house arrest . At the same time , Shears defects to the Turks in an effort to save the gravely ill Elfé . Veld discovers that Elfé is his daughter Felicia , whom he thought dead in a botched Shinra operation , and resigns from the Turks . With Elfé continuing to weaken , Fuhito takes over the command of AVALANCHE . It is revealed that a Materia owned by Elfé is <unk> , an ancient and powerful summoned monster that Fuhito intends to use to destroy humanity and stop them harming the planet . However , the Materia is broken , and is slowly draining Elfé 's life energy . To save her , the four Support Materia must be found . Fuhito holds one , and the Turks and Shears hold another . 
 Meanwhile , not wanting Rufus ' betrayal become known , the President orders the Turks ' destruction . Despite this imminent threat , the Turks manage to find two more Support Materia . Under Fuhito 's control , the remainder of AVALANCHE is turned into a vicious army of uncontrollable Ravens , and he manages to steal all the materia needed . In the final battle , Fuhito summons <unk> , fusing the summon with his own body , and Shears sacrifices himself to save Elfé . Fuhito transforms into a monster , but he is defeated by the Turks . After the battle , Tseng falsely claims that both Veld and Elfé are dead , so as to protect them from being hunted by Shinra . The Turks are then reorganized , with Tseng reinstated as their immediate leader , but they are now sworn to loyalty to Shinra as part of the bargain for their survival . The original Turks find new lives for themselves in hiding , and are later seen helping in the evacuation of Midgar during the events of VII . 
 = = Development = = 
 Before Crisis was created as part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , a multimedia series based in and on the world and characters of VII . While the film Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children was originally to be the only product of the Compilation , the production team agreed that one title was not enough to explore the world of Final Fantasy VII in full , so more titles were decided upon , including Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII and Crisis Core . Before Crisis was originally conceived by Tetsuya Nomura , one of the creative minds behind Final Fantasy VII and the Compilation . His initial idea was simply for a mobile action role @-@ playing game using the mobile network . During pre @-@ production , it was decided to set it within the world of Final Fantasy VII . Hajime Tabata joined at this point . He approached Tabata , who had only recently joined the company 's mobile games division , and asked if the division could create a mobile game focused on the Turks . Nomura would end of designing the game 's characters . Production began in 2002 . It was worked on by a core team of 18 people . Staff from the original game took supervisory roles . The game 's title was thought up by Tabata , and would go on to establish a system of letter @-@ based abbreviations used by staff for titles in the Compilation . To help solidify their goal , the staff created a timeline for the world of Final Fantasy VII . Since there was little definite information concerning events prior to Final Fantasy VII , they had a relative amount of creative freedom , including creating an early , more violent incarnation of rebel group AVALANCHE . Although Before Crisis is the second title created for the series , it was the first to be released because Advent Children was delayed during post @-@ production . 
 Before Crisis was the first original video game developed by Square Enix exclusively for mobile phones , originally released on NTT DoCoMo 's FOMA mobile devices , and the first action role @-@ playing game exclusive to the platform . The company 's first major mobile title , also in collaboration with NTT DoCoMo , was a remake of the original Final Fantasy . Using lessons learned from the development of the Final Fantasy port , the team worked hard to make Before Crisis a uniquely mobile experience , with gameplay features built to exploit mobile functions such as the camera and network capacity . The camera function used to generate Materia was based on a simple image recognition that specifies the Materia generated based on the picture 's general color . One of the challenges during development was to keep the framerate smooth during moments of high action , especially as no two mobiles would have identical components . In addition to these problems were issues with integrating the multiplayer functions , balancing the gameplay for different playstyles , creating a comfortable button layout , and adjusting the amount of content they could include for mobiles while maintaining the desired product quality . 
 To promote the game , Madhouse created a promotional animation featuring some of the main characters . The original version 's beta test started in August 2004 . It was released on September 24 . Following an announcement at the Tokyo Game Show in 2006 , the game was released for two additional Japanese mobile carriers . It was respectively released for SoftBank Mobile and EZweb on January 30 and April 5 , 2007 . New logos were created for each release . In 2010 , Tabata voiced an interest in fully remaking Before Crisis for the Nintendo 3DS , revamping the narrative delivery and incorporating the ability for a substantial number of players to enter missions . This suggestion was positively received by Nomura and Yoshinori Kitase , but at the time Tabata was busy developing Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 ( then Agito XIII ) and The 3rd Birthday . Deployment for the SoftBank version ended in June 2015 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The composer for Before Crisis was Takeharu Ishimoto , who would go on to compose music for Crisis Core . Originally joining the company as a music arranger , he was one of many staff who participated in a competition set up by the game developers to find a composer for Before Crisis . His task was to create a piece of music that was related to the world of Final Fantasy VII , but still distinctive . It was one of Ishimoto 's first jobs as the main composer for a title . The music of Before Crisis was commercially released along with the music from the original video animation Last Order : Final Fantasy VII in an album titled Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII & Last Order : Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack . The majority of the tracks of the album were composed by Ishimoto , apart from a few reorchestrated themes from VII , the music of which was written by regular Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 The game 's release in the west was announced at the 2006 Electronic Entertainment Expo , two years after its release in Japan . At the announcement , the localization was said to be " coming along nicely . " The stated reason for the delay between the original and projected western release was that mobile phones in the west were not yet advanced enough for the game . One of the things planned for the western release was to bring the entire experience over as quickly as possible , with plans for one to three chapters released each month , and fine @-@ tuning to be done using the planned two @-@ year gap between the original and western releases . It formed part of a push by the company into the western mobile game market . Despite these announcements , no further progress has been made and Before Crisis was never released in the west . The official reason for this , as stated by head of mobile operations Keiji Fujita , was that mobile phones in the west were too low @-@ spec for Before Crisis , which could only run on high @-@ end phones in Japan , making a port impossible . Another possible reason suggested by Fujita was Ito 's move from Square Enix to Capcom in 2008 , leaving no @-@ one to manage any future localization and porting efforts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Japanese website <unk> reviewed the beta version in September 2004 . The reviewer enjoyed the experience overall and found communication with other players easy , but found a few faults with the game that they hoped would be resolved later , and generally found the female characters less effective in battle . During its first day of operation , the game registered 200 @,@ 000 users , making it the best @-@ selling mobile game up until that time , and was accessed 1 @.@ 6 million times . According to Ito , by 2006 , the game was still highly popular in Japan . 
 Previews and features concerning the game have generally been positive . AnimeFringe commented that the visuals seemed " remarkable good " and praised the game for choosing to " reverse the good and bad guy roles , " by making the Turks protagonists , and AVALANCHE antagonists . Cara Lee Haslam of RPGamer previewed the game at E3 2006 and stated that the " graphics are really great , especially for a cell phone game , " although she also noted that the animation " isn 't the best . " GameSpot 's Bethany Massimilla also previewed the game at E3 , calling it " perfectly digestible in delivery , " with its use of episodic storytelling that comes in " small bursts in between action periods . " She also stated that the game had " well @-@ defined and detailed character portraits and lean , lanky character models running around the city and mako reactor , which had a simple layout but still looked nice . " Massimilla praised the smooth animations , and felt that " the controls were easy to learn and were responsive . " Additionally , she thought the demo phone 's vibrating function , set off when the player receives a call from Tseng , was a subtle detail . Levi Buchanan of IGN was generally positive , praising the dark art style , and finding the short mission @-@ based structure ideal for mobile gameplay . 1UP.com listed the game as one of five classic Japanese mobile games unlikely to come to North America . 
 Outside its immediate reception , Before Crisis had an effect on other projects within the Final Fantasy series . After the positive reception of Madhouse 's animated commercial , they were chosen by Square Enix to animate Last Order . The high popularity of Before Crisis in Japan led indirectly to the creation of Type @-@ 0 , part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy subseries and then a title for mobiles . 
 = Typhoon Judy ( 1982 ) = 
 Typhoon Judy , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Susang , was the third tropical cyclone to affect Japan during the 1982 Pacific typhoon season . Forming east of the Philippines in tandem with another system on September 4 , the disturbance continued to intensify , and was upgraded into a tropical storm early on September 6 and a typhoon on September 8 while tracking northwestward . On September 9 , Judy attained its peak intensity , with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) . Thereafter , increased wind shear took a toll on the typhoon , as it turned northward on September 11 in the general direction of Japan under the influence of a mid @-@ latitude cyclone . Judy passed over southeastern Japan on September 12 ; by this time , the typhoon had weakened considerably . Judy became an extratropical cyclone almost immediately thereafter . 
 Across Japan , a total of 26 people were killed , eight others were rendered as missing , and 86 were injured . A total of 61 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Three boats sank and highways were cut in 956 locations . It is estimated that 1 @,@ 100 landslides occurred during the passage of the cyclone . Downtown Tokyo sustained the worst of the damage , where 8 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Approximately 200 @,@ 000 travelers were stuck after 25 train lines were flooded , including 17 @,@ 000 individuals who were stranded on 40 stalled trains . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Judy can be traced back from a highly active monsoon trough along the low @-@ latitudes of the Western Pacific basin in the first week of September . Two tropical disturbances soon developed , the first of which later spawned Typhoon Irving . By September 4 , the systems developed a surface circulation . Later that day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) on the second system . This system rapidly became better organized , and on September 5 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) starting watching the second system . Following an increase in organized thunderstorm activity near the center , the JTWC started issuing warnings on Tropical Depression 19 at 1600 UTC that day . At 2200 UTC on September 6 , Hurricane Hunters reported winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) and a pressure of 994 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . Based on this , both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded the depression into Tropical Storm Judy early the next day . 
 Tropical Storm Judy was initially expected by the JTWC to move west @-@ northwest because a subtropical ridge was expected to build north of the system . However , the ridge did not build , which enabled Judy to track northeastward under the influence of a tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) located to north of the cyclone . Meanwhile , the storm held its intensity of about 36 hours , but on September 7 , the JMA upgraded the low into a severe tropical storm . Due to the lack of wind shear , Judy continued to intensify . Meanwhile , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also briefly monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name <unk> . At 0600 UTC on September 8 , the JMA upgraded the system to typhoon status . The storm intensified slightly thereafter , and early the next day , the JMA estimated that Judy attained peak intensity of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) and a pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . Later on September 9 , the JTWC reported that Judy reached peak intensity of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , equivalent to a mid @-@ level Category 2 hurricane on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . 
 Shortly after its peak , cool air began to take a toll on the system as it ingested the remnants of the TUTT . By late on September 9 , virtually all deep convection associated with Judy was removed from the center . Based on this , the JMA lowered the intensity of the system to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Moving slower than expected due the strong northwesterly flow over the Sea of Japan , the system became better organized due to a brief decrease in wind shear . However , Typhoon Judy failed to intensify further . On September 11 , Judy began to accelerate in the general direction of Japan as interaction with the TUTT ceased . The next day , wind shear once again increased significantly ; consequently , thunderstorm activity decreased along the southwest portion of Judy . Despite this , no change in intensity occurred . At 0800 UTC on September 12 , Judy moved onshore at <unk> Point on Honshu , despite still producing hurricane @-@ force winds . Four hours later , however , the JMA demoted Judy to a severe tropical storm . Midday on September 12 , the JTWC downgraded Judy to a tropical storm . Several hours later , the agency noted that Judy had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , with the JMA following suit the next day . On September 15 , the JMA ceased monitoring the system . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Upon making landfall in Japan , 730 mm ( 29 in ) of rain fell in Oshima , including 713 mm ( 28 @.@ 1 in ) of precipitation within 24 hours . Additionally , <unk> sustained a peak total of 91 mm ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) in an hour . Furthermore , a wind gust of 115 km / h ( 71 mph ) was measured in <unk> . A total of 34 people were killed and 86 were hurt . A total of 61 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Three boats sank . Downtown Tokyo sustained the worst of the damage . Nearby , the Kanda River overflowed their banks , flooding 8 @,@ 000 dwellings , including 2 @,@ 000 in the Shinjuku entertainment district . Throughout Tokyo , 590 @,@ 100 homes lost power ; however , power service was quickly restored to all but 20 @,@ 000 . In Shizuoka and Kanagawa , eight people perished because of mudslides . Offshore , one person died due to 3 to 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) waves . One person died and three others were lost when a boat with 10 anglers was capsized due to rough seas off the coast of Kobe . Throughout Tokyo , 12 people perished and three were reportedly missing . Elsewhere , in <unk> , a river overflowed their banks , flooding 631 residencies . Approximately 300 km ( 185 mi ) north of Tokyo , in Sendai , a three @-@ story apart complex was turned upside @-@ down . All the residents living in the complex were rescued . 
 About 50 @,@ 000 police men and soldiers were mobilized to help with rescue work . A total of 105 homes were destroyed . In addition , 1 @,@ 100 landslides were reported while river banks broke in 20 places . According to officials , highways were cut in 956 spots and bridges were damaged in 43 locations . Around 200 @,@ 000 passengers were stranded after railroad lines near Tokyo were inundated in 25 places . Moreover , around 17 @,@ 000 persons on 40 stalled trains were stranded for the night . Air travel in Tokyo and Handa were halted due to strong winds . 
 Typhoon Judy was the second storm to affect Japan within a month , as well as the third to system affect the nation during the 1982 Pacific typhoon season . From all three systems combined , the death toll exceeded 100 . A few weeks later , Typhoon Ken became the fourth storm of the year to rake the islands of Japan . 
 = Crossair Flight 498 = 
 Crossair Flight 498 was a commuter flight from Zurich , Switzerland , to Dresden , Germany , that crashed two minutes after takeoff in the Swiss municipality of <unk> on 10 January 2000 . The seven passengers and three crew members aboard the two @-@ turboprop engine Saab <unk> aircraft all died on impact . It was the first fatal crash for the Swiss regional airline Crossair in its 25 @-@ year history . 
 The official report into the disaster found that the crash was due to a loss of control resulting from multiple human failures . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 33 @-@ seat Saab <unk> airplane used for Crossair Flight LX498 had been leased to Crossair from Moldavian Airlines since 1 October 1999 . The plane was scheduled to depart from Zurich Airport on Monday , 10 January 2000 , at around 6 : 00 p.m. and arrive at Dresden Airport a few hours later . The cold , drizzly weather was normal for the area , there were no indications that anything was wrong with the aircraft , and , although this particular aircraft had 24 @,@ 000 flying hours since its November 1990 delivery , this type of airplane had a very good safety record . Captain Pavel Gruzin , 41 , had 8 @,@ 100 hours of flying time , with 1 @,@ 900 in the Saab 340 type . Co @-@ pilot Rastislav Kolesar , 35 , had about 1 @,@ 800 total hours , with 1 @,@ 100 hours in the Saab 340 type . The plane was carrying no unusual payload such as freight or mail and the plane was not due for its next regular maintenance check for another 21 days , on 31 January 2000 . 
 = = Event = = 
 After the seven passengers and three crew members boarded , the plane was cleared for takeoff on time at 5 : 54 p.m. ( 16 : 54 UTC ) . The aircraft departed Runway 28 heading west . From takeoff , the plane climbed normally . But after 7 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 5 mi ) the plane suddenly started to lose altitude and turn to the right instead of following the approved flight path to the left . When air traffic controllers asked the pilot if he meant to turn right , they were answered with " Stand by , " followed by a loss of radio contact . 
 At 5 : 56 p.m. ( 16 : 56 UTC ) , one minute and 56 seconds into the flight , the plane disappeared from radar screens . Officials later determined that the plane went into a diving right turn before vanishing from radar screens . Burning wreckage was scattered for 200 to 300 metres near houses in <unk> , some 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) northwest of the runway at Zurich 's Kloten airport . The flight data and cockpit voice recorders were recovered from the accident scene , both heavily damaged . 
 = = Parties involved = = 
 Four of the passengers were Germans , the other three passengers were French , Swiss and Spanish . The three @-@ person crew included Moldovan pilot Pavel Gruzin , Slovak copilot Rastislav Kolesar , and a French flight attendant . There were no survivors . 
 At the time of the crash , Crossair was a majority owned subsidiary of <unk> . The crash of Crossair Flight LX498 was the first time in Crossair 's 25 @-@ year history that the regional airline had lost an aircraft , and was the deadliest accident to hit the <unk> since the crash of Swissair Flight 111 , an MD @-@ 11 flying from New York to Geneva that crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off Nova Scotia on 2 September 1998 , killing all 229 aboard . 
 At the time , Crossair operated 17 Saab @-@ 340 type planes , but eventually phased them out with Embraer ERJ @-@ 145 regional jets . The crash came about in the midst of a bitter labor @-@ management dispute between Crossair and its pilots over a possible pay raise and work rules changes . The pilots ' union had just canceled pay agreements with Crossair in December 1999 , with a termination effective in summer 2000 . In addition , and prior to the accident , two Crossair pilots told Swiss media that some foreign pilots employed by Crossair posed a safety risk because of an insufficient knowledge of English . These two pilots were fired by Crossair , but were then elected to head the pilots ' union , " Crossair Cockpit Personnel ( CCP ) " . An investigation of the accident later revealed that the pilot Gruzin and copilot Kolesar were only able to communicate with each other in English , but Gruzin 's ability to speak English was too limited to hold more than a basic conversation . 
 After the crash , both Crossair and CCP , including the pilots who had previously spoken to the media and been fired , publicly stated that the coincidence between the accident and the dispute was very unfortunate and that reports about pilot error being involved in the crash were speculation , although this conclusion was later established to be the probable cause of the accident . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Saab 340 is widely used in the United States , Australia , and elsewhere as a commuter plane . Before the hull loss of Crossair Flight LX498 , there had been only four crashes worldwide of the 400 Saab @-@ 340 plane types since 1984 and only two of those were hull losses . The two hull losses were a 1994 KLM <unk> crash that killed three in the Netherlands and a 1998 Formosa Airlines crash that killed 13 in Taiwan . 
 An examination of pilot Pavel Gruzin 's body revealed traces of the drug <unk> ( A benzodiazepine @-@ class sedative ) in his muscle tissue . Investigators also found an open packet of the Russian @-@ made drug in baggage belonging to Gruzin . 
 = = = Causes = = = 
 According to the Investigation Report of the Swiss Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau , the accident was attributable to the flight crew losing control of the aircraft for the following reasons : 
 The flight crew reacted inappropriately when departure clearance was ordered by ATC . 
 The co @-@ pilot made an entry without being instructed to do so by the commander , which related to the change to the SID <unk> 1 standard instrument departure . In doing so , he omitted to select a turn direction . 
 The commander dispensed with use of the autopilot under instrument flight conditions and during the work @-@ intensive climb phase of the flight . 
 The commander took the aircraft into a spiral dive to the right because , with a probability bordering on certainty , he had lost spatial orientation . 
 The first officer took only inadequate measures to prevent or recover from the spiral dive . 
 According to this same Investigation Report , the following factors may have contributed to the accident : 
 The commander remained unilaterally firm in perceptions which suggested a left turn direction to him . 
 When interpreting the attitude display instruments under stress , the commander resorted to a reaction pattern ( heuristics ) which he had learned earlier . 
 The commander 's capacity for analysis and critical assessment of the situation were possibly limited as a result of the effects of the benzodiazepine drug <unk> found in his muscle tissue . 
 After the change to standard instrument departure SID <unk> 1Y the crew set inappropriate priorities for their tasks and their concentration remained one @-@ sided . 
 The commander was not systematically acquainted by Crossair with the specific features of western systems and cockpit procedures . 
 The investigation did look at the possibility of electromagnetic interference and tested a similar aircraft using mobile phones . It concluded that there were " no indications that aircraft systems were negatively affected by electromagnetic interference ( EMI ) " . 
 = Obernewtyn ( novel ) = 
 Obernewtyn is the first novel in the Obernewtyn Chronicles series by Australian author <unk> Carmody . Carmody began writing it at the age of fourteen , and reworked the novel through high school and university . Much of the inspiration for the protagonist , Elspeth Gordie , comes from her own life experiences . It was published by Penguin Books in Australia in 1988 and shortlisted for the Book of the Year for Older Readers in the Children 's Book Council of Australia Awards . 
 A science fiction @-@ fantasy novel set in a post @-@ apocalyptic world , the story follows Elspeth Gordie , an orphan with special mental abilities , who lives a life of fear and danger . When her abilities are brought to the attention of the ruling , totalitarian Council , she is banished to the remote mountain institution of Obernewtyn , where all " Misfits " are sent . The leaders of Obernewtyn are secretly searching for the old weapons that had sent the world to the brink of despair , and Elspeth finds herself embroiled in a plot that risks more than just her personal safety . 
 The book has been published in Australia , the United Kingdom , the United States of America , Germany and Portugal . The Library Journal stated it was a " thought @-@ provoking tale of courage and sacrifice " ; other reviews found it one @-@ dimensional and difficult to follow . Adapted as a stage play by Caroline <unk> , it was performed in Darwin , Australia in 2004 by the Corrugated Iron Youth Arts Theatre . 
 = = Composition = = 
 <unk> Carmody began writing the book when she was fourteen , in 1972 . She rewrote and developed it throughout high school and university . After briefly working as a journalist , she left to write full @-@ time . Penguin Books agreed to publish the book when Carmody submitted the manuscript in her early twenties and it was published in 1987 . Carmody has said that the character and life experiences of Elspeth reflect her own : 
 As a girl , I felt myself to be a Misfit . I was the eldest of eight children and I grew up in this tough neighbourhood where there were kids that beat up odd kids like me who read and wrote stories . I longed not to fit in and be like the other kids , but to find people who were like me . And of course like probably every kid , though I did not know that then , I longed to have something important to do . I longed to be special . I think this is the natural result of the powerlessness of children in a world of adults that don ’ t always seem to be looking after the world all that well . 
 The author named The Chronicles of Narnia , The Lord of the Rings , Doctor Dolittle and books about Pippi Longstocking as sources of influence . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Context = = = 
 Obernewtyn is set in a world recently ravaged by a nuclear holocaust , known to the survivors as " the Great White " , later said by the <unk> ( leaders of the new religious order ) to have been sent by Lud ( God ) to punish humanity . The surviving remote communities attempted to rebuild society , which over time developed into a totalitarian Council , and a religious order , the Herder Faction . Mutations of the mind also began to appear in some of the surviving generations ; those discovered are either burnt alive along with the rebels or labelled as " Misfits " and outcasts . The resulting large group of children are placed in orphan homes and used for manual labour . 
 = = = Voice and setting = = = 
 The story is told in the first @-@ person through the protagonist , Elspeth Gordie , a teenage girl who has secret mental powers such as telepathy and the ability to communicate with animals . The story begins at <unk> orphan home , where she and her brother Jes live , before moving briefly through <unk> , the capital , and the countryside . However the majority of the narrative is set at Obernewtyn , which lies in the northern mountains of the Land , the fictional nation in which the Obernewtyn Chronicles is set . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Elspeth learns from her premonitions , and her cat <unk> 's prophecies , that a keeper from Obernewtyn , a feared institution where Misfits are sent to work , will come to take her there . Soon , when delivering tea to visiting Head Keeper of Obernewtyn , Madam Vega , Elspeth accidentally reveals she is a Misfit , though not to what extent , and is soon dispatched to Obernewtyn . Her first few weeks at Obernewtyn are spent in the kitchen , where she is worked to the bone . The cook ’ s daughter delights in tormenting her . The favoured Misfit , Ariel , and farm overseer , Rushton , immediately dislike her . Later reassigned to the farm , an encounter with a pair of Misfits named Matthew and <unk> reveals she is not alone in her particular abilities . She also befriends Cameo , a delicate , pretty Misfit of whom Matthew is very fond . Elspeth , plagued by nightmares , begins to feel there is a dark secret underneath their everyday tasks . While working , Elspeth decides to test the range of her telepathic ability , " <unk> " , but beyond the boundaries of Obernewtyn , a strange machine , the Zebkrahn , traps her mind . She is only freed by combining her mental strength with another anonymous mind who offers assistance . Asked by Vega to look out for " special " Misfits , her interview reveals the Doctor is a defective simpleton ; his " assistant " , Alexi , has no interest in Elspeth in his quest to find the " right one " who will lead him to what he desires . Elspeth and Matthew later deduce that tortuous experiments on their kind are occurring , and they resolve to escape . Cameo begins disappearing from her bed at nighttime , and Elspeth fearfully suspects that Cameo is the subject of some of these experiments . 
 That night , Elspeth sneaks into the Doctor ’ s office to retrieve a map and compass , but on finding forbidden books and maps from before the Great White , the " Beforetime " , she realises they must be searching for something from long ago . She leaves empty @-@ handed . Rosamunde , a fellow orphan from the <unk> orphan home , arrives at Obernewtyn and coldly informs Elspeth that her brother Jes had discovered he also had mental abilities , but was killed by guards in an escape attempt . Rushton comforts the distraught Elspeth , and asks her why she plagues him . Fearful that someone will soon be after her as well , her group ’ s escape plans begin in earnest . Elspeth returns a second time to the Doctor ’ s office , but when Vega , Alexi and Ariel enter , she learns Ariel is part of the Obernewtyn family , and that they are searching for a Misfit to help them find the location of Beforetime weapons . Pre @-@ warned that two Councilmen are coming to fetch her for questioning by the <unk> , at nightfall she makes to escape but Rushton stops her . He reveals a secret network of drains which gets her safely to the farms . Once she is safely through the drains after a close shave with Ariel 's pack of mad , wild wolves , she finds that the path to the farms has been obscured by a blizzard and gets lost . She nearly dies , but a Misfit named <unk> finds her and locks her in the farmhouse to return later to Obernewtyn . Overhearing a conversation between her captors , she discovers they are Rushton 's accomplices and were to secretly meet with a rebel group , but Rushton has gone missing . Convincing them that her powers can help find him , she makes her way on foot through the blizzard to the far mountains , with <unk> as her guide . 
 Inside the cave network she finds a dying Cameo , who tells her the Beforetime weapons Alexi and Vega are searching for caused the Great White , but they do not know this . She also reveals it is Elspeth ’ s destiny , as the Seeker , to destroy them . After mourning her death , Elspeth overhears that Rushton , imprisoned in the next cavern , is the true heir of Obernewtyn . Suddenly , she is captured by Ariel , who ties her to a table next to the Zebkrahn machine . Elspeth is forced to hold the diaries of Marisa Seraphim , the wife of the founder of Obernewtyn and Alexi 's stepmother , and use her abilities to discover what Marisa was thinking when she wrote them to determine the weapons ’ location . Still withstanding the torture , Elspeth mentally enters Rushton ’ s mind and recognises the voice of her earlier rescuer from the Zebkrahn . Rushton gives his mental strength to her to endure the pain inflicted on her by the machine . In her despair at their threats to kill him , her resistance breaks and Marissa ’ s thoughts reveal the map to be carved into the front doors of Obernewtyn . At this point , the Zebkrahn overheats and bursts into flames . Something in Elspeth ’ s mind cracks and she uses this new power to kill Vega , who she saw standing over Rushton with a knife . She falls unconscious as <unk> and Rushton ’ s other friends rush in . Alexi is killed , but Ariel flees into the night and is believed to have died in the blizzard . Now known to be the legal master of Obernewtyn , Rushton plans to build it into a secret refuge for Misfits . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 On the whole , Obernewtyn has been positively received . A reviewer for Publishers Weekly called it " a promising new series " and stated that Carmody evades stereotyping by imbuing her characters with conflicting interests . The Library Journal stated that it is a " thought @-@ provoking tale of courage and sacrifice " . 
 Lloyd Alexander , an American fantasy author , commented that it is a fantastically imaginative novel . He cited intricate detail , in @-@ depth character development , and skilled use of language as some of the strengths of the work . American Young Adult fantasy writer <unk> Pierce expressed that the novel is " a dream date for [ her ] " , given the novel involves a courageous girl of many talents and animals with " minds of their own " . 
 However some reviewers have criticised aspects of the book . A reviewer writing for Kirkus Reviews said that the novel is " pedestrian and one @-@ dimensional " . Victoria Strauss , of SF Site , felt the emotional detachment of Elspeth , despite her loss and grief , robs the novel of some of its impact . John Foster felt Obernewtyn is hard to follow due to the complexities of the language and plot . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Obernewtyn won the Marcus Clark Literary Award for Best Unpublished Manuscript , which subsequently saw Carmody receive an Australia Council of the Arts Writer 's Grant . 
 In 1988 , Obernewtyn was shortlisted for Book of the Year for Older Readers in the Children 's Book Council of Australia Awards . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Single Book Publications : 
 Combined Volumes : 
 = = = Foreign language publications = = = 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Corrugated Iron Youth Arts Theatre in Darwin , Australia , produced Caroline <unk> 's stage play adaptation of Obernewtyn , directed by Jeremy Rice , at the Brown 's Mart Theatre from 3 to 7 November 2004 . Rice stated that the original novel has " that imaginative streak that suits theatre " . 
 = Darian Durant = 
 Darian Bernard Durant ( born August 19 , 1982 ) is a professional Canadian football quarterback for the Saskatchewan Roughriders of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) . He played college football at the University of North Carolina . After his college career , he held school records for completion percentage , touchdowns , passing yards , total offense and completions . Durant was signed as a free agent by the Roughriders in 2006 , and became the club 's full @-@ time starting quarterback in 2009 . He was named a CFL West Division All @-@ Star in 2009 and 2013 . His brother Justin plays in the National Football League as a linebacker . Durant was the starting quarterback when the Saskatchewan Roughriders won the 101st Grey Cup in 2013 on their home field . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Durant was born on August 19 , 1982 , in Florence , South Carolina to Betty and Israel Durant . He has three brothers and a sister . His younger brother , Justin , plays for the NFL 's Dallas Cowboys , and his older brother , Keyshawn , was a quarterback at South Carolina State . 
 = = Amateur football = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Durant attended high school at Wilson High School in Florence , South Carolina . During his senior year of high school , he led the team to South Carolina 's 4 @-@ A state semi @-@ finals . Durant set a school record with 2 @,@ 446 passing yards and tied his own record with 25 touchdown passes , which was set during his sophomore season . He was named a Super Prep All @-@ America , Honorable Mention All @-@ America by USA Today and Prep Star All @-@ Region selection . He also played in the South Carolina All @-@ Star game , where he completed 9 of his 11 passing attempts for 215 yards . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Durant signed a letter of intent to play college football at the University of North Carolina in 2000 . In 2001 , during his first NCAA season , Durant established school freshman records with 17 touchdown passes , 142 completions , 1843 passing yards and 1971 yards of total offense . His freshman records for passing yards and completions were broken in 2007 by T.J. Yates . During his freshman season , Durant was named Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) Rookie of the Week five times . He finished second overall in ACC Rookie of the Year voting to Florida State quarterback Chris Rix . As a freshman , Durant split time with Ronald Curry , helping the team to a victory in the 2001 Peach Bowl . He was awarded the Jeffrey Cowell Memorial Award as the team 's top freshman . 
 After his college career , Durant was one of the most accomplished athletes in the school 's history . He held 51 offensive records at the school . During his sophomore season , Durant set the school 's single game record for passing yards with 417 during a victory against Arizona State . In his junior year , he set single season records with 389 passing attempts , 234 completions and 2 @,@ 551 passing yards . Durant had set UNC records with 1 @,@ 159 passing attempts , 701 completions , 68 passing touchdowns , 8 @,@ 755 passing yards and 9 @,@ 630 yards of total offense . While playing football at the University of North Carolina , Durant completed a degree in African American studies . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 = = = Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 Durant was undrafted in the 2005 National Football League ( NFL ) Draft , but signed a free agent contract with the Baltimore Ravens and attended their training camp . Durant was briefly on the team 's practice roster , but was cut during the 2005 season because of concerns about his size . 
 = = = Saskatchewan Roughriders = = = 
 Durant was placed on the Ottawa Renegades negotiation list in 2003 , by future Saskatchewan Roughriders general manager Eric Tillman . After the Renegades folded , his rights were obtained by the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats and later dealt to the Roughriders in a trade that included Corey Holmes . Durant signed with the team on May 11 , 2006 . During the 2006 season , he served as the team 's backup quarterback for eight games , completing a single pass for 14 yards and recording a single rushing attempt for 20 yards in a game against Hamilton . Durant was on the team 's practice roster for the remaining ten games . 
 During the 2007 season , Durant spent the entire season on the active roster , and was available for all of the Roughrider regular season and playoff games , but did not see any game action while serving as the team 's third string quarterback . Durant was on the sidelines as starting quarterback Kerry Joseph led Roughriders to a victory over the Winnipeg Blue Bombers in the Grey Cup . 
 Joseph was traded to the Toronto Argonauts prior to the 2008 season , leaving the club without an incumbent quarterback . During the season , the Roughriders tried four different starting quarterbacks including Durant , Steven <unk> , Michael Bishop and Marcus Crandell . Durant started four games for the Riders during the season , and played in four others . He had seven passing touchdowns , and one rushing touchdown during the season . Crandell was released during the season and Bishop was also released shortly after the Roughriders season was finished . In January 2009 , Durant signed a new contract with the Roughriders rather than becoming a free agent . 
 Durant entered the 2009 season as the club 's starting quarterback , but head coach Ken Miller gave backup <unk> significant playing time as well . Durant made the most of his opportunity , becoming the first Roughrider quarterback to start all 18 games since Kent Austin , who last played for the club in 1993 . Durant 's consistency on the field was one of the reasons he earned the Roughriders ' starting quarterback position , along with his ability to run for yards when his pass protection breaks down . Durant was named the Roughriders nominee for CFL Most Outstanding Player , and was selected a West Division All @-@ Star at quarterback . He was also named the Roughriders ' Wireless Age Most Popular Player . Durant led the Roughriders to the Grey Cup , where they were defeated by the Montreal Alouettes on a last second field goal . He finished the 2009 season with 4 @,@ 348 passing yards and 501 rushing yards . Durant threw 24 touchdown passes during the season and also had 21 interceptions , leading the CFL . Heading into the 2010 season , Durant wanted to cut down on his interceptions , although he tried to be optimistic , " I throw 21 picks last year and I guarantee every guy with better stats than me wishes they were in the Grey Cup . " 
 In a Grey Cup rematch to kick off the 2010 CFL season , Durant and the Roughriders staged a second half comeback to defeat the Alouettes in overtime . Durant threw five touchdown passes and picked up 478 passing yards during the game . For his efforts , he was named the CFL 's Offensive Player of the Week . At the halfway point of the season , Durant had thrown 11 touchdown passes and 14 interceptions , while rushing for another five touchdowns . The CFL named Durant Offensive Player of the Month for September after a month where he passed for 1387 yards and five touchdowns . After Game 17 versus the BC Lions , Durant became only the second Roughrider quarterback to throw for over 5000 yards in a season , with the first being former head coach Kent Austin . Durant was selected as the Roughriders ' nominee for the CFL Most Outstanding Player Award . 
 The 2011 campaign was a let down year not only for Durant but also for the Roughriders as a whole . The Riders stumbled out of the gate losing seven of their first eight games . Durant 's production fell significantly through the course of the season . Near the end of the season Durant was playing with a broken bone in his foot , which ultimately lead to him missing the last two games of the regular season . The Riders would finish the year with only 5 wins and 13 loses , placing them in last place in the league . Despite the reduced production in 2011 on April 27 , 2012 the Riders extended his contract through the 2014 CFL season . 
 The 2013 season was arguably the best season of Durant 's career . He set career highs in touchdowns , with 31 , while limiting his interceptions to only 12 . He began the year having attempted 212 consecutive pass attempts without being intercepted joining Dave Dickenson and later Ricky Ray as the only quarterback in CFL history to start 7 consecutive games without throwing an interception . He also set a career high for passer rating with 95 @.@ 7 ( excluding his 2006 season in which he only completed one pass ) . He led the Riders to an 11 @-@ 7 record and home @-@ field in the Western Semi @-@ Finals against the BC Lions where several of his rushing plays won the game for the Riders . After beating Calgary in the Western Final , Durant led the Riders to their fourth Grey Cup championship on their home turf at Mosaic Stadium . 
 Durant was forced out of the 2015 season due to injury when he suffered a ruptured Achilles tendon in the Riders ' first week game against the Winnipeg Blue Bombers . After rehabbing his Achilles tendon all off @-@ season Durant returned as the Roughriders leading quarterback for the 2016 season . Early in the second quarter of the fourth week Durant left the game after BC defensive linemen Mic ’ <unk> Brooks fell into his leg on a passing play . He was taken into the Riders locker room and later appeared on the sidelines using crutches . Following the game the X @-@ Rays revealed no structural damage , and Durant was considered day @-@ to @-@ day with an ankle sprain . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Durant has a tattoo on his left biceps reading " Against all odds – I 'm gonna shine " , which Durant believes explains his life . Durant 's teammates and coaches describe him as a fierce competitor , who battles through injuries and illnesses . In conjunction with a local Ford dealer , and to commemorate the Roughriders ' 100th anniversary , Durant lent his name to a limited edition Ford F @-@ 150 truck that was sold in Regina . The Durant limited edition featured a Durant license plate , his <unk> logo , Roughriders mud flaps and embossed head rests . There are only four of the trucks available , and $ 500 from the sale of each truck goes to support Durant 's charity of choice , <unk> . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = Fat Freddy 's Drop = 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop are a New Zealand seven @-@ piece band from Wellington , whose musical style has been characterised as any combination of dub , reggae , soul , jazz , rhythm and blues , and techno . Originally a jam band formed in the late 1990s by musicians from other bands in Wellington , Fat Freddy ’ s Drop gradually became its members ' sole focus . Band members continued playing with their other respective groups — The Black Seeds , TrinityRoots , Bongmaster , and others — for much of their 13 @-@ year career . Fat Freddy ’ s Drop are known for their improvised live performances ; songs on their studio albums are versions refined over years of playing them live in New Zealand , and on tour abroad . 
 The group gained international recognition in 2003 after their single " Midnight Marauders " was re @-@ distributed by record labels and DJs in Germany . The group has toured Europe nearly every year since then . The first studio album by Fat Freddy ’ s Drop , Based on a True Story , was the first independently distributed album to reach first place in New Zealand record sales directly after release in 2005 , and is the highest @-@ selling album by a national artist in the country 's history . Based on a True Story won Best Album at the New Zealand Music Awards the same year , and remained on the top 40 New Zealand sales chart for over two years , establishing them as one of the most successful contemporary bands in the island nation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation : 1999 – 2001 = = = 
 The band Fat Freddy ’ s Drop gradually took shape from members of other bands in Wellington , New Zealand 's music scene in the late 1990s . The group 's founder , Chris " Mu " Faiumu , had performed with other bands for most of that decade under the name DJ <unk> . He and two friends , trumpeter Toby Laing and vocalist Dallas Tamaira , occasionally played improvised jam sessions at his seaside home . Faiumu provided percussion and bass for these on an Akai Music Production Center ( MPC ) . All three were involved with other bands . Faiumu and Tamaira were members of the 15 @-@ piece dub band Bongmaster ; Laing was a member of The Black Seeds . In 1999 , they began performing together at local clubs and festivals , and released several vinyl singles distributed locally . 
 That same year , Faiumu founded the independent music label The Drop with the help of his partner Nicole , and money from private investors . According to Faiumu , the venture was a learning experience in the business of making and releasing records . The Drop 's first release was Dallas Tamaira 's solo project , the five @-@ track EP Better Than Change , followed by a single performed by the group named " Hope " . " Hope " was written and recorded over two days under the influence of LSD , according to interviews . Each blotter — individual dose — of that type of LSD , popular in Wellington at that time , had the image of Fat Freddy 's Cat ( from Gilbert Shelton 's comic strip The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers ) printed on it . Dropping — common slang for taking LSD — Fat Freddys became the inspiration for the band 's name . 
 The group organised several informal jam sessions in 2000 , inviting local musicians to play with them at Faiumu 's home . These sessions led to four new members joining Fat Freddy ’ s Drop : Warren Maxwell on tenor and alto saxophone , <unk> Kerr on guitar , Iain Gordon on keyboards , and Joe Lindsay on trombone . Like the original three , the new members played with other groups in and around Wellington , and continued to for most of Fat Freddy ’ s Drop 's career . Iain Gordon was a fellow Bongmaster member with Faiumu and Tamaira . Gordon was also a member of the band Ebb which in 2001 performed an audiovisual concert and released an EP titled Plush Bomb , with Fat Freddy 's Drop playing in support . Maxwell was in the <unk> group TrinityRoots . Maxwell and Joe Lindsay , who make up the horn section of Fat Freddy ’ s Drop , were students at the Conservatorium of Music in Wellington in the mid @-@ 1990s . Faiumu was the " central point [ and ] the reason for the band getting together , " according to a 2009 interview . 
 = = = Live at the Matterhorn and singles : 2001 – 2004 = = = 
 The now seven @-@ member Fat Freddy ’ s Drop , sometimes calling themselves the " seven headed soul monster " , continued to play live at clubs and festivals . The band 's first full @-@ length album , Live at the Matterhorn , was released in 2001 by The Drop . The live album is a recording of their show at the Matterhorn club in Wellington that year . Very little mastering was done to the album , which is divided into four tracks averaging 18 minutes each . It was not formally promoted , but sold 9 @,@ 000 copies in its first few months via word @-@ of @-@ mouth , according to The Sydney Morning Herald . 
 In 2000 , the New Zealand government began a campaign to increase the profitability of the country 's music industry , and of music exports abroad , by funding artists and events . The percentage of music sold by nationals went from 5 @.@ 45 % in 2000 to 10 % in 2004 , and a 2004 government survey indicated one @-@ quarter of New Zealanders attended a live music event in the year previous . Fat Freddy ’ s Drop were not one of the bands funded , but the elevated live music scene , and the relative success of Live at The Matterhorn , gave them more opportunities to establish themselves as one of the area 's best live acts . Several of their early singles , like " Hope " and " Runnin " , were featured on compilation albums published by local labels and radio stations . An established group from Kaikoura named Salmonella Dub — who one member described as the " forerunner for Fat Freddys " — provided the band opportunities to play in front of larger crowds in New Zealand and neighbouring Australia . 
 The third single , released by The Drop in 2002 , " Midnight Marauders " became their first step towards international recognition when a copy was taken to German record label Sonar Kollektiv by a producer . That year , Sonar and affiliated label Best Seven re @-@ released the single in Germany , and European DJ group <unk> used the track in several mixes . A second single , " Hope / This Room " , was re @-@ released by Sonar and Best the next year . After the singles ' success , Sonar invited the band to play a string of European shows in 2003 . Sonar label manager Matthias <unk> said he was surprised when one @-@ thousand copies of " Midnight Marauders " sold at a show in Germany . Not wanting a single label to control their work in Europe , the band also partnered with London @-@ based label Kartel in 2003 to handle distribution and promotion in England . From 2003 to 2009 , distribution of the band 's work was handled by The Drop in New Zealand and Australia , by Sonar Kollektiv and Best Seven in most of Europe , and by Kartel in England . 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop 's European profile slowly increased between 2003 and the release of their first studio album in 2005 . The BBC 's Gilles Peterson called " Hope " one of the top tracks of 2003 . The band was invited to play at the Cannes Film Festival in 2004 . International DJ Magazine listed Fat Freddy ’ s Drop as one of the " top 20 bands to look out for " in 2004 . In what became an almost annual trip , they returned to touring New Zealand and Australia in 2004 , and — partnering with Sonar Kollektiv — returned to Europe for an official " Hope for a Generation " tour . 
 = = = Based on a True Story : 2005 – 2008 = = = 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop 's first studio album in 2005 , Based on a True Story , showcased polished versions of songs the band had developed gradually at live shows over the years — in some cases going back to 1999 ; the album 's title is a reference to that process . Many Fat Freddy ’ s Drop members still played with other Wellington bands while recording Based on a True Story , and scheduling conflicts forced them to record their individual parts at different times to be mixed later . In a later interview , they said it is " healthy for members to be able to do other things , " but they hoped to record the tracks together in the same room on their next album . Replacing Faiumu 's MPC sampler on the album — and in some live shows afterwards — were drummer Riki Gooch and bassist Rio <unk> , who together with Fat Freddy ’ s Drop saxophonist Warren Maxwell make up the band TrinityRoots . Also contributing were vocalists Hollie Smith , <unk> 6 , and P <unk> , and Bongmaster guitarist Aaron <unk> . After mixing Based on a True Story for 18 months at his home studio in @-@ between tours , Faiumu took the album to San Francisco @-@ based Fantasy Studios to be mastered . 
 Based on a True Story became the first independently distributed album to reach first place in New Zealand record sales directly after release , and is the highest @-@ selling album by a national artist in the country 's history . The Recording Industry Association of New Zealand 's ( RIANZ ) sales chart listed Based on a True Story as one of the top 40 selling albums for more than two years after its release , and has since been certified nine @-@ times platinum , denoting shipments of 135 @,@ 000 copies . The album 's only single , " Wandering Eye " , spent more than four months on the top 40 selling singles chart . Like Live at the Matterhorn , the album was given no formal promotion or marketing ; its popularity largely due to the band 's reputation in New Zealand . At the 2005 New Zealand Music Awards , Fat Freddy ’ s Drop won awards in every category they were nominated : Best Group , Best Album , Best New Zealand Roots Group . They also won the People 's Choice Award in both 2005 and 2006 . Based on a True Story had sold 120 @,@ 000 copies in New Zealand as of April 2009 . The album sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in Europe . 
 The band continued touring for the next four years while planning and developing a second studio album . They returned to Germany , England , and Italy in 2005 ; returned in 2006 for their European World Cup Tour , and again for a set of shows in 2007 . They also toured the east coast of Australia in 2006 and 2007 . Many band members were fathers by then , a factor increasingly affecting their " touring stamina " . Warren Maxwell left the band in 2007 for family reasons , and was replaced in live performances with Scott Towers . Towers attended the Conservatorium of Music with Maxwell , and was trombonist Joe Lindsay 's tutor there . 
 = = = Dr Boondigga and the Big BW : 2009 @-@ 2012 = = = 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop released their second studio album , Dr Boondigga and the Big BW , in 2009 . The title refers to " the Big Brain @-@ Wash and Dr. Boondigga [ who ] is some evil creature who ’ s trying to sign us to a major label , " according to Faiumu . The band is still independently distributed by The Drop label , and as of 2009 , have handled distribution themselves in Europe . Like Based on a True Story , the album 's songs are polished versions of songs they developed over four years at live shows ; mixed from 2007 to 2009 in @-@ between tours . Unlike their last album , most of it was recorded live in @-@ studio with all band members present . There were some exceptions ; Alice Russell 's duet with Tamaira on the album 's first single " The Camel " was recorded in 2006 when she was in Wellington with The Bamboos . 
 Dr Boondigga and the Big BW was the highest selling album in New Zealand for five weeks after its release , and the highest selling album there in 2009 . It was listed on the RIANZ top 40 sales chart 38 weeks in total . The album received more international promotion than its predecessor , reaching number 45 in the Australian album chart , and 97th in France . The BBC 's John Lusk called Fat Freddy ’ s Drop " New Zealand 's most critically acclaimed band since The Clean " , and lead singer Tamaira , " one of the most soulful singers of his generation . " At the 2009 New Zealand Music Awards the album won the awards Best Producer , and Best Aotearoa Roots Album Dr Boondigga and the Big BW had sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in New Zealand as of December 2009 . 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop returned to touring New Zealand , Australia and Europe to promote the new album in 2009 . Three shows on the west coast of the United States , and a show in Canada , were also included in the tour . The only previous time the band had played in the United States was a single performance at a Detroit music festival in 2004 . Before 2009 , the cost of touring in the US , difficulty obtaining visas , and the band 's low profile in North America prevented them from including tour dates there . Band members say they now consider playing together as Fat Freddy ’ s Drop their first musical priority , and spend less time playing with other bands . 
 = = = Blackbird : 2013 = = = 
 In early 2013 , the band revealed a new album was in the works , and eventually the first single , Silver and Gold was released as a vinyl and free online download . The single received significant radio airplay following its release . The album , Blackbird was released on the 21st of June in Ireland and in most regions , and on the 24th in others . The album debuted in the number 1 position on the New Zealand album chart and remained in that position for 4 weeks . The band went on a national tour of Australia in late August / early September where they appeared at the Splendour in the Grass festival , and will head to Europe for a string of dates immediately after . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Improvisation , live and in the studio , has been the basis for Fat Freddy ’ s Drop 's music since the beginning of their career . " Live performance is the most natural state for music , " according to trumpeter Toby Laing . Most songs begin as a rhythm on Faiumu 's MPC , and more sections are progressively added during jam sessions . Songs featured on the band 's albums and singles are versions that have been refined over years of playing them in the studio , live in Wellington , and on tour abroad . Faiumu said that , on their first studio album , it was challenging to fit the long songs the band is used to playing into shorter album @-@ length tracks . 
 Describing the band , National Public Radio host Guy Raz said , " Take the swagger of Jamaican dub , throw in a little Memphis soul and send it halfway down the globe , and what comes back ? The band Fat Freddy ’ s Drop . " The band has been categorised under many genres , and members say many of those genres helped shape their musical style : delta blues , jazz , dub , soul , techno , and contemporary rhythm and blues . Musical styles heard while on tour have also shaped their sound ; Dr Boondigga and the Big BW was influenced by contemporary German , Portuguese , and Bhangra music while touring in the years before its release . 
 Faiumu and other band members say their biggest influence is their home country of New Zealand , and their peers in Wellington 's " small @-@ but @-@ solid " music scene — Wellington 's population was less than 180 @,@ 000 in 2007 . They feel their music " belong [ s ] here in New Zealand , you can tell it came from this country . " Fat Freddy 's Drop 's music has been categorised as Aotearoa roots music — meaning contemporary music inspired by Māori and Pacific Islander culture , even though they are a mixed @-@ race group . Faiumu is a first @-@ generation Samoan @-@ New Zealander , Tamaira , Gordon and Kerr are native Māori , and the remaining members are descended from European immigrants . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Dallas Tamaira ( " Joe Dukie " ) – vocals , guitar ( 1999 – present ) 
 Chris Faiumu ( " DJ <unk> " ) – percussion , production ( 1999 – present ) 
 Toby Laing ( " Tony Chang " ) – trumpet ( 1999 – present ) 
 <unk> Kerr ( " <unk> Johnson " ) – guitar ( 2000 – present ) 
 Iain Gordon ( " Dobie Blaze " ) – keyboards ( 2000 – present ) 
 Joe Lindsay ( " <unk> " ) – trombone , tuba ( 2000 – present ) 
 Scott Towers ( " Chopper <unk> " ) – saxophone ( 2007 – present ) 
 MC Slave - raps ( live on stage ) 
 Former members 
 Warren Maxwell ( " Fulla Flash " ) – saxophone ( 2000 – 2007 ) 
 Tom <unk> ( " Muppet Shorts " ) - guitar ( 1999 – 2000 ) 
 Baxter Perry ( " Master Lazy " ) - bass ( 2002 @-@ 2003 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Fat Freddy ’ s Drop have released four studio albums , two live albums , and several singles . Their songs have appeared on compilation albums both in New Zealand and internationally . In 2007 , they released a DVD , Fantastic Voyages Vol . 1 , with live footage from their 2006 World Cup Tour , music videos , and behind the scenes footage . 
 2001 : Live at the Matterhorn 
 2005 : Based on a True Story 
 2009 : Dr Boondigga and the Big BW 
 2010 : Live at Roundhouse 
 2013 : Blackbird 
 2014 : Live in Munich 
 2015 : Bays 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Seymour Goes to Hollywood = 
 Seymour Goes to Hollywood , also known as Seymour at the Movies , is a platform and adventure game developed by Big Red Software and originally published in Europe by Codemasters in 1991 . Players control Seymour , a small potato @-@ like creature who wishes to be a film star . The film 's script has been locked in a safe , meaning Seymour must solve puzzles by collecting and using objects scattered throughout the game in order to progress , ultimately retrieving the script and allowing filming to start . 
 The game was originally designed as part of the Dizzy series , with a working title of Movieland Dizzy , but the creators of Dizzy disagreed with the real @-@ world direction the game had taken , despite it being 90 % complete . The developers , Big Red Software , were given 12 weeks to create a new game with a different character . Seymour was adapted from Dizzy , with a new shape and fingers to differentiate the two . 
 Seymour Goes to Hollywood received both positive and average ratings from the video game press at the time , and was compared to Dizzy video games both positively and negatively . The character also received both praise and criticism for his shape . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players guide Seymour through the game 's locations , solving puzzles by collecting up to three objects at once and using them in pre @-@ set locations . Movement from one screen to the next is enabled through flip @-@ screen , when Seymour touches the outer edge of one screen he is transported to the next . The film studio where the game takes place features several rooms such as an office and eight film sets accessed from a maze of backlots , where each screen is only slightly different from the last . The doors to film sets are locked and Seymour must first locate the relevant key to gain access . The sets ' themes include films such as The Wizard of Oz and King Kong , as well sets based on generic genres such as horror films and science fiction films . 
 Characters throughout the film studios and movie sets will help Seymour on his quest with new objects and advice , but only if he helps them first . Seymour 's observations when collecting objects and sarcastic exchanges with other characters are communicated through speech bubbles . One example of a puzzle is the Frankenstein 's monster which must be created by combining body parts in a specific location on the horror film set . Once the monster is completed it smashes through one of the set 's walls , allowing Seymour to access the set next door . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seymour has been given the starring role in a Hollywood film and duly arrives at the film studio to begin work . It transpires that the studio 's boss , Dirk E. <unk> the second , has taken a vacation to Miami . <unk> has taken the key to his safe with him , which prevents filming from commencing because the safe contains the film scripts . Seymour must blow the safe with dynamite to access the scripts and then collect 16 Academy Awards from around the game and award one to each of the actors . Only then can filming commence . 
 = = Development = = 
 Beginning with <unk> Dizzy , Codemasters sub @-@ contracted Big Red Software , headed by Paul Ranson , to assist in the production of future Dizzy games in the series . The success of Dizzy Prince of the <unk> prompted Big Red Software to take the series in a new direction . The publisher decided that the titular egg character 's next adventure should be set in a world based on real @-@ life . 
 Big Red Software started work and had 90 % completed the project , which had the working title Movieland Dizzy , before the team was told to replace Dizzy with a new character . This was because the creators of Dizzy , the Oliver Twins , disagreed with the direction that Movieland Dizzy was taking the character , after discussions Codemasters agreed . Pete Ranson , Paul 's brother , was one of Big Red Software 's graphic designers and was given the job of creating a new character . This character began as a misshapen egg , was given fingers , and was given jump animations that lacked Dizzy 's bounce . A friend of the Ranson 's , having seen the character graphics , stated that " he looked like a Seymour " . The name " stuck " and the new character was completed . 
 After making the decision to use a new character rather than Dizzy , Codemasters allowed Big Red Software free rein to develop the new game , only stipulating that it must be ready for release within 12 weeks . By this point Big Red Software was already familiar with platform adventure games . The game retained the Dizzy graphic adventure title engine . Pete Ranson had previously designed graphics for every Dizzy game bar the first , graphics were shared between Dizzy games and some were also recycled for Seymour Goes to Hollywood . 
 After the Hollywood theme was decided on , the design team drew up a map and assigned objects and puzzles to different areas . The game was originally designed for the ZX Spectrum and then ported to the Amstrad CPC , due to the systems ' similar architecture . However , the team struggled to port the game to the Commodore 64 due to it being a different machine altogether . The finished game is significantly changed from the incomplete Movieland Dizzy , which featured only film sets as locations , the surrounding film studio and backlots were not present . The real @-@ world studio elements were added after Dizzy was disassociated from the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Both the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum versions received high review scores , one exception being the review in Sinclair User which was less positive . The Commodore 64 version received a comparatively low score from Zzap ! 64 . The magazine 's reviewer stated that despite the game featuring " brilliant humour and some of the best puzzles and animation seen in an arcade adventure " , it remained a " cruel parody " of the Spectrum version that " plays with all the style and grace of a drunken elephant ! " The Amiga version received both positive and average scores . Seymour himself received a mixed response due to his appearance . Comments ranged from Seymour having " snatched Dizzy 's crown " to him being called " a peeled potato on legs " , an " albino mutant <unk> " and " a sort of slug @-@ type thing " . David Crookes of Retro Gamer called Seymour a popular element and Big Red 's most " infamous " character . He , however , commented that Seymour did not match up to Dizzy . 
 Seymour Goes to Hollywood was praised for its comparatively large size and for having more logical puzzles than Dizzy games , due to it being set in the real world . Some players were critical of the size of the game and the time required to complete it . The puzzles themselves were widely praised as " some of the best puzzles ... ... ever seen in an arcade adventure " , and similar to Dizzy but with enough variation to " keep you scratching your head for hours " . Crash magazine 's reviewer stated that the puzzles may be too simple for players experienced with Dizzy games . The game was compared to the Dizzy series by most reviewers , in both positive and negative lights . For instance , one reviewer stated that the game was indistinguishable from Dizzy games and succeeded for the same reasons , another reviewer called it average fare and asked " why didn 't Codemasters just stuff it out as another Dizzy game ? " Crookes commented that though Seymour Goes to Hollywood borrows heavily from the Dizzy series it was a fulfilling game . 
 = My Love ( Justin Timberlake song ) = 
 " My Love " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his second studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . It was released on October 24 , 2006 , by Jive Records as the second single from the album . The song features American rapper T.I. and was co @-@ written by Timberlake , Timbaland , Nate " Danja " Hills , and T.I. , and produced by Timberlake , Timbaland , and Danja . 
 Timberlake revealed that the song 's creating process took time to image and execute . He also stated that " My Love " was less about marriage and a more humble approach to love . The song features synthesizer chords with a slow beat and includes a beatboxing , percussion , and staccato sounds . Timberlake described the track as " a rock @-@ techno ballad " . " My Love " was well received by music critics , although some criticized Timberlake for some of the lyrics and sounds . 
 The track entered the top ten on most charts , topping several of Billboard magazine 's component charts , including the Billboard Hot 100 , Pop 100 , Hot Dance Airplay , and Hot Digital Songs charts . " My Love " also became Timberlake 's second consecutive number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , the single peaked in the number two position , becoming Timberlake 's fourth single to reach number two . In New Zealand , the track peaked at number one for five non @-@ consecutive weeks , to become Timberlake 's second number one single . 
 Pitchfork Media named " My Love " as their number one song of 2006 . Many have cited that the song is similar to Timberlake 's 2002 song " Cry Me a River " . The track won Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 2007 Grammy Awards . " My Love " also won Timberlake the Male Artist of the Year and Best Choreography in a Video at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 2005 , Timberlake began working on his second album , FutureSex / LoveSounds , the follow @-@ up to Justified ( 2002 ) . Within three weeks , " My Love " was one of several songs that were recorded . In September 2006 , Timberlake told Rolling Stone that the song was " a hip @-@ hop ballad " and that the process of creating " took two hours to imagine and execute " . While promoting the album in an interview with MTV News , Timberlake revealed that the second half of the album ( including " My Love " ) focuses on anthems of love . In another interview , he revealed that " My Love " was a " contradiction of sounds . You 've got this operatic thing going on . If you take all the staccato sounds out , the essence of the song is it 's a ballad , but the way the beat is inlaid underneath the vocals , it becomes a percussive ballad . " 
 In discussion of T.I. ' s participation in the track , Timberlake said : " The second hook finished and I said , ' Oh , a rapper would sound good on this ' . " Timbaland , who co @-@ wrote and produced the song , agreed to the idea and suggested T.I. Timberlake agreed to the idea , although he doubted that T.I. would say yes , and said that he was thankful that T.I. agreed to take part . 
 Timberlake revealed in 2013 that he originally asked rapper Jay @-@ Z ( Whom he would collaborate with extensively in his later career ) to appear on the track before T.I. " I wanted to do a record with him on FutureSex / LoveSounds ... " he explained " ... and he at that time had done a record with Beyoncé , it was ' Déjà Vu . ' And he said — respectfully , I can 't knock him for saying like I have this one feature , I think he was working on his own music as well so he didn 't want to be on too many things . And I said , ' I totally respect that . I 'm obviously not gonna get into any domestic anything . That 's your wife . ' But the record was ' My Love . ' And it ended up being an interesting blessing in disguise because I think Tip for that record — I mean his verse is phenomenal . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " My Love " is a R & B and hip hop ballad . The song is composed in the key of E minor , with a chord progression of E @-@ minor @-@ B @-@ minor @-@ A @-@ minor . It is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 121 beats per minute . The music begins with a stuttering sounding trance @-@ style synthesizer , right after one stanza is sung in the chorus , " Ain 't another woman the can take your spot my love " . The word " love " is cut from the start . The song also includes Timbaland beatboxing and adding " toy sounds " , as well as Timberlake 's falsetto . The track features a rap verse from rapper T.I. It also carries a slower beat , with an electro @-@ Southern hip hop sound . The Guardian described the song as a " languid love ballad , <unk> with dark emotion " , while MTV News described the beat as " slow and saucy " . Ben Williams of New York magazine wrote that it has " stabbing techno riff , crunched @-@ together mouth @-@ popping noises , and wailing opera singer " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian said that the single is " a twitching mass of rave synthesizers and [ agonizingly ] slow beats " . Jacqui Swift of The Sun wrote that the song " begins with a tinny percussion sound before launching into a frantic repetitive chorus " . 
 In July 2006 , The Observer Music Monthly interviewed Timberlake and stated that the track " is arguably the album 's ' Cry Me a River ' . " In response , Timberlake said , " It is similar . You go back to Aaliyah 's biggest record , ' Are You That Somebody ' – it 's similar to that too because it 's that percussive ballad . " When asked about the lyrics , " There 's just one thing I need from you : say I do " , being autobiographical , he said no , adding that the line before that , " this ring here represents my heart " , is about marriage and love . Timberlake stated , " It 's not specifically about marriage , but about a humble approach to love . None of it is autobiographical , though obviously I have experience to draw from . " 
 Williams stated that the song is " an obvious sequel " to Timberlake 's 2002 song " Cry Me a River " . The Georgia Straight 's Martin Turenne interprets the song 's background as Timberlake lowering himself on bended knee , proposing long walks on the beach and asking , " Would you date me on the regular ? " . Dagny Salas of North by Northwestern considered it a more romantic song , about Timberlake professing his love to a woman . Others have opined that " My Love " is a marriage proposal . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In The New York Times review of the album , critic Kelefa Sanneh wrote : " ... ' My Love ' , a sumptuous collaboration with the rapper T.I. It starts with a 90 @-@ second ' prelude ' , a clattering rhythm track with a bit of rapping and snippets of melody . Then the real thing hits : sleek synthesizer chords punctuated by tiny bursts of silence . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that the track " mixes Timberlake 's proud beatboxing talent with colossal , futuristic synth swirls and a cartoonish , maniacal giggle that 's looped ad infinitum a la the crying baby from Aaliyah 's ' Are You That Somebody ? ' " . Matthew Gasteier of Prefix magazine noted that the song " is probably the standout triumph here , with stuttering synths and a fade @-@ in @-@ fade @-@ out shimmering beat that may be the best ever from Timbaland " . Lauren Murphy of entertainment.ie stated that the single is " undeniably fluid and features some of the <unk> slo @-@ mo effects around " . Jonah Weiner of Blender magazine cited the song as the " standout " song from the album and wrote that the single " ... straddles the album 's up @-@ tempo FutureSex and balladeering LoveSounds halves — one coos about puppy love over the other 's stroboscopic , salivating beat , and both trade <unk> on the chorus " . 
 " My Love " was criticized for some of the lyrics and sounds that were featured . Sanneh reported that Timberlake " exhales his clumsy pickup lines " with the lyrics " If I told you you were beautiful / Would you date me on the regular ? " . Murphy contemplated that the song is " ultimately ruined " by a " bizarre Crazy Frog @-@ meets @-@ Laughing @-@ Policeman underlay " . Emily Vaughan of North by Northwestern commented that Timberlake claims to have gone around the world twice in " My Love " and " Damn Girl " and that he is also " running out of creative ways to say he would like you to go to bed with him " . Vaughan , however , was positive towards " My Love " , stating that the song , along with " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " , sounded considerably different from the rest of the album . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The song was picked by Pitchfork Media as their number one song of 2006 , also ranking the song at 26 on " The Top 500 Tracks of the 2000s . " " At the 49th Grammy Awards , " My Love " won a Grammy Award in the category of Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . The song was covered by Irish band The <unk> , and by British group Klaxons on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge and was included in the B @-@ side of their song " It 's Not Over Yet " , which was released in June 2007 . The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll voted " My Love " as the fourth best single of 2006 ; Timberlake 's " SexyBack " and T.I. ' s " What You Know " were voted on the same poll at numbers seven and two , respectively . 
 Additionally , the song won ASCAP Pop Music Awards in the category Most Performed Songs in 2007 and 2008 , an ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Award in 2008 , a BMI Urban Award in 2007 , and a BMI Pop Award in 2008 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " My Love " was commercially successful in the United States . The single debuted at number 89 on September 23 , 2006 , on the Billboard Hot 100 , prior to its physical release . From number five on November 11 , 2006 , it propelled to number one the following week . " My Love " became Timberlake 's second consecutive number one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 from his <unk> / <unk> album , becoming the first male artist since Usher in 2004 to have three or more consecutive number one hits from one album . The single peaked at number one on the Hot 100 for three consecutive weeks . In addition to the Hot 100 , " My Love " also reached number one on the following Billboard charts : Pop 100 , Hot Dance Airplay and Top 40 mainstream charts , and has peaked at number three on the Rhythmic Top 40 . Also , on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , " My Love " peaked at number two to become Timberlake 's most successful single on this chart . The song also charted on the Hot Dance Club Play and Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks charts , peaking at number 15 and number 29 , respectively . " My Love " was certified Platinum by the RIAA on February 26 , 2007 , and has sold 2 @,@ 208 @,@ 000 copies as of April 2013 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " My Love " debuted at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart on November 12 , 2006 ( for the week ending date November 18 , 2006 ) , one week prior to its physical release , and ascended to its peak the following week at number 2 ( having been beaten to the summit by Akon and Eminem 's " Smack That " ) , to become Timberlake 's fourth single to reach the runner up position on the British charts . The digital download sales helped propel the single to number two on November 20 , 2006 . The song spent nineteen weeks within the top 75 , retiring on March 24 , 2007 , spending four of those within the top ten . The single entered the top five in Germany , Switzerland , Sweden , and Finland , and entered the top ten in France and Austria . In Australia , " My Love " debuted and peaked at number four on the Australian ARIA singles chart on November 26 , 2006 , gaining the Highest Debut certification . It spent a total of twenty @-@ four weeks on the chart . " My Love " was certified Gold by Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In New Zealand , the single debuted at number 25 and eventually peaked at number one for five non @-@ consecutive weeks , to become Timberlake 's second number one single . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " My Love " was directed by Paul Hunter and premiered on October 23 , 2006 . The video includes the prelude to the song ( " Let Me Talk to You " ) , which includes the song 's producer , Timbaland and features T.I. The video incorporates a black @-@ and @-@ white background and dancing , choreographed as the steps are in synch with the beat of the song . 
 The video starts with " Let Me Talk to You " as the background is surrounded by faulty fluorescent lighting , turning on and off in a programmed pattern . It also begins with Timberlake and Timbaland chanting " hey " to one another . The video proceeds with Timberlake dancing to the beat of the song . Timbaland then begins singing the first verse of the song , which then is proceeded by Timberlake . This is immediately followed with " My Love " playing ; the first verse of the song , " Ain 't another woman that could take your spot my " , plays . Timberlake comes floating toward the camera , down the faulty fluorescent tube . Once Timberlake stops floating , he begins singing the main verse of the song , which violins begin to float swirling gently around him , for " If I wrote you a symphony / Just to say how much you mean to me " . The scene then changes with Timberlake and various dancers dancing accordingly in a choreographed style . When Timberlake begins the second verse , " Now if I wrote you a love note / And made you smile at every word I wrote " , pens and paper begin to float . This later exceeds with Timberlake singing " This ring here represents my heart " with a ring swirling into the camera . T.I. is then seen in the shot . T.I. begins rapping his lines in the song . After T.I. finishes his verse , Timberlake is then seen dancing with a female back @-@ up dancer . Though , as they continue dancing , the female then leaves the shot , leaving Timberlake to dance to the end of the song . In the closing moments , the camera swirls around him , proving , conclusively , from every angle , that everyone has gone . 
 At the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , Timberlake won Male Artist of the Year for " Let Me Talk To You / My Love " , " SexyBack " , and " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " . He , alongside choreographers Blake Anthony and Marty Kudelka , won Best Choreography in a Video for " My Love " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Timberlake performed " My Love " and " SexyBack " as a medley for the opening of the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards , and again for the MTV Europe Music Awards 2006 , which he also hosted . He also performed the song on Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) . Timberlake , alongside Robyn Troup and T.I. , performed the song live at the 49th Grammy Awards . In addition , he performed the song at the Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show . The song was part of the set list of his second worldwide tour FutureSex / LoveShow . 
 " My Love " was performed by Timberlake at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards on August 25 as part of a medley . The song is featured on Timberlake 's 2013 / 14 The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Scleractinia = 
 Scleractinia , also called stony corals or hard corals , are marine animals in the phylum Cnidaria that live on the seabed and build themselves a hard skeleton . The individual animals are known as polyps and have a cylindrical body crowned by an oral disc with a mouth and a fringe of tentacles . Although some species are solitary , most are colonial . The founding polyp settles on the seabed and starts to secrete calcium carbonate to protect its soft body . Solitary corals can be as much as 25 cm ( 10 in ) across but in colonial species the polyps are usually only a few millimetres in diameter . These polyps reproduce by budding but remain attached to each other , forming a multi @-@ polyp colony with a common skeleton , which may be up to several metres in diameter or height according to species . 
 The shape and appearance of each coral colony depends not only on the species , but also on its location , depth , the amount of water movement and other factors . Many shallow @-@ water corals contain symbiont unicellular organisms known as zooxanthellae within their tissues . These give their colour to the coral which thus may vary in hue depending on what species of symbiont it contains . Stony corals are closely related to sea anemones , and like them are armed with stinging cells known as cnidocytes . Corals reproduce both sexually and asexually . Most species release gametes into the sea where fertilisation takes place , and the planula larvae drift as part of the plankton , but a few species brood their eggs . Asexual reproduction is mostly by fragmentation , when part of a colony becomes detached and reattaches elsewhere . 
 Stony corals occur in all the world 's oceans . <unk> corals are mostly colonial and form part of reef structures ; most of these are zooxanthellate and are found in the shallow waters into which sunlight penetrates . Other corals may be solitary or colonial and do not form reefs ; some of these occur at abyssal depths where no light reaches . Stony corals first appeared in the Middle Triassic , but their relationship to the tabulate and rugose corals of the Paleozoic is currently unresolved . Much of the framework of modern coral reefs is formed by scleractinians . Stony corals numbers are expected to decline due to the effects of global warming and ocean acidification . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Scleractinian corals may be solitary or colonial . Colonies can reach considerable size , consisting of a large number of individual polyps . 
 = = = Soft parts = = = 
 Stony corals are members of the class Anthozoa and like other members of the group , do not have a medusa stage in their life cycle . The individual animals are known as polyps and have a cylindrical body crowned by an oral disc surrounded by a ring of tentacles . The base of the polyp secretes the stony material from which the coral skeleton is formed . The body wall of the polyp consists of mesoglea sandwiched between two layers of epidermis . The mouth is at the centre of the oral disc and leads into a tubular pharynx which descends for some distance into the body before opening into the gastrovascular cavity that fills the interior of the body and tentacles . Unlike other cnidarians however , the cavity is subdivided by a number of radiating partitions , thin sheets of living tissue , known as mesenteries . The gonads are also located within the cavity walls . The polyp is retractable into the corallite , the stony cup in which it sits , being pulled back by sheet @-@ like retractor muscles . 
 The polyps are connected by horizontal sheets of tissue known as coenosarc extending over the outer surface of the skeleton and completely covering it . These sheets are continuous with the body wall of the polyps , and include extensions of the gastrovascular cavity , so that food and water can circulate between all the different members of the colony . In colonial species , the repeated asexual division of the polyps causes the corallites to be interconnected , thus forming the colonies . Also , cases exist in which the adjacent colonies of the same species form a single colony by fusing . Most colonial species have very small polyps , ranging from 1 to 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 to 0 @.@ 12 in ) in diameter , although some solitary species may be as large as 25 cm ( 10 in ) . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 The skeleton of an individual scleractinian polyp is known as a corallite . It is secreted by the epidermis of the lower part of the body , and initially forms a cup surrounding this part of the polyp . The interior of the cup contains radially aligned plates , or septa , projecting upwards from the base . Each of these plates is flanked by a pair of mesenteries . 
 The septa are secreted by the mesenteries , and are therefore added in the same order as the mesenteries are . As a result , septa of different ages are adjacent to one another , and the symmetry of the scleractinian skeleton is radial or <unk> . This pattern of septal insertion is termed " cyclic " by paleontologists . By contrast , in some fossil corals , adjacent septa lie in order of increasing age , a pattern termed serial and produces a bilateral symmetry . Scleractinians secrete a stony exoskeleton in which the septa are inserted between the mesenteries in multiples of six . 
 All modern scleractinian skeletons are composed of calcium carbonate in the form of crystals of aragonite , however , a prehistoric scleractinian ( <unk> ) had a non @-@ aragonite skeletal structure which was composed of calcite . The structure of both simple and compound scleractinians is light and porous , rather than solid as is the case in the prehistoric order <unk> . Scleractinians are also distinguished from <unk> by their pattern of septal insertion . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 In colonial corals , growth results from the budding of new polyps . There are two types of budding , intratentacular and <unk> . In intratentacular budding , a new polyp develops on the oral disc , inside the ring of tentacles . This can form individual , separate polyps or a row of partially separated polyps sharing an elongate oral disc with a series of mouths . Tentacles grow around the margin of this elongated oral disc and not around the individual mouths . This is surrounded by a single corallite wall , as is the case in the <unk> corallites of brain corals . 
 <unk> budding always results in separate polyps , each with its own corallite wall . In the case of bushy corals such as Acropora , lateral budding from axial polyps form the basis of the trunk and branches . The rate at which a stony coral colony lays down calcium carbonate depends on the species , but some of the branching species can increase in height or length by around 10 cm ( 4 in ) a year ( about the same rate as human hair grows ) . Other corals , like the dome and plate species , are more bulky and may only grow 0 @.@ 3 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) per year . The rate of aragonite deposition varies diurnally and seasonally . Examination of cross sections of coral can show bands of deposition indicating annual growth . Like tree rings , these can be used to estimate the age of the coral . 
 Solitary corals do not bud . They gradually increase in size as they deposit more calcium carbonate and produce new whorls of septa . A large <unk> echinata for example normally has a single mouth , may be about 25 cm ( 10 in ) long and have more than a thousand septa . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Stony corals occur in all the world 's oceans . There are two main ecological groups . <unk> corals are mostly colonial corals which tend to live in clear , oligotrophic , shallow tropical waters ; they are the world 's primary reef @-@ builders . <unk> corals are either colonial or solitary and are found in all regions of the ocean and do not build reefs . Some live in tropical waters but some inhabit temperate seas , polar waters , or live at great depths , from the photic zone down to about 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Scleractinians fall into one of two main categories : 
 Reef @-@ forming or hermatypic corals , which mostly contain zooxanthellae ; 
 Non @-@ reef @-@ forming or <unk> corals , which mostly do not contain zooxanthellae 
 In reef @-@ forming corals , the endodermal cells are usually replete with symbiotic <unk> dinoflagellates known as zooxanthellae . There are sometimes as many as five million cells of these per 1 square centimetre ( 0 @.@ 16 sq in ) of coral tissue . The symbionts benefit the corals because up to 50 % of the organic compounds they produce are used as food by the polyps . The oxygen byproduct of photosynthesis and the additional energy derived from sugars produced by <unk> enable these corals to grow at a rate up to three times faster than similar species without symbionts . These corals typically grow in shallow , well @-@ lit , warm water with moderate to brisk turbulence and abundant oxygen , and prefer firm , non @-@ muddy surfaces on which to settle . 
 Most stony corals extend their tentacles to feed on zooplankton , but those with larger polyps take correspondingly larger prey , including various invertebrates and even small fish . In addition to capturing prey in this way , many stony corals also produce mucus films they can move over their bodies using cilia ; these trap small organic particles which are then pulled towards and into the mouth . In a few stony corals , this is the primary method of feeding , and the tentacles are reduced or absent , an example being Acropora acuminata . Caribbean stony corals are generally nocturnal , with the polyps retracting into their skeletons during the day , thus maximising the exposure of the <unk> to the light , but in the Indo @-@ Pacific region , many species feed by day and night . 
 Non @-@ zooxanthellate corals are usually not reef @-@ formers ; they can be found most abundantly beneath about 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) of water . They thrive at much colder temperatures and can live in total darkness , deriving their energy from the capture of plankton and suspended organic particles . The growth rates of most species of non @-@ zooxanthellate corals are significantly slower than those of their counterparts , and the typical structure for these corals is less calcified and more susceptible to mechanical damage than that of zooxanthellate corals . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Stony corals have a great range of reproductive strategies and can reproduce both sexually and asexually . Many species have separate sexes , the whole colony being either male or female , but others are hermaphroditic , with individual polyps having both male and female gonads . Some species brood their eggs but in most species , sexual reproduction results in the production of a free @-@ swimming planula larva that eventually settles on the seabed to undergo metamorphosis into a polyp . In colonial species , this initial polyp then repeatedly divides asexually , to give rise to the entire colony . 
 = = = Asexual reproduction = = = 
 The most common means of asexual reproduction in colonial stony corals is by fragmentation . Pieces of branching corals may get detached during storms , by strong water movement or by mechanical means , and fragments fall to the sea bed . In suitable conditions , these are capable of adhering to the substrate and starting new colonies . Even such massive corals as <unk> annularis have been shown to be capable of forming new colonies after fragmentation . This process is used in the reef aquarium hobby to increase stock without the necessity to harvest corals from the wild . 
 Under adverse conditions , certain species of coral resort to another type of asexual reproduction in the form of " polyp bail @-@ out " , which may allow polyps to survive even though the parent colony dies . It involves the growth of the coenosarc to seal off the polyps , detachment of the polyps and their settlement on the seabed to initiate new colonies . In other species , small balls of tissue detach themselves from the coenosarc , differentiate into polyps and start secreting calcium carbonate to form new colonies , and in <unk> <unk> , unfertilised eggs can develop into viable larvae . 
 = = = Sexual reproduction = = = 
 The overwhelming majority of scleractinian taxa are hermaphroditic in their adult colonies . In temperate regions , the usual pattern is synchronized release of eggs and sperm into the water during brief spawning events , often related to the phases of the moon . In tropical regions , reproduction may occur throughout the year . In many cases , as in the genus Acropora , the eggs and sperm are released in buoyant bundles which rise to the surface . This increases the concentration of sperm and eggs and thus the likelihood of fertilization , and reduces the risk of self @-@ fertilization . Immediately after spawning , the eggs are delayed in their capability for fertilization until after the release of polar bodies . This delay , and possibly some degree of self @-@ incompatibility , likely increases the chance of cross @-@ fertilization . A study of four species of Scleractinia found that cross @-@ fertilization was actually the dominant mating pattern , although three of the species were also capable of self @-@ fertilization to varying extents . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 There is little evidence on which to base a hypothesis about the origin of the scleractinians ; plenty is known about modern species but very little about fossil specimens , which first appeared in the record in the Middle Triassic ( 240 million years ago ) . It was not until 25 million years later that they became important reef builders , their success perhaps a result of teaming up with <unk> algae . Nine of the sub @-@ orders were in existence by the end of the Triassic and three more had appeared by the Jurassic ( 200 million years ago ) , with a further suborder appearing in the Middle Cretaceous ( 100 million years ago ) . Some may have developed from a common ancestor , either an anemone @-@ like coral without a skeleton , or a rugose coral . A rugose coral seems an unlikely common ancestor because these corals had calcite rather than aragonite skeletons , and the septa were arranged serially rather than cyclically . However , it may be that similarities of scleractinians to <unk> are due to a common non @-@ <unk> ancestor in the early Paleozoic . Alternatively , scleractinians may have developed from a <unk> @-@ like ancestor . It seems that <unk> may have been associated with the development of symbiosis and reef formation , and may have occurred on more than one occasion . DNA sequencing appears to indicate that scleractinian corals are a monophyletic group . 
 The earliest scleractinians were not reef builders , but were small , <unk> or solitary individuals . Scleractinian corals were probably at their greatest diversity in the Jurassic and all but disappeared in the mass extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous , about 18 out of 67 genera surviving . Recently discovered Paleozoic corals with <unk> skeletons and cyclic septal insertion – two features that characterize Scleractinia – have strengthened the hypothesis for an independent origin of the Scleractinia . Whether the early scleractinian corals were zooxanthellate is an open question . The phenomenon seems to have evolved independently on numerous occasions during the Tertiary , and the genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , all in different families , each have both zooxanthellate and non @-@ zooxanthellate members . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The taxonomy of Scleractinia is particularly challenging . Many species were described before the advent of scuba diving , with little realisation by the authors that coral species could have varying morphologies in different habitats . Collectors were mostly limited to observing corals on reef flats , and were unable to observe the changes in morphology that occurred in more turbid , deeper @-@ water conditions . More than 2 @,@ 000 nominal species were described in this era , and by the rules of nomenclature , the name given to the first described species has precedence over the rest , even when that description is poor , and the environment and even sometimes the country of the type specimen is unknown . 
 Even the concept of " the species " is suspect , with regard to corals which have large geographical ranges with a number of sub @-@ populations ; their geographic boundaries merge with those of other species ; their morphological boundaries merge with those of other species ; and there are no definite distinctions between species and subspecies . 
 The evolutionary relationships among stony corals were first examined in the 19th and early 20th centuries . The two most advanced 19th century classifications both used complex skeletal characters ; The 1857 classification of the French zoologists Henri Milne @-@ Edwards and Jules <unk> ’ s was based on macroscopic skeletal characters , while Francis Grant Ogilvie 's 1897 scheme was developed using observations of skeletal microstructures , with particular attention to the structure and pattern of the septal trabeculae . In 1943 , the American zoologists Thomas Wayland Vaughan and John West Wells , and Wells again in 1956 , used the patterns of the septal trabeculae to divide the group into five suborders . In addition , they considered <unk> features such as the growth of the tentacles . They also distinguished families by wall type and type of budding . 
 The 1952 classification by French zoologist J. Alloiteau was built on these earlier systems but included more <unk> observations and did not involve the anatomical characters of the polyp . Alloiteau recognized eight suborders . In 1942 , W.H. Bryan and D. Hill stressed the importance of <unk> observations by proposing that stony corals begin skeletal growth by configuring calcification centers , which are genetically derived . Therefore , diverse patterns of calcification centers are vital to classification . Alloiteau later showed that established morphological classifications were unbalanced and that there were many examples of convergent evolution between fossils and recent taxa . 
 The rise of molecular techniques at the end of the 20th century prompted new evolutionary hypotheses that were different from ones founded on skeletal data . Results of molecular studies explained a variety of aspects of the evolutionary biology of the Scleractinia , including connections between and within extant taxa , and supplied support for hypotheses about extant corals that are founded on the fossil record . The 1996 analysis of mitochondrial RNA undertaken by American zoologists Sandra Romano and Stephen <unk> found that molecular data supported the assembling of species into the existing families , but not into the traditional suborders . For example , some genera affiliated with different suborders were now located on the same branch of a phylogenetic tree . In addition , there is no distinguishing morphological character that separates clades , only molecular differences . 
 The Australian zoologist John Veron and his co @-@ workers analyzed ribosomal RNA in 1996 to obtain similar results to Romano and <unk> , again concluding that the traditional families were plausible but that the suborders were incorrect . They also established that stony corals are monophyletic , including all the descendants of a common ancestor , but that they are divided into two groups , the robust and complex clades . Veron suggested that both morphological and molecular systems be used in future classification schemes . 
 = = Families = = 
