 The World Register of Marine Species lists the following families as being included in the order Scleractinia : 
 = The X @-@ Files ( film ) = 
 The X @-@ Files ( also known as The X @-@ Files : Fight the Future ) is a 1998 American science fiction thriller film directed by Rob Bowman . Chris Carter wrote the screenplay . The story is by Carter and Frank Spotnitz . It is the first feature film based on Carter 's television series The X @-@ Files that revolves around fictional unsolved cases called the X @-@ Files and the characters solving them . Five main characters from the television series appear in the film : David Duchovny , Gillian Anderson , Mitch Pileggi , John Neville , and William B. Davis reprise their respective roles as FBI agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , FBI Assistant Director Walter Skinner , Well @-@ Manicured Man , and the Cigarette @-@ Smoking Man . The film was promoted with the tagline Fight the Future . 
 The film takes place between seasons five ( episode " The End " ) and six ( episode " The Beginning " ) of the television series , and is based upon the series ' extraterrestrial mythology . The story follows agents Mulder and Scully , removed from their usual jobs on the X @-@ Files , and investigating the bombing of a building and the destruction of criminal evidence . They uncover what appears to be a government conspiracy attempting to hide the truth about an alien colonization of Earth . 
 Carter decided to make a feature film to explore the show 's mythology on a wider scale , as well as appealing to non @-@ fans . He wrote the story with Frank Spotnitz at the end of 1996 and , with a budget from 20th Century Fox , filming began in 1997 , following the end of the show 's fourth season . Carter assembled cast and crew from the show , as well as some other , well @-@ known actors such as Blythe Danner and Martin Landau , to begin production on what they termed " Project Blackwood " . The film was produced by Carter and Daniel Sackheim . Mark Snow continued his role as X @-@ Files composer to create the film 's score . 
 The film premiered on June 19 , 1998 in the United States , and received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Although some enjoyed the style and effects of the film , others found the plot confusing and viewed it as little more than an extended episode of the series . A sequel , entitled I Want to Believe , was released ten years later . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens in what will become North Texas , 35 @,@ 000 BC . Entering a cave , two cavemen hunters stumble upon a large extraterrestrial life form . One is killed by the creature while the other one fights and wins , stabbing the creature to death , but he is also infected by a black oil @-@ like substance which crawls into his skin . In 1998 , in the same area , when a group of boys are digging a deep hole , a young boy named Stevie falls down the hole and finds a human skull . As he holds it , black oil seeps into his body until it reaches his head , causing his eyes to turn black . Later , four firefighters descend into the hole to rescue him , but do not come out . A team of biohazard @-@ suited men arrives on the scene . 
 Meanwhile , FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully have been assigned to other projects since the closure of the X @-@ Files . They are helping investigate a bomb threat against a federal building in Dallas . Mulder inspects a building across the street from the supposed target and discovers the bomb in a vending machine . Special Agent in Charge Darius Michaud stays behind to disarm the bomb as Mulder and Scully evacuate the building . Unknown to the agents , Michaud makes no effort to disarm the bomb , which detonates . 
 Returning to Washington , D.C. , Mulder and Scully are chastised because , in addition to Michaud , five people were apparently still in the building during the bombing . There are scheduled separate hearings at which their job performances will be evaluated . That evening , Mulder encounters a paranoid doctor , Alvin Kurtzweil , who explains that the victims were the firefighters and boy , that they were already dead , and that the bomb was allowed to detonate in order to destroy evidence of how they died . At the hospital morgue , Scully is able to examine one of the victims , finding evidence of an alien virus . 
 Meanwhile , Mulder and Scully 's enemy , the Cigarette Smoking Man , meets with Dr. Ben Bronschweig in Texas , which they locate one of the firefighters who contains the same alien virus , but with an alien organism residing inside the body ; the Cigarette Smoking Man orders to administer a vaccine to it , but should it fail , have the body burned . Later , the alien organism gestates and kills Bronschweig . 
 Mulder and Scully travel to the crime scene in Texas . They come across a strange train hauling tanker trucks and they follow it to a large cornfield surrounding two glowing domes . They enter the domes , only to find them empty . Suddenly , grates leading to an underground area open in the floor and a swarm of bees chases the agents out into the cornfield . Black helicopters appear and begin to chase them , but they escape and head back to Washington . 
 After returning , Mulder unsuccessfully tries to get help from Kurtzweil , while Scully attends her performance hearing and learns that she is being transferred to Salt Lake City , Utah . Mulder is devastated to lose Scully as a partner . The two are about to share a kiss when Scully is stung by a bee which had lodged itself under her shirt collar . The sting causes Scully to quickly lose consciousness . Mulder calls for the paramedics but when an ambulance arrives , the driver shoots Mulder in the head and whisks Scully away . Waking up in hospital , Mulder is told the bullet only grazed his temple and leaves with the help of The Lone Gunmen and FBI Assistant Director Walter Skinner . Mulder then meets a former adversary , the Well @-@ Manicured Man , who gives him Scully 's location in Antarctica , along with a vaccine to combat the virus that has infected her . The Well @-@ Manicured Man then kills himself in a car bomb , before his betrayal of The Syndicate is discovered . 
 Mulder travels to Antarctica to save Scully , and discovers a secret underground laboratory run by the Cigarette Smoking Man . Mulder uses the vaccine to revive Scully , disrupting the stable environment of the lab and reviving the cocooned aliens . The lab is destroyed just after Mulder and Scully escape to the surface . It turns out to be part of a huge alien vessel lying dormant beneath the snow ; the vessel pushes up through tons of ice and snow and travels straight up into the sky . Mulder watches the ship fly directly overhead and disappear into the distance , as Scully regains consciousness . 
 Some time later , Scully attends a hearing , where her testimony is ignored and the evidence covered up . The only remaining proof of their ordeal is the bee that stung Scully , collected by the Lone Gunmen . She hands it over , noting that the FBI does not currently have an investigative unit qualified to pursue the evidence at hand . Outside , Mulder is reading an article that has covered up the domes and crop field in Texas ; Scully informs Mulder that she is willing to continue working with him . 
 At another crop outpost in Tunisia , the Cigarette Smoking Man warns Strughold that Mulder remains a threat , as he explains what Mulder has found out about the virus . He then hands him a telegram revealing that the X @-@ files unit has been re @-@ opened . 
 = = Cast = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully 
 Martin Landau as Alvin Kurtzweil 
 Blythe Danner as Jana Cassidy 
 Armin Mueller @-@ Stahl as Conrad Strughold 
 Mitch Pileggi as Assistant Director Walter Skinner 
 William B. Davis as Cigarette @-@ Smoking Man 
 John Neville as Well @-@ Manicured Man 
 Dean Haglund as Richard " Ringo " Langly 
 Bruce Harwood as John Fitzgerald Byers 
 Tom Braidwood as Melvin Frohike 
 Jeffrey DeMunn as Ben Bronschweig 
 Michael Shamus Wiles as Black @-@ Haired Man 
 Terry O 'Quinn as Special Agent in Charge Darius Michaud 
 Lucas Black as Stevie 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and pre @-@ production = = = 
 After five successful seasons , Chris Carter wanted to tell the story of the series on a wider scale , which ultimately meant creating a feature film . He later explained that the main problem was to create a story for which the viewer would not need to be familiar with the show 's setting and the various story arcs . 
 Carter and Frank Spotnitz wrote major parts of the script in Hawaii over Christmas 1996 . They used the same method that they had used when writing episodes and sketching out scenes for the series on 3x5 index cards . By the time the Christmas break had ended , the whole narrative for the film had been written . Upon his return from Hawaii , Carter looked for spare time to write the script . He returned to Hawaii and in ten days wrote about half of the 124 @-@ page screenplay for the film . 
 Carter gave 90 pages of the screenplay to Fox who received it well . While not officially greenlighted , he got a budget from Fox and began to make plans as to when and where it would be filmed . Carter then enlisted Daniel Sackheim as a producer on the film . Sackheim had previously produced the pilot episode of The X @-@ Files and directed several episodes in the first two seasons . The X @-@ Files marked his first contribution as producer to a feature film . Carter 's choice for director was Rob Bowman , who had been the series ' executive producer and a director before the production base was moved from Vancouver to Los Angeles . 
 During production , the filmmakers went to great lengths to preserve secrecy , including printing the script on red paper to prevent photocopying , and leaking disinformation to the media and giving the film the codename " Project Blackwood " . The code was cracked by fans who speculated on the meaning behind it . According to Spotnitz , " Blackwood " held no particular significance . 
 At the beginning of the pre @-@ production phase , Carter and Bowman were busy with the television series , leaving Sackheim to work alone . Sackheim hired executive producer Lata Ryan , who had previously collaborated with Steven Spielberg for his 1993 film , Jurassic Park . Once hired , Ryan was allowed to read the script in front of the Ten Thirteen Productions staff members — but not to take it away . At this time , most of the staff members had not read the script for themselves . After Ryan accepted the offer of becoming executive producer , Chris Nowak was hired as production designer , Ward Russell as director of photography and Bill <unk> as construction coordinator . According to Ryan , they had secured all key personnel six weeks before principal filming began . 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 Both Carter and Spotnitz wanted to make the film " bigger " than the series , so they decided to start and end the film at an " extreme place " and explain aspects of the story arc that the show had not . While gathering research materials , they learned that the Earth was once covered with ice and decided to open the film in Texas in 35 @,@ 000 BC with human " Primitives " as the first characters to appear . 
 The film included known actors from the show such as David Duchovny as Fox Mulder , Gillian Anderson as Dana Scully , Mitch Pileggi as Walter Skinner and William B. Davis as the Cigarette Smoking Man , as well as new actors and characters to the franchise . These included Martin Landau and Blythe Danner . The signing of these actors broke with what had become tradition for The X @-@ Files . Carter had purposely cast virtually unknown actors for the television series , to make it more believable ; " As soon as you put in an actor whose face is very recognizable , you 've got a situation that works against the reality of the show . " He saw creating the film as a chance to break this rule . He offered Glenne Headly the small role of a bartender . A fan of the show , she accepted enthusiastically . 
 = = = Set design = = = 
 Chris Nowak was hired as production designer for the film by Daniel Sackheim . Nowak was a former architect who had worked as a professional theater set designer for eight years , before moving towards the film business as an art director . Nowak had previously worked with Sackheim on a television production , which led to Sackheim contacting him to do an interview for the selection of a production designer . According to Sackheim , Nowak was hired because he was the only one able to create a " focused vision " for the film . 
 Nowak wanted to start the design process after talking through the story with the filmmakers so that he could formulate " a sense of the atmosphere " which they wanted to create for the film . He wanted to create a " dark , scary and oppressive environment " for the characters , especially Mulder . While familiar with the television series , Nowak decided not to review any episodes as preparation for his role in the production . Explaining this decision , he said , " I wanted the movie to be as fresh and new as possible in its design . Of course , there were some elements from the show that had to be retained . " 
 The design department found all their locations and designed sets in eight weeks , guided by input from the filmmakers . Nowak started by creating artwork for all the major sets and locations , working with the two concept artists Tim Flattery and Jim Martin . Nowak created drafts and sent them to Flattery and Martin who continued to develop them until they were complete . The complete artwork was then presented to Chris Carter , Rob Bowman , Lata Ryan and Sackheim for approval . While considering the time schedule , they made no notable changes to the artwork . 
 Once the set concepts were approved by Carter , Bowman , Sackheim and Ryan , they were sent to the blueprint stage so that construction of the sets could begin under the supervision of construction coordinator Bill <unk> . All the major sets were constructed " simultaneously " because of the schedule . However , this proved to be a challenge for the production team , because it meant they had to pay the rent on all the stages at the same time . The set construction started seven weeks before filming . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Carter and Bowman wanted to film in as many different locations as possible to give the film a " grander " feel than had usually been achievable for the television episodes . The tighter schedule , with only eight weeks of pre @-@ production and 45 days of principal photography , still caused the production to have less location shooting than planned . Los Angeles ended up standing in for Dallas and London ( though a shot was done in London with a double ) , and the ice scenes , initially envisaged for an ice field in Alaska , were moved to Whistler , British Columbia , nearby the show 's regular locations in Vancouver . Principal photography for the film started on June 16 , 1997 . 
 The X @-@ Files was filmed in the hiatus between the show 's fourth and fifth seasons and re @-@ shoots were conducted during the filming of the show 's fifth season . Due to the demands of the film shoot on the actors ' schedules , some episodes of the fifth season did not revolve around both Mulder and Scully but just one of the two lead stars . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Two soundtracks , The X @-@ Files : Original Motion Picture Score and The X @-@ Files : The Album were both released to home markets in 1998 . The X @-@ Files : The Album included a take on the original theme song by the American duo The Dust Brothers , and included a hidden track on which Chris Carter details a summary of The X @-@ Files mythology . Mark Snow , who had worked on the television series as a composer , was hired to score the film . Chris Carter wanted a " very minimal approach " to the music . He did not want much " melody " and wanted to replace it with plain " ambient atmosphere " and " sound design " . Snow mixed electronic music with an 85 @-@ member orchestra to give the film a " great sense of scope and grandeur . " 
 When creating the music for the film , Snow had a couple of months to write and produce the music , composing the television series simultaneously . The film marked the first time in the history of the franchise that music was composed and recorded with the help of an orchestra , although , according to Snow , there was no significant change in the recording and writing process during the production of the film . The most substantial difference was that Snow used MIDI files to save his musical scores and pieces , which would afterward be sent to a copyist who would take it through one of their programs and eventually give it to the orchestrators . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 The film premiered theatrically in the United States ( as well as Canada ) on June 19 , 1998 , distributed by 20th Century Fox . It closed after 14 weeks , with its widest release having been 2 @,@ 650 theaters . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The same year as the international theatrical release , the film was released on VHS in an Extended Cut edition . The film made its first appearance on DVD on January 24 , 2000 in Region 2 and in early 2001 in Region 1 . In 2008 , producer Frank Spotnitz announced plans to release a new special edition DVD and Blu @-@ ray edition of the movie . " We are working on packing the [ re @-@ issued ] DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases with as many extras as they will fit , including video and audio commentaries , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , bloopers , trailers , a new documentary , and several other cool surprises . " The Blu @-@ ray version was released on December 2 , 2008 . In addition , a novelization of the film was written by Elizabeth Hand and released on June 19 , 1998 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film grossed $ 83 @,@ 898 @,@ 313 in the U.S. and $ 105 @,@ 278 @,@ 110 abroad , giving a total worldwide gross of $ 189 @,@ 176 @,@ 423 . In its opening weekend , showing at 2 @,@ 629 theaters , it earned $ 30 @,@ 138 @,@ 758 which was 35 @.@ 9 % of its total gross . According to Box Office Mojo , it ranked at No. 23 for all films released in the U.S. in 1998 and No. 10 for PG @-@ 13 rated films released that year . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received generally positive reviews . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 64 % of 69 listed film critics gave the film a positive review , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 1 out of 10 . 
 Roger Ebert gave a positive review of the film with three out of four stars , saying , " As pure movie , The X @-@ Files more or less works . As a story , it needs a sequel , a prequel , and Cliff Notes . " Joyce Millman of Salon was more equivocal , writing , " ... You really can 't treat The X @-@ Files as a movie because it isn 't one . It 's a two @-@ hour episode of the show , " and said it was far from the " most satisfying " of X @-@ Files releases . San Francisco Chronicle reviewer Bob Graham was positive towards the film , calling " David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson [ ... ] enormously sympathetic heroes . " Michael O 'Sullivan , a reviewer from The Washington Post called the film , " stylish , scary , sardonically funny and at times just plain gross . " 
 Los Angeles Times reviewer Kenneth Turan felt that it was difficult to make sense of the film , saying that it relied too heavily on the series ' mythology . Lisa Alspector wrote that " Only two scenes in this spin @-@ off are worth the time of followers of the TV series . " Variety reviewer Todd McCarthy remarked , " As it is , the pic serves up set @-@ pieces and a measure of scope that are beyond TV size but remain rather underwhelming by feature standards . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times responded negatively towards the film , complaining that it was uneventful and scorning the " hush @-@ hush atmosphere " surrounding the production . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The X @-@ Files has spawned one sequel , a 2008 film entitled The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe released six years after the series ended . The film performed modestly at the box office and received a less positive response than the first film . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Chris Carter announced that if I Want to Believe proved successful , he would propose that a third movie go back to the television series ' mythology and focus on the alien invasion foretold within the series , due to occur in December 2012 . No third movie appeared ; instead the TV series was revived in 2016 . 
 = The Fat Guy Strangler = 
 " The Fat Guy Strangler " is the 17th episode of the fourth season of the animated television series Family Guy . It originally aired on the Fox network on November 27 , 2005 . In the episode , Lois discovers she has a long @-@ lost brother , Patrick , who was institutionalized after seeing his mother being seduced . Lois gets him released , but after a childhood flashback induced by Peter , Patrick becomes traumatized and starts murdering overweight people . The episode was written by Chris Sheridan and directed by Sarah Frost , whilst guest stars were Bob Barker , Dave Boat , Max Burkholder , Barclay DeVeau , Robert Downey Jr . , Margaret Easley , Kim Parks , Will Sasso , Anne @-@ Michelle Seiler and Tara Strong . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Instead of going to his physical , Peter goes out with Brian , Quagmire , Cleveland , and Joe . When Lois finds out , she takes him to the doctor herself . The doctor pronounces him healthy , but fat . Peter takes this badly , even smashing a picture of Lois ' family . Trying to salvage it , Lois discovers another child in the picture : a boy . She telephones her father Carter , who tells her she doesn 't have a brother and quickly terminates the call , but she persists : she breaks into her parents ' house . She finally learns that her brother Patrick has been shut away in a mental hospital for decades , ever since he suffered a nervous breakdown as a young child , upon walking in on his mother having an affair with Jackie Gleason . 
 Meanwhile , Peter announces to the family that he is fat and decides to create the " National Association for The Advancement of Fat People " ( <unk> ) . Peter hosts the first meeting of the association , but it is unsuccessful due to those attending munching junk food the entire way through . 
 Believing Patrick to be sane , Lois authorizes his release , and arranges for Patrick to stay with the family . Patrick soon announces he has a wife , Marion , although she is imaginary and nobody else other than him can see her . This leads Brian and Stewie to believe he is crazy . Lois attempts to overlook the evidence , and instead tries to persuade Peter not to encourage people to be fat . Peter unintentionally <unk> Patrick later by dressing up like Ralph Kramden and repeatedly using one of Kramden 's catchphrases " Pow , right in the kisser ! " which brings back memories of Gleason telling him to get out . This triggers Patrick to start killing fat people . 
 Lois ' father , Carter , calls her and tells her how dangerous Patrick is , but she assures him Patrick is safe , although she becomes worried after seeing on the news that a fat man has been murdered . Lois remains in denial as more murders are committed , even though Brian tries to convince her that Patrick is the killer . 
 Peter brings the fat men back to his home to protect them , but after learning from Brian that Patrick is the killer , a chase between the fat men and Patrick ensues . Brian , still at the house , shows Patrick 's room to Lois , where several of his victims are either deceased or had been left for dead , and photographic evidence of Patrick killing them . Lois continues to make crazy excuses , still wanting to believe her brother is a sane person , but ultimately she snaps out of her denial and realizes that Patrick is dangerous . Lois and Brian pursue Patrick and Peter into the woods , where Patrick is strangling Peter . Patrick quickly releases Peter after Lois threatens to stab Marion , his imaginary wife . Patrick apologizes , telling Lois that he never meant to hurt her , and the two agree he should be sent back to the mental hospital , where Lois and the family plan to visit him once a month . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Patrick was traumatized as a child by Jackie Gleason after seeing him seduce his mother , Barbara , in front of him . While at the mental hospital , Stewie makes a reference to the movie Sling Blade . Brian makes a reference to season @-@ three Family Guy episode " To Love and Die in Dixie " . Lois is shown watching the game show The Price Is Right . The cavemen who " invented singing " perform an a cappella version of Billy Joel 's " The Longest Time . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The origins of the episode and the character of Patrick began when Robert Downey , Jr. telephoned the show production staff and asked if he could produce or assist in an episode creation , as his son is a fan of the show , so the producers came up with the character of Patrick for Downey . Show producer Seth MacFarlane believes Downey " did a great job , " and brought a " very kind of half crazy , and maybe just eccentric personality to that character that really worked out great . " When Patrick makes his second appearance in season 10 's " Killer Queen " , he is not voiced by Downey . Instead , he is voiced by Family Guy writer , and recurring guest voice actor , Danny Smith . Bob Barker voiced himself presenting The Price Is Right ; but the actual sequence took years to make . Barker has provided his voice for the show twice , although MacFarlane has never met him . John <unk> voiced Bobby McFerrin falling down a flight of stairs . The ball @-@ in @-@ a @-@ cup scene is commented upon by MacFarlane , where he states that " the voice @-@ overs work , the drawings work " and that Walter Murphy " did a great job of creating a piece of deliberately annoying music . " Several jokes had been pitched for Peter 's words after killing an evil dragon , but all were dropped , as they weren 't deemed funny enough by production staff . 
 MacFarlane notes that he was surprised they were allowed to do the pickle gag , which consisted of Stewie placing a cucumber on the sofa where Patrick 's imaginary wife is sitting , but inserting it into her imaginary vagina ( to see if it would turn into a pickle ) , but suggests that maybe broadcasting standards did not fully understand the scene . The music song by the overweight people at a funeral for a murdered obese man was only shown on the DVD version and not televised , for timing purposes , and for potential boredom to viewers . The musical composition was recorded at Fox studios on the Gary Numan stage . George W. Bush is portrayed hiding in a tree house and Brian informing by Brian of Hurricane Katrina . Bush was offered the opportunity to voice himself , but declined . 
 A deleted scene had been made which showed the family traveling on board an airplane on which Peter , rather than using the airplane toilet as " he is too fat to get out of his seat , " urinates in his seat , but unknowingly urinates on Brian in the process , as he is in a dog cage below Peter 's seat . If this scene had been used in the episode , it was intended for Brian , after throwing a rock aimed at Peter 's head , to say " that 's for pissing on me ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a review of the episode , TV Squad commented positively about the storyline , noting that " Unlike The Simpsons tonight , Family Guy actually did work their two storylines together . Their first big one , was about Peter 's ever increasing weight problem . He skips out on going to his physical , so that he and Brian can go meet the guys at an all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat steak restaurant . " In a review of Family Guy , Volume 4 , Nancy Basile regards " The Fat Guy Strangler " as one of her favorite episodes , as well as " PTV . " Basile moves on to comment that " Being prejudiced against fat people just isn 't talked about , but this episode sheds a harsh light on that problem . At times the episode tries to show people who are fat as being victims of unfair bias , but other times just out and out makes fun of them . " 
 = Malagasy hippopotamus = 
 Several species of Malagasy hippopotamus ( also known as Malagasy dwarf hippopotamus or Malagasy pygmy hippopotamus or Madagascan instead of Malagasy ) lived on the island of Madagascar but are now believed to be extinct . The animals were very similar to the extant hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus . The fossil record suggests that at least one species of hippopotamus lived until about 1 @,@ 000 years ago , and other evidence suggests that the species may have survived until much more recently . The taxonomy of these animals is not resolved and not widely studied . The various species are believed to have survived into the Holocene era . 
 = = Discovery and taxonomy = = 
 The Malagasy hippopotamus was first described in the mid @-@ 19th century by Alfred Grandidier , who unearthed nearly 50 individual hippos from a dried @-@ up swamp near Lake Ranobe , a few miles from the Mozambique Channel . As many as four different species of hippopotamus were subsequently identified by various researchers . In a careful revision of the fossil record of the Malagasy hippos , <unk> <unk> concluded that there were only two species of hippopotamus which she classified as Hippopotamus lemerlei and Hippopotamus madagascariensis . In 1990 , Faure and Guerin discovered a distinct third species of hippo , which they named Hippopotamus laloumena . In a review of <unk> work , Harris suggested that <unk> madagascariensis had much in common with the extant pygmy hippopotamus of West Africa . Since the extant pygmy hippopotamus was placed in the genus Hexaprotodon , he used the name <unk> madagascariensis . Some taxonomists , however , consider the modern pygmy hippo to belong to the genus Choeropsis , so this species may also be classified as C. madagascariensis . 
 The fossil record of the Malagasy hippopotamus is extensive . At least seven hippopotamus bones show unequivocal signs of butchery , suggesting that they survived until humans arrived on Madagascar . The evidence of humans butchering the hippos also suggests their extinction may have been , in part , due to humans . Despite the discovery of many fossils , the hippos of Madagascar are not very well studied , perhaps because researchers are interested in some of the more exotic megafauna of Madagascar , such as the giant lemurs and the elephant birds . 
 = = Species = = 
 Although not well @-@ studied , there is growing acceptance of three species of Malagasy hippopotamus . It is not known when or exactly how these hippos arrived on the island of Madagascar . As hippos are semi @-@ aquatic , it is possible that they survived the 400 km ( 248 mi ) trek across the channel , although presumably when the water was shallower and there were perhaps small islands along the way . It is possible that the three species of hippopotamus represent three distinct and successful colonizations of the island . Hippos are the only endemic ungulates ever to have lived on Madagascar . 
 = = = H. lemerlei = = = 
 Hippopotamus lemerlei bones have been mostly discovered in the rivers and lakes of western Madagascar , suggesting a riparian lifestyle , very similar to that of the modern hippopotamus of modern Africa . H. lemerlei also shared the high @-@ orbits that make it easier for the hippopotamus to see while in the water . The skull of H. lemerlei also resembled that of the modern hippopotamus , but with consistent size differences , indicating that H. lemerlei was a sexually dimorphic species . 
 Although a clear relative to the common hippopotamus , H. lemerlei was much smaller , roughly the size of the modern pygmy hippopotamus . The largest specimens were 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 m ) long and 2 @.@ 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 7 m ) tall . The ancestors of H. lemerlei may have been full @-@ sized hippos who shrunk through the process of insular dwarfism . A similar dwarfing process has occurred with hippos in many Mediterranean islands such as with the Cretan dwarf hippopotamus or the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus . 
 Because H. lemerlei reached its size through dwarfing , it is properly known as the Malagasy dwarf hippopotamus , though this term is sometimes applied to the other species of Malagasy hippos . Bones of H. lemerlei have been dated to about 1 @,@ 000 years ago ( 980 ± 200 radiocarbon years before present ) . 
 = = = C. madagascariensis = = = 
 Also called the Malagasy pygmy hippopotamus , this species was originally classified as Hippopotamus along with H. lemerlei , and indeed the two species were roughly the same size . A review of their morphology and habitat , however , suggested a closer relationship to the modern pygmy hippopotamus . 
 Like the modern pygmy hippopotamus , the Malagasy pygmy hippo has eyes on the side of its head rather than high orbits and teeth similar to those of the pygmy hippopotamus . The Malagasy pygmy hippo is similarly less aquatic , with many of its fossils found in the forested highlands of Madagascar . 
 Fossils of both the Malagasy pygmy hippopotamus and H. lemerlei show a cursorial adaptation , distinct from the hippos on the African continent , and they would have been much better runners . This common trait is a possible indicator that both species of Malagasy hippo descended from a common ancestor , and that the similarities to the modern hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are a case of parallel evolution . 
 The Malagasy pygmy hippopotamus is classified along with the modern Liberian pygmy hippopotamus , but researchers sometimes place the Liberian hippo in two different genera . The pygmy hippopotamus was originally classified as Choeropsis by Samuel G. Morton in 1849 . In 1977 , the pygmy hippopotamus was reclassified as a member of Hexaprotodon along with fossil species from Asia . Further examination , however , has discovered differences between the pygmy hippopotamus and the Asian hippos , prompting its reclassification by some as Choeropsis . 
 = = = H. laloumena = = = 
 In 1990 , Faure and Guerin described a third species of Malagasy hippopotamus , Hippopotamus laloumena ( " laloumena " is a Malagasy word for hippopotamus ) , which was a distinct species . Little is known about the species , because it was identified with only a lower jaw and limb bones , recovered from a site near Mananjary on the east coast of Madagascar . 
 The fossils clearly belong to a hippopotamus , but one much larger than any previously described Madagascan species . From what is known , the species closely resembled the modern hippopotamus , but was somewhat smaller . 
 = = Oral legends and the kilopilopitsofy = = 
 Although no fossil evidence has been dated within the last 1 @,@ 000 years , the hippopotamus has been surprisingly common in the oral legends of the Malagasy . In 1648 , Étienne de Flacourt became the French governor of Madagascar and he wrote in his Histoire de la grande isle de Madagascar about hearing stories from the Malagasy about an animal called the <unk> which closely resembled the hippopotamus . In different regions of Madagascar , stories were recorded of the <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , the <unk> @-@ <unk> , and the laloumena , all animals that resembled hippopotami , but few other animals on the island . In 1902 , a colonial administrator named <unk> asserted that stories he heard in the highlands could only be about Malagasy hippos still living as late as 1878 . The strength of these oral traditions led the IUCN to classify the Malagasy hippopotami as recent extinctions . 
 In the 1990s , Burney , who was studying recent extinctions in Madagascar , collected tales about a creature called the kilopilopitsofy that had been described by villagers in the town of Belo @-@ sur @-@ mer , a small fishing village on the west coast . Several villagers independently described an animal that , as recently as 1976 , had entered their village , was the size of a cow , was dark pigmented , <unk> a lot , and when threatened , fled underwater . No known animal on Madagascar fits the description but the animal seemed remarkably like a hippopotamus . 
 One man in the village could accurately mimic the sound of many animals , and when asked to imitate the kilopilopitsofy , he made noises very similar to that of a hippopotamus , even though he had never left the island and said he had never seen an African hippo . When shown photos , others also identified a hippopotamus @-@ like animal , but with larger ears . Several described the creature 's last appearance in 1976 . 
 Burney was reluctant to publish the study for fear of being labeled a cryptozoologist , but eventually published the results in American Anthropologist . Burney concluded that while the villagers had possibly encountered a Malagasy hippopotamus , it was also possible that the stories were inaccurate — a combination of misidentified animals , old folk traditions , and information the villagers had gathered from modern paleontology . 
 = Clare Nott = 
 Clare Nott ( née Burzynski ) ( born 11 August 1986 ) is an Australian 1 @.@ 0 point wheelchair basketball player who plays for the Kilsyth Cobras in the Women 's national Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) and for the Red Dust Heelers in the mixed National Wheelchair basketball League ( NWBL ) . She participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where she won a bronze medal , and the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , where she won a silver medal . 
 A paraplegic as a result of a car crash , Nott was named the WNWBL 's Best New Talent in 2005 . She was the league 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) in the 1 point class and a member of its All Star Five in 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 and 2015 . She has also won four National League premierships with the Wheelcats and two National Women 's League premierships with the Western Stars ( 2013 ) and the Kilsyth Cobras ( 2015 ) . She made her debut with the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in a tournament in Canada in 2005 , and has since played 141 international games . She won gold medals at the 2009 , 2010 and 2012 Osaka Cups in Japan . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Clare Louise Burzynski was born in Newcastle , New South Wales , on 11 August 1986 , the daughter of Eddie and Barbara Burzynski . She has an older sister , Lauren . All four members of the family were injured in a car accident on 28 June 1989 , while holidaying in Queensland . Clare was treated at the hospital in Nambour , Queensland and then at the Royal Children 's Hospital in Brisbane . It was discovered that her spinal cord was severed at the T8 spinal nerve , rendering her a paraplegic . 
 Burzynski was educated at Tranby College from 1996 to 2000 , and at Ormiston College from 2000 to 2004 . As of 2013 lives in Landsdale , Western Australia , and attended Murdoch University , where she graduated in 2013 with a Bachelor of Legal Studies and Criminology degree . She is married to Lee Nott , and works as a legal secretary . Before becoming a basketball player , she competed in swimming from 1998 to 2004 . 
 = = Basketball = = 
 Nott is a 1 @.@ 0 point player , who plays point guard . The Australian Sports Commission gave her a A $ 20 @,@ 000 grant in financial year 2012 / 2013 , and $ 11 @,@ 000 in 2011 / 2012 as part of its Direct Athlete Support ( DAS ) program . She was a Western Australian Institute of Sport scholarship holder from 2009 to 2012 . 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Nott plays club basketball for the Kilsyth Cobras in the Women 's national Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) and for the Red Dust Heelers in the mixed National Wheelchair basketball League ( NWBL ) . In the WNWBL she played for the Queensland Comets from 2005 to 2006 , the Western Stars since 2007 to 2014 , and the Kilsyth Cobras since 2015 . She won two Women 's National League premierships with the Western Stars ( 2013 ) and the Kilsyth Cobras ( 2015 ) . In the NWBL she played for the Brisbane Spinning Bullets in 2006 , the Perth Wheelcats from 2007 to 2011 , and the Red Dust Heelers since 2014 . She has won four National League premierships with the Wheelcats . 
 In 2005 Nott was named the WNWBL 's Best New Talent . She was the league 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) in the 1 point class and a member of the WNWBL All Star Five in 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 and 2015 . She was the first female to be named in a NWBL All Star 5 in 2014 while representing the Red Dust Heelers . She was also WNWBL Final Series MVP in 2015 while representing the Kilsyth Cobras . She names Alison Mosely , who helped her in the early stages of her basketball career , as her sporting heroine . 
 = = = National team = = = 
 Nott made her debut with the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in a tournament in Canada in 2005 . She also won gold medals at the 2009 , 2010 and 2012 Osaka Cups in Japan . She was part of the bronze medal winning Gliders team at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , and the fourth @-@ place finishing team at the 2010 World Championships . As of 2013 , has played 141 international games . 
 Nott was part of the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . The Gliders posted wins in the group stage against Brazil , Great Britain , and the Netherlands , but lost to the Canada . This was enough to advance the Gliders to the quarter @-@ finals , where they beat Mexico . The Gliders then defeated the United States by a point to set up a final clash with Germany . The Gliders lost 44 – 58 , and earned a silver medal . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = Sack of Amorium = 
 The Sack of Amorium by the Abbasid Caliphate in mid @-@ August 838 was one of the major events in the long history of the Arab – Byzantine Wars . The Abbasid campaign was led personally by the Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( reigned 833 – 842 ) , in retaliation to a virtually unopposed expedition launched by the Byzantine emperor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) into the Caliphate 's borderlands the previous year . Mu 'tasim targeted Amorium , a Byzantine city in western Asia Minor ( modern Anatolia ) , because it was the birthplace of the ruling Byzantine dynasty and , at the time , one of Byzantium 's largest and most important cities . The caliph gathered an exceptionally large army , which he divided in two parts , which invaded from the northeast and the south . The northeastern army defeated the Byzantine forces under Theophilos at Anzen , allowing the Abbasids to penetrate deep into Byzantine @-@ held Asia Minor and converge upon Ancyra , which they found abandoned . After sacking the city , they turned south to Amorium , where they arrived on 1 August . Faced with intrigues at Constantinople and the rebellion of the large Khurramite contingent of his army , Theophilos was unable to aid the city . 
 Amorium was strongly fortified and garrisoned , but a traitor revealed a weak spot in the wall , where the Abbasids concentrated their attack , effecting a breach . Unable to break through the besieging army , Boiditzes , the commander of the breached section privately attempted to negotiate with the Caliph without notifying his superiors . He concluded a local truce and left his post , which allowed the Arabs to take advantage , enter the city and capture it . Amorium was systematically destroyed , never to recover its former prosperity . Many of its inhabitants were slaughtered , and the remainder driven off as slaves . Most of the survivors were released after a truce in 841 , but prominent officials were taken to the caliph 's capital of Samarra and executed years later after refusing to convert to Islam , becoming known as the 42 Martyrs of Amorium . 
 The conquest of Amorium was not only a major military disaster and a heavy personal blow for Theophilos , but also a traumatic event for the Byzantines , its impact resonating in later literature . The sack did not ultimately alter the balance of power , which was slowly shifting in Byzantium 's favour , but it thoroughly discredited the theological doctrine of Iconoclasm , ardently supported by Theophilos . As Iconoclasm relied heavily on military success for its legitimization , the fall of Amorium contributed decisively to its abandonment shortly after Theophilos 's death in 842 . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 829 , when the young emperor Theophilos ascended the Byzantine throne , the Byzantines and Arabs had been fighting on and off for almost two centuries . At this time , Arab attacks resumed both in the east , where after almost twenty years of peace due to the Abbasid civil war Caliph al @-@ Ma 'mun ( r . 813 – 833 ) launched several large @-@ scale raids , and in the west , where the gradual Muslim conquest of Sicily was under way since 827 . Theophilos was an ambitious man and also a convinced adherent of Byzantine Iconoclasm , which prohibited the depiction of divine figures and the veneration of icons . He sought to bolster his regime and support his religious policies by military success against the Abbasid Caliphate , the Empire 's major antagonist . 
 Seeking divine favour , and responding to iconophile plots against him , Theophilos reinstated active suppression of the iconophiles and other perceived " heretics " in June 833 , including mass arrests and exiles , beatings and confiscations of property . In Byzantine eyes , God seemed indeed to reward this decision : al @-@ Ma 'mun died during the first stages of a new , large @-@ scale invasion against Byzantium that was intended to be the first step in conquering Constantinople itself , and his brother and successor al @-@ Mu 'tasim withdrew to focus on internal matters , having trouble establishing his authority , and needing to confront the ongoing rebellion of the Khurramite religious sect under Babak Khorramdin . This allowed Theophilos to achieve a series of modest victories over the next few years , as well as to bolster his forces with some 14 @,@ 000 Khurramite refugees under their leader Nasr , who was baptized a Christian and took the name Theophobos . The emperor 's successes were not particularly spectacular , but coming after two decades of defeats and civil war under iconophile emperors , Theophilos felt justified in claiming them as vindication for his religious policy . Consequently , the emperor began to publicly associate himself with the memory of the militarily successful and fanatically iconoclast emperor Constantine V ( r . 741 – 775 ) , and issued a new type of the copper follis coin , minted in huge numbers , which portrayed him as the archetypical victorious Roman emperor . 
 In 837 , Theophilos decided — at the urging of the hard @-@ pressed Babak — to take advantage of the Caliphate 's preoccupation with the suppression of the Khurramite revolt and lead a major campaign against the frontier emirates . He assembled a very large army , some 70 @,@ 000 fighting men and 100 @,@ 000 in total according to al @-@ Tabari , and invaded Arab territory around the upper Euphrates almost unopposed . The Byzantines took the towns of Sozopetra and Arsamosata , ravaged and plundered the countryside , extracted ransom from several cities in exchange for not attacking them , and defeated a number of smaller Arab forces . While Theophilos returned home to celebrate a triumph and be acclaimed in the Hippodrome of Constantinople as the " incomparable champion " , the refugees from Sozopetra began arriving at Mu 'tasim 's capital , Samarra . The caliphal court was outraged by the brutality and brazenness of the raids : not only had the Byzantines acted in open collusion with the Khurramite rebels , but during the sack of Sozopetra — which some sources claim as Mu 'tasim 's own birthplace — all male prisoners were executed and the rest sold into slavery , and some captive women were raped by Theophilos 's Khurramites . Theophilos 's campaign was unable , however , to save Babak and his followers , who in late 837 were forced from their mountain strongholds by the general Afshin . Babak fled to Armenia , but was betrayed to the Abbasids and died of torture . 
 With the Khurramite threat over , the caliph began marshalling his forces for a reprisal campaign against Byzantium . A huge Arab army gathered at Tarsus ; according to the most reliable account , that of Michael the Syrian , it numbered some 80 @,@ 000 men with 30 @,@ 000 servants and camp followers and 70 @,@ 000 pack animals . Other writers give far larger numbers , ranging from 200 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 according to al @-@ Mas 'udi . Unlike earlier campaigns , which did not go far beyond attacking the forts of the frontier zone , this expedition was intended to penetrate deep into Asia Minor and exact vengeance . The great city of Amorium in particular was the intended prize . The Arab chronicles record that Mu 'tasim asked his advisors to name the " most inaccessible and strongest " Byzantine fortress , and they named Amorium , " where no Muslim has gone since the appearance of Islam . It is the eye and foundation of Christendom ; among the Byzantines , it is more famous than Constantinople " . According to Byzantine sources , the caliph had the city 's name written on the shields and banners of his soldiers . The capital of the powerful Anatolic Theme , the city was strategically located at the western edge of the Anatolian plateau and controlled the main southern route followed by the Arab invasions . At the time , Amorium was one of the largest cities in the Byzantine Empire , ranking in importance immediately after Constantinople . It was also the birthplace of Theophilos 's father , Michael II the Amorian ( r . 820 – 829 ) , and perhaps of Theophilos himself . Due to its strategic importance , the city had been a frequent target of Arab attacks in the 7th and 8th centuries , and Mu 'tasim 's predecessor Ma 'mun was said to be planning to attack the city when he died in 833 . 
 = = Opening stages of the campaign : Anzen and Ancyra = = 
 The caliph divided his force in two : a detachment of 10 @,@ 000 Turks under Afshin was sent northeast to join forces with the emir of Malatya Umar al @-@ Aqta and Armenian troops ( the Artsruni and Bagratuni rulers of Vaspurakan and Taron respectively both participated in person in the campaign ) and invade the Armeniac Theme from the Pass of Hadath , while the main army under the caliph himself would invade Cappadocia through the Cilician Gates . The advance guard of the latter was led by Ashinas , with Itakh commanding the right , Ja 'far ibn Dinar al @-@ Khayyat the left and ' Ujayf ibn ' Anbasa the centre . The two forces would link up at Ancyra , before marching jointly on Amorium . On the Byzantine side , Theophilos was soon made aware of the caliph 's intentions , and set out from Constantinople in early June . His army included men from the Anatolian and possibly also the European themes , the elite tagmata regiments , as well as the Khurramites . The Byzantines expected the Arab army to advance north to Ancyra after passing through the Cilician Gates and then to turn south toward Amorium , but it was also possible that the Arabs would march directly over the Cappadocian plain to Amorium . Although his generals advised evacuation of the city , with the intention of rendering the Arabs ' campaign objective void and keeping the Byzantine army undivided , Theophilos decided to reinforce the city 's garrison , with Aetios the strategos of the Anatolics , and men from the tagmata of the Excubitors and the Vigla . 
 With the rest of his army , Theophilos then marched to interpose himself between the Cilician Gates and Ancyra , camping on the north bank of the river Halys , close to one of the major river crossings . Ashinas crossed the Cilician Gates on 19 June , and the caliph himself with his main army set out on the march two days later . The Arab advance was slow and cautious . Anxious to avoid an ambush and learn the emperor 's whereabouts , Mu 'tasim forbade Ashinas to advance too deeply into Cappadocia . Ashinas sent out many scouting detachments to take captives , and from them finally learned of Theophilos 's presence at the Halys , where he awaited the Arab approach to give battle . At the same time , around mid @-@ July , Theophilos learned of the arrival of Afshin 's army , comprising some 30 @,@ 000 men , at the plain of Dazimon . Leaving a part of his army under a relative to watch the crossings of the Halys , Theophilos immediately departed with most of his army , some 40 @,@ 000 men according to Michael the Syrian , to confront the smaller Arab force . Mu 'tasim learned of Theophilos 's departure from captives and tried to warn Afshin , but the emperor was faster and met Afshin 's army in the Battle of Anzen on the plain of Dazimon on 22 July . Despite initial success , the Byzantine army broke and scattered , while Theophilos with his guard were encircled and barely managed to break through and escape . 
 Theophilos quickly began regrouping his forces and sent the general Theodore Krateros to Ancyra . Krateros found the city completely deserted , and was ordered to reinforce the garrison of Amorium instead . Theophilos himself was soon forced to return to Constantinople , where rumours of his death at Anzen had led to plots to declare a new emperor . At the same time , the Khurramites , gathered around Sinope , revolted and declared their reluctant commander Theophobos emperor . Luckily for the Empire , Theophobos maintained a passive stance and made no move to confront Theophilos or join Mu 'tasim . The caliph 's vanguard under Ashinas reached Ancyra on 26 July . The inhabitants , who had sought refuge in some mines nearby , were discovered and taken captive after a brief struggle by an Arab detachment under Malik ibn <unk> al @-@ Safadi . The Byzantines , some of whom were soldiers who had fled from Anzen , informed the Arabs of Afshin 's victory , after which Malik allowed all of them to go free . The other Arab forces arrived at Ancyra over the next days , and after plundering the deserted city , the united Arab army turned south towards Amorium . 
 = = Siege and fall of Amorium = = 
 The Arab army marched in three separate corps , with Ashinas once again in front , the caliph in the middle , and Afshin bringing up the rear . Looting the countryside as they advanced , they arrived before Amorium seven days after their departure from Ancyra , and began their siege of the city on 1 August . Theophilos , anxious to prevent the city 's fall , left Constantinople for Dorylaion , and from there sent an embassy to Mu 'tasim . His envoys , who arrived shortly before or during the first days of the siege , offered assurances that the atrocities at Sozopetra had been against the emperor 's orders , and further promised to help rebuild the city , to return all Muslim prisoners , and to pay a tribute . The caliph , however , not only refused to parley with the envoys , but detained them in his camp , so that they could observe the siege . 
 The city 's fortifications were strong , with a wide moat and a thick wall protected by 44 towers , according to the contemporary geographer Ibn Khordadbeh . The caliph assigned each of his generals to a stretch of the walls . Both besiegers and besieged had many siege engines , and for three days both sides exchanged missile fire while Arab sappers tried to undermine the walls . According to Arab accounts , an Arab prisoner who had converted to Christianity defected back to the caliph , and informed him about a place in the wall which had been badly damaged by heavy rainfall and only hastily and superficially repaired due to the city commander 's negligence . As a result , the Arabs concentrated their efforts on this section . The defenders tried to protect the wall by hanging wooden beams to absorb the shock of the siege engines , but they splintered , and after two days a breach was made . Immediately Aetios realized that the defence was compromised , and decided to try and break through the besieging army during the night and link up with Theophilos . He sent two messengers to the emperor , but both were captured by the Arabs and brought before the caliph . Both agreed to convert to Islam , and Mu 'tasim , after giving them a rich reward , paraded them around the city walls in full view of Aetios and his troops . To prevent any sortie , the Arabs stepped up their vigilance , maintaining constant cavalry patrols even during the night . 
 The Arabs now launched repeated attacks on the breach , but the defenders held firm . At first , according to al @-@ Tabari , catapults manned by four men each were placed on wheeled platforms , and mobile towers with ten men each were constructed and advanced to the edge of the moat , which they began to fill with sheep skins ( from the animals they had brought along as food ) filled with earth . However , the work was uneven due to the soldiers ' fear of the Byzantine catapults , and Mu 'tasim had to order earth to be thrown over the skins to pave the surface up to the wall itself . A tower was pushed over the filled moat , but became stuck midway and it and the other siege engines had to be abandoned and burned . Another attack on the next day , led by Ashinas , failed due to the narrowness of the breach , and Mu 'tasim eventually ordered more catapults brought forward to widen it . The next day Afshin with his troops attacked the breach , and Itakh on the day after . The Byzantine defenders were gradually worn down by the constant assaults , and after about two weeks of siege ( the date is variously interpreted as 12 , 13 or 15 August by modern writers ) Aetios sent an embassy under the city 's bishop , offering to surrender Amorium in exchange for safe passage of the inhabitants and garrison , but Mu 'tasim refused . The Byzantine commander Boiditzes , however , who was in charge of the breach section , decided to conduct direct negotiations with the caliph on his own , probably intending to betray his own post . He went to the Abbasid camp , leaving orders for his men in the breach to stand down until his return . While Boiditzes <unk> with the caliph , the Arabs came closer to the breach , and at a signal charged and broke into the city . Taken by surprise , the Byzantines ' resistance was sporadic : some soldiers barricaded themselves in a monastery and were burned to death , while Aetios with his officers sought refuge in a tower before being forced to surrender . 
 The city was thoroughly sacked and plundered ; according to the Arab accounts , the sale of the spoils went on for five days . The Byzantine chronicler Theophanes Continuatus mentions 70 @,@ 000 dead , while the Arab al @-@ Mas 'udi records 30 @,@ 000 . The surviving population were divided as slaves among the army leaders , except for the city 's military and civic leaders , who were reserved for the caliph 's disposal . After allowing Theophilos 's envoys to return to him with the news of Amorium 's fall , Mu 'tasim burned the city to the ground , with only the city walls surviving relatively intact . Among the spoils taken were the massive iron doors of the city , which al @-@ Mu 'tasim initially transported to Samarra , where they were installed at the entrance of his palace . From there they were taken , probably towards the end of the century , and installed at al @-@ Raqqah , where they remained until 964 , when the Hamdanid ruler Sayf al @-@ Dawla had them removed and incorporated in the Bab al @-@ Qinnasrin gate in his capital Aleppo . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately after the sack , rumours reached the caliph that Theophilos was advancing to attack him . Mu 'tasim set out with his army a day 's march along the road in the direction of Dorylaion , but encountered no sign of a Byzantine attack . According to al @-@ Tabari , Mu 'tasim now pondered extending his campaign to attack Constantinople , when news reached him of a conspiracy headed by his nephew , al @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Ma 'mun . Mu 'tasim was forced to cut short his campaign and return quickly to his realm , leaving intact the fortresses around Amorium as well as Theophilos and his army in Dorylaion . Taking the direct route from Amorium to the Cilician Gates , both the caliph 's army and its prisoners suffered in the march through the arid countryside of central Anatolia . Some captives were so exhausted that they could not move and were executed , whereupon others found the opportunity to escape . In retaliation , Mu 'tasim , after separating the most prominent among them , executed the rest , some 6 @,@ 000 in number . 
 Theophilos now sent a second embassy to the caliph , headed by the tourmarches of Charsianon , Basil , bearing gifts and an apologetic letter , and offering to ransom the high @-@ ranking prisoners for 20 @,@ 000 Byzantine pounds ( about 6 @,@ 500 kg ) of gold and to release all Arabs held captive by the Byzantines . In reply , Mu 'tasim refused the ransom , saying that the expedition alone had cost him over 100 @,@ 000 pounds , and demanded the surrender of Theophobos and the Domestic of the Schools , Manuel the Armenian , who had some years ago deserted from Arab service . The Byzantine ambassador refused to comply to this and indeed could not , as Theophobos was in revolt and Manuel had died , according to some accounts , from wounds received at Anzen . Instead , Basil handed over a second , much more threatening letter by Theophilos . Mu 'tasim , angered by this , returned the emperor 's gifts . 
 In the aftermath of the sack of Amorium , Theophilos sought the aid of other powers against the Abbasid threat : embassies were sent to both the western emperor Louis the Pious ( r . 813 – 840 ) and to the court of Abd ar @-@ Rahman II ( r . 822 – 852 ) , Emir of Córdoba . The Byzantine envoys were received with honours , but no help materialized . The Abbasids , however , did not follow up on their success . Warfare continued between the two empires with raids and counter @-@ raids for several years , but after a few Byzantine successes a truce and possibly also a prisoner exchange — which excluded the high @-@ ranking captives from Amorium — was agreed in 841 . At the time of his death in 842 , Mu 'tasim was preparing yet another large @-@ scale invasion , but the great fleet he had prepared to assault Constantinople perished in a storm off Cape <unk> a few months later . Following Mu 'tasim 's death , the Caliphate entered a prolonged period of unrest , and the Battle of Mauropotamos in 844 was the last major Arab – Byzantine engagement until the 850s . 
 Among the captured Byzantine magnates of Amorium , the strategos Aetios was executed soon after his capture , perhaps , as the historian Warren Treadgold suggests , in retaliation to Theophilos 's second letter to the caliph . After years of captivity and no hope of ransom , the rest were urged to convert to Islam . When they refused , they were executed at Samarra on 6 March 845 , and are celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the 42 Martyrs of Amorium . Several tales also sprung up around Boiditzes and his betrayal . According to the legend of the 42 Martyrs , he converted to Islam , but was nevertheless executed by the caliph alongside the other captives ; unlike the others , however , whose bodies " miraculously " floated in the water of the river Tigris , his sank to the bottom . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The sack of Amorium was one of the most devastating events in the long history of Arab raids into Anatolia . Theophilos reportedly fell ill soon after the city 's fall , and although he recovered , his health remained in poor state until his death , three years later . Later Byzantine historians attribute his death before the age of thirty to his sorrow over the impact of the city 's loss , although this is most likely a legend . The fall of Amorium inspired several legends and stories among the Byzantines , and can be traced in surviving literary works such as the Song of Armouris or the ballad Kastro tis <unk> ( " Castle of the Fair Maiden " ) . Arabs on the other hand celebrated the capture of Amorium , which became the subject of Abu Tammam 's famous Ode on the Conquest of Amorium . In addition , caliphal propaganda made use of the campaign to legitimize al @-@ Mu 'tasim 's rule and justify his subsequent murder of his nephew and the rightful heir to al @-@ Ma 'mun , al @-@ Abbas . 
 In reality , the campaign 's military impact on Byzantium was limited : outside the garrison and population of Amorium itself , the Byzantine field army at Anzen seems to have suffered few casualties , and the revolt of the Khurramite corps was suppressed without bloodshed the next year and its soldiers reintegrated into the Byzantine army . Ancyra was quickly rebuilt and reoccupied , as was Amorium itself , although it never recovered its former glory and the seat of the Anatolic theme was for a time transferred to <unk> . According to the assessment of Warren Treadgold , the imperial army 's defeats at Anzen and Amorium were to a large degree the result of circumstance rather than actual incapability or inadequacy . In addition , the Byzantine campaign had suffered from Theophilos 's overconfidence , both in his willingness to divide his forces in the face of greater Arab numbers and in his over @-@ reliance on the Khurramites . Nevertheless , the defeat prompted Theophilos to undertake a major reorganization of his army , which included the establishment of new frontier commands and the dispersing of the Khurramite troops among the native troops of the themes . 
 The most long @-@ term and long @-@ lasting result of the fall of Amorium , however , was in the religious rather than in the military sphere . Iconoclasm was supposed to bring divine favour and assure military victory , but neither the army 's weaknesses nor the reported treachery of Boiditzes could detract from the fact that this was " a humiliating disaster to match the worst defeats of any iconophile emperor " ( Whittow ) , comparable in recent memory only to the crushing defeat suffered by Nikephoros I ( r . 802 – 811 ) at Pliska . As Warren Treadgold writes , " the outcome did not exactly prove that Iconoclasm was wrong ... but it did rob the iconoclasts for all time of their most persuasive argument to the undecided , that Iconoclasm won battles " . A little over a year after Theophilos 's death , on 11 March 843 , a synod restored the veneration of icons , and iconoclasm was declared heretical . 
 = Fifth Test , 1948 Ashes series = 
 The Fifth Test of the 1948 Ashes series , held at The Oval in London , was the final Test in that cricket series between Australia and England . The match took place on 14 – 18 August , with a rest day on 15 August . Australia won the match by an innings and 149 runs to complete a 4 – 0 series win . It was the last Test in the career of Australian captain Donald Bradman , generally regarded as the best batsman in the history of the sport . Going into the match , if Australia batted only once , Bradman needed only four runs from his final innings to have a Test batting average of exactly 100 , but he failed to score , bowled second ball for a duck by leg spinner Eric Hollies . 
 With the series already lost , the England selectors continued to make many changes , on this occasion , four . In all , they had used 21 players for the series and were severely criticised for failing to maintain continuity . England captain Norman Yardley won the toss , and elected to bat on a pitch affected by rain . After a delayed start due to inclement weather , the Australian pace attack , led by Ray Lindwall , dismissed England within the first day for just 52 . Lindwall was the main destroyer , taking six wickets for 20 runs ( 6 / 20 ) . The English batsmen found it difficult to cope with his prodigious swing and pace ; four of his wickets were either bowled or leg before wicket . Len Hutton was the only batsman to resist , making 30 before being the final man dismissed . In reply , Australia 's opening pair of Arthur Morris and Sid Barnes passed England 's score on the same afternoon with no loss of wickets . The opening stand ended at 117 when Barnes fell for 61 and Bradman came to the crease to a standing ovation and three cheers from his opponents . He fell second ball , but Australia reached 153 / 2 at stumps on the first day . 
 On the second day , Australian batsmen fell regularly once Lindsay Hassett was dismissed at 226 / 3 , most of them being troubled by Hollies , who had been selected after taking 8 / 107 against Australia for Warwickshire . Morris was an exception and he made 196 , more than half his team 's total , before being run out as Australia were dismissed for 389 . Hollies took 5 / 131 . England reached 54 / 1 at stumps and by lunch on the third day were 121 / 2 , Hutton and Denis Compton batting steadily . However , they suffered a late collapse to be 178 / 7 when bad light and rain stopped the day 's play . Hutton top @-@ scored for the second time in the match for England , making 64 . The next morning , Bill Johnston took the last three wickets as England were bowled out for 188 , ending the match . Johnston ended with 4 / 40 and Lindwall 3 / 50 . 
 The match was followed by speeches from both captains , after which the crowd sang " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " in Bradman 's honour . Having been undefeated in their matches up to this point , the Australians maintained their streak in the remaining fixtures , gaining them the sobriquet of The Invincibles . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the first four Tests , Australia led the series 3 – 0 , having won all but the Third Test , which was rain @-@ affected . They had taken an unlikely win in the Fourth Test at Headingley , scoring 404 / 3 in their second innings , the highest ever score in a successful Test runchase . 
 Australia had been unbeaten throughout the tour . Between the Fourth and Fifth Test , they played five tour matches . They defeated Derbyshire by an innings , before having a washout against Glamorgan . The Australians then defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets , before drawing with Lancashire , who hung on with three wickets in hand on the final day . Australia 's final lead @-@ in outing was a two @-@ day non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , which was drawn after rain washed out the second day . 
 With the series already lost , England made four changes to their team . John Dewes replaced Cyril Washbrook — who broke his thumb in a match for Lancashire against the Australians — at the top of the order . Dewes had gained attention after scoring 51 for Middlesex in the tour match against the Australians . In the three weeks between then and the Test , he had scored 105 and 89 against Lancashire and Sussex respectively . However , he had averaged less than 40 for the season and made three consecutive scores below 20 leading into the Tests . The journalist and former Australian Test cricketer Bill O 'Reilly condemned the decision , claiming that aside from defending the ball , Dewes was too reliant on slogging towards the leg side with a horizontal bat . O 'Reilly claimed Dewes was not ready for Test cricket and that asking him to face the rampant Australians could have psychologically scarred him . He said the selection " was tantamount to asking a young first @-@ year medical student to carry out an intricate operation with a butcher 's knife . " 
 Allan Watkins replaced Ken Cranston as the middle order batsman and pace bowler . Both Dewes and Watkins were making their Test debut , and the latter became the second Welshman to play in an Ashes Test . Watkins had scored 19 and taken 1 / 47 for Glamorgan in their match against Australia two weeks earlier , but had only scored 168 runs at 18 @.@ 66 and taken 11 wickets in his last six matches . Cranston had made a duck and 10 , and taken 1 / 79 on his debut in the previous Test . While acknowledging Cranston 's poor performances and concluding that he had not been of international quality , O 'Reilly said Watkins ' performance in Glamorgan 's match against the Australians " had not inspired anyone with his ability " to counter the tourists ' bowling . 
 England played two spinners ; left arm orthodox spinner Jack Young replaced fellow finger spinner Jim Laker , while the leg spin of Eric Hollies replaced the pace bowling of Dick Pollard . Hollies was brought into the team because he had caused the Australian batsmen difficulty in the tour match against Warwickshire . He took 8 / 107 in the first innings , the best innings figures against the Australians for the summer . His performance included bowling Bradman with a topspinner that went between bat and pad . It was part of a month @-@ long run in which he took 52 wickets in seven matches , including two ten @-@ wicket match hauls . Young had taken 12 and 14 wickets in consecutive matches against Northamptonshire and Surrey since his omission following the Third Test , while Pollard and Laker had managed totals of only 2 / 159 and 3 / 206 respectively in the Headingley Test . 
 Having made only 5 and 18 in the previous Test , Jack Crapp was originally dropped from the team but was reprieved by Washbrook 's injury . The England selectors were widely condemned for their decisions , which were seen as an investment in youth rather than necessarily picking the best players available at the time . Their frequent changes meant the home team had used a total of 21 players for the five Tests . 
 Australia made three changes . Having taken only seven wickets in the first four Tests at an average of 61 @.@ 00 , off spinner Ian Johnson was replaced by leg spinner Doug Ring . Australia 's second change was forced on them ; the injured medium pacer Ernie Toshack was replaced by the opening batsman Sid Barnes , who had missed the Fourth Test with a rib injury . This meant Australia were playing with one extra batsman and one less frontline bowler . The final change was the return of first @-@ choice wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon from injury and the omission of his deputy Ron Saggers . 
 The two nations had last met at The Oval in the Fifth Test of the 1938 Ashes series , during Australia 's previous tour of England . On that occasion , England made a Test world record score of 903 / 7 declared , and Len Hutton made 364 , an individual Test world record . Australia batted in both innings with only nine men because of injuries sustained by Bradman and Jack Fingleton during Hutton 's 13 @-@ hour marathon effort . They collapsed to the heaviest defeat in Test history , by an innings and 579 runs . It was Australia 's last Test before World War II and they had not lost a Test since then . 
 Hundreds of spectators had slept on wet pavements outside the stadium in rainy weather on the eve of the Test to queue for tickets . Bradman had announced his forthcoming retirement at the end of the season , so the public were anxious to witness his last appearance at Test level . 
 = = Scorecard = = 
 = = = England innings = = = 
 = = = Australia innings = = = 
 = = 14 August : Day One = = 
 English skipper Norman Yardley won the toss and elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . Precipitation in the week leading up to the match meant the Test could not start until after midday . Yardley 's decision was regarded as a surprise . Although The Oval had a reputation as a batting paradise , weather conditions suggested that bowlers would be at an advantage . Jack Fingleton , a former Test team @-@ mate of Bradman who was covering the tour as a journalist , thought the Australians would have bowled had they won the toss . However , O 'Reilly disagreed , saying the pitch was so wet it should have favoured the batsmen because the ball would bounce slowly from the surface . He further thought the slippery run @-@ up areas would have forced the faster bowlers to operate less vigorously to avoid injuring themselves . The damp conditions necessitated the addition of large amounts of sawdust to allow the bowlers to keep their footing , because parts of the pitch were muddy . The humidity , along with the rain , assisted the bowlers ; Lindwall in particular managed to make the ball bounce at variable heights . 
 Dewes and Len Hutton opened for England , a move that attracted criticism of Yardley for exposing the debutant Dewes to the new ball bowling of Lindwall and Keith Miller . After Hutton opened the scoring with a single from the second ball of the day , Dewes was on strike . The single had almost turned into a five when Sam Loxton fired in a wide return , but Sid Barnes managed to prevent from going for four overthrows . Dewes took a single from the opening over — bowled by Lindwall — and thus faced the start of the second over , which was delivered by Miller . Dewes had been troubled by Miller in the past . During the Victory Tests in 1945 , Miller had repeatedly dismissed the batsman , and during a match for Cambridge University against the Australians earlier in the tour , Dewes had used towels to pad his torso against Miller 's short balls . During his short innings , Dewes was also visibly nervous and kept on moving around , unable to stand still . 
 Miller caused a stoppage after his first ball in order to sprinkle sawdust on the crease . With the second ball , he bowled Dewes — who was playing across the line — middle stump for one with an inswinger to leave England at 2 / 1 . However , despite the early wicket , the bowlers appeared to lack confidence in their run @-@ up on the soggy ground . Bradman made an early bowling change and brought Johnston into the attack to replace Miller after the latter had bowled three overs for the concession of two runs . At this time , Bradman adopted relatively defensive field settings despite the early breakthrough . Bill Edrich joined Hutton and they played cautiously until the former attempted to hook a short ball from Johnston . He failed to get the ball in the middle of the bat and it looped up and travelled around 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . Lindsay Hassett took the catch just behind square leg , diving sideways and getting two hands to the ball . This left England at 10 / 2 as Denis Compton came to the crease . Lindwall bounced Compton , drawing an edge that flew towards the slips cordon . However , the ball continued to rise and cleared the ring of Australian fielders . Hutton called Compton for a run , but his surprised partner was watching the ball narrowly evade the slips catchers and dropped his bat in panic . Luckily for Compton , the ball went to Hassett at third man , who stopped the ball and waited for Compton to regain his bat and his composure before returning the ball , thereby forfeiting the opportunity to run him out . However , this sporting gesture did not cost Australia many runs because when Compton was on three , Lindwall bowled another bouncer . Compton went for a hook shot and Arthur Morris ran from his position at short square leg to take a difficult catch . Bradman later said he had remembered how Compton had been out in exactly the same position in the corresponding match at the same ground during the 1938 series . Fingleton described Morris 's effort as " one of the catches of the season " . England were 17 / 3 , and Crapp came in to join Hutton . At this point , Bradman began to put in place more attacking field settings . Johnston then hit Hutton on the fingers with a ball that rose sharply after pitching . Bradman took Lindwall off after 50 minutes and replaced him with Miller , who then removed Crapp , caught behind from an outside edge for a 23 @-@ ball duck , leaving England at 23 / 4 . When play was adjourned for lunch with England on 29 / 4 , Hutton was 17 while Yardley was on four . According to Fingleton , Hutton " had never been in the slightest difficulty " . He had played cautiously but did not seem hurried by the bowling . Miller had taken 2 / 3 from six overs . 
 After the lunch break , England added six runs to be 35 / 4 , before Lindwall bowled Yardley with a swinging yorker . The debutant Watkins came in , having earned a reputation in Glamorgan 's match against Australia for hooking . He made several attempts at the shot in his innings of 16 balls . He attempted a hook shot from a short ball and missed before being hit on the shoulder by another Lindwall bouncer , having tried to hook the ball downwards in an unorthodox manner akin to a tennis serve . He was then dismissed without scoring after playing across the line and being trapped leg before wicket by Johnston for a duck to leave England at 42 / 6 . For his troubles , Watkins also collected a bruise from the hit to the shoulder , which inhibited his bowling later in the match . Lindwall then removed Godfrey Evans , Alec Bedser and Young , all yorked by swinging deliveries in the space of two runs , as England fell from 45 / 6 to 47 / 9 . This brought Hollies in at No. 11 to accompany Hutton , who then hit the only boundary of the innings , lofting Lindwall for a straight drive back over his head . The ball almost went for six , landing just short of the boundary . The innings ended at 52 when Hutton — who never appeared troubled by the bowling — leg glanced Lindwall and was caught by wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon , who caught the ball one @-@ handed at full stretch to his left . Lindwall described the catch as one of the best he had ever seen , while O 'Reilly called it " extraordinarily good " . 
 The match saw Lindwall at his best . In his post @-@ lunch spell , Lindwall bowled 8 @.@ 1 overs , taking five wickets for eight runs , and finishing with 6 / 20 from 16 @.@ 1 overs . Bradman described the spell as " the most devastating and one of the fastest I ever saw in Test cricket " . Fingleton , who played against the Bodyline attack in 1932 – 33 , said " I was watching a man almost the equal of Larwood [ the Bodyline spearhead ] in pace ... Truly a great bowler " . O 'Reilly wrote Lindwall 's " magnificent performance must go down as one of the greatest bowling efforts in Anglo @-@ Australian Tests . He had two <unk> long sessions in the innings and overcame each so well that he set the seal on his well @-@ earned reputation as one of the best bowlers ever . " Hutton was the only batsman to resist the Lindwall @-@ led attack , scoring 30 in 124 minutes and surviving 147 deliveries . The next most resilient display was from Yardley , who scored seven runs in 31 minutes of resistance , facing 33 balls . Miller and Johnston took 2 / 5 and 2 / 20 respectively , and Australia 's pace trio removed all the batsmen without Bradman having to call upon Ring 's leg spin . 
 In contrast , Australia batted with apparent ease , as the overcast skies cleared and sun came out . The debutant Watkins sent down four overs for 19 runs with his bruised shoulder and did not bowl again . He was in much pain and his limp bowling did little to trouble the Australian openers . Morris and Barnes batted comfortably and passed England 's first innings total by themselves , taking less than an hour to push the Australians into the lead . O 'Reilly felt the Australian openers wanted to prove " the pitch itself had nothing whatever to do with the English batting debacle " . Australia reached 100 at 17 : 30 with Barnes on 52 and Morris on 47 . The only chance came when Barnes powerfully square cut Bedser low to point , where Young spilled the catch . When Young came on to bowl , his finger spin was expected to trouble the batsmen on a rain @-@ affected surface , but he delivered little variation in pace and trajectory and Barnes in particular hit him repeatedly through the off side field . The score had reached 117 after only 126 minutes , when Barnes was caught behind from Hollies for 61 . The right @-@ handed Australian opener stumbled forward to a fast @-@ turning leg break that caught his outside edge . He had overbalanced and would have been stumped if he had failed to make contact with the leather . This brought Bradman to the crease shortly before 18 : 00 , late on the first day . As Bradman had already announced the tour would be his last at international level , the innings would be his last at Test level if Australia batted only once . The crowd gave him a standing ovation as he walked out to bat ; Yardley led the Englishmen and the crowd in giving his Australian counterpart three cheers , before shaking Bradman 's hand . With 6 @,@ 996 Test career runs , Bradman needed only four runs to average exactly 100 in Test cricket . Bradman took guard and played the first ball from Hollies , a leg break , from the back foot . The leg spinner pitched the next ball up , bowling Bradman for a duck with a googly that went between bat and pad as the Australian skipper leaned forward . Bradman appeared stunned by what had happened and slowly turned around and walked back to the pavilion , receiving another large round of applause . It was claimed by many , including Hollies , that Bradman became emotional and had tears in his eyes at the ovation given to him by the crowd and the English players , and that this hampered his ability to see and hit the ball . Bradman admitted to being moved by the applause , but always denied shedding tears , saying " to suggest I got out , as some people did , because I had tears in my eyes while I was looking at the bowler was quite untrue . Eric Hollies deceived me and he deserves full credit . " 
 Hassett came in at 117 / 2 and together with Morris saw Australia to the close at 153 / 2 . Morris was unbeaten on 77 , having hit two hook shots from Hollies for four . Hassett was on 10 . 
 = = 16 August : Day Two = = 
 15 August was a Sunday , and thus a rest day . Play resumed on Monday , the second morning , and Morris registered his third century of the Test series and his sixth in ten Ashes matches . Overall , it was his seventh century in 14 Tests . It had taken him 208 minutes and he had hit four fours . Hassett and Morris took the score to 226 before their 109 @-@ run stand was broken when Young trapped Hassett lbw for 37 after 134 minutes of batting . As the Australians had dismissed their hosts cheaply on the first day and were already well in the lead , they had plenty of time to complete a victory , so Hassett and Morris had no need to take undue risks and scored at a sedate pace . The following batsmen were unable to establish themselves at the crease . Miller came in and tried to attack , but made only five before overbalancing and stumbling forward out of his crease , allowing Evans to stump him from the bowling of Hollies . Harvey , the youngest player in the Australian squad at the age of 19 , came to the crease at 243 / 4 and quickly displayed the exuberance of youth . He hit Young for a straight @-@ driven four and then pulled him for another boundary , but the attacking strokeplay did not last . Harvey succumbed to Hollies , hitting him to Young . The young batsman was having trouble against the turning ball , so he decided to use his feet and step towards the pitch of the ball . The Warwickshire spinner noticed this , and delivered a topspinner that dipped more than usual , and the batsman mistimed his off @-@ drive , which went in the air towards mid @-@ off . Hollies ' success against the middle @-@ order prompted Yardley to opt to continue with the older ball even when a replacement was available , a move that was rarely made throughout the series as the pacemen dominated the bowling . Hollies did not spin the ball significantly but relied on variations in flight to defeat his opponents . 
 Loxton came in with the score at 265 / 5 and accompanied Morris for 39 further runs before he fell to the new ball . He appeared uncomfortable with the outswingers and leg cutters of Bedser , and was beaten several times , before Edrich had him caught behind for 15 . Lindwall came in and attacked immediately , scoring two fours before falling for nine . He played a cover drive from the bowling of Young , but hit the ball too early and thus launched it into the air , and it was caught by Edrich at cover point to leave the score at 332 / 7 . Morris was then finally removed for 196 , ending an innings noted for its numerous hooks and off @-@ drives . It took a run out to remove Morris ; he attempted a quick run to third man after being called through from the non @-@ striker 's end by Tallon , but was too slow for the substitute fielder Reg Simpson 's arm . Tallon , who scored 31 , put on another 30 runs with Ring , before both were out with Australia 's score on 389 , ending the tourists ' innings . Both were caught by Crapp in slips from the bowling of Hollies and Bedser respectively . Morris had scored more than half the runs as the rest of the team struggled against the leg spin of Hollies , who took 5 / 131 . England had relied heavily on spin bowling ; Young took 2 / 118 and of the 158 @.@ 2 overs bowled , 107 were delivered by the two slow men . Hollies pitched the ball up repeatedly , coaxing the Australians into playing front @-@ foot shots from balls that spun after pitching on off stump . 
 England started their second innings 337 runs in arrears . Dewes took strike and got off the mark from Lindwall when he aimed a hook shot and was credited with a boundary when the ball came off his shoulder . Lindwall 's steepling bouncer rose over his bat and narrowly missed his head . Soon after , Lindwall made the early breakthrough , bowling Dewes — who offered no shot — for 10 to leave England 20 / 1 . Dewes had often committed to playing the ball from the front foot before the bowler delivered the ball , thereby putting himself into difficulty . This was because of his habit of leaning his weight onto his back foot as the ball was being bowled , which meant that a forward lean would instinctively result . Edrich joined Hutton and the pair consolidated the England innings , which reached 54 / 1 at the close at the second day 's play , which was hastened by bad light . 
 = = 17 August : Day Three = = 
 Early on the third day , Lindwall bowled Edrich — who was playing across the line — between bat and pad for 28 , hitting the off stump with a ball that cut inwards , leaving the score at 64 / 2 , before Compton and Hutton consolidated the innings and took the score to 121 at lunch without further loss . Hutton and Compton were 42 and 37 respectively . Compton started slowly but had accelerated as the adjournment approached . The morning 's batting had been relatively slow , with only 67 runs scored in 100 minutes , of which Hutton added only 23 . The morning session also featured a tight spell of 13 overs by Ring . The leg spinner did not bowl consistently or accurately , and although the batsman hit him regularly , they did not place their shots , which often went to the fielders . At the other end , Johnston bowled his finger spin from around the wicket with a well @-@ protected off side . There were four men in the off side ring and they had much work to do as Hutton hit the ball there repeatedly . The English batsmen progressed steadily and both Johnston and Ring had one confident appeal for lbw against Compton , but there were no other scares . Towards the end of the morning session , the second new ball became available but Bradman decided to bide his time . He allowed Johnston to rest after his morning spell and used Lindwall and Miller — delivering off spinners — to bowl with the old ball for the last half hour before lunch break so that the trio could use the adjournment to recuperate before attacking with the new ball . 
 After lunch , Lindwall and Johnston took the new ball , and the partnership progressed only four further runs to 61 in 110 minutes . On 39 , Compton aimed a hard cut shot from Johnston 's bowling , which flew into Lindwall 's left hand at second slip for a " freak slip catch " . Hutton managed to continue resisting the Australians before Miller struck Crapp in the neck with a bouncer . The batsman did not react to the blow and did not bother to rub the point of impact . After hitting a series of cover drives for boundaries , Hutton edged Miller to Tallon and was out for 64 , having top @-@ scored in both innings . He had batted for over four hours and left England at 153 / 4 . Thereafter , the home side collapsed . Crapp was bowled by Miller for nine , and two runs later , Ring dismissed debutant Watkins for two , his only wicket for the match . Watkins swung Ring to the leg side and the ball went straight into the hands of Hassett , who did not need to move from his position on the boundary , leaving England at 167 / 6 . Lindwall returned and yorked Evans , who appeared to not detect the delivery in the poor light , for eight . The umpires thus called off play after Yardley appealed against the light . The ground was then hit by rain , resulting in a premature end to the day 's play with England at 178 / 7 , having lost 4 / 25 . 
 = = 18 August : Day Four = = 
 England resumed on the fourth morning with only three wickets in hand and they were still 159 runs in arrears . Johnston quickly removed the last three wickets to seal an Australian victory by an innings and 149 runs . Only ten runs were added ; the match ended when Hollies fell for a golden duck after skying a ball to Morris , immediately after Yardley 's departure . Johnston ended with 4 / 40 from 27 @.@ 3 overs while Lindwall took 3 / 50 from 25 overs . Miller claimed 2 / 22 while Ring bowled the most overs , 28 , to finish with 1 / 44 . Given the time lost to inclement weather on the first day , Australia had won the match in less than three days of playing time . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 This result sealed the series 4 – 0 in favour of Australia . The match was followed by a series of congratulatory speeches . Bradman began with : 
 No matter what you may read to the contrary , this is definitely my last Test match ever . I am sorry my personal contribution has been so small ... It has been a great pleasure for me to come on this tour and I would like you all to know how much I have appreciated it ... We have played against a very lovable opening skipper ... It will not be my pleasure to play ever again on this Oval but I hope it will not be the last time I come to England . 
 Yardley spoke after Bradman : 
 In saying good @-@ bye to Don we are saying good @-@ bye to the greatest cricketer of all time . He is not only a great cricketer but a great sportsman , on and off the field . I hope this is not the last time we see Don Bradman in this country . 
 Bradman was then given three cheers and the crowd sang " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " before dispersing . 
 The win brought Australia closer to Bradman 's aim of going through the tour undefeated . The Fifth Test was the last international match , and Australia only had seven further matches to negotiate . They secured three consecutive innings victories against Kent , the Gentlemen of England and Somerset . They then took first innings leads of more than 200 against the South of England and Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , but both matches were washed out . The last two matches were two @-@ day non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland , both won by an innings . Bradman 's men thus completed the tour undefeated , earning themselves the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 = No Can Do = 
 " No Can Do " is a song by English girl group Sugababes from their sixth studio album , Catfights and Spotlights ( 2008 ) . It was written by Jason Pebworth and George Astasio of The Invisible Men , Jon Shave and VV Brown , and produced by The Invisible Men in collaboration with Si Hulbert . The song was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 19 December 2008 as the album 's second and final single . " No Can Do " is a pop song with influences of R & B and soul . It contains a sample of Sweet Charles <unk> 's " Yes It 's You " , and contains influences of Motown music and songs performed by The Jackson 5 . 
 The song received mixed reviews from critics , who were ambivalent towards its Motown influence . " No Can Do " peaked at number 23 on the UK Singles Chart and is one of the group 's lowest @-@ charting singles in the UK . The single also charted on the Danish and Slovakian airplay charts . The music video for " No Can Do " was directed by Marco Puig , and was inspired by a piece of pop created by Allen Jones in the 1960s . It features the group using twenty half @-@ naked men as objects such as cars , motorcycles and bridges . The Sugababes performed the song in November 2008 to promote the release of the New Xbox Experience , and at Ponty 's Big Weekend in July 2009 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the release of their fifth studio album , Change ( 2007 ) , and the completion of its supporting tour , the Sugababes announced that they would take a year @-@ long break to record their sixth studio album . Despite the announcement , the trio soon began work on the album , titled Catfights and Spotlights , which they eventually recorded within a matter of weeks and in between various festivals . " No Can Do " was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by The Invisible Men team members Jason Pebworth and George Astasio . The two musicians co @-@ wrote the song in collaboration with Jon Shave and VV Brown , and co @-@ produced it with Si Hulbert . The song was programmed collectively by Hulbert , Shave , Pebworth and Melvin <unk> , mixed by Jeremy Wheatley and engineered by Dave Palmer . " No Can Do " was recorded at Metropolis Studios in London , England . 
 " No Can Do " was released as the second and final single from Catfights and Spotlights . When Digital Spy questioned group member Keisha Buchanan about her reaction to its release , she responded : " I 'm really excited about it . I 'm looking forward to people hearing another side to the album . This single has got a kind of Jackson 5 feel to it which I love . The whole album has got a really old @-@ school , laid @-@ back Motown sound , so hopefully ' No Can Do ' will get more people interested in the album . " " No Can Do " was released as a digital download in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 19 December 2008 . The following day , it was made available as a CD single , which consists of three remixes of the track and a cover version of Keane 's song " <unk> " . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " No Can Do " is an uptempo pop song with influences of R & B and soul . It features prominent bass instrumentation provided by the keyboard , guitar , trombone , trumpet , saxophone and brass . " No Can Do " is based around a sample of Sweet Charles <unk> 's " Yes It 's You " , as written and produced by <unk> and Hal Ritson , respectively . The song is largely inspired by Motown music and is reminiscent of songs performed by The Jackson 5 , namely their 1969 song " I Want You Back " . Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail described it as " a bubbly Jackson Five pastiche " . The Motown influences are most evident within the song 's beat . The record 's influences also derive from the music of girl groups from the 1960s . According to the digital sheet music published at Sheet Music Direct , " No Can Do " was composed in the key of G major using common time , with a tempo of 96 beats per minute . 
 Matthew Chisling of AllMusic noted that the song " [ builds ] on the recurring themes of enticing harmonies and vocal showcasing which are seen as the most dominant traits that the girls are showing off this time around " . The lyrics of " No Can Do " address the riddance of a boyfriend , following the group 's " trademark super @-@ energised big goodbye songs " . Buchanan stated during an interview with BBC 's Sarah Jane Griffiths that the lyrics are " about your partner treating you really bad and you saying , ' Not any more . Or No Can Do ' " . 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reception for " No Can Do " was mixed . David Balls of Digital Spy gave the song a two out of five star rating , and wrote , " in comparison to the majority of the group 's singles , it 's a half @-@ hearted , bland and middle of the road offering that lacks the excitement of Sugababes at their best " . He did , however , call the song an improvement from the group 's previous single " Girls " . A writer from Orange criticised the song 's incorporation of multiple genres as " less than the sum of its parts " . The reviewer was also unfavourable of the sampling of " Yes It 's You " , which was noted as " giving the ladies ' <unk> a strange air of karaoke with the wrong lyrics " as a result of its resemblance to " I Want You Back " . The writer concluded the review by stating that " things are just a little lacklustre ; the trio 's vocals are still strong , but missing the sass that made them famous " . 
 Entertainment.ie 's Lauren Murphy regarded " No Can Do " and album track " Side Chick " as " feeble uptempo tracks that sound like they 've been plucked at random from a pop factory conveyor belt " . A writer from the Daily Record commented that " as much as [ ' No Can Do ' ] is mainstream and poppy , it 's hardly their most remarkable offering " . Popjustice considered the song to be " above average " but not the best track from the album , while Fraser McAlphine of the BBC Chart Blog wrote that it " won 't be the all @-@ conquering pop <unk> that it could be " . A positive response came from AllMusic writer Matthew Chisling , who considered the song to be a " show @-@ stopping [ number ] " and stated that it " work [ s ] as shimmering displays of subtle strength " . Virgin Media 's Johnny Dee praised inclusion of the Motown beat , which according to him makes the song " feel retro and modern simultaneously . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " No Can Do " entered the UK Singles Chart on 13 December 2008 at number 170 , based on digital downloads from Catfights and Spotlights . Upon its release as a single , the song peaked at number 23 in the issue dated 10 January 2009 with 12 @,@ 890 copies sold . Subsequently , " No Can Do " became the group 's lowest @-@ charting single since 2006 's " Follow Me Home " and their third @-@ lowest charting single overall . The song is also one of their lowest @-@ selling singles to date . " No Can Do " brought the Sugababes ' total single sales in the UK to three million . The single also peaked at number eleven on the Danish airplay chart , number 53 on the Slovakian airplay chart , and number 67 on Billboard 's European Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " No Can Do " was directed by Marco Puig , who previously directed videos for recording artists such as Robbie Williams and Madonna . The video was filmed in November 2008 , and was released onto the iTunes Store later that month . On YouTube , it was released on 2 December 2008 . The video 's inspiration stemmed from a piece of art created by the sculptor Allen Jones in the 1960s , involving the use of female mannequins as everyday pieces of furniture . Shortly before its release , pictures of the group 's members with men in tight underpants surfaced online ; according to Alison Maloney of The Sun , this " [ left ] little to the imagination " . The Sugababes wore glamorous gowns and had large hair and long eyelashes for the video , which features twenty muscly men who are used as pieces of furniture . 
 The video opens with a scene of group member Amelle Berrabah , who is spread out on the floor and surrounded by multiple men . Berrabah , Buchanan and other group member Heidi Range join together and walk on a bridge , which is constructed by the men 's bodies . Later , Buchanan straddles onto two men who pretend to be a motorbike . Berrabah and Range then drive a car made from the men 's bodies . During the milk bar scene , the trio are surrounded by men who are used as tables and lamps . Another scene shows Berrabah and Range in a car constructed by the men . At the end of the video , Range uses a microphone to yell at the men who are standing in a line . Balls described the video as " a little racier than we 'd expect from Keisha and Co " , but acknowledged that " it 's nice to see the girls letting their hair down for a change " . He compared it to the music video for Kylie Minogue 's 2003 single " Slow " . VV Brown , the co @-@ writer of " No Can Do " , stated that she did not expect the video to be racy : " Being very honest , I didn 't see in that way . I saw the song as more fun and cheeky , rather than sassy and glossy like that . " 
 = = Live performances and impact = = 
 The Sugababes performed " No Can Do " on 14 November 2008 for Children in Need . The trio performed the song later that month to promote the release of the New Xbox Experience , as part of a set list that included their singles " Push the Button " and " About You Now " . They performed " No Can Do " on 18 July 2009 at Ponty ’ s Big Weekend , which was held at <unk> Park in Pontypridd , Wales , and dedicated the performance to Michael Jackson who died a month earlier . Buchanan named " No Can Do " one of her favourite songs from the Sugababes ' career , stating : " I love ' No Can Do ' because it 's such a different sound for us . I really like the whole old @-@ school , laid @-@ back sound and it 's got a kind of Jackson 5 feel to it which I love . " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Catfights and Spotlights . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Unearthed ( Fringe ) = 
 " Unearthed " is the 11th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . While the body of a young , recently deceased girl is being harvested of its organs , she suddenly comes back to life yelling classified naval launch codes and Russian phrases , leading the Fringe Division to a recently murdered naval officer . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producers David H. Goodman and Andrew Kreisberg , and was directed by producer Frederick E. O. Toye . 
 Though the episode was produced at the end of the first season " Unearthed " first aired during the second season , on January 11 , 2010 , in a one @-@ time timeslot . An estimated 7 @.@ 79 million viewers tuned into the episode , giving it a " whopping " ratings improvement over its best ratings of the season . It was included in the second season 's DVD release as a special feature . The episode was almost unanimously disliked by critics , with one reviewer calling it " a stinker that should have remained safely out of public view . " Numerous critics also disliked guest actress Alice Kremelberg 's performance , particularly when her character becomes possessed by a male ghost . 
 Netflix streaming service lists " Unearthed " as episode 21 of season one . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A seventeen @-@ year @-@ old girl , Lisa Donovan ( Alice Kremelberg ) , is declared brain dead at a hospital and is pulled off life support . While the doctors remove her organs for donation , she suddenly comes back from the dead and yells highly classified naval missile codes . Fringe Division arrives to investigate , along with a naval officer ; he tells them the codes are tied to a missing sailor called Andrew Rusk ( Chazz Menendez ) . Lisa is unaware of the numbers or Rusk , but suddenly starts speaking Russian while Olivia ( Anna Torv ) , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , and Walter ( John Noble ) question her . The naval officer informs them that Rusk is fluent in the language . 
 Olivia asks Lisa 's mother Maureen ( Amy Carlson ) for permission to run more tests on the girl as a means to find Rusk , but Maureen disagrees . Meanwhile , Lisa has a vision of Rusk standing behind her , which leads Maureen to conclude they should end the investigation , as it is causing Lisa to experience these strange occurrences . Walter posits that Lisa 's aneurysm tied her to Rusk and gave them a psychic bond . Having continued to suffer visions , Lisa soon calls Olivia and leads her to Rusk 's body . It is determined that at the same time Lisa was taken off life support , Rusk was murdered . Walter believes that part of Rusk 's consciousness transferred over to Lisa . Walter clashes with the family 's priest ( Sean Dugan ) over her resurrection . Olivia learns that Rusk had recently experienced high levels of radiation ; Walter posits that , due to this heavy radiation exposure , Rusk 's energy is not completely " expended " . 
 Lisa is transferred to Walter 's lab , where he gives her special drugs to extract Rusk 's thoughts from her mind . Instead , Rusk gains control of Lisa 's body and demands to know where he is . His description of the murderer leads them another naval officer , who tells them Rusk 's physically abused wife Teresa ( Annie <unk> ) hired him for the murder . Believing that he has left her mind , they learn too late that Rusk is still in control of Lisa ; he goes to exact revenge on Teresa , but is stopped by Peter before he can go through with the murder . Lisa is eventually able to purge Rusk from her consciousness . The final scene shows an unrelated car crash victim suddenly waking up , mumbling in Russian : " My Star " , the pet name Rusk called his wife , meaning that Rusk is back . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ executive producers David H. Goodman and Andrew Kreisberg wrote " Unearthed " , while producer Frederick E. O. Toye worked as the episode director . " Unearthed " was the last episode filmed during the first season schedule . Although it was filmed during the first season , " Unearthed " aired during the following season on Monday , January 11 , 2010 , a departure from its normal timeslot on Thursdays . Actor Joshua Jackson explained the move in April 2009 , " [ It 's ] for boring reasons . They only had 22 airdates for our show this year , but they ordered 23 episodes , so we shot one for next year , which is just silly TV network stuff . It 's not for any cool reason like we had something we needed in New York that we couldn 't shoot elsewhere . It 's just an accounting issue . " That same month , executive producer / showrunner Jeff Pinkner further commented on the episode chronology for the new season , " It won 't be the first episode , and it probably won 't be the second , but it 'll be somewhere in the first batch of episodes . It 's a stand @-@ alone , but it still honors the condition that we know it will fall into the world . " 
 Fox issued a press release on January 11 previewing the episode 's plot . It concluded , " While the girl 's mind @-@ bending condition intensifies , Walter dusts off some old lab videos and hypothesizes the unthinkable , sending Olivia and Peter to investigate the bewildering case in an original ' Unearthed ' episode of Fringe and here 's another mystery : is it an unaired episode from Season One or is it from an alternate universe ? " As the press release purposely alluded to whether the episode was indeed originally part of the first season or from the parallel universe , one critic wrote that " FOX [ was just ] having fun with the fact that Fringe has alternate universes " and that readers of the press release should " take this with a grain of salt " . According to Fox 's media site , " Unearthed " was listed as the 21st episode of season one , despite its broadcast during the second season and inclusion in that season 's DVD release as a special feature . Though one character had been killed off earlier in the second season , a former series regular appeared in the episode , sparking confusion among some viewers . As the broadcasting change went unexplained at the time , one media outlet speculated it was a marketing ploy on the network 's part , believing the episode title was " more than a stunning coincidence " and that it was a reference to co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams ' other television series , Lost . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its initial broadcast in the United States , " Unearthed " was watched by an estimated 7 @.@ 79 million viewers , earning a 2 @.@ 8 / 7 share among viewers aged 18 – 49 . The episode aired on a Monday night , which was a departure from its usual timeslot on Thursdays . This led it temporarily into direct competition with another science fiction series , Heroes ; Fringe easily won , as Heroes had its lowest rated airing in the show 's history while , according to SFScope 's Sarah Stegall , " Unearthed " gave Fringe a " whopping 24 percent improvement over its best ratings this season . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to the episode was generally negative . A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with a C- , explaining he didn 't want to watch a season one cast @-@ off , and that some of the episode moments were " generic [ ally ] embarrassing " , such as when Olivia tricked someone into telling her Rusk was sick and when Rusk failed to kill his wife after falling into the " old Fallacy Of The Talking Killer " cliche . New York 's Tim Grierson thought it was " the lamest in recent memory " and " a stinker that should have remained safely out of public view " . He did however remark that the episode allowed him to see how far the show had improved since its first season . In a slightly more positive review , MTV 's Josh Wigler wrote " As far as standard installments of Fringe go , ' Unearthed ' ranks somewhere in the middle of the pack , but the quality diminishes due to its awkward placement in the middle of season two " . IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 6 @.@ 4 / 10 , commenting that it was " cheesy , with mediocre writing and some fairly bad performances from the guest supporting cast " . Isler found little to redeem the episode , and wished the story 's partial focus on the intersection of science and faith had been further explored . 
 Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times thought the " premise was a little thinly stretched over the hour " and believed it would have been overshadowed by stronger episodes in season one , but was glad to have another hour of Fringe regardless . SFScope contributor Sarah Stegall disliked that the network failed to issue a " disclaimer " about the episode 's production date , stating " ... maybe the producers assume that all their audiences are brand new to the franchise . Or perhaps , unhappily , it is a sign that Fox has given up on this show , and no longer cares whether its lingering audience is confused . " She concluded , " As a standalone episode , this one was of middling interest , and I can see why Fox would have dropped it from the Season One lineup . Fans looking eagerly for more ' mythology ' episodes , where the links between the Fringe team , Massive Dynamics [ sic ] , Nina Sharpe , William Bell and , for all I know , the Illuminati are explored , may be disappointed . " Jane Boursaw of AOL TV was also critical of Fox for giving no warning about the episode and thought it should actually have been titled ' Walter vs. The Priest . ' " She continued , " The whole episode was an interesting intersect between science and faith , not to mention the whole ' being possessed by a dead person because your brain waves crossed during life and death ' thing . You can tell it was vintage Fringe -- if indeed it was -- because the storylines are more complex than that these days , what with the alternate universe and Leonard Nimoy and all . " Various critics noted guest actress Alice Kremelberg 's performance , particularly when she had to give the impression she was possessed by a male ghost ; most reviews were negative , though Boursaw praised it , giving Kremelberg " high fives " . 
 = Don Getty = 
 Donald Ross " Don " Getty , OC AOE ( August 30 , 1933 – February 26 , 2016 ) was a Canadian politician who served as the 11th Premier of Alberta between 1985 and 1992 . A member of the Progressive Conservatives , he served as Energy Minister and Federal and Intergovernmental Affairs Minister in the government of Peter Lougheed before leaving politics for the private sector in 1979 . He returned to politics six years later to contest the leadership contest resulting from Lougheed 's retirement . He defeated two other candidates , and became Premier November 1 , 1985 . 
 As Premier , Getty was faced with an economic slowdown and falling energy prices , which hit Alberta 's petroleum @-@ dominated economy hard . Faced with mounting government deficits and increasing unemployment , he cut social spending and intervened with government money to prevent businesses from failing . Several of these interventions backfired in high profile fashion , failing at their intended objective and costing scarce public funds as well . While some analysts argue that Getty 's fiscal program laid the groundwork for Ralph Klein 's later balancing of the provincial budget , on Getty 's departure from office the government 's debt had reached $ 11 billion , setting the stage for his successor to characterize the Getty years as an era of wasteful and excessive spending . 
 His efforts at strengthening Alberta 's presence in Canada initially appeared more successful , as he won the agreement of Canada 's other first ministers in including elements of Senate reform in the Meech Lake and Charlottetown Accords , but these efforts came to naught when both accords were rejected — the second by the Canadian public , including a majority of Albertans . Getty was also facing political problems within Alberta , including a defeat in his home riding of Edmonton @-@ Whitemud in the 1989 election ( leading to a successful by @-@ election in Stettler , vacated by a P.C. MLA ) and leadership machinations from some of his own ministers . In light of this , he resigned the Premiership in 1992 . 
 Before entering politics , Getty had been a quarterback for the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League . He passed for more than eight thousand yards over his ten @-@ year career , and was put on the team 's Wall of Fame in 1992 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Don Getty was born on August 30 , 1933 in Westmount , Quebec , the son of Beatrice Lillian ( Hampton ) Getty ( 1910 – 1973 ) and Charles Ross Getty ( 1909 – 1974 ) . His father had dropped out of McGill University 's medical school due to the Great Depression and worked a variety of jobs — sometimes more than one at a time — to support his wife , three sons , and two daughters . Getty 's childhood was spent in Verdun , Toronto , Ottawa , London , and Agincourt , sharing a three @-@ room apartment with his seven @-@ member family in the last . Returning for London in time for high school , he became an accomplished athlete ( drinking eggnog to gain enough weight to play football ) and was elected students ' council president . Sports were his passion , and he was an especially great fan of the Montreal Canadiens and Toronto Argonauts running back Royal Copeland . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 After graduating , Getty enrolled to study business administration at the University of Western Ontario , where he became a football star and a member of The Kappa Alpha Society . He quarterbacked the Western Ontario Mustangs to Eastern Collegiate Union Championships in 1954 and 1955 , and was awarded the Claude Brown Memorial Trophy as the outstanding athlete at UWO in 1955 . He also played basketball , and was part of championship teams in that sport in 1952 , 1953 , and 1954 . A week after his 1955 graduation , he married Margaret Mitchell , his high school sweetheart . The Edmonton Eskimos had offered Getty a professional contract , so the newlyweds drove out west in an old blue Buick . 
 While still playing football , Getty was hired by Imperial Oil in 1955 . He worked for Midwestern Industrial Gas Limited , beginning in 1961 as Lands and Contracts Manager with a promotion to Assistant General Manager following in 1963 . In 1964 he founded his own company , <unk> Oil and Gas Company , before entering the world of finance as a partner with Doherty , Roadhouse , and McCuaig investments in 1967 . 
 = = = MLA and cabinet minister = = = 
 In 1965 , Getty was approached by fellow Eskimos veteran and Progressive Conservative leader Peter Lougheed to run in the 1967 provincial election . Getty agreed to run in Strathcona West , and defeated incumbent Social Crediter Randolph McKinnon by more than one thousand votes . He entered the Legislative Assembly of Alberta as one of six newly elected <unk> Four years later , in the 1971 election , Getty was re @-@ elected by more than 3 @,@ 500 votes in the new riding of Edmonton @-@ Whitemud and was appointed Minister of Federal and Intergovernmental Affairs in the new Lougheed majority government . With Getty and the government both re @-@ elected by increasing margins in the 1975 election , Lougheed appointed him Minister of Energy . In this capacity Getty partially continued his responsibility for relations with the federal government , as energy policy was a major sticking point between the two governments ( at one point , federal Energy Minister Donald Macdonald called Getty " dripping with venom " ) . Getty did not seek re @-@ election in the 1979 election . 
 = = = Hiatus from politics and leadership fight = = = 
 While out of politics , Getty became the head of an investment firm and sat on the boards of a number of corporations , including the Royal Bank of Canada and Celanese Canada . However , when Lougheed stepped down from the Progressive Conservative leadership in 1985 , Getty entered the contest to replace him and immediately became the favourite . At an October convention , Getty won a second ballot victory against Minister of Municipal Affairs Julian <unk> and former legislator Ron Ghitter . 
 = = Premier = = 
 Getty was appointed Premier November 1 , 1985 . He returned to the legislature just over a month later , winning a by @-@ election in his old riding of Edmonton @-@ Whitemud . As Premier for nearly seven years , Getty presided over some of Alberta 's toughest economic times . His time in office was characterized by attempts to reduce the government 's budget deficit and interventions calculated to stabilize the economy during the recession of the 1980s . When Getty became Premier he left his predecessor 's cabinet completely intact . 
 = = = Budget deficit = = = 
 After Getty won the party leadership , Lougheed told him to expect a budget deficit of $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in his first year in office , though the figure turned out to be $ 2 @.@ 1 billion . Things got worse the next year as a drop in energy prices led to the oil @-@ rich province running a deficit of $ 3 @.@ 4 billion , as energy revenues fell by $ 3 billion . Getty 's Treasurer , Dick Johnston , reacted by raising taxes by $ 1 billion and cutting program spending by 6 @.@ 3 % , including decreases of 3 % in grants to schools , universities , municipalities , and hospitals . In 1990 , due to these measures , Johnston predicted that the government would be in surplus by the 1995 fiscal year . By 1992 , program spending was growing at a rate of 2 @.@ 3 % annually , among the lowest rates in Canada . In fact , when adjusted for population growth and inflation , government spending fell over Getty 's term in office , with non @-@ health care program spending 40 % lower in 1993 than it had been in 1986 ( health spending had remained approximately constant over the same period ) . Even so , Getty entered the premiership with no public debt and left with the public debt at $ 11 billion . 
 = = = Economic intervention = = = 
 Getty 's government was faced with a combination of a general economic malaise and falling oil prices . The slowdown in the energy sector contributed to a decrease in capital spending , which reduced demand for labour in the construction industry by 50 % between 1980 and 1985 . Many workers left the province , which suppressed real estate prices and hurt financial institutions ; two Albertan banks , the Canadian Commercial Bank and the Northlands Bank , failed in September 1985 . Credit unions were facing similar troubles , and the Lougheed government had , in its last days , injected $ 100 million into the industry . 
 Getty 's response to these issues was interventionist . During his first budget , he targeted spending at the province 's struggling agricultural sector , including a $ 2 billion loan program meant to address high interest rates . His government tried to stimulate the energy sector by making loan guarantees to Husky Oil ( $ 380 million ) and Syncrude ( $ 200 million ) for new and expanded capital projects . The government also provided a $ 55 million guarantee — in addition to a $ 20 million loan — to Peter Pocklington 's <unk> meat @-@ packing plant ; when Pocklington defaulted on the loan , the government seized , and eventually closed , the plant . This incident and others contributed to a perception that Getty 's administration was willing to spend public money to support large businesses , but that it was indifferent to the struggles of labour ( the <unk> loan had initially been made after the government brokered a labour settlement favourable to the plant 's management ) . In 1986 the price of oil bottomed at $ <unk> a barrel . Getty responded by providing the oil industry with $ 250 million in incentives and royalty cuts . By the end of 1986 Alberta had granted another nine @-@ month cut from 12 % to 1 % in royalties at the Suncor oilsands . 
 Most damaging to the government 's reputation was the failure of the Principal Group , an Edmonton @-@ based trust company . Its investment subsidiaries were ordered shut down June 30 , 1987 , by court orders obtained at the instigation of Provincial Treasurer Dick Johnston . The parent company went bankrupt August 10 amid accusations of fraud . A court @-@ ordered investigation led by Bill Code found that the company was in trouble as early as 1980 and , though subsequent economic downturns hurt it , " it would not have been profitable in any event " . It also found that Consumer and Corporate Affairs Minister Connie Osterman had disregarded 1984 warnings from a regulator in her department that the company was likely insolvent . Though Osterman was fired shortly after the report 's release , Getty 's immediate offer of an $ 85 million settlement to investors further hurt the government 's reputation in areas of business . 
 A similar incident stemmed from the 1992 privatization of Alberta Government Telephones ( AGT ) . NovaTel , a cellular subsidiary of AGT , had made a number of financing deals with local companies in the late 1980s , and many of these deals were collapsing just as the government was prepared to sell AGT . At the last moment , the government removed NovaTel from the AGT share offering . NovaTel 's liabilities eventually cost the government more than $ 600 million . 
 = = = Intergovernmental and constitutional affairs = = = 
 As a former Minister of Federal and Intergovernmental Affairs , Getty had strong views about constitutional matters , and about Senate reform in particular . He made the cause the centrepiece of Alberta 's constitutional policy going into the Meech Lake Accord discussions . The Accord 's final version included a provision whereby the Prime Minister would continue to recommend senatorial appointments to the Governor @-@ General , but would have to make their recommendations from lists provided by the provincial governments . Once it became apparent that the Meech Lake Accord would fail , Getty 's government introduced the Senatorial Selection Act , which provided for an election process whenever there was a vacant Senate seat for Alberta . However , Getty 's favoured candidate , Progressive Conservative Bert Brown , was soundly defeated by Stan Waters of the upstart Reform Party of Canada , which opposed Meech Lake and favoured aggressive senate reform . Though Prime Minister Brian Mulroney opposed the legislation , he eventually recommended Waters for appointment to the Senate . Getty was still more successful at pursuing senate reform during the negotiations for the Charlottetown Accord , when he won the addition of a Triple @-@ E Senate to the package , against Mulroney 's opposition . However , the Charlottetown Accord failed after a national referendum in which a majority of Canadians , including 60 @.@ 2 % of Albertans , rejected it . 
 In 1991 , Getty 's Progressive Conservatives formally severed ties with the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada , which was becoming increasingly unpopular under Mulroney . Getty also broke with Mulroney on a number of issues other than Senate reform , including the new federal Goods and Services Tax , which he fought unsuccessfully against implementing . His government also implemented legislation , against Mulroney 's express wishes , that made English the only official language of Alberta . Despite these steps , Getty remained a supporter of the federal Conservatives ( and not the Reform Party , to which many provincial P.C.s were defecting ) , whose unpopularity rubbed off on him . 
 Getty 's government also made progress on aboriginal land claims in the northern part of the province . In addition to creating Canada 's first Métis land base in 1989 , Getty took the lead in an ultimately unsuccessful effort to negotiate a settlement between the federal government and the <unk> Cree . 
 = = = Political style = = = 
 In contrast to his predecessor , who was actively involved in most elements of his government , Getty preferred to set the government 's broad direction and leave lower @-@ level details to his ministers . Ralph Klein , while serving as Environment Minister under Getty , commented that " If you are a minister , you run that portfolio yourself " and expressed an appreciation for the freedom that the Premier gave his cabinet . Al Adair , who served in two different portfolios under Getty , described this approach in his memoirs as " you make the decisions , you run your department , but make mistakes and you 're gone " . Lisac credits him for knowing when to intervene and when not to , but Adair felt that his approach led to ministers working too much in isolation . 
 Getty was a private , reserved person , which , combined with his tendency to delegate to ministers , sometimes gave the impression of an uncaring aloofness . During the Principal Group affair , which he left primarily in the hands of Treasurer Dick Johnston and Consumer and Corporate Affairs Minister Elaine McCoy , a photographer captured a shot of Getty playing golf while his press secretary had said that he was " working out of the office " . This was typical of his strained relationship with the media , which Adair attributed to the Premier 's awkwardness and the media 's unfairness . 
 Although Getty governed with fairly large majorities during his tenure , they were nowhere near as large as the ones Lougheed enjoyed . His first election as premier saw the return of the provincial Liberals to the legislature after being shut out for 15 years . That same election saw the Alberta NDP pick up 16 seats in the legislature . In contrast , during his last two terms , Lougheed never faced more than six opposition MLAs in total . 
 = = = Decline and retirement = = = 
 Getty called the 1989 election less than three years into his 1986 mandate to take advantage of the economic optimism prevalent in the province , partly as a result of the Canada @-@ U.S. free trade agreement . While the P.C.s made spending promises including paving all of the province 's secondary highways , the Liberals under new leader Laurence <unk> stressed dealing with the deficit . The overall end result was respectable for the government , as it won a sixth term in government with a net loss of only two seats . However , Getty was defeated in his own riding by Liberal Percy Wickman . Brian C. Downey resigned his seat in the rural central Alberta riding of Stettler to allow Getty to run in a by @-@ election , which he won handily . He built a home in the riding on Buffalo Lake , and was later accused of arranging for the lake to be risen so it would be better @-@ suited for fishing ( though Adair claimed that the arrangements had been in place since 1979 , when he had been Minister of Recreation , Parks and Wildlife ) . 
 Getty 's relationship with his own party was often stormy . Shortly after he lost his riding in 1989 , a group of Calgary Conservatives , including party budget director Jack Major and Getty 's old leadership rival Ron Ghitter , began making plans to force party renewal , with or without Getty . They felt that the party was perceived as being tired , directionless , arrogant , and deaf to urban concerns , and that it was in political trouble in the crucial battleground of Calgary . At the 1989 party convention , recently retired cabinet minister Marvin Moore , who had organized Ghitter 's 1985 leadership campaign , advocated for a leadership review ; after a speech by Getty , the convention voted to refer the recommendation to a committee for months of study . Cabinet ministers , including Treasurer Dick Johnston and Education Minister Jim Dinning , began to consider leadership bids in the event that Getty retired or was pushed out . 
 In 1992 , as the national referendum on the Charlottetown Accord and the release of a report on the NovaTel incident loomed , Getty decided to leave politics . In his last months , he deliberately refrained from taking measures that he knew would be popular , such as shrinking cabinet , in order to leave them for his successor . After a party leadership election chose Ralph Klein to succeed him , Getty resigned as party leader December 5 and as Premier several days later . 
 = = = Political legacy = = = 
 As Premier , Klein positioned himself in contrast to Getty , asserting that the government had " a spending problem " , and stating that he had become Premier at a time of " uncontrolled spending " . Given Klein 's aggressive spending cuts , which shaped the political climate of Alberta for much of the 1990s , Getty 's legacy with respect to public finances has been criticized . However , Kevin Taft , writing four years before entering politics , challenged this view , asserting that Getty was running " the tightest government in Canada " . Besides its management of the deficit , Getty 's government is remembered for the creation of Family Day . For the most part , however , Getty dropped quickly from the public view and public memory . Lisac suggests that this is because , unlike his predecessor and successor , he lacked a central message : 
 = = Professional football career = = 
 Getty played 10 seasons with the Edmonton Eskimos as a quarterback . For the first part of his career , he backed up Jackie Parker and filled in for him when he was moved to running back . Eskimos coach Pop Ivy surprised many observers when he started Getty at quarterback in the third game of the 1956 western final ( which was a three @-@ game series at the time ) during the 44th Grey Cup , with Parker at running back . However , it bore results as Parker tied the record for most touchdowns scored in a Grey Cup game , at three . Getty also handed the ball to Johnny Bright for two touchdowns and scored two himself on quarterback keeps from the one @-@ yard line , as the Eskimos won their third consecutive championship over the Montreal Alouettes by a score of 50 – 27 . He continued with Eskimos until 1963 , and also made three appearances in the 1965 season . 
 Getty was one of the most successful Canadian @-@ born quarterbacks in the history of the Canadian Football League and sits at third on the all @-@ time passing yardage list of Canadian quarterbacks , behind Russ Jackson and Gerry <unk> , with nearly nine thousand yards . He was declared the outstanding Canadian player in the Western Interprovincial Football Union in 1959 , and was the runner up ( to Jackson ) for the Schenley Award as the league 's most outstanding Canadian player the same year . He was placed on the Eskimos ' Wall of Honor in 1992 . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 <unk> and including the 1958 season , a tackle for a loss on a passing play was registered as a rushing attempt . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Getty kept a low profile after leaving politics . He assumed several corporate directorships and spent time with his grandchildren . Unlike Lougheed , he rarely commented on political matters . He was appointed as an Officer to the Order of Canada in 1998 . 
 In July 2008 , after Ed Stelmach announced $ 2 billion in funding to industry to develop carbon capture technology , Getty 's company sought some of the funding to bury carbon dioxide in salt caverns near Two Hills . 
 On February 26 , 2016 , Getty died of heart failure at the age of 82 in Edmonton , following years of declining health . 
 = = Honours = = 
 He was appointed as an Officer of the Order of Canada on 21 October 1998 . He was appointed as a Member of the Alberta Order of Excellence in 1999 . Also received the Canadian Version of the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal the 125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal in 1992 . The Canadian Version of the Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal in 2002 and the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal in 2012 . 
 In 2012 He was Inducted into the London Sports Hall of Fame in London , Ontario in Recognition of His achievements in Canadian Football . 
 On 19 November 2013 He received the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Alberta . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = = = As party leader = = = 
 * Party did not nominate candidates in the previous election . 
 = = = As MLA = = = 
 = = = Party leadership contest = = = 
 = Brough Castle = 
 Brough Castle is a ruined castle in the village of Brough , Cumbria , England . The castle was built by William Rufus around 1092 within the old Roman fort of Verterae to protect a key route through the Pennine mountains . The initial motte and bailey castle was attacked and destroyed by the Scots in 1174 during the Great Revolt against Henry II . Rebuilt after the war , a square keep was constructed and the rest of the castle converted to stone . 
 The Clifford family took possession of Brough after the Second Barons ' War in the 1260s ; they built Clifford 's Tower and undertook a sequence of renovations to the castle , creating a fortification in a typical northern English style . In 1521 , however , Henry Clifford held a Christmas feast at the castle , after which a major fire broke out , destroying the property . The castle remained abandoned until Lady Anne Clifford restored the property between 1659 and 1661 , using it as one of her northern country homes . In 1666 another fire broke out , once again rendering the castle uninhabitable . Brough Castle went into sharp decline and was stripped first of its fittings and then its stonework . The castle 's masonry began to collapse around 1800 . 
 In 1921 , Brough Castle was given to the state and is now run by English Heritage as a tourist attraction . It is a listed building and a scheduled monument . 
 = = 11th century = = 
 Brough Castle was built on the site of the Roman fort of Verterae , a 3 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) fortification that was occupied until the 5th century . The site protected the Stainmore Pass that stretched from the River Eden across the Pennines , and the Roman road connecting Carlisle and Ermine Street , a valuable trading route during the period . 
 Following the Norman conquest of England in 1066 , William the Conqueror subdued the north of the country in a sequence of harsh campaigns , and the north @-@ west region became a contested border territory between the Normans and the Scottish kings . William 's son , William Rufus , invaded the north @-@ west in 1091 and built Brough Castle around 1092 , placing it in the north part of the old Roman fort in order to make use of the existing earthworks , in a similar way to nearby Brougham and Lancaster . The north side of the site overlooks the River Eden . This castle appears to have been a motte and bailey design ; the keep had stone foundations and a main structure built from timber , while the rest of the former fort was turned into a palisaded bailey . The village of Church Brough was created alongside the castle at around the same time , in the form of a planned settlement , part of the Norman colonisation of the low @-@ lands in the region . 
 = = 12th century = = 
 The region around Brough continued to be disputed between the kings of England and Scotland ; in 1173 , William the Lion of Scotland invaded as part of the Great Revolt against the rule of Henry II . William 's army struck south but failed to take Wark and moved on to attack Carlisle instead ; when that failed too , they successfully took Appleby before turning their attention to Brough . 
 Brough , guarded by six knights , put up a strong resistance , but William took the outer defences and then besieged the keep , threatening to execute the garrison if the castle was not surrendered . The keep was set on fire , forcing the surrender of the garrison , including one knight who , according to the chronicler Jordan <unk> , fought on first with spears and then wooden stakes , until finally overwhelmed . William then destroyed the remaining defences of the castle using Flemish mercenary troops . Henry II 's forces defeated William at the battle of Alnwick and Brough Castle was recovered later in the year . 
 Henry II had a square stone keep constructed in the 1180s by first Theobald de Valoignes and then Hugh de Morville , who rebuilt the remains of the castle . It was placed into the bailey wall , allowing it to directly support the outer defences . Thomas de <unk> conducted further work between 1199 and 1202 for King John , converting the castle entirely into stone . 
 = = 13th – 15th centuries = = 
 King John granted the lordship of Westmoreland , including Brough , to Robert de Vieuxpont in 1203 . Robert enlarged the castle in order to exert his authority over the region , where he was competing for control with other members of his extended family . In 1206 , King John briefly entrusted his captive niece Eleanor to the custody of Robert . Robert died in 1228 , leaving substantial debts of £ 2 @,@ 000 to the Crown and passing the castle to his young son , John . His son 's guardian , Hubert de Burgh appointed the Prior of Carlisle to run the estate and the castle was left to fall into ruin . John died supporting the rebels during the Second Barons ' War between 1264 and 1267 and his lands were divided between his two daughters , Isabel and <unk> . Isabel de Vieuxpont inherited Brough and the eastern Vieuxpont estates ; Henry III gave guardianship of some of these lands to Roger de Clifford ; Roger then married Isabel , acquiring all her lands and beginning a long period of Clifford control of the castle . 
 The Cliffords successfully recombined the former Vieuxpont estates by 1333 , and were able to controlled the Eden valley through their castles at Appleby , Brougham , Pendragon and Brough . Robert Clifford controlled Brough by around 1308 and improved the defences , rebuilding the east wall and constructing a new hall , alongside his apartments which were located in a new circular tower , called Clifford 's Tower . These apartments may have been similar to those surviving at Appleby Castle , also built by Robert . 
 Robert died fighting the Scots at the battle of Bannockburn and the region around the castle was attacked in 1314 and 1319 , causing significant damage to neighbouring Church Brough . Around this time the village of Market Brough was established along the road overlooked by the castle , in an attempt by the Cliffords to maximise the possibilities for profits from trade along the valley . Market Brough acquired a royal charter in 1330 and seems to have rapidly overtaken Church Brough as the main settlement in the area . 
 In the 1380s Roger , the fifth baron , decided to modify the castle , partially to improve the defences . Roger conducted work to most of the Clifford castles in the area and at Brough he rebuilt the south wall and reconstructed the living accommodation , replacing the existing hall with a more fashionable first @-@ floor hall and chamber block . Clifford 's Tower was converted for use as bedrooms and some of the old hall was converted into a <unk> in With the exception of Clifford 's Tower , these renovations at Brough reflected the popular architectural style of castles in the north of England at the time , stressing square lines and towers in preference to the rounder shapes prevalent in the south . The bailey was cobbled over at around this time . 
 The gatehouse was reinforced with buttresses and an additional courtyard built within the bailey around 1450 , possibly by Thomas Clifford . During the Wars of the Roses between the rival houses of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists , the Clifford supported the Lancastrians . Thomas died in 1455 , followed by his son John in 1461 ; Brough was temporarily seized from the Cliffords by the Yorkists , until John 's son Henry was restored to his lands in 1485 by Henry VII . 
 = = 16th – 17th centuries = = 
 Henry Clifford used the castle until 1521 , when a fire broke out after a lavish Christmas Feast , destroying the inhabitable parts of the castle . Henry died shortly afterwards and the castle remained ruined for many years . 
 The castle was restored in the 17th century by Lady Anne Clifford , a major landowner in the Clifford family who retired to the north during the years of the Commonwealth after the English Civil War . Although Anne was a royalist , she was protected by powerful friends within the ruling Parliamentary faction and able to enjoy her properties freely . She rebuilt a number of the Clifford castles , including Brough , where she conducted restoration work between 1659 and 1661 . Anne undertook more work at Brough than anywhere else on her estates , aiming to restore it to its pre @-@ 1521 condition . Although Anne would have been familiar with contemporary styles , her restoration work was quite traditional in approach , drawing on existing northern castle architecture and deliberately trying to recreate 12th century features in the keep . As part of this work , new windows , a ground floor entrance to the keep and new service accommodation was installed to allow her to live a late 17th century lifestyle , and the castle had 24 fireplaces by 1665 . 
 Anne renamed Brough 's keep as " the Roman Tower " , in the belief that it had been built by the Romans . She divided her time at the castle between living in Clifford 's Tower , part of the castle 's apartments and , as work progressed , the keep ; by 1665 , she was able to spend her Christmas at the castle for the first time . In 1666 another fire struck the castle , however , rendering it uninhabitable . In the aftermath , the remaining buildings in the bailey was converted for use as a law court , and Anne died in 1676 , the castle unrestored . 
 = = 18th – 21st centuries = = 
 Anne 's daughter , Margaret , married John Tufton , the Earl of Thanet . John 's son , Thomas , stripped the castle around 1695 to support the reconstruction of Appleby Castle . The furnishings were sold in 1714 and in 1763 much of the stone from Clifford 's Tower was plundered for use in the construction of Brough Mill ; the castle was subsequently completely abandoned . The south @-@ west corner of the keep partially collapsed around 1800 . 
 In 1920 more of the south @-@ west corner collapsed and the castle 's owner , Lord Hothfield , gave the property to the Office of Works . Work to stabilise the ruins was carried out and the castle , as a listed building and ancient monument , eventually passed into the control of English Heritage as a tourist attraction . There were initial archaeological excavations on the site in 1925 , and then further work in 1970 @-@ 71 , 1993 , 2007 and 2009 . Erosion continues to be a threat to the castle 's masonry , and as of 2010 English Heritage considered the castle 's condition to be declining , with some parts at particular risk . 
 = German cruiser Leipzig = 
 Leipzig was the lead ship of her class of light cruisers built by the German navy . She had one sister ship , Nürnberg . Leipzig was laid down in April 1928 , was launched in October 1929 , and was commissioned into the Reichsmarine in October 1931 . Armed with a main battery of nine 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns in three triple turrets , Leipzig had a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . 
 Leipzig participated in non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War . In the first year of World War II , she performed escort duties for warships in the Baltic and North seas . While on one of these operations in December 1939 , the ship was torpedoed by a British submarine and badly damaged . Repairs were completed by late 1940 , when she returned to service as a training ship . She provided gunfire support to the advancing Wehrmacht troops as they invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 . 
 In October 1944 , Leipzig collided with the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen ; the damage was so severe that the navy decided complete repairs were unfeasible . The ship was patched up to keep her afloat , and she helped to defend Gotenhafen from the advancing Red Army in March 1945 . She then carried a group of fleeing German civilians , reaching Denmark by late April . After the end of the war , Leipzig was used as a barracks ship for minesweeping forces and was scuttled in July 1946 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Leipzig was 177 meters ( 581 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 16 @.@ 3 m ( 53 ft ) and a maximum draft of 5 @.@ 69 m ( 18 @.@ 7 ft ) forward . She displaced 8 @,@ 100 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 000 long tons ; 8 @,@ 900 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two steam turbines and four 7 @-@ cylinder MAN two @-@ stroke double @-@ acting diesel engines , which were the basis for the unsuccessful US Navy Hooven @-@ Owens @-@ Rentschler design . Steam for the turbines was provided by six Marine @-@ type double @-@ ended oil @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 200 km ; 4 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) using only the diesel engines . Leipzig had a crew of 26 officers and 508 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns mounted in three triple gun turrets . One was located forward , and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft , all on the centerline . They were supplied with between 1 @,@ 080 and 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for between 120 and 166 shells per gun . As built , the ship was also equipped with two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in single mounts ; they had 400 rounds of ammunition each . Leipzig also carried four triple torpedo tube mounts located amidships ; they were supplied with twenty @-@ four 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedoes . She was also capable of carrying 120 naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick amidships and an armored belt that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Leipzig was laid down at the Reichsmarinewerft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven on 28 April 1928 and launched on 18 October 1929 . She was commissioned into the Reichsmarine on 8 October 1931 . The ship trained extensively in the Baltic Sea throughout 1932 and 1933 , and also made several goodwill cruises overseas . In 1934 , she and the cruiser Königsberg made the first goodwill visit to the United Kingdom since the end of World War I. In late 1934 , Leipzig went into drydock for modifications . An aircraft catapult was installed on the aft superstructure and a crane for handling float planes replaced one of her boat derricks . The original single @-@ mount 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced with twin mounts . These modifications were made in Kiel . In early 1935 , Leipzig joined the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Schlesien , the new heavy cruiser Deutschland , and the light cruiser Köln for major fleet exercises . 
 Later in 1935 , Adolf Hitler visited the ship during training maneuvers with the rest of the fleet . The ship joined her sister Nürnberg and Köln for exercises in the Atlantic Ocean in early 1936 . In August , Leipzig took part in the non @-@ intervention patrols off Spain during the Spanish Civil War . She conducted several patrols between August 1936 and June 1937 , and in late June , she was allegedly attacked with torpedoes ; this prompted Germany and Italy to withdraw from the non @-@ intervention patrols . She thereafter returned to Germany and went into the Baltic Sea for training , which lasted through 1938 . In March 1939 , she participated in the annexation of Memel which Germany had demanded from Lithuania . The following month , she joined the battleship Gneisenau , the cruiser Deutschland , and several destroyers and U @-@ boats for major exercises in the Atlantic . Additional maneuvers were conducted through the middle of 1939 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , Leipzig was assigned to the blocking force that was intended to prevent the escape of the Polish Navy from the Baltic ; they were unsuccessful . Leipzig thereafter went to the North Sea , where she and the other light cruisers laid a series of defensive minefields . This task lasted through the end of the month , after which she returned to the Baltic for training maneuvers . On 17 – 19 November , Leipzig covered a minelaying operation in the North Sea . She joined Deutschland , Köln , and three torpedo boats for a sweep in the Skagerrak for Allied shipping on 21 – 22 November . Leipzig was tasked with escorting the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau through the Skagerrak , and with covering their return on the 27th . 
 On 13 December , Leipzig was tasked with escorting a flotilla of destroyers and other small vessels as they proceeded through the Skagerrak to lay a minefield . While en route , the British submarine HMS Salmon attacked the German warships , and at 11 : 25 , hit Leipzig with a torpedo . The torpedo hit Leipzig just below the waterline , where a bulkhead separated two of the ship 's three boiler rooms . The explosion bent her armored deck and damaged her keel ; some 1 @,@ 700 t ( 1 @,@ 700 long tons ; 1 @,@ 900 short tons ) of water flooded the ship , and the damage cut electrical power to the ship 's pumping system . The two boiler rooms were flooded , steam lines were damaged , and the port turbine was shut down . At around the same time , her sister Nürnberg was also torpedoed . A pair of destroyers arrived to escort the damaged cruisers back to port ; an hour after Leipzig was torpedoed , one of the escorting destroyers was also torpedoed , just outside the mouth of the Elbe . Another torpedo passed just ahead of Leipzig , nearly hitting the damaged cruiser . 
 After safely returning to port in Kiel , Leipzig was taken into the Deutsche Werke shipyard for repairs . She was decommissioned while under repair and reclassified as a training ship . To accommodate additional training crews , four of the ship 's boilers were removed . She returned to service in late 1940 . In early June 1941 , she escorted the heavy cruiser Lützow ( formerly Deutschland ) to Norway . After she returned to the Baltic , she and the cruiser Emden provided artillery support to advancing German ground forces during Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . In September , she supported the invasion of the Baltic islands in the West Estonian archipelago . While bombarding Soviet positions on Moon Island , Leipzig was attacked unsuccessfully by the Soviet submarine <unk> @-@ 317 . In late September , the ship joined the German Baltic Fleet , centered on the battleship Tirpitz ; the fleet was tasked with blocking a possible Soviet attempt to break out of the Baltic . Leipzig returned to Kiel in October , and conducted maneuvers with the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer . Leipzig became the flagship of the training fleet in 1942 ; she spent the year performing training duties . 
 Leipzig was decommissioned briefly in March 1943 , and recommissioned on 1 August . She was in need of an overhaul , however , and the work significantly delayed her return to operational status . Furthermore , an outbreak of meningitis killed two crewmen and created an additional delay . Leipzig returned to escort duties in the Baltic in mid @-@ September 1944 . Her first operation covered troop transports between Gotenhafen and Swinemünde in company with Admiral Scheer . On 14 October , Leipzig departed Gotenhafen , bound for Swinemünde , to take on a load of mines . In a heavy fog , she collided with the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , which was steaming at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . At the time of collision , Leipzig was switching from her diesel cruise engines to her steam turbine main engines , a process of first uncoupling the diesels from the shafts and then coupling turbines to the shafts , which left the ship temporary without propulsion drifting out of her fairway into the path of Prinz Eugen which was moving in the opposite way Prinz Eugen struck C on her port side , just forward of her funnel , cutting her nearly in half - the forward point of the clipper bow of Prinz Eugen actually stuck out beyond the starboard side of Leipzig . The collision destroyed the number 3 ( port ) engine room , flooded a second engine room and killed or wounded 39 crewmen . The ships remained stuck fast for over a day , after which Leipzig was towed back to Gotenhafen . The damage was so severe that repairs were deemed impractical , especially considering Germany 's pressing military situation by late 1944 . Only repairs to keep her afloat in the harbor were effected . 
 Leipzig provided fire support to the defending German forces in March 1945 , while Soviet Red Army forces advanced on the city . On 24 March , Leipzig was moved to Hela , laden with refugees ; she was capable of steaming at only 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . She was repeatedly attacked by Soviet aircraft , and Allied submarines attempted to torpedo her twice . She nevertheless safely reached Denmark on 29 April . Due to her poor state following the end of the war , she was used as a barracks ship for the men of the German Mine Sweeping Administration , tasked with clearing mines off the German coast . The battered ship was eventually towed out and scuttled in July 1946 . 
 = Isaac and Miria = 
 Isaac Dian ( <unk> · <unk> , <unk> Dian ) and Miria <unk> ( <unk> · <unk> , Miria <unk> ) are fictional characters in the light novel and anime series Baccano ! written by Ryohgo Narita and illustrated by Katsumi Enami . Isaac and Miria are a pair of idiotic and eccentric lovers who dress up in costumes and commit strange robberies in Prohibition @-@ era United States . In 1930 , the duo are two of many characters who mistake an immortality elixir for alcohol and drink it at a celebration , inadvertently gaining immortality and eternal youth . The next year , they board the Flying Pussyfoot express train and survive the bloody hijacking that occurs . Isaac is arrested for various thefts in 1934 and imprisoned on Alcatraz Island . He is released the same year and reunites with Miria . The pair continue to live happily , finally realizing they are immortal in 2001 . Isaac and Miria appear in the other media relating to the Baccano ! franchise , including the video game , the two drama CDs and manga adaptation . 
 Numerous publications in various media have been written on the subject of Isaac and Miria 's characters . Most described them as the most entertaining characters and commented on how the series would not be the same without them . One reviewer felt that they are the protagonists of the series , which features an ensemble cast . They were awarded " Duo of the Year " in 2009 by Anime News Network . 
 = = Voice portrayal = = 
 In the Japanese version of Baccano ! ' s anime adaptation , Isaac has been voiced by Masaya <unk> and Miria has been voiced by Sayaka Aoki . In the English version , Isaac 's role has been played by J. Michael Tatum and Caitlin Glass has played Miria . Tyler Walker , ADR director for the English version , wanted Isaac to be portrayed by someone who can convincingly portray an idiot and had a certain voice from the time period . He felt that Tatum was perfect because his voice was big , but not cheesy , and had depth . While casting Miria , he chose Glass because her voice complemented Tatum 's . He wanted a lower pitch than Isaac 's voice , but wanted the same enthusiasm for both characters . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In the light novels and anime series = = = 
 Within the series , set during the Prohibition @-@ era of the United States , Isaac and Miria " are a pair of idiotic lovers and thieves " who are portrayed as " always enthusiastic and optimistic " . They are often mistaken for performers because of the variety of disguises they employ during their heists , such as dressing up as mummies or as the Tramp . The duo commit a variety of eccentric robberies , including attempting to steal time by stealing watches , trying to stop anyone from entering a museum by stealing the entrance and stealing the Genoard family fortune to prevent the family from fighting over it . Miria exhibits a complete trust in Isaac and supports anything he says no matter how ridiculous it is and often goes as far to mimic his body language and his speech , although she often does not really know what she is saying . Although the pair are very idiotic , Isaac is not completely stupid and there are occasions that shows that he displays his inner intelligence . He is able to recognize a pair of plainclothes officers because he claims that he is familiar with their speech style . Isaac and Miria may have been born into wealthy families because they state that their parents ' homes and the Genoard mansion have similar exteriors . 
 In the Rolling Bootlegs , set in 1930 , Isaac and Miria decide to visit Manhattan . When attempting to buy several disguises , they briefly meet <unk> Firo Prochainezo and Maiza Avaro and befriend the homunculus Ennis , instilling her with confidence and hope . They decide to rob the very small Martillo and Gandor families . The pair sneak into the Martillo 's speakeasy , the Alveare , to scout the area , and while they are in the storage room , Isaac is nearly killed by a ceremonial gunshot from Firo 's <unk> inauguration downstairs . Firo and Maiza respond to Miria 's scream for help , and the couple are invited to the celebration as an apology . Shortly afterward , they leave to investigate the Gandor headquarters . Believing it contains money , they steal a box . However , they find a bottle of immortality elixir inside , which they mistake for alcohol . Disappointed there is no money , they give the bottle to the Martillo thank them for their kindness . This prompts the immortal Szilard <unk> , who owns the elixir and created Ennis , to attack the Alveare to retrieve the elixir . He orders Ennis to kill Isaac and Miria , but she attacks Szilard instead . When he is about to kill her , Isaac and Miria defend her , buying enough time for another immortal to devour Szilard , the only way to kill an immortal . It is later discovered that the immortality elixir was not in the bottle the duo stole . Firo , not realizing what it was , had stolen it earlier and distributed it at the celebration , bestowing immortality and eternal youth on all the guests , including Isaac and Miria . In the anime series , the bottle the pair stole is truly the immortality elixir and they inadvertently distribute it at the party as a gesture of thanks toward the Martillo . Afterward , the two travel to California and search for gold . 
 In the two Grand Punk Railroad novels , set during late 1931 , the pair receive a letter from Ennis and decide to visit her in Manhattan . To buy her a gift , they create a plan to rob a train , but instead steal money from the Russo family and make their escape aboard the Flying Pussyfoot express train . There , they befriend gangsters Jacuzzi Splot and Nice Holystone and the immortal boy Czeslaw Meyer . They tell the legend of the Rail Tracer , a monster that eats train passengers , causing Jacuzzi to leave in a panic . Shortly after , the train is hijacked and they escape in the confusion . Later , the duo discover the conductors ' mutilated bodies . Believing that the story of the Rail Tracer has come true , they assume Jacuzzi has also been eaten , only to discover otherwise . Isaac and Miria make up their minds to ask the Rail Tracer to leave , oblivious to the seriousness of the situation and how dangerous the Rail Tracer is . They find Czeslaw 's body underneath the train in their search for the monster . When trying to rescue him , Isaac cuts himself , revealing their immortality to Czeslaw . Believing they are trying to devour him , the boy decides to devour them first , but changes his mind after they rescue him and promise to be his family . After the train arrives in Manhattan , they realize they never bought Ennis a present and tell her their gift is Czeslaw , who will be her younger brother . 
 Afterward , they stay with the Martillo and spend their time in the Alveare restaurant setting up and knocking down dominoes . In The Slash , Firo 's purposely knocks over their dominoes , enraging Isaac and Miria . The pair decide to spend the night at the Genoard mansion with Jacuzzi . When Tim and the Larvae arrive at the mansion , they believe that the display of Dallas ' immortality is a magic trick and the fights are dances . Isaac inadvertently reveals his own immortality when he receives a cut trying to praise the " dancers . " After everyone departs the mansion , the duo decide to " steal " Ronnie <unk> and Ennis , two people precious to Firo , in an attempt to make him apologize . However , Firo wrongly assumes that Dallas kidnapped Ronnie and Ennis . Isaac and Miria are confronted by plainclothes officers in 1934 in Imprisoned Chapter Alice in Jails . Isaac knows they are in fact police @-@ in @-@ disguise and realizes that Miria is unaware of this and sends her away . He is arrested for multiple thefts and imprisoned on Alcatraz Island . Isaac is released later in the year and reunites with Miria in Chicago , as told in Conclusion Chapter Peter Pan In Chains . In Children of Bottle , set in 2001 , they finally understand they are immortal after realizing they have not aged at all . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Isaac and Miria appear in the series ' two drama CDs ; they survive the Flying Pussyfoot incident in 1931 Local Chapter ・ Express Chapter The Grand Punk Railroad and hope to meet true revolutionaries in a small Mexican village in Firo Prochainezo witnesses the 53rd death of Pietro Gonzalez . The pair are also playable characters in the Baccano ! video game and are characters in the two @-@ volume manga ; like the first drama CD , the video game and manga adaptations recount the events aboard the Pussyfoot . The pair have also made a brief appearance in an episode of the <unk> ! ! anime series , voiced by Sam Riegel and Jennie Kwan in the English dub , during which they are in modern @-@ day Ikebukuro , Tokyo and attend the first meeting of the Dollars , an anonymous online gang . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Isaac and Miria have been named one of two of 2009 's " Duo of the Year " by Theron Martin of Anime News Network ( ANN ) . He felt that the pair were " flawlessly in synch " and were " comedic gold " . He believed that they are " endlessly entertaining " because of their " kooky natures , <unk> , and talents for both disrupting the intended flow of any situation and succeeding despite themselves " . Martin also stated that the series would only be " half as great without them " , despite the fact that they are members of such a large cast . Martin praised the performances of J. Michael Tatum and Caitlin Glass , citing the actors ' ability to " steal the show in every appearance " and " sell [ the pair ] as thoroughly as any voice actors could possibly do , giving them every ounce of verve and idiotic enthusiasm that their characters ' action say they should have . " Hartel comments that the voice actors " deserve special recognition for some flat out , insane voice work . " Although Surat and Tool were not opposed to the English dubbing , they felt that Isaac 's accent sounded weird and " might get on someone 's nerves . " 
 In his review of the series , Martin called them as the " most entertaining characters " of the series and " one of anime 's liveliest and most entertaining couples " . He described their constant glee as infectious and their " bizarre logic " as priceless . He felt that their presence " elevates the series from merely a very good one to a truly exceptional one . " He believes that they always " make the most of their screen time " , noting how every one of their actions " give an entirely new twist to the events otherwise playing out normally . " Carl Kimlinger , also from ANN , adds that " the things those two can do to a well @-@ laid plan are simply appalling . " Davey Jones of Active Anime felt the pair was the " highlight of the story " and should have their own series . Chris Beveridge from Mania Entertainment described the two as " very off center in a colorful and fun way " and believed they stood out from the large cast because they were " far more outgoing . " He felt that the connections they make with the rest of the cast " are fun to watch and there 's only a kind of elegance to it " . Beveridge commented that " when this pair comes on the screen , [ he ] can ’ t help but smile " and that he " enjoy [ s ] all of the scenes that involve [ them ] because they bring such a lighthearted aspect to the show that ’ s definitely needed to break up the more intense scenes . " DVD Talk 's Todd Douglass felt that Isaac and Miria are " the uplifting and energetic component of [ the ] show , " feeling that it is entertaining to see how they influenced the events . Nick Hartel , also from DVD Talk , believed that it would be cruel not to mention them . He described them to be filled with " a maniac energy , often brought to a screeching halt by melodramatic breakdowns over trivial occurrences or bold assumptions . " Although he admit they seem to have to place in the series at first , he notes that their interactions with other characters " causes a drastic shift in tone . " He comments that as the plot progresses , the pair " become a bright spot as storylines take dark turns and serve as a reminder of the goodness that makes up the vast majority of the world . " Daryl Surat of the Anime World Order Podcast and quest Mike Toole believed that out of every other character in the ensemble cast , the pair are the " default protagonists " simply because they meet every other character . They also felt that if ignorance is bliss , they are the happiest people " in the world " because they are " that stupid " . The two characters were compared to Bonnie and Clyde , but the reviewers felt that were more like Blue Falcon and <unk> , characters from the animated series <unk> , Dog Wonder . Even if the events become grim , the reviewers could not help but smile as Isaac and Miria appear . ANN columnist Erin Finnegan described Isaac and Miria as " a couple of completely loveable <unk> " . She agreed that the subplot revolving around them " takes some of the edge off the dark moments . " Amanda Tarbet of <unk> drew parallels between the duo and the trickster god archetype . She compared them to the kitsune of Japanese folklore , which are portrayed " as tricksters , but also as nurturing characters such as guardians and friends " . She felt that Isaac and Miria " represent this duality perfectly . " Tarbet also described them as part Bonnie and Clyde and part Rodgers and Hammerstein . 
 = Knowle West = 
 Knowle West is a neighbourhood situated on a low plateau in the south of Bristol , England , about 2 miles ( 3 km ) from the centre of the city . Historically in Somerset , most of the area is coterminous with the Filwood ward of Bristol City Council , although a small part of the estate lies within Knowle ward to the east . To the west are Bishopsworth and Hartcliffe . To the north are Bedminster and Windmill Hill and to the south Whitchurch Park and Hengrove . The population as of 2008 was estimated as 11 @,@ 787 . The area is approximately 1 @.@ 26 square miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km2 ) in extent . 
 There is evidence of late Iron Age and Roman settlements in the area . At the time of the Domesday Book , Knowle was a rural area assessed at a taxable value of two geld units . Knowle West remained rural in character until the 1930s , when a council housing estate was developed to provide homes for people displaced by slum clearance in the centre of the city . 
 Famous former residents include the musician Tricky , the boxer Dixie Brown and late 1950s rock and roll band the Eagles . There are five schools and four churches in Knowle West , as well as a number of open spaces , community centres , youth clubs and shopping facilities . Community organisations include the Knowle West Media Centre , the Residents ' Planning Group and the Knowle West Health Association . There are no major employers in Knowle West but there are many small local enterprises and larger businesses on nearby trading estates . The closure of the Imperial Tobacco factory at nearby Hartcliffe in 1990 caused a large number of job losses . Just under a third of the residents are classed as economically inactive and the area is one of the most economically deprived in Bristol . Knowle West has relatively high indices of crime and drug use , but community efforts to combat this have had some success . 
 = = History = = 
 There is evidence of late Iron Age and Roman settlement at Inns Court and Filwood Park , which lie within Knowle West . In 1086 , the area that is now Knowle West was assessed by the Domesday survey as part of Knowle in the hundred of Hartcliffe . The survey shows Knowle as being under the lordship of Eadnoth the Constable who had 30 holdings in Devon , Dorset , Somerset and Wiltshire before the Norman conquest . After the conquest , Knowle became part of the holdings of Osbern Giffard , who was lord , or tenant in chief , of holdings throughout Gloucestershire , Hampshire , Wiltshire and Somerset . The Domesday Book shows Knowle as having eleven households , three ploughlands , one cob ( small horse ) , eight cattle , twenty five pigs , a meadow of 16 acres ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) , pasture of 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) and a woodland area of 2 @.@ 5 furlongs ( 500 m ) by 1 @.@ 5 furlongs ( 300 m ) . For taxation purposes , the whole was assessed at two geld units . Filwood Park , in the southern part of the area was part of the parish of Whitchurch until incorporated into Bristol in 1930 . In Anglo @-@ Saxon times Filwood Chase was part of the royal hunting estate known as Kingswood Forest , which encompassed a large area around Bristol . 
 Inns Court and Filwood farms have medieval origins . The surviving parts of Inns Court , originally <unk> 's Court , are now part of the former Holy Cross Inns Court Vicarage and the staircase turret is now a Grade II * listed building . The building is in a state of bad repair and is on the " at risk " register . An isolation hospital was built at <unk> 's Hill in 1892 , eventually superseded by a new hospital at Ham Green , near Pill , which opened in 1927 . The site is now occupied by the Knowle DGE ( DGE standing for Discovery , Guidance and Enjoyment ) Special School . In the 1920s , the area was still rural in nature , mostly agricultural and allotment land , including Filwood Farm , Inns Court Farm and Hengrove House . The old field boundaries influenced the subsequent development . 
 Knowle West was built in the 1930s as a council housing estate . It was constructed on garden city principles , with large gardens and " an abundance of fresh air and daylight . " The aim of the development was to provide new homes for those who needed to be relocated as a result of clearance of inner @-@ city slums in Bristol and " to provide healthier living conditions for large families on low incomes . 
 A new wave of development commenced in the 1960s at Inns Court , occasioned by the need for more homes following the further clearance of inner city areas which had been devastated by the Bristol Blitz . <unk> homes , which had been erected since World War II at Filwood Park were demolished in the 1960s . Subsequently , new homes were built on the <unk> principles . " Common features were grouped houses arranged around a cul @-@ de sac street layout thus the street layout broke away from the conventional street grid pattern " , but this style of development is now considered to be a failure , due to the lack of " a safe and well @-@ overlooked environment . " The layout of housing built around short cul @-@ de @-@ sacs " has resulted in a physical environment that contributes to isolation rather than facilitating community interaction " , according to a 2009 city council report on the area . By 2008 , around 45 per cent of the 4 @,@ 475 homes were owner occupied . Plans were announced in 2010 for demolition of 1 @,@ 000 homes in Inns Court . Local residents were opposed to this , and following their campaign , the council withdrew the plans and met with residents to discuss plans for redeveloping Filwood Broadway with new shops and a supermarket . 
 = = Location = = 
 Modern Knowle West has an area of approximately 1 @.@ 26 square miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km2 ) , located on a plateau about 215 feet ( 66 m ) above sea level , south of the centre of Bristol , between the districts of Knowle on the east , Whitchurch Park and Hengrove to the south , Hartcliffe and Bishopsworth to the west and Bedminster and Windmill Hill to the north . There is steeply sloping land to the north and west , which together with <unk> Brook , a tributary of the River Malago , creates a natural barrier to adjacent areas . The underlying bedrock is of the Lias Group , a mixture of mudstones , marine limestones , sandstones and clays . The Bedminster Great coal seam lies some 2 @,@ 952 feet ( 900 m ) below the area , but it is considered unlikely that coal was mined underneath Knowle West . 
 The local council Filwood ward is roughly coterminous with Knowle West , but two small areas of the estate lie in the neighbouring Knowle ward . Definitions of the area of Knowle West vary , with some residents in the eastern fringes preferring to identify with Knowle . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 The musician Tricky was a member of the Wild Bunch sound system and a contributor to Massive Attack 's first two albums . Born in 1968 , Tricky grew up in Knowle West in the 1970s and 1980s and was educated at <unk> School . He named his 2008 album Knowle West Boy in tribute to the area 's influence on him and his music . Boxer Dixie Brown lived in Knowle West from the 1930s until the 1950s and was a regular at the Venture Inn , a public house in Melvin Square . He was frequently visited by black American troops during World War II . The Eagles were a rock and roll band who formed in the late 1950s at the Eagle House youth club and featured in the 1962 film Some People . 
 = = Amenities = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 There are three primary schools in Knowle West ; Greenfield Primary School , Oasis Academy Connaught , and the School of Christ the King . In addition there is Knowle DGE Special School ( formerly the Florence Brown Community Special School ) , which serves pupils of all ages who have learning difficulties or social and emotional behaviour difficulties . There is also a nursery , Knowle West Children 's Centre . · Secondary school students are educated in adjacent areas , following the closure of <unk> School in 2000 , after a critical report by Ofsted in 1997 . The nearest secondary schools are Oasis Academy John Williams in Hengrove , St Bernadette Catholic Secondary School in Brislington , Bridge Learning Campus in Hartcliffe and Bedminster Down Secondary School . Ongoing adult education is provided at the Park Centre and nearby Bedminster and Marksbury Road libraries . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 There is a National Health Service walk @-@ in centre for treating minor injuries on the Knowle West Health Park site . Doctors may be consulted at the adjacent GP walk @-@ in centre and there are general practitioner ( GP ) led health centres nearby in Knowle , Bedminster and Hartcliffe . Dentistry is provided at practices in Bishopsworth , Knowle and Bedminster . The nearest hospital is Bristol Royal Infirmary in Bristol city centre . South Bristol Community Hospital in nearby Hengrove is expected to be open in 2012 . 
 = = Community activities = = 
 There are a number of community activities , including a community website , <unk> , showing the latest events and news in the area . A community newsletter called The Knowledge is produced by Community In Partnership ( CIP ) , facilitated by the Knowle West Media Centre . The Knowle West Future planning forum was established in 2013 to work on a regeneration plan , based on the positive attributes of the estate . 
 The Knowle West Media Centre won a Queen 's Award for Services in the Community in 2006 and the Knowle West Health Association won a Queen 's Award for Voluntary Service in 2010 . 
 Community enterprises include Re : work , who run construction , gardening , and furniture renovation projects , including their store on Filwood Broadway . They work with volunteers and support young people in skills development . Knowle West Health Park includes a GP service , a healthy living centre ( which includes a studio with activities such as keep fit and dance activities ) , children 's park , outdoor sports facilities , and a one @-@ mile walk . Nearby nature walks include the Northern Slopes , including <unk> Common , Glyn Vale / Kingswear and Wedmore Vale . 
 Local amenities include The Park Opportunity Centre , which offers a number of courses and programmes . The area has local shopping facilities , cafés and community centres and youth clubs such as Filwood Community Centre , Eagle House , <unk> House , <unk> Park , The Mede and <unk> ( Knowle West Media Centre ) . 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 Churches include Christ the King ( Roman Catholic ) , built in 1952 ; Destiny Knowles Pentecostal Church ( Pentecostal ) ; St Barnabas ( Church of England ) , built in 1938 ; Holy Cross ( Church of God of Prophecy ) ; and the Salvation Army . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Knowle West is served by four council supported bus services , which connect the area to Totterdown , Broadmead , Hotwells , Bedminster and Brislington . In addition First Bristol run two services , which connect with <unk> , the city centre and Hengrove . The nearest railway station is at Parson Street in Bedminster . 
 Journey times from Knowle West to the city centre have been identified as hampering employment opportunities for residents and proposals for a Greater Bristol Bus Network and a rapid transit scheme have noted the need to provide better connectivity for the area . A journey from Filwood Park to the city centre takes around 50 minutes and from Inns Court to Broadmead takes over 30 minutes . Proposed extensions to the A4174 ring road , which would pass along the southern part of Knowle West , have been claimed to reduce delays across the Greater Bristol area by 6 % , and lead to a 9 % increase in public transport use . The plans were approved by the Department for Transport in December 2011 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population estimate for Filwood ward , as of 2008 , was 11 @,@ 787 . There were 3 @,@ 007 under 15 years old and 1 @,@ 651 were of pensionable age . 7 @,@ 316 were Christian , 2 @,@ 925 had no religion and there were small numbers of Muslim , Buddhist , Hindu and Sikh residents . 96 @.@ 2 per cent were described as white and 3 @.@ 8 per cent as being of black minority ethnicity . 
 Even in 2011 , the Filwood ward was still an area with a relatively small amount of ethnic minorities , with 85 @.@ 8 per cent of the 12 @,@ 267 residents being White British . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 There are a number of small community enterprises in the area , but most of those in work need to drive to other parts of Bristol . The Bristol City Council Baseline Briefing notes that employment opportunities for those without a car are limited There is a retail park on the former Imperial Tobacco factory site in Hartcliffe , which has plans for further development . In addition , South Bristol Business Park was built on the former Filwood playing fields in the early 21st century . It was reported that 2 @,@ 300 residents had local employment in 2008 and 3 @,@ 264 were classed as economically inactive ; that is to say they were not employed and not actively seeking employment . 71 per cent of jobs were in service industries . 213 residents were claiming unemployment benefits . 
 = = = Deprivation = = = 
 Six out of eight areas in Knowle West are ranked as being economically deprived . The closure of the Imperial Tobacco factory at nearby Hartcliffe in 1990 meant the loss of 5 @,@ 000 jobs and an estimated further 20 @,@ 000 jobs in service and supporting industries throughout South Bristol . A House of Commons report noted that this had a seriously negative effect on the area as many people in Knowle West and neighbouring areas lost the opportunity for " manual and semi @-@ skilled employment " . The Independent in 1995 noted high drug use and associated crime and reported on the establishment of Knowle West Against Drugs , led by local parents concerned about these problems . In 2006 , BBC News said " Knowle West has more than its share of social problems . The highest number of kids in care of any council ward in Bristol . The lowest number of young people with any qualifications ( under half ) . A major petty crime problem , drug addiction , and add to that people are fed up with bad housing . " <unk> , a 2006 novel by social worker Ed Trewavas , written from the point of view of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl living in Knowle West , documents some of the deprivation he encountered in his work . One of the novel 's characters " describes Knowle West ... as a ' shit hole ' populated by ' yokels , cider @-@ heads , junkies , dole @-@ <unk> , <unk> and failed wide boys , all interbreeding and nicking their cruddy possessions off of each other in some giant , dismal rota . ' " 
 The Guardian in 2007 reported " Fed up with the media 's view of their community as a hub for drug use , crime and antisocial behaviour , the residents of one of Britain 's most notorious housing estates decided to fight back . " The article noted that projects such as Knowle West Media were having a positive impact , " Those kids coming out of the media centre aren 't the criminals and <unk> everyone expects from Knowle West ; they 're film @-@ makers , photographers and designers . " According to police statistics the levels of crime and anti @-@ social behaviour ( ASB ) in Knowle West are above average for England and Wales , with 241 crimes and ASB incidents reported in June 2011 . A 2007 report for the Community Foundation Network , looking at the work of voluntary sector groups , found that three quarters of the super output areas in Filwood ward are amongst the 10 % most deprived in England . The report also found a strong sense of community within the area with " a history of community activity " . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Since 2007 , the two Bristol City councillors for Filwood ward have been Labour Party members . The MP for the Bristol South constituency , since 2015 , is Karin Smyth , of the Labour Party . Prior to that , the constituency was represented from 1987 by Dawn <unk> , now the Right Honourable the Baroness <unk> . Filwood is represented in the European Parliament by the six MEPs of the South West England constituency . 
 = = Environment = = 
 Open spaces include Glyn Vale Open Space , part of the Northern Slopes ; Filwood Playing Fields and Filwood Park ; Airport Road Open Space ; Inns Court Open Space , which all are proposed Sites of Nature Conservation Interest ( SNCI ) , with areas of grassland , scrub and broad @-@ leaved woodland . There are also three children 's playgrounds and a few small open spaces , mostly grassed areas between buildings or at road junctions . There are 42 acres ( 17 ha ) of natural open space and 69 acres ( 28 ha ) of what is described by the city council as " informal open space " , such as wide road verges , roundabouts and playing fields , in Knowle West . The average number of bird species per garden is two and 41 per cent of residents reported frogs in gardens or allotments . Proposals for development of open spaces were made in 2009 by Bristol City Council and opposed by residents . On the Northern Slopes , tree species recorded include hazel , blackthorn , alder , and hawthorn ; bird life includes robins , blackbirds , chiffchaffs , house sparrows , starlings , and thrushes ; wildflowers include cowslips , primroses , <unk> , and knapweed ; and mammals include rabbits and foxes as well as pipistrelle and noctule bats . 
 = Ýdalir = 
 In Norse mythology , Ýdalir ( " yew @-@ dales " ) is a location containing a dwelling owned by the god Ullr . Ýdalir is solely attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources . Scholarly theories have been proposed about the implications of the location . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 Ýdalir is solely attested in stanza 5 of the poem Grímnismál ( collected in the Poetic Edda ) , where Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) tells the young Agnar that Ullr owns a dwelling in Ýdalir . The stanza reads ( Ýdalir is here translated as <unk> ) : 
 <unk> it is called , where Ullr 
 has himself a dwelling made . 
 <unk> the gods Frey gave 
 in days of yore for a tooth @-@ gift . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Discussing Ýdalir , Henry Adams Bellows comments that " the wood of the yew @-@ tree was used for bows in the North just as it was long afterwards for England . " Rudolf Simek says that " this connexion of the god with the yew @-@ tree , of whose wood bows were made ( cf . ON <unk> ' yew bow ' ) , has led to Ullr being seen as a bow @-@ god . " Andy Orchard comments that Ýdalir is an " aptly named dwelling @-@ place [ for the ] archer @-@ god , Ull . " According to Hilda Ellis Davidson , while Valhalla " is well known because it plays so large a part in images of warfare and death , " the significance of other halls in Norse mythology such as Ýdalir , and the goddess Freyja 's afterlife location Fólkvangr has been lost . 
 <unk> , located in Cromarty , Scotland , is first recorded in 1578 , and is thought to derive from Old Norse y @-@ <unk> . Robert Bevan @-@ Jones proposes a connection between veneration of Ullr and Ýdalir among the settling pagan Norse in Scotland and their <unk> of the name <unk> to the location . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Isabel in Maryland and Washington , D.C. = 
 The effects of Hurricane Isabel in Maryland and Washington , D.C. , were among the most damaging from a tropical cyclone in the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area , United States . Hurricane Isabel formed from a tropical wave on September 6 , 2003 , in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It moved northwestward , and within an environment of light wind shear and warm waters , it steadily strengthened to reach peak winds of 165 mph ( 265 km / h ) on September 11 . After fluctuating in intensity for four days , Isabel gradually weakened and made landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on September 18 . It quickly weakened over land and became extratropical over western Pennsylvania the next day . 
 On September 19 , Tropical Storm Isabel passed through extreme western Maryland , though its large circulation produced tropical storm force winds throughout the state . About 1 @.@ 24 million people lost power throughout the state . The worst of its effects came from its storm surge , which inundated areas along the coast and resulted in severe beach erosion . On the Eastern Shore , hundreds of buildings were damaged or destroyed , primarily in Queen Anne 's County from tidal flooding . Thousands of houses were affected in Central Maryland , with severe storm surge flooding reported in Baltimore and Annapolis . Washington , D.C. , sustained moderate damage , primarily from the winds . Throughout Maryland and Washington , damage totaled about $ 945 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 1 @.@ 22 billion 2016 USD ) , with only one fatality due to flooding . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 While Isabel was still over the western Atlantic Ocean as a Category 5 hurricane , forecasters predicted the storm would move northwestward and within five days be at a position 130 miles ( 210 km ) east @-@ southeast of Ocean City , Maryland as a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) major hurricane . By four days before Isabel made landfall , most computer models predicted Isabel to make landfall between North Carolina and New Jersey . On September 16 , about two days before the hurricane struck land , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch for the southern region of the Maryland coastline on the Chesapeake Bay . Later that day , a tropical storm watch was issued for the eastern Maryland coastline , which was upgraded to a tropical storm warning by about 24 hours before landfall . 
 Officials recommended the citizens on Smith Island to evacuate on the day prior to the hurricane making landfall , the only evacuations for the Eastern shore of Maryland . Mandatory evacuations were ordered for low @-@ lying and other specific areas in Calvert , St. Mary 's , and Charles counties , and the residents in six homes were asked to leave in Howard County . Officials recommended residents in flood areas of Baltimore County to evacuate , and some in the city of Baltimore left spontaneously due to flooding . Evacuation rates were low throughout the Maryland coastline , with the highest rate being in the southernmost counties on the western shore . The primary reason for people staying was due to the track of the hurricane . Between 20 % and 33 % of those who participated in an evacuation survey said they had concerns about being caught on roadways while trying to evacuate as the storm arrived , with similar numbers expressing concern about being able to return to their homes if they evacuated . Of those who left , most went to the house of a friend or family member , with two @-@ thirds to three @-@ fourths going to destinations in their own neighborhood or county . Most did not evacuate until the day before or the day of landfall . In most areas , the public response to the evacuation orders was normal to fast , with traffic during the evacuation described as light to normal . The most significant problems experienced during the evacuation were downed trees , inadequate signage , flooded roads , or stalled cars . In all , 3 @,@ 080 people evacuated their homes in preparation for Hurricane Isabel . Boats , trucks , and school buses helped more than 1 @,@ 000 people evacuate the Inner Harbor of Baltimore , as well . 
 Washington , D.C. , mayor , Anthony Williams , declared a state of emergency for the district . In Washington , preparations began several days prior to the arrival of the hurricane , including placing sandbags in flood @-@ prone areas . Many people , including non @-@ emergency government personnel , were told to stay home . Most people in the district took shelter by the time the hurricane passed through the area , and the streets across the city were largely empty . President George W. Bush along with Abdullah II of Jordan were evacuated from the city to the presidential retreat at Camp David . Most United States Congress representatives and members of the Department of Defense also left the city . Many buildings , including some federal , were shut down . All three airports in the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area were closed , with flights into the capital cancelled or diverted . Many train routes were canceled or delayed , and the Washington Metro and Metrobus systems were closed entirely . Workers at the National Zoo prepared by moving animals inside and lowering water levels . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Eastern Shore = = = 
 On the Eastern Shore of Maryland , Hurricane Isabel produced a storm surge peaking at 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) on the Chesapeake Bay in <unk> Island and 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 m ) on the Atlantic coast in Ocean City . The track of the hurricane to the west funneled into the bay and was so strong it negated the normal tide cycle in the bay . <unk> Beach recorded a record @-@ breaking high tide of 7 @.@ 91 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above mean low water . Rainfall in the Maryland portion of the Delmarva Peninsula reached 3 @.@ 2 inches ( 81 mm ) in Steeles Neck . The large circulation of the hurricane produced strong winds across the area , including maximum sustained winds of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) and a gust of 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) in Cambridge . 
 Tidal flooding from the storm surge forced residents to evacuate near the bay . Tidal flooding was reported in and around Rock Hall , Chestertown , Skinners Neck , Piney Neck , and Cliffs City , and was carried along the Chester River slightly inland . The flooding destroyed or damaged over 100 homes , vehicles , and boats , and also destroyed the Romancoke pier , one of the pre @-@ Bay Bridge ferry landings which was still in use as a fishing pier at the time . The flooding also severely damaged eleven marinas , three restaurants , four hotels , one boat @-@ building business , and one marine railway . In Queen Anne 's County , the hurricane destroyed 37 homes , greatly damaged 151 , and moderately damaged 192 , with damage totaling $ 37 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 47 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . The damage was mainly due to the tidal flooding , though four homes were destroyed due to falling trees . Moderate wind gusts knocked down numerous trees , tree limbs , and power lines , leaving about 65 @,@ 750 homes and businesses without power , half of which occurred in Cecil County . The resulting power outage was described as one of the worst in the history of <unk> Energy . Damage in the Eastern Shore of Maryland totaled about $ 50 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 64 @.@ 3 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Central Maryland = = = 
 Wind gusts in central Maryland peaked at 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) in Silver Spring , with a location along the Patuxent River recording sustained winds of 55 mph ( 88 km / h ) . Unofficially , rainfall reached 7 inches ( 178 mm ) in portions of Maryland , though the highest precipitation amount totaled 3 @.@ 21 inches ( 82 mm ) at the Baltimore @-@ Washington International Airport . Swells from the hurricane produced high storm surges along the Western Shore which peaked at 8 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) in Baltimore . Annapolis also reported a surge of 7 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) . In many locations , the storm surge was higher than the previous record set by the 1933 Chesapeake Potomac Hurricane . Throughout central Maryland , 472 buildings and homes were destroyed , with 3 @,@ 260 greatly damaged and another 3 @,@ 600 affected in general . Strong storm surge from the hurricane washed 43 @,@ 000 tons ( 39 @,@ 000 t ) of salt , millions of pounds of nitrogen and phosphorus , and millions of gallons of raw sewage into the Chesapeake Bay . One person died as a result of a traffic death in the state . Property damage totaled $ 530 @.@ 5 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 682 million 2016 USD ) , with an additional $ 190 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , ( $ 244 thousand 2016 USD ) in crop damage . The crop damage was primarily limited to minor damage to livestock buildings and sheds , though the winds destroyed a hay barn and a dairy barn at one farm in Frederick County . The United States Department of Agriculture estimated the winds of the hurricane destroyed 15 – 30 % of the field corn and 10 – 15 % of the soybean crop . Excess amounts of water led to the closure of many crab processing plants and crab house restaurants , and officials restricted harvest on shellfish for eleven days due to unsafe impurities in the water . 
 Most coastal areas under 10 feet ( 3 m ) above sea level experienced severe wave damage . The Maryland Geological Survey estimates the waves removed 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of sand along the coastline , based on an estimate of losses in Baltimore County . The 20 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 m2 ) of lost in single day represent about 15 % of the total beach loss in an average year . The average location lost about 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of beach , and throughout the Chesapeake Bay the erosion deposited about 81 @,@ 000 tons ( 73 @,@ 500 t ) of sediment into the bay . The erosion was irregular , however ; some locations were unaffected , while others experienced greater losses , despite that the two locations were similar . The erosion and storm surge damaged many bulkheads , and after the storm surge retreated into the bay it washed away freestanding structures . The passage of Isabel resulted in an unusual increase in phytoplankton in the middle portion of the Chesapeake Bay , followed by an abrupt return to normal conditions by early October . 
 = = = = Effects by county = = = = 
 Six foot ( 2 m ) waves along the coastline of Saint Mary 's County , with Point Lookout State Park suffering $ 3 million in damages ( 2003 USD , ( $ 4 @.@ 24 million 2016 USD ) . In the county , 2 @,@ 500 wharves and piers were destroyed , with another 1 @,@ 000 moderately damaged , resulting in $ 10 @.@ 25 million in monetary damage ( 2003 USD , ( $ 13 @.@ 2 million 2016 USD ) . The storm surge destroyed the bridge to Saint George Island by a few hours after the hurricane made landfall , and the flooding covered much of the island for a week . There , 20 homes were destroyed . Shore revetments experienced $ 53 @.@ 4 million in damage ( 2003 USD , ( $ 80 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . Throughout Saint Mary 's County , residential damage amounted to about $ 17 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 239 million 2016 USD ) with about $ 1 @.@ 5 million to commercial buildings ( 2003 USD , ( $ 1 @.@ 93 million 2016 USD ) . The damage was caused primarily by the storm surge , though the winds produced minor to moderate damage , the worst effects in the state from winds . In the county , the winds blew off the roof of a home and downed 70 trees , leaving 27 @,@ 092 without power . 
 In Charles County , the hurricane resulted in about $ 2 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 2 @.@ 57 million 2016 USD ) in damage to roads . Two homes were destroyed with several others damaged on Cobb Island . Elsewhere in the county , <unk> City , Port Tobacco , Woodland Point , Swan Point , and Morgantown also reported damage from Hurricane Isabel , with 52 houses damaged and eight homes destroyed or severely damaged . Seven businesses were also destroyed or greatly damaged . Many piers along the shore were damaged or lost , and two private community wells were contaminated . The winds downed several trees and power lines , leaving about 32 @,@ 000 people without power . Residential damage totaled $ 1 @.@ 1 million ( 2003 USD , $ 1 @.@ 2 million 2006 USD ) , with another $ 600 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , ( $ 772 thousand 2016 USD ) to commercial buildings . 
 Four to five foot ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) waves hit the eastern portion of Calvert County , causing a home to be knocked off its foundation in North Beach . The storm surge destroyed the pier and greatly damaged buildings along the shoreline at Solomons Island . Power was lost to 22 @,@ 400 residents as a result of the passage of the hurricane . 
 The storm surge produced higher than usual tides in along the Patuxent , Potomac , and Anacostia River coastlines . Much of the shoreline of Prince George 's County possessed adequate rise of terrain to prevent significant flooding , though the high waters closed three roads where the shoreline was not high enough . The passage of the hurricane created about 5 @,@ 000 tons ( 4 @,@ 500 t ) of debris to be removed . Fifteen buildings sustained major damage , with another 53 buildings affected to some degree . Nearly 200 @,@ 000 residents in the county lost power . When two of the largest sewage treatment plants in the state lost power , 96 million US gallons ( 360 @,@ 000 m3 ) of hazardous sewage overflowed to mix with storm water into two waterways in the county . The wastewater combined with rainwater , making it less threatening . No humans or animals were known to have become sick due to the overflows . 
 In Annapolis in Anne Arundel County , the storm surge surrounded many of the buildings at the United States Naval Academy , resulting in about $ 116 million in damage ( 2003 USD , ( $ 149 million 2016 USD ) The Annapolis Maritime Museum suffered severe damage as well , though volunteers moved artifacts to a safer location . There , the storm surge flooded the building in 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of water , causing great damage to the floor , drywall , and electricity . About 93 % of the 211 @,@ 000 power customers in the county were left without electricity after the storm . FEMA estimated a damage total of up to $ 500 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 643 million 2016 USD ) in the county . 
 Moderate wave action produced severe beach erosion along the shore of Baltimore County at a loss of $ 3 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 3 @.@ 86 million 2016 USD ) ) . Residential areas of Millers Island , Edgemere , North Point , Bowleys Quarters and Turners Station suffered severe damage from the hurricane , with over 400 people needing to be rescued . Over 300 buildings were destroyed . The storm surge flooding killed a man in Dundalk , and either destroyed or greatly damaged most marinas . Strong winds downed 118 trees on school grounds and hundreds of others elsewhere , some of which fell on power lines which resulted in leaving 220 @,@ 000 customers without power . The passage of Hurricane Isabel left 3 @,@ 189 tons ( 2 @,@ 893 t ) of debris across the county . 
 The storm surge flooded Fells Point and the Inner Harbor of Baltimore , causing millions of dollars of damage to waterfront properties . As the Inner Harbor began to flood , boat owners helped evacuate 35 people in flooded homes . Winds from Isabel destroyed at least three buildings in the city . The Baltimore Museum of Industry alone suffered $ 1 @.@ 5 million in damage ( 2003 USD , ( $ 1 @.@ 93 million 2016 USD ) . 70 @,@ 000 were left without power in the city . 
 In Harford County , high waves and the storm surge caused moderate flooding in areas , forcing 55 to evacuate along the Bush River and 12 to evacuate along the waterfront to Havre de Grace . The promenade boardwalk in Havre de Grace was destroyed . Moderate winds left 51 @,@ 600 residents in the county without power . Damage in the county totaled at least $ 12 @.@ 5 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 16 @.@ 1 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Western Maryland = = = 
 The center of Tropical Storm Isabel passed over Garrett County on September 19 , with its unusually large and powerful wind field producing 50 to 60 mph ( 80 to 95 km / h ) wind gusts across western Maryland . Some rainbands produced up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) gusts ( 113 km / h ) , and in some areas isolated streaks of damage were described as being caused by tornadoes . Rainfall varied between 2 and 4 inches ( 50 to 100 mm ) across the area , resulting in the Potomac River overflowing its banks . At Point of Rocks , the river crested at 23 @.@ 12 feet ( 7 m ) , 7 @.@ 12 feet ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) above flood stage . Moderate flooding occurred there , and minor flooding occurred in Paw Paw , West Virginia where the river crested at 2 @.@ 91 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) . The flooding closed a portion of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal . 
 The gusty winds from the passage of the hurricane resulted in widespread and extensive tree damage . Due to previous rainfall , moist grounds easily allowed for trees to be uprooted . Wind damage to structures was minor , however , with one house in Carroll County being damaged when a tree fell on it . Trees fell onto cars , roads , homes , and power lines , leaving 358 @,@ 000 without power after the storm . 600 traffic signals were without power in Montgomery County , and about 70 roads were closed due to fallen trees . Isabel destroyed 94 buildings and damaged 87 , including 33 homes , six of which were severely impacted with one losing a portion of its roof . Fallen trees injured two in Frederick County . In western Maryland , damage totaled $ 2 @.@ 07 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 2 @.@ 66 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Washington , D.C. = = = 
 In Washington , D.C. , sustained winds remained below tropical storm force , though gusts reached 71 mph ( 114 km / h ) as recorded by the National Academy of Science . Hurricane @-@ force winds existed several hundred feet in the air , with wind sensors on the top of tall buildings recording winds of 70 to 85 mph ( 115 to 135 km / h ) . Rainfall was minimal , amounting to around two inches across the district . A gauge on Wisconsin Avenue recorded a storm surge of 11 @.@ 3 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) , and a gauge on a pier in the southwest portion of the district recorded a storm surge of 10 @.@ 25 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 m ) . Both observations were records , surpassing the previous observation set by the 1933 Chesapeake Potomac Hurricane . 
 Moderate winds blew down about 1 @,@ 600 trees in the district , 23 of which fell onto houses . The United States National Arboretum lost many mature trees and azaleas on the bank of the Anacostia River . The winds also downed many power lines , leaving 129 @,@ 000 customers without power . Many streets were blocked by the fallen trees and power lines . At the White House , the winds downed one tree in the front garden , though there was no damage to the building itself . The storm surge resulted in flooding at the Washington Navy Yard . There , the marina was damaged , and some buildings and cars in low area garages were flooded . Five people were rescued from cars in flood waters during the storm , and several roads were closed due to the flooding . Throughout the district , the passage of Isabel created approximately 30 @,@ 000 pounds ( 13 @,@ 600 kg ) of debris . Damage in Washington , D.C. , totaled $ 125 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 161 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Power crews restored 75 % of the power outages in the Eastern Shore of Maryland by two days after the hurricane struck , and by one week after the hurricane the power was restored completely to the Eastern Shore . Buildings in Washington , D.C. , remained closed for two days after the hurricane . After the hurricane , several people in central and western Maryland were injured with three killed from carbon monoxide due to improperly running generators in their houses . Additionally , others were injured due to chain saws and cleaning up debris . In the days after the hurricane , the Calvert County Hospital reported an extra 130 patients per day . 
 The strong winds and storm surge of the hurricane dislodged and damaged a large number of home heating oil tanks , releasing thousands of gallons of oil onto yards and into the environment . The Maryland Department of the Environment and the United States Environmental Protection Agency worked together to recover more than 50 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 190 @,@ 000 L ) of oil from the tanks . Five hundred properties were contaminated by the oil , causing the Federal Emergency Management Agency to provide 75 % of the funding for cleaning the properties , with the government of Maryland providing for the remainder of the cost . 
 On September 19 , 2003 , President George W. Bush declared the entire state of Maryland as a disaster area , which allowed residents affected by the hurricane to apply for federal aid . FEMA officials urged residents and business owners with significant damage to call as soon as possible , while those with minimal damage were asked to wait for a few days . All residents in the state who received damage from the storm had sixty days to apply for assistance . Federal and state officials opened disaster recovery centers in Annapolis , Baltimore , Essex , and Prince Frederick five days after the hurricane passed through the area , with the centers designed to provide more information to those who applied for federal assistance . About six days after Isabel made landfall , additional disaster recovery centers opened in Rock Hall in Kent County , California in Saint Mary 's County , Silver Spring in Montgomery County , Chester in Queen Anne 's County , Crisfield in Somerset County , Cambridge in Dorchester County , and Easton in Talbot County . Around a month after the hurricane , officials placed some residents unable to live in their damaged homes into travel trailers because they had no options for alternate housing , such as staying with a relative or friend . 
 On September 26 , the affected residents began receiving housing assistance grants , totaling $ 4 @.@ 3 million in aid . By a month after the hurricane passed through the area , disaster aid amounted to just over $ 30 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 38 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . Ultimately , aid in the state totalled just under $ 100 million ( $ 129 million 2016 USD ) . Business owners applied for 14 @,@ 595 loans and received $ 53 @.@ 4 million ( $ 68 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) in low interest loans from the Small Business Administration . The state also received more than $ 16 @.@ 9 million in funds ( 2003 USD , ( $ 21 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) to rebuild infrastructure damaged by Isabel . 17 @,@ 855 residents applied to receive more than $ 20 @.@ 8 million ( $ 26 @.@ 8 million 2016 USD ) in housing assistance , and $ 8 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 10 @.@ 3 million 2016 USD ) in assistance for other needs such as personal property , transportation and medical expenses . 
 President Bush also declared Washington , D.C. , as a disaster area two days after Isabel passed through the area . The United States Department of Agriculture approved a request for an emergency food stamp program for two weeks for the city to ensure those who lost food as a result of the hurricane would not go hungry . By eight days after the hurricane , the Department of Employment Services created disaster unemployment benefits for those who lost their work as a direct result of Isabel . By 11 days after Isabel , the government approved $ 5 @.@ 21 million in disaster assistance ( 2003 USD , $ 6 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) . The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers delivered nearly 800 @,@ 000 pounds ( 363 @,@ 000 kg ) of dry ice to four distribution sites for use with cold food storage to areas in the District suffering from power outages . Various groups joined to provide more than 15 @,@ 000 meals for residents who lost stored food due to spoilage resulting from the power outages . Volunteers assisted in distributing 515 tons ( 467 t ) of ice , along with 21 @,@ 000 sandbags throughout the district . Officials opened two disaster recovery centers which moved through the neighborhoods of the district . Ultimately , nearly 1 @,@ 500 residents in the district applied for federal assistance , with FEMA providing the residents more than $ 600 @,@ 000 in aid ( 2003 USD , ( $ 772 thousand 2016 USD ) . 
 = February 1969 nor 'easter = 
 The February 1969 nor 'easter was a severe winter storm that affected the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England regions of the United States between February 8 and February 10 . The nor 'easter developed on February 8 , and as it moved towards the northeast , intensifying to become a powerful storm . The system dropped paralyzing snowfall , often exceeding 20 in ( 51 cm ) . New York City bore the brunt of the storm , suffering extensive disruption . Thousands of travelers became stranded on roads and in airports . Overall , at least 94 people lost their lives to the storm . Following the event , the mayor of New York , John Lindsay , was criticized for failing to respond to the snowstorm adequately . Some areas of the city remained uncleared for over a week after the storm , and city schools were closed for several days . 
 = = Synoptic history = = 
 An area of low pressure moved generally eastward from Oklahoma and produced heavy rains from Missouri to Ohio on February 8 . By February 9 , it had reached Kentucky . A new , secondary low pressure system formed over Georgia along the warm front associated with the primary low . As the secondary low matured along the U.S. East Coast , the initial center weakened rapidly , and heavy rainfall developed over the Carolinas in association with the new low . Mixed precipitation soon spread across the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , and heavy snow began to fall from New Jersey northward by 1200 UTC on February 9 . 
 The primary low dissipated , and the secondary low continued to intensify as it moved northeastward from the North Carolina coast to Long Island . Its forward motion slowed substantially , leading to increased precipitation totals over land . By 0000 UTC on February 10 , the storm deepened to 970 millibars , having strengthened 32 millibars in an 18 @-@ hour period . At 1200 UTC , it was situated off Cape Cod , still an intense cyclone . On February 11 , the storm moved out of the region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The storm produced paralyzing snowfall from New Jersey through most of New England . Forecasts severely underestimated the duration of the storm , often predicting just a chance of snow . The highest totals — often exceeding 42 in ( 110 cm ) — were reported in the Bangor , Maine area with Lewiston , Maine topping 32 in ( 81 cm ) . Lesser accumulations up to 20 in ( 51 cm ) — occurred in areas south to western Connecticut , Massachusetts , southern Vermont , northern Rhode Island , and eastern New Hampshire . Lighter snowfall extended as far south as central Virginia , and as far west as Indiana . The snow was accompanied by high winds , in some areas reaching 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . Heavy snow and gale warnings were declared across the region . Tides along the coast ran 2 to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal during the storm . 
 New York City was struck particularly hard by the storm . It is estimated that 42 people perished , and several hundred more people were injured . The storm disrupted the city for days , and forced schools to close . Streets throughout Queens became impassable ; mail service , buses , taxis , delivery vehicles , and trash collection were all disrupted . Thousands of motorists became trapped on the New York State Thruway . A snow emergency was issued in the city , and the Long Island Rail Road suspended all service at the time . The snowstorm left approximately 6 @,@ 000 travelers stranded at Kennedy Airport . They slept on chairs and floors . Over 1 @,@ 000 vehicles were stalled or abandoned on the Tappan Zee Bridge ; most of these were removed within a day . 
 Overall , at least 94 deaths were attributed to the storm . Throughout the region , the lack of delivery trucks also led to a shortage of food staples such as milk and bread . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , then @-@ mayor John Lindsay was criticized for not dealing with the snow adequately . Portions of the city remained unplowed a week after the nor 'easter , leading the mayor into " political misfortune " . Lindsay 's visit to Queens was poorly received , and his limousine had trouble driving through the streets of Rego Park . The mayor was booed by residents of Kew Gardens Hills . The storm became known as the " Lindsay <unk> " , and created a political crisis ; as a result , Lindsay lost the Republican primary for the next mayoral election . Lindsay was able to win the mayoral election by running on a third @-@ party ticket , but he was politically weakened by the crisis . 
 The storm also had an economic impact . The New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) and American Stock Exchange ( AMEX ) closed as a result of the storm . It was the first time in history that the NYSE closed for a full day due to the weather , and the first time since 1918 that AMEX had done so . All commodity exchanges in New York City and the National Association of Securities Dealers also closed . 
 = Voalavo gymnocaudus = 
 Voalavo gymnocaudus , also known as the northern voalavo , naked @-@ tailed voalavo , or just voalavo , is a rodent in the family Nesomyidae found in the highlands of northern Madagascar . Discovered in 1994 and formally described in 1998 , it is the type species of genus Voalavo ; its closest relative is Voalavo antsahabensis of the Central Highlands . DNA sequence data suggests it may be more closely related to Eliurus grandidieri than to other species of the closely related genus Eliurus . V. gymnocaudus is found at 1 @,@ 250 to 1 @,@ 950 m ( 4 @,@ 100 to 6 @,@ 400 ft ) above sea level in montane wet and dry forest in the Marojejy and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud massifs . Nocturnal and solitary , it lives mainly on the ground , but can climb , and probably eats plant matter . Despite a small range , it is classified as " Least Concern " because it lacks obvious threats and much of its range is within protected areas . 
 Voalavo gymnocaudus is a small , mouse @-@ like rodent with soft , gray fur which is only slightly darker above than below . The ears are short and rounded . The long tail appears mostly naked and lacks a distinct tuft , which is present in Eliurus . It differs from V. antsahabensis mainly in the values of some measurements . The skull is delicate , with a long , narrow rostrum ( front part ) , narrow interorbital region ( between the eyes ) , and no development of ridges on the braincase . The molars are relatively high @-@ crowned ( hypsodont ) . Body mass is 17 to 25 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 60 to 0 @.@ 90 oz ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The rodent fauna of the Northern Highlands of Madagascar remained almost totally unstudied until the 1990s . A 1994 survey of the Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud Reserve partially filled this gap and led to the discovery of two new species : Eliurus grandidieri ( genus Eliurus ) and Voalavo gymnocaudus , the first known and type species of the genus Voalavo . Both species were formally described in 1998 by Michael Carleton and Steven Goodman . The generic name , Voalavo , is a general Malagasy word for rodent , and the specific name , gymnocaudus , refers to the naked tail , which distinguishes V. gymnocaudus from the related tufted @-@ tailed rats ( Eliurus ) . In 2000 , the species was also recorded from the nearby Marojejy National Park . 
 Meanwhile , in 1999 , Sharon Jansa and colleagues published a molecular phylogenetic study of the Nesomyinae , the native Malagasy rodents , using the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b . Their results suggested that the current definitions of Eliurus and Voalavo may not be correct , because they found that V. gymnocaudus and E. grandidieri are more closely related to each other than to the remaining species of Eliurus . However , the DNA of Eliurus petteri , a possible close relative of E. grandidieri , could not be sampled , so Jansa and colleagues recommended further evaluation of the problem . According to a 2003 report , data from nuclear genes also support the relationship between V. gymnocaudus and E. grandidieri , but E. petteri remains genetically unstudied and the taxonomic issue has not been resolved . 
 A second species of Voalavo , Voalavo antsahabensis , was named in 2005 from central Madagascar . Morphological differences between the two are subtle but consistent , and the cytochrome b sequences of the two species differ by about 10 % . In mammals , closely related species regularly differ by less than 5 % in their cytochrome b sequences , and a divergence of more than 5 % within a single species suggests the presence of cryptic species . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = External morphology = = = 
 Voalavo gymnocaudus is a small , mouse @-@ like rodent . It differs from the very similar V. antsahabensis mainly in some measurements , such as a greater tail length . It also resembles small species of Eliurus , but the fur is darker and there is no tail tuft . The fur is soft , short , and thick , and appears dark gray on most of the upperparts , but more brownish on the sides . On the back , the cover hairs , which form the main part of the fur , are three @-@ colored : most of the hair is gray , followed by a narrow light buff band and a black tip . The longer guard hairs are black . The fur of the underparts is not different in overall color , but the individual hairs are gray for about three quarters of their length and white at the tips , except for those at the chin , which are white throughout . 
 The mystacial vibrissae ( whiskers on the upper lips ) reach the tips of the ears when pressed against the head . The short , rounded ears themselves are naked on the inside , but covered with short brown hairs on the outer surface . Females have three pairs of mammae . The digits and metapodials are mostly covered by white hairs . Short ungual tufts of hairs surrounding the bases of the claws are present . There are five pads on the forefeet and six on the hindfeet . On the hindfeet , the fifth digit is nearly as long as the middle three and the first ( the hallux ) is much shorter . The tail is longer than the head and body and appears naked for most of its length , but fine hairs are visible near the tip . Although the lower side is slightly lighter , there is no clear difference in coloration between the upper and lower sides . The skin of the tail is gray , and it is covered lightly by fine hairs that are dark brown over most of the length of the tail , but white near the tip . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 The skull is delicate and lightly built . The rostrum , the front part of the skull , is narrow and fairly long ; it is shorter in V. antsahabensis . The narrow zygomatic plate ( a plate on the side of the skull ) extends back to about the front of the first upper molar ( M1 ) . The zygomatic notch , a notch in the upper part of the zygomatic plate , is small . The zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) are narrow , but as usual in nesomyines contain a relatively long jugal bone . The interorbital region ( between the eyes ) is narrow and short and lacks accessory shelves and ridges . The braincase also lacks such ridges . 
 The incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) are medium in length , and do not reach the first molars . Their back margin is angular , not rounded as in V. antsahabensis . The diastema ( the gap between the upper incisors and molars ) is shorter than in V. antsahabensis . The bony palate is broad and lacks notable ridges and other features , except for a pair of foramina ( openings ) near the place where the first and second molars ( M1 and M2 ) meet . The back border of the palate is at the level of the middle of the third molars ( M3 ) . In the bony roof of the mesopterygoid fossa , the opening behind the palate , wide sphenopalatine vacuities ( openings ) are present . A thin alisphenoid strut ( a piece of bone on the lower side of the skull separating two foramina ) is present in specimens from Marojejy , but not in those from Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud . The tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , is reduced . 
 The root of the lower incisor is visible at the back of the mandible ( lower jaw ) as a slight protrusion ; a true capsular process is absent . There are 13 thoracic ( chest ) , 7 lumbar , 4 sacral , and 38 or 39 caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . The humerus ( upper arm bone ) lacks an entepicondylar foramen . 
 = = = Dentition = = = 
 The upper incisors are orthodont ( with their cutting edge perpendicular to the plane formed by the molars ) and have yellow to light orange enamel . On the lower incisor , the enamel contains series of fine ridges . The toothrows are longer than in V. antsahabensis . As in Eliurus , the molars are <unk> hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) and the individual cusps have lost their identities , having merged into transverse laminae that are not connected longitudinally . There are three laminae on each first and second molar , two on the third lower molar , and the laminae cannot be differentiated on the third upper molar . Although the first and second molars are similar to each other in size , the third ( upper and lower ) molars are conspicuously smaller . There are three roots below each upper and two below each lower molar . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Voalavo gymnocaudus has been found only in two massifs of the Northern Highlands , Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud and Marojejy , but may range more widely . At Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud , the species has been found in wet mountain forest at 1 @,@ 950 m ( 6 @,@ 400 ft ) , where it occurred with the indigenous rodents Eliurus majori and Nesomys rufus as well as the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) , and in drier forest at about 1 @,@ 300 m ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) , where it may live alongside other species of Eliurus and Gymnuromys roberti . The Marojejy records come from similar habitats at 1 @,@ 250 to 1 @,@ 875 m ( 4 @,@ 101 to 6 @,@ 152 ft ) above sea level . V. gymnocaudus probably largely lives on the ground , but is able to climb in vegetation . It likes areas with dense networks of roots , among which it moves using runways and natural tunnels . The species is nocturnal ( active during the night ) , is solitary , probably eats fruits and seeds , and bears up to three young per litter . A variety of parasitic arthropods have been recorded on V. gymnocaudus : mites from the families <unk> and <unk> ( both Marojejy and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud ) , the <unk> mite Demodex ( Marojejy only ) , the <unk> mite <unk> ( both Marojejy and Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud ) , and unidentified sucking lice ( Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud only ) . In 2007 , a <unk> mite found on V. gymnocaudus in Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud was described as a new species , Andreacarus voalavo . The <unk> parasite Eimeria has also been recorded in Anjanaharibe @-@ Sud V. gymnocaudus . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Although Voalavo gymnocaudus has a small range and is uncommon even within that range , no major threats are known and virtually all of its distribution is within protected areas . The species is therefore classified as " Least Concern " on the IUCN Red List . 
 = Candy Shop = 
 " Candy Shop " is the second single by rapper 50 Cent from his second commercial album , The Massacre ( 2005 ) . It features Olivia , and was written by 50 Cent . 
 " Candy Shop " peaked at # 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming 50 Cent 's third number one single and fifth top @-@ ten single . It received mixed reviews from critics , with some calling it a retread of 50 Cent 's collaboration with Lil ' Kim on " Magic Stick " ( 2003 ) . At the 2006 Grammy Awards , it was nominated for Best Rap Song , and at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , the music video was nominated for Best Male Video . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with XXL magazine , rapper Fat Joe claimed that he helped produce the track while working with producer Scott Storch . He stated : " I 'm pretty sure the world don 't know we actually produced Candy Shop together . I produced it with him ( Storch ) ... Scott called me like 50 times , 100 times : ' Yo , you sure you don 't want to use it ? 50 Cent called me . 50 Cent want it . ' I never had a problem with this dude . I was like , ' Go ahead . ' " When writing the song , 50 Cent stated : " I attempted to be as sexual as possible , from a male perspective , without being vulgar or obscene " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Candy Shop " is a mid @-@ tempo dancefloor track . The song was produced by Scott Storch , who took influence from Middle Eastern music . The track samples The <unk> Orchestra 's " Love Break " . The production was described by IGN as having a " Middle Eastern tinge " with synthesized strings that " unleash a darkly atonal whirl that sounds too much like something either Timbaland or The Neptunes or Mannie Fresh have concocted " . The Guardian wrote that the production contains " wan @-@ sounding imitations of the Neptunes ' sparse , breathy funk " . PopMatters described the bridge as being " relaxed yet faintly ominous " with 50 Cent and Olivia crooning : " Girl what we do ( what we do ) / And where we do ( and where we do ) / The things we do ( things we do ) / Are just between me and you ( oh yeah ) . " Rolling Stone noted the chorus for 50 Cent 's " amateur @-@ sounding tenor croon " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received mixed reviews from critics . PopMatters described it as " dripping with sexual energy and cool " and is " sexy as hell , but contains a pretty unmistakable edge of hostility , macho swagger , and thunderous chest thumping . " Entertainment Weekly wrote that it was an " appealing throwaway single " and lyrics such as " after you work up a sweat , you can play with the stick " are not seductions ; " they 're orders " . MusicOMH wrote that the chemistry between 50 Cent and Olivia " is almost as explicit as the lyrics ... the bass line is made for grinding to " . Author Ethan Brown , in a review of The Massacre , called the track " uninspiring " and " nearly identical " to his previous collaboration with Lil ' Kim on " Magic Stick " . He stated that 50 Cent seemed too content with his " hypersexual image " among other things and " not inspired enough to work beyond the same old attention @-@ getting schemes . " Pitchfork Media listed " Candy Shop " as a reprise of " Magic Stick " both " in beats and in timbre " , and Stylus magazine said it was " more of the same " as his previous collaboration . Billboard wrote that 50 Cent " shows little growth lyrically " with the song being " typical playa @-@ friendly fodder " . The song was nominated at the 2006 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Song , but lost to Kanye West 's " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Candy Shop " performed well in the United States , becoming 50 Cent 's third number one single , fifth solo top @-@ ten single , and seventh overall top @-@ ten single . The song debuted at # 53 on the Billboard Hot 100 . In its second week on the chart , the song jumped to # 30 . " Candy Shop " then jumped to # 8 in its third week . In its fourth week , the song charted at # 2 . It peaked at # 1 in its fifth week , where it remained for nine straight weeks . It remained on the chart for 23 weeks . The track reached number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , Hot Rap Tracks , and Rhythmic Top 40 charts . The song also did well on pop @-@ oriented charts , reaching # 2 on the Pop 100 and # 5 on the Top 40 Mainstream . " Candy Shop " was helped on the Hot 100 and Pop 100 by its strong digital downloads , peaking at # 1 on the Hot Digital Songs . The RIAA certified the track Platinum in 2006 . Across Europe , the song reached number one in Austria , Belgium , Germany , and Switzerland , and the top five in Ireland , Norway , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . In Australia , the track peaked at number three , was certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , and on the 2005 year @-@ end chart , it was listed at # 24 . It reached number two in New Zealand . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Jessy Terrero on January 11 – 12 , 2005 , and filmed in Hollywood , California . Due to rapper Trick Daddy 's music video for " Sugar ( Gimme Some ) " already having candy references , 50 Cent said , " we tried to do something a little different " and not follow the same route . The video features Olivia as the lead dancer and several models including <unk> Cartwright ( as a dominatrix ) , " Lyric " ( as a nurse ) , It features cameo appearances from Lil Scrappy , former WWE Diva and TNA Knockout Kristal Marshall , former Deal Or No Deal model Leyla Milani , G @-@ Unit member Lloyd Banks , and Young Buck . It was nominated for Best Male Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , but lost to Kanye West 's " Jesus Walks " . On February 2 , 2005 , the video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number nine and remained on the chart for 46 days . It also reached number one on the MuchMusic video charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK CD single # 1 
 " Candy Shop " - 3 : 31 
 " Disco Inferno " - 3 : 34 
 UK CD single # 2 
 " Candy Shop " - 3 : 34 
 " Candy Shop " ( Instrumental ) - 3 : 34 
 " Candy Shop " ( Ringtone ) - 0 : 38 
 " Candy Shop " ( Music Video ) - 3 : 34 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Dan Finnerty and The Dan Band famously covered the song in the record @-@ breaking box @-@ office smash The Hangover in 2009 . 
 In 2011 , German group The Baseballs released a rockabilly version of " Candy Shop " , which reached number 69 on the Austrian singles chart . " Weird Al " Yankovic included the song in his polka medley " Polkarama ! " from his 2006 album Straight Outta Lynwood . On the film Little Man Percy P made his own mixtape over it . Legendary folk artist Suzanne Vega sampled " Candy Shop " for her forthcoming 2014 release , " Tales from the Realm of the Queen of <unk> " . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Whitby = 
 Whitby is a seaside town , port and civil parish in the Borough of Scarborough and English county of North Yorkshire . It is located within the historic boundaries of the North Riding of Yorkshire . Situated on the east coast of Yorkshire at the mouth of the River Esk , Whitby has an established maritime , mineral and tourist heritage . Its East Cliff is home to the ruins of Whitby Abbey , where Cædmon , the earliest recognised English poet , lived . The fishing port developed during the Middle Ages , supporting important herring and whaling fleets , and was ( along with the nearby fishing village of Staithes ) where Captain Cook learned seamanship . 
 Tourism started in Whitby during the Georgian period and developed further on the arrival of the railway in 1839 . Its attraction as a tourist destination is enhanced by its proximity to the high ground of the North York Moors National Park , its Heritage Coastline and by its association with the horror novel Dracula . Jet and alum were mined locally . Whitby Jet , which was mined by the Romans and Victorians , became fashionable during the 19th century . 
 The earliest record of a permanent settlement is in 656 , when as <unk> it was the place where Oswy , the Christian king of Northumbria , founded the first abbey , under the abbess Hilda . The Synod of Whitby was held there in 664 . In 867 , the monastery was destroyed by Viking raiders . Another monastery was founded in 1078 . It was in this period that the town gained its current name , Whitby ( from " white settlement " in Old Norse ) . In the following centuries Whitby functioned as a fishing settlement until , in the 18th century , it developed as a port and centre for shipbuilding and whaling , the trade in locally mined alum , and the manufacture of Whitby jet jewellery . 
 The abbey ruin at the top of the East Cliff is the town 's oldest and most prominent landmark . Other significant features include the swing bridge , which crosses the River Esk and the harbour , which is sheltered by the grade II listed East and West piers . The town 's maritime heritage is commemorated by statues of Captain Cook and William Scoresby , as well as the whalebone arch that sits at the top of the West Cliff . The town also has a strong literary tradition and has featured in literary works , television and cinema , most famously in Bram Stoker 's novel Dracula . 
 While Whitby 's cultural and historical heritage contribute to the local economy , the town does suffer from the economic constraints of its remote location , ongoing changes in the fishing industry , relatively underdeveloped transport infrastructure , and limitations on available land and property . As a result , tourism and some forms of fishing remain the mainstay of its economy . It is the closest port to a proposed wind farm development in the North Sea , 47 miles ( 76 km ) from York and 22 miles ( 35 km ) from Middlesbrough . There are transport links to the rest of North Yorkshire and North East England , primarily through national rail links to Middlesbrough and road links to Teesside , via both the A171 and <unk> , and Scarborough by the former . 
 According to the 2011 UK census , the town had a population of 13 @,@ 213 , a decrease on the 2001 UK census figure of 13 @,@ 594 . 
 = = History = = 
 Whitby was called <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> @-@ <unk> in <unk> in records of the 7th and 8th centuries . <unk> , meaning the " habitation of priests " in Old Norse , is an 11th century name . Its name was recorded as <unk> and <unk> , meaning the " white settlement " in Old Norse , in the 12th century , <unk> in the 13th century and <unk> in the 14th century . 
 = = = Abbey = = = 
 A monastery was founded at <unk> in AD 657 by King Oswiu or Oswy of Northumbria , as an act of thanksgiving , after defeating Penda , the pagan king of Mercia . At its foundation , the abbey was an Anglo @-@ Saxon ' double monastery ' for men and women . Its first abbess , the royal princess Hild , was later venerated as a saint . The abbey became a centre of learning and here Cædmon the cowherd was " miraculously " transformed into an inspired poet whose poetry is an example of Anglo @-@ Saxon literature . The abbey became the leading royal nunnery of the kingdom of Deira , and the burial @-@ place of its royal family . The Synod of Whitby , in 664 , established the Roman date of Easter in Northumbria at the expense of the Celtic one . 
 The monastery was destroyed between 867 and 870 in a series of raids by Vikings from Denmark under their leaders <unk> and Ubba . Its site remained desolate for more than 200 years until after the Norman Conquest of 1066 . After the Conquest , the area was granted to William de Percy who , in 1078 donated land to found a Benedictine monastery dedicated to St Peter and St Hilda . William de Percy 's gift included land for the monastery , the town and port of Whitby and St Mary 's Church and dependent chapels at <unk> , Hawsker , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , five mills including Ruswarp , Hackness with two mills and two churches . In about 1128 Henry I granted the abbey burgage in Whitby and permission to hold a fair at the feast of St Hilda on 25 August . A second fair was held close to St. Hilda 's winter feast at Martinmas . Market rights were granted to the abbey and descended with the liberty . Whitby Abbey surrendered in December 1539 when Henry VIII dissolved the monasteries . 
 = = = Town = = = 
 In 1540 the town had between 20 and 30 houses and a population of about 200 . The burgesses , who had little independence under the abbey , tried to obtain self @-@ government after the dissolution of the monasteries . The king ordered Letters Patent to be drawn up granting their requests , but it was not implemented . In 1550 the Liberty of Whitby Strand , except for Hackness , was granted to the Earl of Warwick who in 1551 conveyed it to Sir John York and his wife Anne who sold the lease to the <unk> . In the reign of Elizabeth I , Whitby was a small fishing port . In 1635 the owners of the liberty governed the port and town where 24 burgesses had the privilege of buying and selling goods brought in by sea . <unk> tenure continued until 1837 , when by an Act of Parliament , government of the town was entrusted to a board of Improvement Commissioners , elected by the ratepayers . 
 At the end of the 16th century Thomas Chaloner visited alum works in the Papal States where he observed that the rock being processed was similar to that under his Guisborough estate . At that time alum was important for medicinal uses , in curing leather and for fixing dyed cloths and the Papal States and Spain maintained monopolies on its production and sale . Chaloner secretly brought workmen to develop the industry in Yorkshire , and alum was produced near Sandsend Ness 3 miles ( 5 km ) from Whitby in the reign of James I. Once the industry was established , imports were banned and although the methods in its production were laborious , England became self @-@ sufficient . Whitby grew significantly as a port as a result of the alum trade and by importing coal from the Durham coalfield to process it . 
 Whitby grew in size and wealth , extending its activities to include shipbuilding using local oak timber . In 1790 – 91 Whitby built 11 @,@ 754 tons of shipping , making it the third largest shipbuilder in England , after London and Newcastle . Taxes on imports entering the port raised money to improve and extend the town 's twin piers , improving the harbour and permitting further increases in trade . In 1753 the first whaling ship set sail to Greenland and by 1795 Whitby had become a major whaling port . The most successful year was 1814 when eight ships caught 172 whales , and the whaler , the Resolution 's catch produced 230 tons of oil . The carcases yielded 42 tons of whale bone used for ' stays ' which were used in the corsetry trade until changes in fashion made them redundant . Blubber was boiled to produce oil for use in lamps in four oil houses on the harbourside . Oil was used for street lighting until the spread of gas lighting reduced demand and the Whitby Whale Oil and Gas Company changed into the Whitby Coal and Gas Company . As the market for whale products fell , catches became too small to be economic and by 1831 only one whaling ship , the Phoenix , remained . 
 Whitby benefited from trade between the Newcastle coalfield and London , both by shipbuilding and supplying transport . In his youth the explorer James Cook learned his trade on colliers , shipping coal from the port . HMS Endeavour , the ship commanded by Cook on his voyage to Australia and New Zealand , was built in Whitby in 1764 by Tomas Fishburn as a coal carrier named Earl of Pembroke . She was bought by the Royal Navy 1768 , refitted and renamed . 
 Whitby developed as a spa town in Georgian times when three chalybeate springs were in demand for their medicinal and tonic qualities . Visitors were attracted to the town leading to the building of " lodging @-@ houses " and hotels particularly on the West Cliff . Then , in 1839 , the Whitby and Pickering Railway connecting Whitby to Pickering and eventually to York was built , and played a part in the town 's development as a tourism destination . George Hudson , who promoted the link to York , was responsible for the development of the Royal Crescent which was partly completed . For 12 years from 1847 , Robert Stephenson , son of George Stephenson , engineer to the Whitby and Pickering Railway , was the Conservative MP for the town promoted by Hudson as a fellow protectionist . 
 The black <unk> jet , the compressed remains of ancestors of the monkey @-@ puzzle tree , is found in the cliffs and on the moors and has been used since the Bronze Age to make beads . The Romans are known to have mined it in the area . In Victorian times jet was brought to Whitby by pack pony to be made into decorative items . It was at the peak of its popularity in the mid @-@ 19th century when it was favoured for mourning jewellery by Queen Victoria after the death of Prince Albert . 
 The advent of iron ships in the late 19th century and the development of port facilities on the River Tees led to the decline of smaller Yorkshire harbours . The Monks @-@ haven launched in 1871 was the last wooden ship built Whitby and a year later the harbour was silted up . 
 On 30 October 1914 , the hospital ship Rohilla was sunk , hitting the rocks within sight of shore just off Whitby at <unk> Bay . Of the 229 people on board , 85 lost their lives in the disaster ; most are buried in the churchyard at Whitby . In a raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 , the town was shelled by the German battlecruisers Von der Tann and Derfflinger . In the final assault on the Yorkshire coast the ships aimed their guns at the signal post on the end of the headland . Whitby Abbey sustained considerable damage in the attack which lasted ten minutes . The German squadron responsible for the strike escaped despite attempts made by the Royal Navy . 
 During the early 20th century the fishing fleet kept the harbour busy and few cargo boats used the port . It was revitalised as a result of a strike at Hull docks in 1955 when six ships were diverted and unloaded their cargoes on the fish quay . Endeavour Wharf , near the railway station , was opened in 1964 by the local council . The number of vessels using the port in 1972 was 291 , increased from 64 in 1964 . Timber , paper and chemicals are imported while exports include steel , furnace @-@ bricks and doors . The port is owned and managed by Scarborough Borough Council since the Harbour Commissioners relinquished responsibility in 1905 . 
 A marina was started in 1979 by dredging the upper harbour and laying pontoons . Light industry and car parks occupy the adjacent land . More pontoons were completed in 1991 and 1995 . The Whitby Marina Facilities Centre was opened in June 2010 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 By an Act of 1837 government of the town was entrusted to a board of Improvement Commissioners , elected by the ratepayers . A Local Board was formed in 1872 , and lasted until Whitby Urban District Council was formed under the Local Government Act 1894 . The townships of Whitby , Ruswarp and Hawsker @-@ cum @-@ <unk> were formed into a Parliamentary borough under the Reform Act of 1832 returning one member until the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 . 
 Since 1974 Whitby has been administered by Scarborough Borough Council , one of the seven district councils in North Yorkshire . For borough council purposes the town comprises three wards , Mayfield , <unk> and Whitby West Cliff . The borough council is a non @-@ metropolitan district , responsible for housing , planning , leisure and recreation , waste collection , environmental health and revenue collection . North Yorkshire County Council is a non @-@ metropolitan county providing education , transport , highways , fire , waste disposal , social and library services . At the lowest level of governance Whitby has a town council which , for election and administrative purposes , is divided into six electoral wards represented by 19 councillors responsible for burial grounds , allotments , play areas and street lighting . Elections to the town council are held every four years . 
 In the UK parliament the town is represented by a Conservative , Robert Goodwill , who was elected member for the Scarborough and Whitby constituency in 2010 . Whitby lies within the Yorkshire and the Humber constituency of the European Parliament , which in the May 2014 European Election elected three UKIP , two Labour and one Conservative MEPs . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Whitby is situated on the east coast of Yorkshire facing the North Sea in a deep valley at the mouth of the River Esk . It has been a bridging point since at least medieval times and several bridges have spanned the river . The current bridge , built in 1908 , is a swing bridge with a 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) span that separates the upper and lower harbours which have a total area of around 80 @.@ 1 acres ( 32 @.@ 40 ha ) . The houses are built of brick or stone , often with red <unk> roofs , in narrow , steep streets , on both sides of the river . 
 The town is surrounded on its landward sides by the moorland of the North York Moors National Park and the North Sea abuts it on the seaward side . The coastal areas are designated part of the North Yorkshire and Cleveland Heritage Coast . This stretch of coast , known as the ' Dinosaur Coast ' , the ' Fossil Coast ' or the ' Jurassic Coast ' , is around 35 miles ( 56 km ) long , stretching from Staithes in the north , to Flamborough in the East Riding of Yorkshire . At Whitby dinosaur footprints are visible on the beach . The rock strata contain fossils and organic remains including jet . Fossils include the petrified bones of an almost complete crocodile and a specimen of plesiosaurus measuring 15 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 72 m ) in length , and 8 feet 5 inches ( 2 @.@ 57 m ) in breadth was discovered in 1841 . Smaller fossils include ammonite , or " snake stones " from the alum shales and at Whitby Scar and <unk> in the lower beds of the lias strata . The <unk> genus of ammonite is named in honour of St. Hilda of Whitby . The Rotunda Museum in Scarborough has a comprehensive collection of fossils from the area . 
 The harbour and the mouth of the River Esk are on a geological fault . On the east side the cliff is tall , 187 feet ( 57 m ) , and consists of alternating layers of shale , sandstone and clay . On the west side the cliff is much lower and has a deep capping of boulder clay over a sandstone base making it less stable and liable to slippage . Both cliffs are being eroded quite rapidly . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The area generally has warm summers and relatively mild winters . Weather conditions vary from day to day as well as from season to season . Its latitude means that it is influenced by predominantly westerly winds with depressions and their associated fronts , bringing unsettled and windy weather particularly in winter . Between depressions there are often small mobile anticyclones that bring periods of fine weather . In winter anticyclones bring cold dry weather . In summer the anticyclones tend to bring dry settled conditions which can lead to drought . The two dominant influences on the climate of the Whitby area are shelter against the worst of the moist westerly winds provided by the North York Moors and the proximity of the North Sea . Late , chilly springs and warm summers are a feature of the area but there are often spells of fine autumn weather . Onshore winds in spring and early summer bring mists or low stratus clouds ( known locally as sea frets ) to the coast and moors . 
 On 5 January 2016 the town became " virtually cut off " after flash floods . North Yorkshire Police warned on the night of 4 January that the town was only accessible through one route by 4x4 vehicles . It urged motorists to use " extreme caution " and avoid the area unless " absolutely necessary " . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the 2011 UK census , Whitby parish had a population of 13 @,@ 213 living in 6 @,@ 097 households . In the 2001 UK census of the total number of 5 @,@ 973 homes 2 @,@ 034 were rented and 3 @,@ 939 were owner occupied . Of the 5 @,@ 506 economically active persons aged between 16 and 74 , 420 were unemployed . The number of people working in the service industry was 4 @,@ 113 . Approximately 2 @,@ 500 people were aged under 16 , 8 @,@ 400 were aged 16 – 64 , and 2 @,@ 700 aged 65 and over . The mean age of the population was 41 @.@ 78 years . The number of people who travel to work by motorised transport is 3 @,@ 134 but 2 @,@ 190 households have no cars or vans . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 Note : Between 1801 and 1925 Whitby comprised Whitby , Ruswarp and part of Hawsker civil parishes and ( between 1894 and 1925 ) <unk> civil parish , all of which were merged on 1 April 1925 into the current Whitby area . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In the three wards that make up the Whitby district of North Yorkshire , out of a population of 13 @,@ 596 there are 10 @,@ 286 who stated that their religion was Christian in the 2001 UK census . There were 19 Muslims , 17 Buddhists , 12 Jews , 3 Sikhs and 499 people had no religious affiliations . 
 St Mary 's Church is an ancient foundation , St Ninian 's opened in Baxtergate in 1778 and St John 's , also on Baxtergate , was consecrated in 1850 . St Michael 's was opened in 1856 and St Hilda 's on the West Cliff was built in 1885 . The Roman Catholic Church dedicated to St Hilda was built in 1867 on Baxtergate . There are places of worship for nonconformists including a United Reformed Church ; two Methodist chapels are no longer used . The Mission to Seafarers maintains a Christian ministry and has a chapel , reading room and recreational facilities . 
 The Bishop of Whitby is a suffragan bishop of the Church of England Diocese of York , in the Province of York . The town lies within the Central Vicariate of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Middlesbrough . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Tourism supported by fishing is the mainstay of Whitby 's economy in an isolated community with poor transport infrastructure and restricted by building constraints in the surrounding North York Moors National Park . The economy is governed by the changing fortunes of fishing , tourism and to some extent , manufacturing . Structural changes have led to concentrations of deprivation , unemployment and benefit dependence . A narrowing employment base and dependence on low wage and low skill sectors has resulted in younger age groups leaving the area . There are few business start @-@ ups and small and medium @-@ sized enterprises . Older people who make increasing demands on the area 's health and social care capacity have moved into the area . Demographic changes , Whitby 's relative isolation from the region 's main growth areas and decline in traditional employment sectors pose an economic challenge . 
 The town has a variety of self @-@ catering accommodation , holiday cottages , caravans and campsites , and guest houses , inns , bed & breakfast establishments and hotels . The jet industry declined at the end of the nineteenth century but eight shops sell jet jewellery , mainly as souvenirs to tourists . In 1996 , Whitby West Cliff qualified for a ' Tidy Britain Group Seaside Award ' . The town was awarded " Best Seaside Resort 2006 " , by Which ? Holiday magazine . 
 The harbour has a total area of about 80 acres ( 32 ha ) and is used by commercial , fishing and pleasure craft . Inshore fishing , particularly for crustaceans and line fish , takes place along the coast . Lobsters , brown and velvet crabs are important to the local fishery . From May to August , salmon is found in the Esk and small open boats are licensed to net these off the harbour entrance . There are around 40 licensed angling party boats . The commercial catch is no longer herring but has been replaced by cod , haddock , and other fish caught within 12 miles ( 19 km ) of the coast . A fish market on the quayside operates as need arises . The ready supply of fresh fish has resulted in an abundance of " <unk> " in the town , including the Magpie Cafe which Rick Stein has described as the best fish and chip shop in Britain . 
 The Whitby Marina project , jointly funded by Scarborough Borough Council , Yorkshire Forward and the European Regional Development Fund , was developed to diversify the local economy . The remaining shipbuilding firm , <unk> Marine , is a family @-@ run business on the east side of the river . Founded in 1988 , the boatyard has two berths for new build and a dry dock for repairs . St Hilda 's Business Centre provides office space for a range of businesses . Whitby Business Park is a 49 @-@ acre ( 20 ha ) site located by the A171 road , 2 miles ( 3 km ) from the harbour on the southern outskirts of the town . Companies on the park include Supreme Plastics , Whitby <unk> and Botham 's of Whitby alongside major retailers , Homebase and Sainsbury 's . 
 The east coast has limited conventional energy generation capacity , but Whitby is the closest port to a proposed development on Dogger Bank , ideally placed to provide the offshore wind power industry with support vessel operations and logistics . The Dogger Bank wind farm could include up to 2 @,@ 600 giant 400 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) turbines covering more than 3 @,@ 300 square miles ( 850 @,@ 000 ha ) . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Whitby is situated on the A171 road from Scarborough to Guisborough which originally passed over the swing bridge . A high level bridge over the Esk Valley was built in 1980 to avoid the bridge and ease congestion in the town centre . The <unk> accesses coastal towns to the north and the <unk> crosses the moors to Pickering . Whitby is served by the Yorkshire Coastliner bus line , operating from Leeds , Tadcaster , York , Scarborough , Bridlington , Pickering and Malton with connections beyond Yorkshire . Arriva runs bus services connecting Whitby to Scarborough and Middlesbrough . The nearest airport , about 45 miles ( 72 km ) from Whitby , is Durham Tees Valley Airport , which has a regular service from Amsterdam , Schiphol airport . 
 The town is served by Whitby railway station which is the terminus of the Esk Valley Line from Middlesbrough operated by Northern Rail . It was formerly the northern terminus of the Whitby , Pickering and York Line , and in 2007 the North Yorkshire Moors Railway began a summer service between Pickering and Whitby operated by steam locomotives . The Scarborough and Whitby Railway following a scenic route along the coast was built in 1885 requiring construction of the red brick <unk> Viaduct across the Esk Valley into Whitby . The line closed as a result of the Beeching axe in 1965 and the trackbed is used as a footpath , bridleway and by cyclists . The Whitby , Redcar and Middlesbrough Union Railway had a station at Whitby West Cliff and ran close to the cliffs to the north of the town . It opened in 1883 and closed in 1958 . 
 The coastal section of the 110 @-@ mile ( 180 km ) Cleveland Way National Trail passes through Whitby . 
 The Port of Whitby is strategically placed for shipping to Europe , especially Scandinavia , and is capable of handling cargoes of grain , steel products , timber and potash . Vessels of up to 3 @,@ 000 tonnes deadweight tonnage are received at the wharf , which can load or unload two ships simultaneously . As of 2004 54 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 000 m2 ) of dock space is used to store all @-@ weather cargo and there is a 17 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 600 m2 ) warehouse for weather @-@ critical cargoes . 
 = = Public services = = 
 A wide range of health care services is provided by Whitby Community Hospital , run by the Scarborough and North East Yorkshire Health Care NHS Trust . There are five general practitioners and five dentists in the area . Yorkshire Ambulance Service provides hospital transport throughout Yorkshire . 
 Whitby fire station , run by North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service , is crewed between 8 am and 6 pm . The town 's two police stations are provided by the North Yorkshire Police Authority . The lifeboat station built in 2007 , on the east bank , is operated by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution . The crew members are unpaid volunteers and the station has two lifeboats , an inshore D class lifeboat the OEM Stone III and an all @-@ weather Trent class lifeboat , the George and Mary Webb . 
 North Yorkshire County Council waste management services provide a household waste recycling centre at Whitby Industrial Estate , and operates an alternate weekly collection of household waste , whereby the type of waste collected alternates between recyclables and landfill waste . The water supply , predominantly from the River Esk , is treated at Ruswarp Water Treatment Works and distributed from there by Yorkshire Water who also deal with the town 's sewerage . CE Electric UK is responsible for delivering electricity and Northern Gas Networks supply piped gas . 
 = = Education = = 
 Whitby has a three tier school system , primary , middle ( 11 – 14 ) and Caedmon College ( 11 – 19 ) , which was formed in 2014 from the merger of Caedmon School ( 11 – 14 ) and Whitby Community College ( 14 – 19 ) . Eskdale School continues to operate as a middle school , but is currently consulting on raising its age range to 16 . 
 The primary schools are St Hilda 's Roman Catholic Primary School , <unk> Community Primary School , West Cliff Primary School , Airy Hill Community Primary School and East Whitby Community Primary School . North Yorkshire County Council provides education services . 
 The Whitby and District Fishing Industry Training School offers training for new entrants to the fishing industry and experienced fishermen . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The swing bridge spanning the Esk divides the upper and lower harbours and joins the east and west sides of the town . Whitby developed as an important bridging point of the River Esk and in 1351 permission was granted for tolls to be taken on the bridge for its maintenance . In 1609 a survey for a new bridge was commissioned while in 1628 it was described as a drawbridge where men raised planks to let vessels pass and tolls were collected . The bridge posts were rebuilt in stone at a cost of £ 3 @,@ 000 in 1766 . This structure was replaced by a four @-@ arched bridge between 1833 and 1835 , one arch made of cast iron <unk> to allow vessels to pass . This bridge was replaced between 1908 and 1909 by the current electric swing bridge . 
 The bridge allowed the town to spread onto the west bank , whilst the east bank , the <unk> , is dominated by St Mary 's Church and the ruins of Whitby Abbey which is owned by English Heritage . St Mary 's Church is a grade I listed building on the site of a Saxon church . The church 's ancient foundation dates from the 12th century . Over time it has been extensively altered and enlarged but retains several features including box pews . The East Cliff is quite a distance by road from the church , the alternative is to climb the 199 steps of the " Church Stairs " or use the footpath called " Caedmon 's <unk> " . The stone stairs , which replaced the original wooden steps , were built about 200 years old ago and renovated between 2005 and 2006 . There are landings to assist coffin bearers on their journey to the graveyard on the cliff top . 
 The harbour is sheltered by the grade II listed east and west piers each with a lighthouse and beacon . The west lighthouse , of 1831 , is the taller at 84 feet ( 25 @.@ 5 m ) and the east lighthouse , built in 1855 , is 54 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) high . On the west pier extension is a foghorn that sounds a blast every 30 seconds during fog . New lights were fitted to both the lighthouse towers and the beacons in 2011 . Whitby Lighthouse , operated by Trinity House , is located outside the town , to the south east , on Ling Hill . 
 On the West Cliff is a statue of Captain James Cook who served his apprenticeship in the town , and a whalebone arch , commemorates the whaling industry . It is the second such arch , the original is preserved in Whitby Archives Heritage Centre . By the inner harbour is a statue commemorating William Scoresby , designer of the crow 's nest . 
 On the outskirts of town to the west is the 19th @-@ century <unk> Castle built by James Wilson who sold his sugar plantation where he had over 200 slaves and moved to Whitby . Alongside it is St Hilda 's Priory , the mother house of the Order of the Holy Paraclete . The castle was used as a school and is now a conference centre and hotel in association with the priory . 
 = = Culture , media and sport = = 
 Frank Meadow Sutcliffe left a photographic record of the town , harbour , fishing and residents in late @-@ Victorian times . His most famous photograph entitled " Water Rats " was taken in 1886 . He became famous internationally as a great exponent of pictorial photography . He exhibited his work in Tokyo , Vienna , France , the USA and Great Britain winning over 60 gold , silver and bronze medals . He retired in 1922 and became curator of Whitby Museum . The Royal Photographic Society made him an honorary member in 1935 . A gallery of his work is located on <unk> . 
 Pannett Park was built on land purchased by a local philanthropist and politician Alderman Robert Pannett in 1902 . After his death in 1928 , the trust he set up created a public park and art gallery . In 1931 Whitby Museum was built behind the gallery by the Whitby Literary and Philosophical Society . It holds a collection of the archaeological and social history of jet and has on display a " Hand of Glory " . The Friends of Pannett Park , formed in 2005 , successfully bid for a Heritage Lottery Fund grant to refurbish the park . There has been a lifeboat in Whitby since 1802 and the old boathouse , built in 1895 and used until 1957 , is a museum displaying the Robert and Ellen Robson lifeboat , built in 1919 . 
 The ancient Penny Hedge ceremony is performed on the eve of Ascension Day commemorating a penance imposed by the abbot on miscreant hunters in the Middle Ages . The hunters using a knife costing a penny had to cut wood in <unk> and take it to Whitby harbour where it was made into a hedge that would survive three tides . This tradition is carried out annually on the east side of the upper harbour . 
 The Whitby Gazette was founded in 1854 by Ralph Horne , a local printer . The first issues were records of visitors and lodgings rather than a newspaper . The publication became a weekly newspaper in 1858 , with a short spell of being published twice weekly between 2000 and 2012 . Local radio stations are BBC Tees and Yorkshire Coast Radio . 
 The Pavilion Theatre built in the 1870s in West Cliff hosts a range of events during the summer months . For over four decades the town has hosted the Whitby Folk Week , and since 1993 the bi @-@ annual Whitby Goth Weekend for members of the Goth subculture . " Whitby Now " is an annual live music event featuring local bands in the Pavilion which has taken place since 1991 . Since 2008 , the Bram Stoker Film Festival has taken place in October . 
 Wind surfing , sailing and surfing take place off the beaches between Whitby and Sandsend and the area is visited by divers . Whitby has various sports facilities including the town cricket and football pitches and tennis courts . The Cleveland Way Long Distance Footpath follows the coast between Saltburn and Filey running along the developed frontage of Whitby . 
 The Whitby Regatta takes place annually over three days in August . The competition between three rowing clubs – Whitby Friendship ARC , Whitby Fishermen 's ARC and Scarborough ARC – forms the backbone of the weekend . The event has expanded to include a fair on the pier , demonstrations , fireworks and military displays – including the spectacle of the Red Arrows aerobatics display team of the Royal Air Force . 
 Whitby Town F.C. , formed in 1892 , is a semi @-@ professional football club which plays in the Northern Premier League at the 3 @,@ 200 capacity Turnbull Ground on <unk> Lane . Golfing facilities range from " pitch and putt " to Whitby Golf Club whose 18 @-@ hole golf course is situated on the cliff tops to the north west of the town . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The town has a strong literary tradition and can even be said that the earliest English literature comes from Whitby as Cædmon , the first known Anglo Saxon poet was a monk at the order that used Whitby Abbey during the abbacy of St. Hilda ( 657 – 680 ) . Part of Bram Stoker 's novel Dracula was set in Whitby , incorporating pieces of local folklore , including the beaching of the Russian ship Dmitri . Stoker discovered the name " Dracula " at the old public library . One scholar has suggested that Stoker chose Whitby as the site of Dracula 's first appearance in England because of the Synod of Whitby , given the novel 's preoccupation with timekeeping and calendar disputes . Elizabeth Gaskell set her novel Sylvia 's Lovers partly in the town which she visited in 1859 and Lewis Carroll stayed at 5 , East Terrace between July and September 1854 : his first publications may have been published in the Whitby Gazette . 
 Charles Dickens is known to have visited Whitby and in a letter of 1861 to his friend Wilkie Collins , who was at the time in Whitby , Dickens says : 
 In my time that curious railroad by the Whitby Moor was so much the more curious , that you were balanced against a counter @-@ weight of water , and that you did it like Blondin . But in these remote days the one inn of Whitby was up a back @-@ yard , and oyster @-@ shell grottoes were the only view from the best private room . 
 Wilkie Collins stayed in Whitby to work on his novel , No Name . He was accompanied by Caroline Graves , the inspiration for The Woman in White . Mary <unk> was born in a small house at Blackburn 's Yard in 1840 . She reached a wide readership when her second novel , Between the Heather and the Northern Sea , was published in 1884 . Her last novel For Pity 's Sake , was published posthumously in 1891 . James Russell Lowell , the American writer , visited Whitby while ambassador in London 1880 – 85 , staying at 3 Wellington Terrace , West Cliff . On his last visit in 1889 , he wrote : 
 This is my ninth year at Whitby and the place loses none of its charm for me . 
 G. P. Taylor , a former Church of England curate in Whitby , is now a celebrated author . His best @-@ selling book <unk> was set in Whitby . 
 The novel Possession : A Romance by A. S. Byatt set in the town was adapted into a 2002 feature film called Possession starring Gwyneth Paltrow . 
 A crime novel series by James Whitworth is set in Whitby . The first two novels are Death 's Disciple and The Eve of Murder . 
 A trilogy of young adult novels , The Whitby Witches , makes much of the town 's setting and history , embellishing local traditions whilst incorporating them into the narrative . The author , Robin Jarvis , recalls " The first time I visited Whitby , I stepped off the train and knew I was somewhere very special . It was a grey , drizzling day but that only added to the haunting beauty and lonely atmosphere of the place . Listening to Carmina Burana on my headphones , I explored the ruined abbey on the clifftop . The place was a fantastic inspiration . In the Whitby Witches I have interwoven many of the existing local legends , such as the frightening <unk> , whilst inventing a few of my own , most notably the <unk> . " 
 Other literary works referencing Whitby include : 
 Caedmon 's Song by Peter Robinson 
 The Hundred and Ninety Nine Steps by Michel Faber 
 The Resurrectionists by Kim Wilkins 
 Never the Bride , Something Borrowed , <unk> Rites , Hell 's Belles by Paul <unk> 
 = = Twin cities = = 
 Whitby is twinned with a number of towns across the globe . Most were either visited by Captain Cook in ships that were built in Whitby – and one was named after Whitby by settlers from England . 
 Anchorage , Alaska , United States 
 Porirua , New Zealand 
 Stanley , Falkland Islands 
 Whitby , Canada 
 Nukuʻalofa , Tonga 
 Kauai County , Hawaii , United States 
 <unk> , Germany 
 = Ike Davis = 
 Isaac Benjamin " Ike " Davis ( born March 22 , 1987 ) is an American professional baseball first baseman in the New York Yankees organization . From 2010 through 2015 , he played in MLB for the New York Mets , Pittsburgh Pirates and Oakland Athletics . 
 Davis led his high school team to three straight Arizona state championships as a pitcher / first baseman . As a hitter he batted .447 , while as a pitcher he recorded a 23 – 0 win – loss record , a 1 @.@ 85 earned run average ( ERA ) , and 14 saves . He also pitched for the gold medal @-@ winning U.S.A. Youth National Team in the 2003 World Youth Championships , and was the most valuable player of the 2004 <unk> All @-@ American High School Baseball Classic . Ranked second in the nation as a freshman for Arizona State University by both Baseball America and Collegiate Baseball , he was named Pac @-@ 10 Conference Freshman of the Year , as he became the first freshman ever to lead the conference in runs batted in ( RBIs ) . He hit .353 with a <unk> slugging percentage in college , threw a fastball that reached 94 miles per hour , and was a two @-@ time All @-@ American and a three @-@ time All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 selection . 
 Davis was drafted 18th overall in the first round of the 2008 MLB Draft . In the minor leagues , he batted .288 with a .371 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) , and a <unk> slugging percentage , and was the Mets 2009 Organizational Player of the Year . 
 The Mets called him up to the majors in April 2010 . His 11 home runs prior to the All @-@ Star break that season tied him for the second @-@ most ever by a Mets rookie . He set the Mets rookie record for total bases ( 230 ) , and tied the Mets rookie records for bases on balls ( 72 ) and extra @-@ base hits ( 53 ) . He was named the first baseman on Baseball America 's 2010 All @-@ Rookie Team . During a 2011 season shortened by an ankle injury , Davis batted .302 . In 2012 he batted .227 , but his 32 home runs were 5th @-@ best in the National League . In 2013 , he split his time between the Mets and AAA Las Vegas . He was traded to the Pirates in April 2014 , and traded to the Athletics after the season . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Davis was born in Edina , Minnesota , to Millie ( née <unk> ) Davis and former major league pitcher Ron Davis , who pitched in 481 games in the majors in his 11 @-@ year career . His father was a power relief pitcher , and an American League All @-@ Star in 1981 . He pitched from 1978 to 1988 , starting with the New York Yankees ( 1978 – 81 , going 27 – 10 with 22 saves , primarily as the setup man for Rich Gossage ) . He then pitched for the Minnesota Twins , Chicago Cubs , Los Angeles Dodgers , and San Francisco Giants . His father retired when he was 32 , however , so he mostly remembers old @-@ timers ' games , such as the one in which he met Derek Jeter when he was 12 . He and his father are the 197th father @-@ son combination to have both played in the major leagues . 
 Ike went to Cocopah Middle School and has a field there named after him . He took the baseball team to two straight state championships . He set a school record with 18 home runs in one season and 3 in one game . 
 Davis is Jewish . His mother , the youngest daughter of Bernard and Harriet <unk> , is Jewish , and his father is Baptist . Davis embraces both sides of his family ’ s history . His mother 's family was from Lithuania , and a significant portion of it was murdered in The Holocaust . 
 His great aunt on his mother ’ s side was a Holocaust survivor , and Davis said : " She was the one who knew everything that happened . She was able to come to the United States , and she brought the story with her . " Davis ' grandfather on his father ’ s side was a paratrooper in the United States Army who landed in France on D @-@ Day in 1944 , and later helped liberate one of the Nazi concentration camps . 
 Davis ' given names are Isaac and Benjamin ( after his mother 's two grandfathers ) . Although Davis does not practice Judaism and is non @-@ religious , he stated : " I am really proud of my Jewish heritage " and describes himself as " culturally Jewish . " He reflected : " It 's funny about Judaism ; It doesn ’ t matter if you 're ultra @-@ religious or not , as long as you know that it 's in you or you 're a part of it , everyone accepts you . " He often uses the Jewish greeting " shalom " . Davis states : " I 'm glad Jewish kids get to see they can grow up to be professional baseball players . " Davis followed four other players of Jewish heritage on the Mets : Art <unk> , Shawn Green , Scott Schoeneweis , and Josh Satin . 
 As a youth , he attended a five @-@ day baseball fundamentals camp that his father runs for children ages 5 – 14 . His father was also his little league coach until he was 14 . His father said : 
 People would say Ike was good because his dad was a player . But it 's not that easy .... I can tell Ike how to swing , I can teach him to pitch , [ teach ] the game of baseball , but he 's the only one to make it to the big leagues . You can 't teach heart and soul . That 's what it takes to play in the game . 
 = = High school = = 
 Davis attended Chaparral High School in Scottsdale , Arizona , where he won three state titles ( 2003 – 05 ) . His father would throw him batting practice . He hit .559 as a sophomore , the school record , ahead of Paul Konerko 's .558 in 1994 . He also hit a school @-@ record 23 doubles , breaking Konerko 's record of 18 . He followed that up by batting .425 as a junior ( when he was also Arizona 4A Pitcher of the Year ) , and .450 as a senior . As a senior , he had a 92 – 93 mph fastball , to complement his changeup and slider . He was ranked 12th in the country by Baseball America , and was a high school All @-@ American . 
 In 2003 , he also pitched for the U.S.A. Youth National Team ( 16 @-@ under ) in international play . They won the gold medal in the International Baseball Federation XI " AA " World Youth Championships in Taiwan . In 2004 , he played on the U.S.A. Junior National Team ( 18 @-@ under ) . In his two seasons playing for Team U.S.A. , he batted <unk> . 
 In 2004 , he was one of 40 players from across the country chosen to play in the <unk> All @-@ American High School Baseball Classic . He won the MVP Award for the game , hitting the go @-@ ahead home run for his team . The following year , he was MVP in the all star 2005 High School American Game . 
 By November 2004 , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Davis was already 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) and 194 pounds . In 2005 , despite his having indicated he was going to go to college , he was drafted in the 19th round by the Tampa Bay Devil Rays . He elected not to sign . 
 Davis graduated from high school with a .447 batting average in 320 at bats , with 48 doubles ( a school record , ahead of Konerko 's 44 ) , 12 home runs , and 106 runs batted in ( RBIs ) ( third in school history ) . As a pitcher he was a perfect 23 – 0 , with a 1 @.@ 85 ERA , 14 saves , and 213 strikeouts ( a school record ) in 174 innings . His teams were 95 – 8 over his sophomore , junior , and senior years . 
 = = College baseball career = = 
 = = = Freshman year ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Davis chose to attend Arizona State University ( ASU ) . In October 2005 , he was ranked the # 2 freshman in the nation by both Baseball America and Collegiate Baseball . He pitched ( as the team 's Friday night starter ; the role given the " ace " of a college rotation ) , was the designated hitter , and played first base and corner outfield . In March 2006 , he was named a Louisville Slugger National Player of the Week , Pac @-@ 10 Conference Player of the Week , and College Baseball Foundation National Honor Roll Player of the Week for a week in which he batted <unk> and drove in 13 runs , in four games . 
 In 2006 , with 65 RBIs in 227 at bats he became the first freshman ever to lead the Pac @-@ 10 in runs batted in during the regular season , and set the ASU freshman RBI record . Batting clean @-@ up , he hit .329 with 79 hits ( third all @-@ time , for an ASU freshman ) , 23 doubles ( tied for the Pac @-@ 10 lead , and tying the ASU record for doubles by a freshman ) , and a .542 slugging percentage in 58 games . His 9 home runs tied him with Bob Horner ( 1976 ) for third all @-@ time by a Sun Devil freshman , 2 behind Barry Bonds ( 11 , in 1983 ) . He was also the team 's opening day starter , and pitched a team @-@ high 12 starts . He was named a Collegiate Baseball Louisville Slugger Freshman All @-@ American , Rivals.com First @-@ Team Freshman All @-@ American , Baseball America Second @-@ Team Freshman All @-@ American , Jewish Sports Review First @-@ Team All @-@ American , American Baseball Coaches Association ( ABCA ) First @-@ Team All @-@ West Region , Pac @-@ 10 Freshman of the Year , and a member of the First @-@ Team All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 . 
 Davis spent the first part of the summer of 2006 with Team USA . He then played in 22 games for the Anchorage Bucs of the Alaska Baseball League , and was named the # 10 prospect in the league by Baseball America . 
 = = = Sophomore year ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Davis demonstrated his versatility in an April 2007 game . He came to the mound with his team trailing 5 – 4 , ended the inning by striking out a batter , and in the next half @-@ inning stole home as the lead runner in a triple steal . For his sophomore season , he primarily played right field ( batting .349 with 23 doubles — tied for the conference lead — and 61 RBIs , in 62 games ) and pitched as a middle reliever ( sporting a 1 @.@ 35 ERA ) . He again received First @-@ Team All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 honors , and was named a Collegiate Baseball Louisville Slugger Third Team All @-@ American , a National Collegiate Baseball Writers Association ( NCBWA ) Third @-@ Team All @-@ American , and again a Jewish Sports Review First @-@ Team All @-@ American . 
 In the summer of 2007 , he played for the Wareham <unk> in the Cape Cod League . A bone spur in his left wrist required surgery over the summer . 
 = = = Junior year ( 2008 ) = = = 
 He was named a pre @-@ season 2008 All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 outfielder by Rivals.com , and a pre @-@ season Third @-@ Team All @-@ American by both the NCBWA and Collegiate Baseball . In consecutive weeks in March 2008 he was named both the Louisville Slugger National Player of the Week and the Pac @-@ 10 Conference Player of the Week . In the first week he hit .450 and struck out all four batters he faced . In the second week he batted .529 with a 1 @.@ 412 slugging percentage , and recorded five outs from the mound , four by strikeout , without giving up a hit . He was the first Sun Devil to win the Pac @-@ 10 @-@ award in consecutive weeks since Travis Buck in 2004 . The College Baseball Foundation named him to its National All @-@ Star Lineup . 
 For his junior season , Davis hit .385 , with a <unk> on @-@ base percentage and a <unk> slugging percentage . He hit 23 doubles ( tied for the Pac @-@ 10 lead ) , 16 home runs , and 76 RBIs in 213 at bats over 52 games , while missing 10 games with a rib oblique muscle strain . He was 4 – 1 as a pitcher , with a 2 @.@ 25 ERA , 4 saves , 20 strikeouts in 24 innings against 4 walks , and hit 94 miles per hour on the radar gun . He also threw out four runners from right field . He was named ASU On Deck Circle Most Valuable Player ; prior winners included Dustin Pedroia , Willie Bloomquist , Paul Lo Duca , and Barry Bonds . He received First @-@ Team All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 honors for the third straight year . He was also named a First Team All @-@ American by Baseball America , Collegiate Baseball , the NCBWA , Rivals.com , and the ABCA . Four of his Sun Devils teammates that season went on to play in the major leagues : Brett Wallace , Jake Elmore , Jason Kipnis , and Mike Leake . 
 He hit .353 in his college career , with a <unk> slugging percentage ( 10th @-@ best in ASU history ) . He totaled 159 runs ( 8th @-@ best ) , 244 hits , 33 homers ( 5th ) , 69 doubles ( 2nd , behind Dustin Pedroia ) , and 202 RBIs ( 3rd ) . On the mound , he ended his college career as the Sun Devils closer , and totaled a 7 – 5 mark with 4 saves and 78 strikeouts in his career . Davis was also a part of two Pac @-@ 10 Championship teams , and went to the College World Series in 2007 . He was named to the ASU All @-@ Decade team . 
 Scouts felt he was at his best as a batter when he used the whole field . They noted that his bat speed allowed him to wait on pitches and drive them the other way , and that he was quick enough to catch up to good fastballs . Mark <unk> of ESPN observed : " The bigger the game , the better he plays . " 
 = = Minor leagues ( 2008 – 10 , 2013 ) = = 
