 = = Construction and career = = 
 Fortune , the 23rd ship of that name in the Royal Navy , was laid down by John Brown & Company at their Clydebank shipyard on 27 July 1933 . She was launched on 29 August 1934 and completed on 27 April 1935 . The ship cost 247 @,@ 564 pounds , excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament . Fortune was initially assigned to the 6th Destroyer Flotilla ( DF ) of the Home Fleet , but detached to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1937 to enforce the arms embargo imposed on both sides in the Spanish Civil War by the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . The 6th DF was renumbered the 8th Destroyer Flotilla in April 1939 , five months before the start of World War II . 
 After a pair of fishing trawlers were sunk by a submarine off the Hebrides after the start of World War II in September 1939 , the 6th and 8th DFs were ordered to sweep the area on 19 September . The following day , Fortune and three of her sister ships sank the German submarine U @-@ 27 and then resumed their normal escort duties . In February 1940 , she was one of the escorts for Convoy TC 3 carrying troops from Canada to the UK . In the following month , while escorting units of the Home Fleet north @-@ west of the Shetlands on 20 March , she was credited with sinking U @-@ 44 , although later research suggests that the submarine was destroyed in a minefield which had been laid by other British destroyers on 13 March . 
 During the Norwegian Campaign , Fortune played a minor role escorting the oiler RFA War Pindari to Namsos on 15 April . On 25 April , she ferried part of the 2nd Battalion , the South Wales Borderers to Bogen and <unk> . A few days later the ship escorted the aircraft carriers Ark Royal and Glorious and the battleship Valiant off the coast of Norway . In early May , she escorted two cruisers ferrying troops to occupy Iceland . In August , Fortune was briefly transferred to the 4th DF and on 10 August , the ship rescued survivors from the torpedoed armed merchant cruiser Transylvania . Later in the month , she escorted a convoy to Gibraltar and was transferred to Force H on the 28th . 
 = = = Force H , 1940 – 41 = = = 
 During Operation Hats , the ship escorted Force H while the carriers Argus and Ark Royal flew off fighter aircraft for Malta and conducted an airstrike on Cagliari on 2 August . On 13 September , Force H rendezvoused with a convoy that was carrying troops intended to capture Dakar from the Vichy French . Ten days later , they attacked Dakar where Fortune sank the French submarine Ajax on the 24th , rescuing 76 of the crew . In November , the ship escorted the carriers during Operations Coat and White as they flew off fighters for Malta and attacked the airfield at Elmas , Sardinia . During the former operation , Fortune was detached and escorted Force F to Malta , streaming her TSDS gear at the head of the convoy to serve as a fast minesweeper . 
 In early January 1941 , she participated in Operation Excess . Three months later , Fortune and four other destroyers escorted the light cruiser HMS Sheffield , the battlecruiser Renown , and Ark Royal in Operation Winch , which delivered a dozen Hurricane fighters to Malta . Beginning on 24 April , Fortune and Force H covered Argus flying off more Hurricanes as well as the destroyers of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla sailing to Malta in Operation Dunlop . In early May she was part of the destroyer screen with five other destroyers for the battleship Queen Elizabeth , and the light cruisers Naiad , Fiji and Gloucester which were joining the Mediterranean Fleet . This was part of Operation Tiger which included a supply convoy taking tanks to the Middle East and the transfer of warships . Fortune and her sisters had their TSDS gear deployed en route to Malta . Despite this , one merchant ship was sunk by mines and another damaged . During the return voyage on 10 May , the ship was badly damaged by 250 @-@ kilogram ( 550 lb ) bomb that detonated nearby . The shockwave ruptured the hull , knocked out her engines , slightly bent her propeller shafts , and caused a lot of flooding . Her crew jettisoned nearly 18 @,@ 000 pounds ( 8 @,@ 200 kg ) of topweight and she was able to reach a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) en route to Gibraltar for temporary repairs . Fortune then sailed to Chatham Royal Dockyard for permanent repairs that lasted until November . 
 Although she returned to Gibraltar that same month , the ship did not become fully operational and mechanical problems restricted her to local duties until February 1942 . On the 9th of that month , Fortune escorted the light cruiser Cleopatra to Malta and then escorted her and a convoy including the transport MV Breconshire to Alexandria , Egypt where they arrived on the 17th . She was transferred to the 2nd DF of the Eastern Fleet and arrived at Trincomalee , Ceylon on 7 March . Admiral James Somerville , commander of the fleet , assigned her to screen the slow ships of Force B as he organised his forces in anticipation of the Japanese Indian Ocean Raid . On 4 April , the ship rescued 88 survivors from the torpedoed freighter MV <unk> . Fortune returned to the Mediterranean to participate in Operation Vigorous , a convoy from Alexandria to Malta , in June . After the ship returned to the Indian Ocean , she was assigned to the 12th DF and escorted the carrier Illustrious when that ship supported operations on Madagascar in September . Fortune spent the rest of the year and the first part of 1943 escorting convoys in the Indian Ocean until she was sent home in February for conversion into an escort destroyer . 
 = = = HMCS Saskatchewan = = = 
 Upon completion of the conversion , the ship was transferred to the RCN on 31 May , renamed Saskatchewan , and then gifted to Canada on 15 June 1943 . She was assigned to Escort Group C3 , of the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force , as the " Senior Officer 's " ship , which was based in Londonderry Port . The ship remained with the group until she was transferred to the 12th Escort Group in May 1944 where she later patrolled the western entrance to the English Channel after the Normandy landings to protect shipping from German attacks . 
 Together with the destroyers Qu 'Appelle , Skeena , and Restigouche , Saskatchewan attacked three German patrol boats off Brest on the night of 5 – 6 July , with sinking the German patrol boat <unk> . Sasketchewan was lightly damaged and suffered one man dead and four wounded . The ship was sent to Canada for a refit and arrived at Halifax on 6 August . She began her refit at Shelburne , Nova Scotia which lasted until November . More work was required at St. John 's , Newfoundland and Sasketchewan did not return to Britain until January 1945 . 
 Upon her arrival , she was assigned first to the 14th Escort Group and then the 11th Escort Group . With the end of the war on 9 May , the ship ferried Canadian troops back home , arriving on 30 May . She made four voyages between St John 's and Quebec City before being declared surplus on 23 September , although the ship was not paid off until 28 January 1946 at Sydney , Nova Scotia . Sasketchewan was sold later that year to the International Iron & Metal Co. for scrap . 
 = = Ship 's bell = = 
 The ship 's bell of Saskatchewan is currently at the Vancouver Island Military Museum in Nanaimo , British Columbia . The Christening Bells Project at Canadian Forces Base Esquimalt Naval and Military Museum includes information from the ship 's bell of Saskatchewan , which was used for baptism of babies onboard ship . 
 = The Well @-@ Worn Lock = 
 " ' The Well @-@ Worn Lock " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on December 20 , 1996 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter , and directed by Ralph Hemecker . " The Well @-@ Worn Lock " featured guest appearances by Paul Dooley and Lenore <unk> . 
 Clinical social worker Catherine Black ( Megan Gallagher ) aids a family as they come to terms with the incestuous abuse they have suffered for decades . However , the father who is responsible still commands respect and political connections in the area , making the case a difficult one . 
 " The Well @-@ Worn Lock " is the third of seven Millennium episodes written by Carter . Hemecker would return to direct an episode in each of the show 's seasons . The episode opens with a quote from Robert Louis Stevenson , and features several actors who would reappear in unrelated roles in both Millennium and its sister series The X @-@ Files . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Madison Park , Seattle , a family are gathered around the television . The mother leaves to go to bed , and the atmosphere in the room grows tense . The older of two sisters , Connie Bangs ( Michelle Joyner ) takes her sister Sara — who is clearly much younger than she is — to her bedroom and locks her in , warning her not to let her father inside . Connie runs out of the house , fighting off her father , and is later found wandering the streets confused . She is taken to clinical social worker Catherine Black ( Megan Gallagher ) , and admits that her father has been sexually abusing her for years . 
 However , given the length of time the abuse has been going on , Connie is afraid no one will believe her . The assistant district attorney assigned to the case , Rhonda <unk> ( Christine Dunford ) agrees , believing the case to be weak . Child Protective Services cannot remove Sara from the household until Connie undergoes a psychiatric evaluation , although Black and police lieutenant Bob Bletcher ( Bill Smitrovich ) investigate the Bangs home to check up on the girl . The father , Joe Bangs ( Paul Dooley ) , chases them off as his wife watches <unk> . Bangs wields a degree of political clout in the community , and pressures the district attorney 's office to drop the case . <unk> is furious with Black over the matter , until it is discovered from Connie 's medical exams that Sara is not her sister , but her daughter . 
 Black is later woken in her office by her husband Frank ( Lance Henriksen ) . She had fallen asleep there while trying to find a legal precedent to remove Sara from the Bangs home . Catherine visits Connie , who is staying with another sister , Ruthie ( Lenore <unk> ) . Ruthie also reveals that their father had abused her , until she was sectioned following mental breakdown . Black is worried that Connie might be persuaded by her mother to drop the case . 
 Joe Bangs finds himself unable to have the case dropped , but Bletcher still feels that Black 's pursuit of it may end up costing her her job . However , Black knows she is doing the right thing and is determined to continue . Her fears for Sara are confirmed when it is discovered she and the elder Bangs have gone missing . Frank , an offender profiler , deduces that Bangs ' controlling personality would cause him to take his daughter somewhere he knows , and realizes that they will be in the family 's holiday cabin in the woods . A police manhunt begins , and Bangs is arrested without Sara coming to harm . 
 The case against Bangs is presented before a grand jury , and Black is afraid that Connie will be too afraid to testify . However , she manages to reveal the truth of her abuse to the court . Later , she is seen with the lock from her bedroom door — which had previously been used by her father to lock them both inside — which she throws into a river . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Well @-@ Worn Lock " was the first of three Millennium episodes directed by Ralph Hemecker . Hemecker would later helm the second season 's " The Curse of Frank Black " , and the third season episode " Exegesis " . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter . Beyond creating the concept for Millennium , Carter would write a total of six other episodes for the series in addition to " The Well @-@ Worn Lock " — three in the first season , and a further three in the third season . 
 Several of the actors in this episode have made other appearances in Millennium or series related to it . Michelle Joyner , who played abuse victim Connie Bangs , would later appear on Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , starring in the seventh season episode " Chimera " . Guest star J. Douglas Stewart , who portrays Larry Bangs , later appeared in the second season episode " Monster " in an unrelated role . Fellow guest Sheila Moore , who played Clea Bangs , had previously made two appearances on The X @-@ Files , in the episodes " Deep Throat " and " Excelsis Dei " . 
 The episode opens with a quotation by Robert Louis Stevenson — " The cruelest lies are often told in silence " . The line is taken from <unk> <unk> , and Other Papers , an 1881 collection of essays . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Well @-@ Worn Lock " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on December 20 , 1996 , and earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 8 , meaning that roughly 6 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned into the episode . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five , noting that it " turns the complex into something easy and obvious " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the character of Sara Bangs was " treated as an object by the episode " , and that Carter 's script " takes a very real issue and <unk> it " by presenting such an " open and shut case " . However , they noted that the episode was " very well acted " , and was " clearly well intentioned " . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B + , noting that it " tries some interesting things with the Millennium template " . VanDerWerff felt that several of the episode 's scenes " are as horrifying as anything I 've seen on TV " , adding that " they accomplish much of this through the mere power of suggestion " . However , he also noted that the character of Joe Bangs was too simplistic , claiming that he is " so damned blatant about what he does that it eventually stops being horrifying and becomes preposterous " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 , finding that its focus on legal issues and counselling " fragments the tone and atmosphere " built by previous episodes . However , Gibron felt that " Carter 's script handles the horrifying subject very well " . 
 = Lena Rivers ( 1910 film ) = 
 Lena Rivers is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows a young woman who leaves home to search for employment and becoming married to a wealthy man , but the marriage is kept secret . The husband is arrested by mistake and by the time he is freed , his wife and child depart and he believes them dead . The young woman entrusts her baby , Lena , to her mother before her death . At age 16 , Lena goes to the city is visited by her father , but the relationship is only known when he sees a picture of her mother in her locket . The film was an adaptation of Mary Jane Holmes ' 1856 novel Lena Rivers and was released on August 12 , 1910 . It had a wide national release and received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from August 13 , 1910 . It states : " At the opening of the play , Granny Nichols ' only daughter is leaving the farm to go to the city in search of employment . We next find her in the city , married to a wealthy man who has forbidden her to make their marriage public as he is afraid his family will object . One day , after a year of happy married life , the husband leaves his wife and baby daughter to go downtown on business . Through a case of mistaken identity , he is arrested , and before he can prove his innocence , to the satisfaction of the police , his wife - believing him to have deserted her - takes her baby and returns to her mother . The husband , upon regaining his freedom and returning home , finds only a note from his wife saying that he will never see her or the baby again . He mourns his loved ones as dead , thinking that his wife left him contemplating the death of herself and her child . The mother and child return to the farm and there , with her dying breath , the mother entrusts baby Lena to the care of Granny Nichols . Here , on the farm , Lena grows to womanhood never knowing her father 's name . When Lena is 16 her Uncle John decides to take his mother to live with him in the city . Granny refuses to leave without Lena , so she also moves to Uncle John 's home . In the meantime , Lena 's father is a frequent visitor to the home of Uncle John , whom he little thinks is any relation to his dead wife . Here he meets Lena , and <unk> a locket containing the picture of her mother , which she wears around her neck , recognizes her as his daughter . Not only this but lucky Lena is enabled to marry the man she loves . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Violet Heming 
 Anna Rosemond 
 Frank H. Crane 
 = = Production = = 
 The story for the production is an adaptation of Mary Jane Holmes ' 1856 novel Lena Rivers . The novel was very popular and reprinted numerous times by 1900 . According to The Atlanta Constitution , the theater stage productions had recently been adapted for the old work in June 1910 . Though newspapers records show the appearance of a stage adaptation by winter 1906 . The writer of the adapted scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The Thanhouser Company adaptation is the first film adaptation of the book . 
 The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Though the roles of the leading players are unknown , it is likely that numerous other character roles and persons appeared in the film . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . The cast includes both leading ladies of the company , Anna Rosemond and Violet Heming . The other known credit , Frank H. Crane was a leading male actor of the company . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on August 12 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with theater advertisements appearing in Pennsylvania , Minnesota , Washington D. C. , Washington state , and North Carolina . Some advertisements were ambiguous in whether or not the picture of the play was being performed , as one Bell Theatre advertisement shows . 
 The one reel format was very restrictive in terms of allowing complex plots to be told while still being showing action in the production . The release of St. Elmo in March 22 , 1910 was the first adaptation and second film to be released by the Thanhouser Company . The film was reviewed by critics to be too reliant on the use of inter @-@ titles to tell the story . The company 's adaptation of The Winter 's Tale would require foreknowledge of the plot to understand the film , but some theaters employed aids to inform the audience of such productions By the adaptation of Uncle Tom 's Cabin the coherency in the story was praised by critics , but this story was both popular and well @-@ known subject . The Moving Picture World review provides specific insight to the Thanhouser adaptation 's ability to convey the story to audiences : " To those who have read Lena Rivers with pleasure the picture will be more than ordinarily entertaining . To those who have not read the story the film presents a narrative not without its interest in offering a quarter hour 's diversion well worthwhile . " The New York Dramatic Mirror would commend the picture for its acting and also confirm the adaptations coherency , " The well @-@ known novel is adapted for a film story with considerable success in this picture . The story is clear and not too complicated , although the film covers all the essential points of the written story . " 
 = Blue 's Clues = 
 Blue 's Clues was an American children 's television series that premiered on Nickelodeon in 1996 . Producers Angela Santomero , Todd Kessler and Traci Paige Johnson combined concepts from child development and early @-@ childhood education with innovative animation and production techniques that helped their viewers learn . It was hosted originally by Steve Burns , who left in 2002 to pursue a music career , and was replaced by Donovan Patton . The show follows an animated blue @-@ spotted dog named Blue as she plays a game with the host and the viewers . Blue 's Clues became the highest @-@ rated show for preschoolers on American commercial television and was critical to Nickelodeon 's growth . It has been called " one of the most successful , critically acclaimed , and ground @-@ breaking preschool television series of all time . " A spin @-@ off called Blue 's Room premiered in 2004 . 
 The show 's producers and creators presented material in a narrative format instead of the more traditional magazine format , used repetition to reinforce its curriculum , and structured every episode the same way . They used research about child development and young children 's viewing habits that had been conducted in the thirty years since the debut of Sesame Street in the U.S. , and revolutionized the genre by inviting their viewers ' involvement . Research was part of the creative and decision @-@ making process in the production of the show and was integrated into all aspects and stages of the creative process . Blue 's Clues was the first cutout animation series for preschoolers and resembles a storybook in its use of primary colors and its simple construction paper shapes of familiar objects with varied colors and textures . Its home @-@ based setting is familiar to American children but has a look unlike other children 's TV shows . A live production of Blue 's Clues , which used many of the production innovations developed by the show 's creators , toured the U.S. starting in 1999 . As of 2002 , over 2 million people had attended over 1 @,@ 000 performances . 
 By 2002 , Blue 's Clues had received several awards for excellence in children 's programming , educational software , and licensing , and had been nominated for nine Emmy Awards . It has been syndicated in 120 countries and translated into 15 languages . Regional versions of the show featuring local hosts have been produced in other countries . It was one of the first preschool shows to incorporate American Sign Language into its content . The show 's extensive use of research in its development and production process inspired several research studies that have provided evidence for its effectiveness as a learning tool . 
 = = History = = 
 Blue 's Clues was developed during a transitional period for children 's television . In 1990 , Congress had passed the Children 's Television Act , which required networks and TV stations to devote a portion of their programming to children 's shows , but the legislation did not specify how many hours of programming broadcasters were required to air . It set no guidelines or criteria for educational programs and had no provisions for enforcement . According to author Diane Tracy in her 2002 book Blue 's Clues for Success , " The state of children 's television was pretty dismal . " Since the late 1960s , PBS was one of the few sources for children 's educational television programming in the U.S. , and most other U.S. children 's TV shows were violent and created for the purpose of selling toys . The Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) ruled in 1997 that the commercial broadcast networks had to air educational children 's programs for a minimum of three hours per week . The cable network Nickelodeon , which had been airing programs for six- to twelve @-@ year @-@ olds , was not legally bound by this legislation but complied with it anyway many years before the laws and regulations were passed . 
 Nickelodeon assigned a team of producers to create a new U.S. television program for young children in mid @-@ 1994 using research on early childhood education and the viewing habits of preschoolers . These producers , who were made up of the " green creative team " of Angela Santomero , Todd Kessler and Traci Paige Johnson , met at Nickelodeon Studios for a month to develop Blue 's Clues . Kessler , Santomero and Johnson , according to Tracy , did not have the traditional backgrounds of most producers of children 's programs but " did possess an amazing combination of talents , backgrounds and personal attributes " . Researcher Daniel R. Anderson of the University of Massachusetts Amherst , who had also worked on Sesame Street , was an adviser for the new show . The character Blue was originally conceived as a cat , and the name of the show was to be " Blue 's Prints , " but the show 's name was changed and Blue became a dog because Nickelodeon was already producing a show about a cat . Kessler handled the show 's production , Santomero the research , and Johnson the animation and design . They were given a modest $ 150 @,@ 000 to produce a pilot . 
 Blue 's Clues premiered in the U.S. on September 8 , 1996 . It was a smash hit , largely due to the producers ' extensive research , and became crucial to Nickelodeon 's growth . Within 18 months of its premiere , Blue 's Clues was as well @-@ known as more established children 's shows such as the 30 @-@ year @-@ old Sesame Street . It became the highest @-@ rated show for preschoolers on commercial television . By 2002 , 13 @.@ 7 million viewers tuned in each week . 
 In 2004 , a spin @-@ off , Blue 's Room , was launched . It featured puppets instead of animation as well as the original show 's second host , Joe , in several episodes . Blue 's Clues celebrated its 10 @-@ year anniversary in 2006 with a DVD that consisted of a 12 @-@ minute retrospective produced by VH1 's " Behind the Music " staff and a collection of " milestone " episodes , including first host Steve Burns ' 2002 departure . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The most important casting decision was that of the host , the only human character in the show . The host 's role was to empower and challenge the show 's young viewers , to help increase their self @-@ esteem , and to strongly connect with them through the television screen . The producers originally wanted a female host , but after months of research and over 1 @,@ 000 auditions , they hired actor / performer Steve Burns based on the strength of his audition . Burns received the strongest and most enthusiastic response in tests with preschoolers . Johnson said that what made Burns a great children 's TV host was that " he didn 't want to be a children 's host ... He loved kids , but he didn 't want to make a career out of it . " Burns remained on Blue 's Clues for seven years and was in over 100 episodes before he left to pursue a musical career in 2002 . Burns himself stated , " I knew I wasn 't gonna be doing children 's television all my life , mostly because I refused to lose my hair on a kid 's TV show , and it was <unk> ' — fast . " 
 Accompanied by a " concentrated multiplatform promotional campaign " that included articles in Nickelodeon 's magazine and on its webpage , an arc of three episodes introduced Burns ' replacement Donovan Patton , who played Steve 's brother Joe . Patton was subjected to the same kind of scrutiny to earn the job , and was selected out of 1 @,@ 500 auditions . Patton had never seen Blue 's Clues before he auditioned for the part but , like Burns , was the favorite with preschool test audiences . Burns helped train Patton to perform the role . " We saw Steve Burns ' retirement from the show as a chance to put Blue 's Clues on a new course , " Johnson said . Also , according to Johnson , Joe 's character was more like a preschooler and more innocent than Steve . 
 Johnson was cast as Blue 's voice because , of the show 's crew , she was able to sound the most like a dog . Nick Balaban , who wrote the music for the show along with Michael Rubin , was cast as the voice of Mr. Salt . Balaban initially used a Brooklyn accent for Mr. Salt before settling on a French accent . Rubin also provided the voice of Mailbox . 
 = = Format = = 
 In The Tipping Point , author Malcolm Gladwell called the show " sticky , " and described its format : 
 Steve , the host , presents the audience with a puzzle involving Blue , the animated dog ... To help the audience unlock the puzzle , Blue leaves behind a series of clues , which are objects marked with one of her paw prints . In between the discovery of the clues , Steve plays a series of games — mini @-@ puzzles — with the audience that are thematically related to the overall puzzle ... As the show unfolds , Steve and Blue move from one animated set to another , jumping through magical doorways , leading viewers on a journey of discovery , until , at the end of the story , Steve returns to the living room . There , at the climax of the show , he sits down in a comfortable chair to think — a chair known , of course , in the literal world of Blue 's Clues , as the Thinking Chair . He puzzles over Blue 's three clues and attempts to come up with the answer . 
 Nickelodeon researcher Daniel R. Anderson called the structure of Blue 's Clues a game that presented its viewers with increasingly challenging and developmentally appropriate problems to solve . Early episodes focused on basic subjects such as colors and numbers , but later the programs focused on math , physics , anatomy and astronomy . The show 's producers believed that comprehension and attention were strongly connected , so they wrote the episodes to encourage and increase their viewers ' attention . They used content and production characteristics such as pacing which gave children time to respond , as well as " camera techniques , children 's voices , musical cues , sound effects , clear transitions , repeatable dialogue , and visuals . " Participation , in the form of spoken or physical response from the audience , and the mastery of thinking skills were encouraged by the use of repetition , both within the structure of individual episodes and across multiple episodes . The producers used a variety of formal features , which were auditory , and content features , which consisted of invitations given to the audience , such as " Will you help ? " The features were also in the form of both recurrent and unique formats and content . The purpose of the recurrent formats and content , which were similar in every episode , was to increase viewers ' attention , comprehension , and participation during key educational lessons . 
 Nickelodeon originally aired the same episode daily for five days before showing the next one . The producers believed this telecast strategy empowered young children by giving them many opportunities to master the content and problems presented to them . 
 = = Educational goals = = 
 The creators ' and producers ' goals were to " empower , challenge , and build the self @-@ esteem of preschoolers " while entertaining them . Kessler , Santomero and Johnson were influenced by Sesame Street , the first children 's television program to utilize a detailed and comprehensive educational curriculum developed from research . " We wanted to learn from Sesame Street and take it one step further , " Santomero said . Like Sesame Street , formative research which the producers called their " secret sauce , " was used during all aspects of the creative and decision @-@ making process during the production of Blue 's Clues . In addition to a curriculum that emphasized reasoning skills relevant to preschoolers ' everyday lives , the producers wanted to include audience participation , called by Variety its " call and response style , " that encouraged mastery of the information presented , positive reinforcement , and prosocial messages . In their first brainstorming sessions in 1994 , Santomero , Kessler and Johnson decided to promote mastery rather than rote learning or memorizing , make sure that their viewers knew the answers to the puzzles with which they were presented , and include elements of surprise and play . By 2001 , the show 's research team consisted of head researcher Alice Wilder , Alison Sherman , Karen Leavitt , and Koshi Dhingra . The research team and creators worked collaboratively . 
 Unlike Sesame Street , which tested a third of its episodes , the Blue 's Clues research team field tested every episode three times with children aged between two to six in preschool environments such as Head Start programs , public schools , and private day care centers . There were three phases of testing : content evaluation , video evaluations , and content analysis . In their tests of the pilot , conducted throughout the New York City area with over 100 children aged from three to seven , the show was " immediately successful . " They found that as the pilot progressed , children 's attention was not only captured and sustained , but they became excited and actively participated with what they saw , to the point that they stood up to get closer to the television and spoke back to the host . The producers and researchers also consulted outside advisers , who were chosen based on their expertise and the needs of each script . As Anderson stated , the formative research team served " as a liaison between the feedback provided by the preschoolers and outside advisers and the production team , including writers , talent , producers , directors , element artists , and animators . " 
 Twenty years worth of research had showed that television , a " cultural artifact " accessible to most American children , could be a " powerful educational agent . " The show was designed and produced on the assumption that , since children are cognitively active when they watch television , a show could be an effective method of scientific education for young children by telling stories through pictures and by modeling behavior and learning . The creators and producers used film techniques to present information from multiple perspectives in many " real world " contexts , or situations within the daily experiences of young children . They wanted to provide their viewers with more " authentic learning opportunities " by placing problem @-@ solving tasks within the stories they told , by slowly increasing the difficulty of these tasks , and by inviting their involvement . These learning opportunities included the use of mnemonics in the form of mantras and songs , and what Tracy called " <unk> wrap @-@ up " at the end of each episode , in which the lessons were summarized and rehearsed . The producers wanted to foster their audience 's sense of empowerment by eliciting their assistance for the show 's host and by encouraging their identification with the character Blue , who served as a stand @-@ in for the typical preschooler . 
 Sesame Street was designed around the prevailing view that preschoolers had short attention spans , so its curriculum was a magazine @-@ like format in which each episode was made up of a variety of segments . Based on research conducted over the 30 years since the launch of Sesame Street by theorists like Anderson , the producers of Blue 's Clues wanted to develop a show that took advantage of children 's intellectual and behavioral activity when watching television . Previous children 's television programs presented their content with little input from their viewers , but Blue 's Clues was one of the first children 's shows to actively invite its viewers ' involvement . Its creators believed that if children were more involved in what they were viewing , they would attend to its content longer than previously expected — for up to a half hour — and learn more . They also dropped the magazine format for a more traditional narrative format . As Variety magazine stated , " ... The choice for Blue 's Clues became to tell one story , beginning to end , camera moving left @-@ to @-@ right like reading a storybook , transitions from scene to scene as obvious as the turning of a page . " Every episode of Blue 's Clues was structured in this way . 
 The pace of Blue 's Clues was deliberate , and its material was presented clearly . Similar to Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood , which also inspired the producers , this was done was in the use of pauses that were " long enough to give the youngest time to think , short enough for the oldest not to get bored . " The length of the pauses , which was estimated from formative research , gave children enough time to process the information and solve the problem . After pausing , child voice @-@ overs provided the answers so that they were given to children who had not come up with the solution and helped encourage viewer participation . Researcher Alisha M. Crawley and her colleagues stated that the show was " unique in making overt involvement a systematic research @-@ based design element . " In 2002 , the success of Blue 's Clues inspired the producers of Sesame Street to change its format and add more interactive segments . Blue 's Clues also differed from Sesame Street by not using cultural references or humor aimed at adults , as this could confuse preschoolers , but instead made the show literal , which the producers felt would better hold the children 's attention . The structure of each episode was repetitive , designed to provide preschoolers with comfort and predictability . 
 = = Production = = 
 Blue 's Clues was set in the home — the environment that was most familiar and secure for preschoolers — and looked like no other children 's television show . Each episode was in development , from idea development to final production , for approximately one year . Writers created a goal sheet , which identified their objectives based on the show 's curriculum and audience needs . Script drafts , once developed and approved by the show 's creators and research team , were tested at public and private schools , day care centers , preschools , and Head Start programs by three researchers , who would narrate the story in the form of a storybook and take notes about the children 's responses . The writers and creators revised the scripts based on this feedback . A rough video , in which the host performed from the revised script in front of a blue screen with no animation , was filmed and retested . The script was revised based on the audiences ' responses , tested a third time with animation and music added , and incorporated into future productions . 
 Most of the show 's production was done in @-@ house , rather than by outside companies as was customary for children 's TV shows . The show 's creators understood that the look and visual design of the show would be integral to children 's attachment with it . Johnson expanded on the " cut @-@ out " style she had created during her college years . Blue 's Clues was the first animated series for preschoolers that utilized simple cut @-@ out construction paper shapes of familiar objects with a wide variety of colors and textures , resembling a storybook . Johnson also used primary colors and organized each room of the home setting into groups . The green @-@ striped shirt worn by the show 's original host , Steve , was inspired by Fruit Stripe gum . The goals were to make the show look natural and simplistic ; as Tracy put it , " freshly cut and glued together with a vivid array of textures , colors , and shadows " similar to picture book illustrations . The music , produced by composer Michael Rubin and pianist Nick Balaban , was simple , had a natural sound , and exposed children to a wide variety of genres and instruments . According to Tracy , the music empowered children and gave the show " a sense of playfulness , a sense of joy , and a sense of the fantastic " . Rubin and Balaban encouraged the musicians who performed for the show to improvise . 
 The host performed each episode in front of a " blue screen " , with animation added later . The show 's digital design department combined high @-@ tech and low @-@ tech methods by creating and photographing three @-@ dimensional objects , then cutting them out and placing them into the background . This made the objects look more real and added perspective and depth . Their animation technique was at that time a new technology . Johnson hired artist Dave Palmer and production company Big Pink to create the animation from simple materials like fabric , paper , or pipe @-@ cleaners , and scan them into a Macintosh computer so that they could be animated using inexpensive computer software such as Media 100 , <unk> , Photoshop and After Effects , instead of being repeatedly redrawn as in traditional animation . The result was something that looked different from anything else on television at the time , and the producers were able to animate two episodes in eight weeks , as compared to the sixteen weeks necessary to create a single episode by traditional methods . Their process looked like traditional cut @-@ out animation , but was faster , more flexible , and less expensive , and it allowed them to make changes based on feedback from test audiences . Unlike traditional animation environments , which tended to be highly structured , the animators were given information about the characters and goals of the scenes they would animate , and then given the freedom to work out the timing and look of each scene themselves , as long as their creations were true to the characters and to the story . By 1999 , the show 's animation department consisted of Palmer , 20 animators , 11 digital designers , and 5 art directors and model makers . By 2002 , Nickelodeon had built a " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art " $ 6 million digital animation studio that housed 140 people , including 70 animators . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ratings for Blue 's Clues were high during its first season , and it was Nickelodeon 's most popular preschool program . It has been described as the first commercial television show for preschoolers that was both educational and profitable . Its creators met regularly with businesses that developed Blue 's Clues merchandise and products to ensure that toys that were educational and met " the same high ... standards as the show . " Products , like the show , were heavily tested prior to marketing . Blue 's Clues had sold almost 40 million units of its 45 VHS and DVD titles by 1998 and generated over $ 1 billion in product licensing in 2000 . More than ten million Blue 's Clues books were in print by 2001 and over three million copies of six CD @-@ ROM titles based on the show had been sold . Seven Blue 's Clues titles sold at least 1 million copies each . The show 's first direct @-@ to @-@ video production was Blue 's Big Musical Movie ( 2000 ) , featuring Ray Charles and The Persuasions ; it received mostly positive reviews and has sold over 3 million copies since 2006 . The launch of Blue 's Clues products at FAO Schwarz 's flagship store in New York City was the most successful product launch in the store 's history and was attended by over 7 @,@ 000 people . By 2002 , Blue 's Clues had received several awards for children 's programming , educational software , and licensing and been nominated for nine Emmy Awards . It also won a Peabody Award in 2001 . 
 Starting in 1999 , a live production of Blue 's Clues toured the U.S. to positive reviews . Johnson compared the show 's audience participation with that of The Rocky Horror Picture Show . As of 2002 , over 2 million people had attended over 1 @,@ 000 performances . The creators of the TV show were involved in all aspects of the live show , aiming to translate the bond between the TV show 's audience and its cast to the stage and to provide young audiences with their first theatrical experience . The creators chose Jonathan Hochwald as the live show 's producer , <unk> Hoppe as its director , and Dave Gallo as its set designer . Neither Hoppe nor Gallo had any previous experience in children 's theater . Nick Balaban and Michael Rubin , who wrote the music for the TV show , composed the live show 's soundtrack . The producers were concerned with children 's response to the host , who was played by Tom <unk> ( a different actor than the host of the TV show ) , but his young audience enthusiastically accepted and embraced him . Actors were encouraged to improvise and respond to the audience , which resulted in changes throughout the show 's run . The show 's script included humor that both children and their parents could enjoy . 
 Regional versions of the show , featuring native hosts , have been produced in other countries . It was a big hit in the United Kingdom ( hosted by Kevin Duala ) , became part of pop culture in Korea , was syndicated in 120 countries , and was translated into 15 languages . In 2000 , it became one of the first preschool shows to incorporate American Sign Language into its content , with between five and ten signs used consistently in each episode . Blue 's Clues won an award from the Greater Los Angeles Agency on <unk> ( <unk> ) for promoting deaf awareness in the media . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The show 's extensive use of research in its development and production process inspired several studies that provided evidence for its effectiveness as a learning tool . Field tests showed that the attention and comprehension of young viewers increased with each repeat viewing . In 1999 , Anderson and a team of researchers , some of which were his colleagues at Nickelodeon , studied how episode repetition affected comprehension , audience participation , and visual attention . The researchers tested whether repeated viewings of the show resulted in mastery over the material presented , or whether viewers would habituate or become bored . They discovered that audience participation was lower for the first few viewings , because children paid more attention to unfamiliar material , and because it was more cognitively demanding to understand and solve the problems presented . After five viewings , more of the viewers ' cognitive resources were available for interaction and participation , so they answered more questions . Episode repetition seemed to empower viewers , as shown in their enthusiastic efforts to solve the problems presented to them . Repetition , which the researchers called " an inexpensive tool to maximize comprehension , " improved comprehension , held children 's attention , and increased audience participation . Children were not only tolerant of repetition , they were " positively enthusiastic " about it . Nielsen ratings of the show 's first season , when the same episode was shown daily , were flat over the five @-@ day period , which indicated to Anderson that young children did not tire of its repetition or of its complexity over time . Anderson and Crawley felt that the telecast strategy helped increase the show 's ratings and called it a success . 
 In 2000 , another team of researchers , including Anderson , Crawley , and other Nickelodeon colleagues , studied whether experienced Blue 's Clues viewers interacted more with the show than less @-@ frequent viewers and whether regular viewers of the show interacted more with other shows than did children who were not . They found that when the content of a program was new and challenging , children paid more attention , and when it was familiar , either from previous viewings or in a format they recognized , they instead interacted more . In short , they found that " interaction in Blue 's Clues to some extent reflects mastery . " A similar study , also conducted in 2000 by many of the same researchers , found that experienced Blue 's Clues viewers interacted more with other educational programs than did inexperienced viewers , which proved that watching Blue 's Clues changed the way children watch television . Researcher Shalom M. Fisch , however , stated that although the show attempted to be " participatory , " it could not truly be so , because unlike interactive computer games , the viewers ' responses could not change or influence what occurred on @-@ screen . 
 Jennings Bryant conducted a two @-@ year longitudinal study of the effects of Blue 's Clues at the University of Alabama in 2001 to ascertain whether or not the show 's curriculum goals were achieved . He compared regular viewers and non @-@ viewers and found that the show 's episode repetition strategy improved children 's comprehension while holding their attention and increasing their participation , which suggested that watching Blue 's Clues increased children 's learning and social interactions . At the end of the study , regular viewers outperformed the non @-@ viewers , solving problems more successfully and systematically . Anderson stated , " Given the program 's large audience , it appears that the program is not only doing well , but it is also doing good . " 
 In 2002 , Crawley , Anderson , and their colleagues conducted another study on the effects of Blue 's Clues , this time researching whether more experienced viewers mastered the content and cognitive challenges faster and easier than first @-@ time viewers . They surmised that experienced viewers would comprehend and interact more with the recurring and familiar segments of the show designed to aid comprehension , but they found that familiarity with the structure of an individual episode did not provide experienced viewers with an advantage over the inexperienced viewers . Crawley and Anderson also studied whether experienced viewers of Blue 's Clues interacted more with other children 's TV shows and whether the viewing behaviors they learned from Blue 's Clues could be transferred to other shows . They found that although experienced viewers of Blue 's Clues interacted with an episode of another series , they did not spend more time watching it than viewers unfamiliar with the show . The researchers stated , " It is apparent that , although preschoolers learn to enthusiastically engage in overt audience participation , they do not , by and large , have a <unk> understanding of why they do so . " The 2002 studies demonstrated that experience with watching one TV series affects how children watch other programs , especially in the way they interact with them . They also showed that since children are selective in the material they attend to and that their interaction increases with comprehension and mastery , children tend to pay more attention to novel information and interact more with material they have seen before and mastered . The researchers predicted that since shows like Blue 's Clues help children feel empowered to learn , it could have long @-@ term effects in motivating children to learn and provide them with a lifelong love of learning . 
 Erin Ryan and her colleagues performed a 2009 study on the effect of the use of American Sign Language ( ASL ) in Blue 's Clues episodes . They analyzed 16 episodes over two weeks for the content and frequency of the signs used and found a high incidence of ASL usage by various characters , but that it was inconsistent , especially in the connection between English words and their corresponding signs . The purpose of signed communication and its connection with ASL and the Deaf community was not clearly explained , either . The researchers speculated that hearing children with no previous ASL exposure would be familiarized with ASL and the deaf by these episodes , thus reducing the stigma attached to deafness and hard of hearing individuals . Based on other research about the positive effects of teaching ASL to hearing children , the researchers also speculated that it could lead to an increase of vocabulary skills and IQ , as well as improve interpersonal communication . They surmised that deaf children would feel more included and less isolated and be provided with the opportunity to view positive models of ASL and deaf people . 
 <unk> L. Troseth and her colleagues at Vanderbilt University studied how toddlers use information gained from prerecorded video and from interactions with a person through closed @-@ circuit video , and found that two @-@ year @-@ olds do not learn as much from prerecorded videos because the videos lack social cues and personal references . Two @-@ year @-@ olds who viewed a <unk> video with instructions about how to find a toy in an adjoining room by a non @-@ interactive researcher did not use the information , even though they smiled and responded to questions . Troseth speculated that their research had implications for interactive educational shows like Blue 's Clues , which although was " on the right track " due to the way in which the host invites interaction with the show 's viewers , did not provide children with the social cues to solve real @-@ world problems . Troseth stated that repetition , repeated exposure , and familiarity with the show 's host may increase children 's ability to learn facts and to use strategies they learn from Blue 's Clues to solve new problems . Her research suggested that Blue 's Clues engaged young children and elicited their active participation because they mimicked social interaction . A longitudinal study published in 2005 found that early exposure to Blue 's Clues to children between six and thirty months of age was positively linked with vocabulary and expressive language later learned . 
 = Llantwit Major = 
 Llantwit Major ( Welsh : Llanilltud Fawr ) is a small coastal town and community in the Vale of Glamorgan , Wales , lying on the Bristol Channel coast . It is one of four towns in the Vale of Glamorgan and the third largest by population ( 13 @,@ 366 ( 2001 ) ) after Barry and Penarth , and ahead of Cowbridge , which lies about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the northeast . The town centre of Llantwit Major lies about 9 miles ( 14 km ) southeast of the centre of Bridgend , 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of the centre of Barry , and about 15 miles ( 24 km ) miles south @-@ west of the centre of the Welsh capital of Cardiff . 
 The town 's name in Welsh , Llanilltud Fawr , is derived from the name of Saint Illtud , who came to the area from Brittany , Gaul . He founded the monastery of Illtud and the college attached to it , Cor Tewdws , which would grow into one of the most esteemed Christian colleges of the times . At peak it attracted over 2000 students , including princes and numerous eminent clergymen , some now revered as saints . Destroyed by the Vikings in 987 , the monastery was rebuilt in 1111 and continued to be a centre of learning governed by Tewkesbury Abbey until it closed in 1539 during the Dissolution of the Monasteries . The 13th @-@ century St Illtyd 's Church , built near the ancient monastery , today is a Grade I listed building and one of the oldest parish churches in Wales . 
 The modern town of Llantwit developed rapidly in the 20th century to accommodate Royal Air Force personnel from the base built at nearby St Athan , but it retains its medieval cobbled streets and buildings of the 15th and 16th centuries . Llantwit Major railway station on the Vale of Glamorgan Line was reopened in June 2005 . <unk> Beach is a popular surfing venue and has the remnants of an Iron Age fort and some of the finest examples of Jurassic @-@ period fossils in Wales . The pebble beach and its dramatic clifftops are part of a 14 miles ( 23 km ) -long coastline protected under the Glamorgan Heritage Coast , which stretches from <unk> in the east to Newton Point beyond Southerndown in the west . 
 = = Name = = 
 Although the parish church glosses the name of the town rather literally as " Illtud 's Great Church " , both the Welsh placename and its English form do not properly call the place " great " but rather " greater " : the epithet distinguishes this Llantwit from Llantwit <unk> ( Llanilltud <unk> ) near Pontypridd and Llantwit Minor ( Llanilltud Fach ; also known as Llantwit @-@ juxta @-@ Neath and Lower Llantwit ) near Neath . The Welsh placename element llan , meanwhile , is related to English lawn ( which was borrowed into Middle English from French , which borrowed it from Gaulish ) and referred to the sanctified community around early Christian settlements in Wales and its parish rather than merely the church itself ( <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Llantwit Major has been occupied for over 3000 years and archaeological evidence has shown it was occupied in Neolithic times . The remains of an Iron Age fort lie in the beach area . Excavations at the Roman villa at Caer Mead have revealed that this area was occupied during Roman times for around 350 years ; its bathrooms and the mosaic pavements date from the mid 2nd century AD . 
 In the 5th century , after the withdrawal of the Roman legions , Saint Illtud came to the <unk> valley from Brittany and founded the monastery of Illtud on the <unk> Brook , and a college , in close proximity to the current St Illtyd 's Church , about a mile from the sea . The exact date of its founding is unknown , but some sources indicate around the year 500 AD ; the blue plaque on the church today also gives this date . Because of its monastery and teaching centre it became a major centre for education and Celtic Church evangelism , attracting scholars from across Wales , Devon , Cornwall and Brittany and the wider world . The college of Llantwit , known as the College or Seminary of Theodosius ( Cor Tewdws in Welsh ) or College of St. Illtyd , at its peak reputedly had seven halls , over 400 houses and over 2000 students , including seven sons of British princes , and scholars such as St. Patrick , St. Paul Aurelian , the bard Taliesin , Gildas the historian , Samson of Dol , Paulinus , Bishop of Leon , and St. David is believed to have spent some time there . Samson was known to have been summoned by Dyfrig to join the monastery in 521 and he was briefly elected abbot before leaving for Cornwall . King Hywel ap Rhys ( d . 886 ) was buried at the monastery . 
 The college suffered during the invasions of the Saxons and the Danes and was destroyed by the Vikings in 987 and the Normans in the late 11th century . However , in 1111 , it is documented as being restored but likely in a lesser state than the original . It is known to have continued to function as a monastic school until the 16th @-@ century Reformation . The ruins of the original school house are located in a garden on the northern end of the churchyard and the monastic halls were located in a place called Hill @-@ head on the north side of the tithe @-@ barn . Although nothing of the original monastery remains , the present church was originally built between 950 and 1400 and its earliest existing secular buildings date from the 15th century . The church and school became the property of Tewkesbury Abbey around 1130 after becoming part of the Norman kingdom of Glamorgan . 
 After the dissolution of the monasteries by king Henry VIII during the Reformation , it became independent from Tewkesbury in 1539 . St Donat 's Castle , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the west , was built in the 13th century . 
 In the 20th century , Llantwit developed into a dormitory town and grew about 15 times in size to accommodate the Royal Air Force at St Athan . Despite its modernization and rapid growth , it retains its pre @-@ modern feel with its narrow winding streets , high walls , old town hall and gatehouse , and several inns and houses dated to the 16th century . Llantwit Major railway station on the Vale of Glamorgan Line was reopened in June 2005 . In 2014 , it was rated one of the most attractive postcode areas to live in Wales . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Llantwit Major is located in southeast Wales and mid @-@ west along the coast of the Vale of Glamorgan . The town can be accessed from the north directly by the <unk> road and indirectly by the <unk> road ( St. Athan road ) stemming from the A48 road , and directly by the <unk> road which leads to Bridgend in the northwest and Cardiff Airport and Barry in the east . It is one of four towns in the Vale of Glamorgan and the third largest by population after Barry and Penarth , and ahead of Cowbridge , which lies about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the northeast . The town centre of Llantwit Major lies about 9 miles ( 14 km ) from the centre of Bridgend , 10 miles from the centre of Barry and about 15 miles ( 24 km ) from the centre of Cardiff which lies further to the east . Boverton is an eastern suburb of Llantwit . 
 A small stream , the River <unk> , runs through the town and joins the streams [ <unk> and Boverton Brook ] which flow in from Eglwys Brewis in the northeast ; these then merge and become the Afon <unk> which meanders down the <unk> meadows before discharging through an outfall into the sea . The Llantwit Major area is built on a range of different levels and the town itself is sloping . At the lower coastal level is the flat , glacial <unk> Valley , marked by steep cliffs on both sides , leading to a pebble beach . The beach , located to the south of the town ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , has the remains of an ancient old stone wall from the large Iron Age hill fort , Castle Ditches , which was once located here . The steep cliffs at Llantwit which allow walks along the coast to St Donat 's Castle and Atlantic College have undergone dramatic erosion in recent years with the result that , in many places , the rock structure has collapsed in piles , particularly on the eastern face . 
 The cliff path , once set approximately 100 yards ( 91 m ) from the edge is now within metres of the nature pathway , causing the installation of extensive new barriers by the Vale of Glamorgan Council to prevent fatalities . The 14 miles ( 23 km ) of coastline from <unk> in the east to Newton Point and in the west , passing through St Donat 's and Southerndown is protected under the Glamorgan Heritage Coast . Tresilian Bay is situated between Llantwit Major and St Donat 's . Along this stretch of coast the cliff path winds through numerous valleys . Llantwit Major beach has one of the finest sites in Wales for Jurassic fossils , including corals , giant brachiopods , gastropods and the bones of Ichthyosaurus . In the early 1990s the beach flooded with the tide rising beyond the beach wall and inundating the surrounding pasture in the valley , which is now used as a campsite . 
 The beach is a popular tourist destination during the summer months and has a campsite on the nearby fields . The beach has a snack bar and restaurant and associated amenities to cater for the increased public demand in recent years . The beach at low tide is an expansive rocky beach with a stretch of sand towards the far west , offering dramatic views of the Bristol Channel and the coastline of Somerset , England , with the landmark white roof of Butlins , Minehead . 
 = = Economy and local government = = 
 Llantwit Major is a small town which is largely dependent on local retail and earnings from further afield . The majority of the inhabitants commute to work elsewhere , especially Cardiff or Bridgend . During the summer months tourism is important to the town which has " The Precinct " , Rainbow Plaza and several pubs and restaurants . Of note are the Old Swan Inn , Old White Hart Inn , The Tudor Tavern , and the 17th century West House Country Hotel Heritage Restaurant . 
 Llantwit Major has considerable renown in South Wales as a surfing location , although it is much less known than Porthcawl further down the coast . The beach has a lifeguard station funded by the Vale of Glamorgan Council , built in the late 1990s , functioning during the summer months . There is a surf shop in the town catering to surfers and several others selling items related to surfing fashion . During the summer months the local government often charges visitors to the beach for parking and further income is obtained from the beach cafe and organised walks . 
 The Victorian Fair Day , established in 1983 , is usually held in June on the Saturday nearest to the 22nd of the month , with a Victorian theme which attracts people from across southern Wales . The town has several supermarkets including Somerfield and <unk> , and a town library . At least three pharmacies and two banks ( HSBC and Lloyds TSB ) located in the central shopping area along Boverton Road . The local artistic community supports a number of arts and crafts shops , some selling locally made pottery and other ceramics . 
 An electoral ward of the same name exists . This ward covers Llantwit Major community but also stretches west to St. Donats . The total population of this ward at the 2011 census was 10 @,@ 621 . 
 The town is governed by the Llantwit Major town council consisting of fifteen councillors . There are fifteen independent councillors . The current Mayor is Councillor Mick Mason . It also comes under the administration of the Vale of Glamorgan unitary authority . Llantwit Major is twinned with Le <unk> , France . 
 = = Notable landmarks = = 
 = = = Roman villa = = = 
 The Roman villa at <unk> ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) remains as faint earthworks in a field , near the 13th century parish church of St Illtud . The L @-@ shaped courtyard villa was discovered in 1888 . Records from 1893 suggest that one room was used as a praetorium , another as a workshop ; and there was a 5th @-@ century adjoining sacristy , simple in style , which featured a chancel , nave , and stone altar . Found remains included <unk> and <unk> skulls , as well as horse bones . Fine mosaic floors are a notable feature of the villa . The tesserae included blue and crystalline limestone , green volcanic stones , brown sandstone , and red @-@ brick cuttings , encircled with a red , white , blue and brown border . A record from 1907 described the relics as Samian ware pieces ; bronze coins of Maximinus Thrax , <unk> , and Constantius Chlorus ; as well as roofing materials . 
 The site was again excavated between 1938 and 1948 . It may have been first settled in the 1st century , but the first stone structure was not erected until a hundred years later . The site developed slowly and , it has been suggested , was even abandoned for a while during the 3rd century . By the 4th century , there was an L @-@ shaped villa with a large , aisled building possibly for farm workers and a number of smaller agricultural structures almost enclosing a central courtyard . The Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales has associated collection records of the site , including drawings of other remains such as statues and tessellated pavement , as well as documentation of a 1971 excavation . An early @-@ medieval @-@ period cemetery is in <unk> as are earthworks , traces of walling , a bank and a ditch . Pieces of pottery have been found . 
 = = = Listed buildings = = = 
 = = = = St Illtyd 's Church and monastery = = = = 
 The town grew up around Cor Tewdws , a monastery and divinity school , alternately named <unk> , or Bangor Tewdws ( College of Theodosius ) , or later Bangor Illtyd ( " Illtyd 's college " ) . Saint David , Saint Samson , Saint Paul Aurelian , Saint Gildas , Saint <unk> , Saint <unk> and king Maelgwn Gwynedd are said to have studied at the divinity <unk> Tewdws was destroyed in AD 446 and re @-@ founded in AD 508 by St Illtyd as a centre of learning . The ruins of the school are in a garden on the north side of the churchyard ; and the monastery was situated north of the tithe barn on Hill Head . 
 The elongated church ( 51 @.@ 4081 ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ 4081 ; <unk> ) , a conglomeration of distinct buildings , is divided into two areas by a wall , a 13th @-@ century monastery church , and the Norman parish church . The eastern section contains interesting medieval wall paintings with religious themes , and a fine reredos . The western section , a Lady chapel , 40 @.@ 5 feet ( 12 @.@ 3 m ) in length , has an inscription to King Rhys ap <unk> of Morgannwg who died in the mid @-@ 9th century . The church contains a curfew bell and medieval priest effigies . The older church is 64 feet ( 20 m ) long ; the newer church was built by Richard Neville . 
 St. Illtyd 's church predates the Age of the Saints in early Welsh Christianity and thus by its very existence provides evidence of continuity with sub @-@ Roman Christianity . The churchyard contains three ancient relics , a pillar and two inscribed stones ; one dates from Saint Samson 's time . The grounds also include a 13th @-@ century gatehouse , a monks ' pigeon @-@ house , ruined walls in a garden area , and mounds near the vicarage . 
 = = = = Town Hall = = = = 
 Manorial records indicate that the Town Hall ( 51 @.@ 4076 ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ 4076 ; <unk> ) dates to the 15th century but it is often attributed to Gilbert de Clare , Lord of Glamorgan , who died much earlier in 1295 . It then functioned as a manor and a meeting venue for the court to organise duties and collect rents and at weekends held fairs . It was renovated in the late 16th century and over the years the lower floor functioned as a school , a slaughterhouse and a jail and the top floor a venue for church meetings , leased to Oddfellows in the 1830s . Aside from fairs it also held plays , concerts and dances . It became a Grade : II * listed building on 22 February 1963 . It features a bell with the inscription , Sancte <unk> , ora pro nobis ( " Saint Illtyd , pray for us " ) . It is reached by a flight of steps . 
 = = = = Great House = = = = 
 The Great House ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , located along the road to Cowbridge , on the northern outskirts originally dated from the 14th century when it consisted of just a square central section , but significant additions have made it an excellent example of a Tudor " Ty <unk> " ( Great House ) . A northern wing with a stable and dovecot were amongst the added parts . The house was occupied by the Nicholl family for centuries but by the 1920s it had been abandoned and fell into a heavily dilapidated state . The building was bought and restored to its former glory in the 1950s . 
 = = = = Dove cote and gatehouse = = = = 
 Covered by a domical vault , the Dove Cote ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) is a Grade II * listed tall 13th @-@ century cylindrical column in a middle of the Hill Head field , which lies in close proximity to St <unk> Church , next to the site of the old tithe barn , built for the monks at the St. Illtud 's monastery . Another site on Hill Head is the ( 13th – 14th century ) gatehouse , now belonging to St Illtyd 's Church , Llantwit Major . Today these are the only remaining buildings which at one time belonged to Tewkesbury Abbey . There is a plaque on the gatehouse , telling of its history . 
 = = = = The Old Place = = = = 
 The Old Place ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) is a ruin of an Elizabethan manor house , built by Griffith Williams for his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law Edmund Vann in 1596 . It is often mistakenly called Llantwit Castle . The Williams family were successful lawyers and part of the rising minor gentry who were loathed by the Seys of Boverton and the <unk> of St Donats . Vann was fined over £ 1 @,@ 000 for being involved in a scuffle in central Llantwit on a Sunday which led him to take on the Sey family and seek his revenge . 
 = = = = Old Swan Inn = = = = 
 Records state that a building was located here from the 11th century and during medieval times it is believed to have been a monastic or manorial <unk> but the current Grade II * listed inn ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) is dated to the 16th century , aside from restoration work ; it was once thatched roofed . It was run for many years in Tudor times by the Raglan family . In the mid 17th century there is evidence that its owner Edward Craddock was again using it as a mint to " mint his own tokens as there was a shortage of coin at this time . " There are five other pubs and four restaurants in the town . 
 = = = = Plymouth House = = = = 
 According to the blue plaque on the wall outside Plymouth House ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , the house is believed to have been formerly part of the monastery , perhaps functioning as a <unk> house for some time in the fifteenth century . After its closure in 1539 , it became the manor house of West Llantwit owned by Edward <unk> . Later owners include Lewis of the Van , the Earl of Plymouth and then Dr. J. W. Nicholl Carne , who renamed it after its previous owner some time in the 19th century . 
 = = = = Court House = = = = 
 From the blue plaque on the Court House ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , it was formerly known as Ivy house when it was a town house from the 16th century . In the 18th century it was extended by Christopher Bassett . For some time it was owned by the Throckmorton family of Coughton Court , Warwickshire , descendants of one of the perpetrators of the Gunpowder Plot . Later owners included Daniel Durrell , headmaster of Cowbridge Grammar School , and the benefactor of Tabernacle Chapel , Elias Bassett . It then fell to his niece and her husband William Thomas and became part of the Thomas family and at one time was owned by Illtyd Thomas , father of Mare <unk> , an antiquarian . The Thomases built the Town Hall clock to commemorate Queen Victoria . 
 = = = = Knolles Place = = = = 
 According to the blue plaque on the building ( also known as " The Old School " ) ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , it was built around 1450 by John Raglan ( Herbert ) and was then owned by Robert Raglan , from a family who had significant power in the area at the time and held many local administrative posts as stewards and priests . In the 17th century it became a vicarage for Stephen <unk> and functioned as a boarding school for primary school children between 1874 and 1975 . 
 = = = = Old police station = = = = 
 The old police station ( 51 @.@ 4069 ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ 4069 ; <unk> ) was built in the mid @-@ 1840s after the place is Glamorgan Constabulary was established in 1841 , and was originally comprised a single @-@ storey building , but was expanded in 1876 to include four bedrooms on the top floor . It continued to function as a police station until 1928 when a new building opened nearer the town centre on Wesley Street . 
 = = = = War memorial = = = = 
 This is located in the centre of Llantwit War Memorial ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) , between the Old Swan and the White Hart and has a Celtic cross . The memorial commemorates residents who lost their lives or went missing in World War I and World War II . There are 32 names listed for World War I and 26 names for World War II . 
 = = = = Bethel Baptist Church = = = = 
 Bethel Baptist Church ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) was erected in 1830 to provide for local Baptists and its first minister was a local shopkeeper named Jabez Lawrence . Christmas Evans , a one @-@ eyed Welsh preacher of considerable renown was reported to have held services here . 
 = = = = Boverton Place = = = = 
 Located in Boverton , Boverton Place ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) is a former fortified manor house , now in ruins . It was built at the end of the 16th century and served as the seat of Roger Seys , Queen ’ s Attorney to the Council of Wales and the Marches in the 1590s . It remained in Seys family until the last heiress Jane Seys married Robert Jones of <unk> who sold it to owners who let it fall into ruin . Its last occupants were mentioned in the census of 1861 . 
 = = = = Dimlands = = = = 
 Dimlands ( or <unk> Castle or <unk> Lodge ) ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 51 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) is situated about a kilometre back from the clifftops of the Bristol Channel along the road to St. Donats . It was owned at one time by John Whitlock Nicholl Carne of the University of Oxford who moved there after his father 's death . Dimlands was built by John Carne 's father , Rev. Robert Carne , at the end of the 18th century , upon land left him by his father , Whitlock Nicholl of The Ham , sheriff for the county of Glamorgan in 1746 . The property was held by the Nicholl family since the time of King Henry VII . The dwelling is of castellated Tudor architecture with blue lias limestone exterior , and <unk> stone windows and cornices . The south @-@ facing front is more than 130 feet ( 40 m ) in length . The western coast of Cornwall and Lundy Island are visible from the turrets . The carved chimney in the dining room is made of Caen stone , and the chimney @-@ piece in the drawing room is also . Other features are the Minton tile flooring , the large Tudor @-@ style staircase , two sitting rooms , and the library , a newer addition . The Dimlands stables feature sharp @-@ pointed gables , as well as a carved stone with the date of the original grant ( 1336 ) . 
 = = Education and sport = = 
 Llanilltud Fawr Comprehensive School is the secondary school in the town . A fire gutted the building in October 1991 and a new building was constructed . The school has roughly 1300 pupils and around 85 full @-@ time staff . Immediately adjacent is Llanilltud Fawr primary school , one of four primary schools in Llantwit , the others being <unk> primary school , Ysgol Dewi Sant and St. Illtyd 's primary school . 
 Facilities at the Llantwit Major leisure centre include a small swimming pool , large and small sports halls , the LifeStyle Fitness Studio , <unk> facilities , conference room and bar . The Llantwit Major Rugby Football Club , which played its first match against Cowbridge Rugby Football Club in 1889 , fields two senior , one youth ( U / 19 ) and eight mini / junior teams , and plays in Division Four of the Welsh Rugby Union leagues . Other sports clubs represent association football and cricket . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The town is fictionally portrayed in the late Glyn Daniel 's novel Welcome Death ( 1954 ) . Some areas of the town have been used in the recording of the recent series of Doctor Who and The Sarah Jane Adventures ( created by BBC Wales ) . The local tearooms were used in the 2007 making of Y Pris filmed by and shown on S4C . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Joe Blackman ( <unk> ) , Entrepreneur and Magistrate , grew up in Llantwit Major . 
 Glyn Daniel ( 1914 – 1986 ) , scientist and archaeologist 
 Dafydd Hewitt ( 1985 – ) , Cardiff Blues Rugby Player 
 Daniel Hopkin MC ( 1886 – 1951 ) , Labour MP born in Llantwit Major 
 Pat Mountain ( 1976 – ) , goalkeeping coach for Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. , grew up in Llantwit Major 
 Ray ' The Belgian ' <unk> ( 1937 – ) , East End gangster linked with the Kray twins but ran a pie and mash stall in Borough Market and had six witnesses when it all went down in the Blind Beggar 
 Theophilus Redwood ( 1806 – 1892 ) , pharmacist , one of the founding members of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain 
 = Dance in the Dark = 
 " Dance in the Dark " is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga , from her third EP , The Fame Monster . Inspired by Gaga 's " Fear of Self Monster " , the song deals with the intimate experience between two people alone in a bedroom . According to Gaga , the record is about a girl who likes to have sex with the lights off because she is embarrassed about her body . She explained that she came across such women while working on the MAC AIDS Fund , and that the song is not about freedom , but rather the assurance that Gaga understood their feelings . The song was initially planned to be released after " Telephone " , but due to a dispute between Gaga and her record company , " Alejandro " was released instead . It was later released as a digital download and radio @-@ only single in Australia , Belgium , and France . 
 " Dance in the Dark " contains retro and new wave music influences , and begins with a stuttering introduction . It includes a spoken interlude , where Gaga says the names of famous people whose lives ended tragically . The song has received critical acclaim from music critics . It charted on the UK Singles Chart and Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , while reaching the top @-@ thirty in Australia and the top @-@ ten in Slovakia , Hungary and Czech Republic . 
 Gaga performed " Dance in the Dark " as the opening song of The Monster Ball Tour . In the first leg of the tour , she appeared behind a scrim @-@ lit screen to perform the song , while in the revamped shows , Gaga performs it on a set reminiscent of a New York City night scene . The song was also performed at the 2010 BRIT Awards , where Gaga dedicated it to her close friend , Alexander McQueen , who had committed suicide a few days earlier . It was nominated for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Grammy Awards , but lost to Rihanna 's " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 Gaga told Los Angeles Times that the inspiration behind " Dance in the Dark " as being the intimate experience taking place between two people alone in a bedroom , the fear of Sex Monster . According to her , the record is about a girl who likes to have sex with the lights off , because she is embarrassed about her body . " She doesn 't want her man to see her naked . She will be free , and she will let her inner animal out , but only when the lights are out , " Gaga explained . She added that like the song , she has to struggle with issues of body image and self @-@ doubt in her own life . While working on the MAC AIDS Fund , she realized that women of her age do not speak their mind , in fear that their boyfriends would not love them if they did so . 
 " All of these new things entering my life are changing the way I view my purpose , but ' Dance in the Dark ' in particular is about me wanting to live — but also , the song isn 't called ' Dance in the Light ' . I 'm not a gospel singer trying to cross people over . What I 'm saying is , ' I get it . I feel you , I feel the same way , and it 's <unk> 
 " I hope and pray that I can inspire some sort of change in people subliminally through the show . They 're singing ' Dance in the Dark , ' but they 're dancing and they 're free , they 're letting it out . But the songs are not about freedom , they 're about [ the fact that ] I get it . I feel the way you feel . " 
 According to MTV , the song was initially planned to be released after " Telephone " , but due to a dispute between Gaga and her record company , " Alejandro " was released instead . The song was released to Belgian iTunes on November 9 , 2009 . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Dance in the Dark " infuses influences of retro and new wave music in its composition . Michael Hubbard from musicOMH wrote that the song begins with a stuttering introduction and orgasmic groans , followed by Gaga singing the song . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Dance in The Dark " was written in the time signature of common time , with a tempo of 121 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D minor with Gaga 's vocal range spanning from B ♭ 3 to D5 . It follows a basic sequence of Am – Dm / A – F / A – G as its chord progression . A spoken interlude is also present . 
 The lyrics of the song refer to vampires and werewolves : " Run run her kiss is a vampire grin / The moon lights her way while she 's <unk> ' at him " . Gaga explained that the lines were means of expressing how people rely on external motivations to cope with internal anxiety . " She doesn 't feel free without the moon , " Gaga said . " These lyrics are a way for me to talk about how I believe women and some men feel innately insecure about themselves all the time . It 's not sometimes , it 's not in adolescence , it 's always . " The spoken interlude refers to famous people who met with a tragic end of their lives , namely Marilyn Monroe , Judy Garland , Sylvia Plath , JonBenét Ramsey , Liberace , Jesus Christ , Stanley Kubrick , and Princess Diana . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has received critical acclaim from music critics , with many citing it as a highlight of the album . Paul Lester from BBC felt that the song was " generic machine RnB " . Evan Sawdey from PopMatters commented that " Dance in the Dark " , along with " Monster " are a " delightfully dirty retro workout ..... to make for one surprisingly effective pop cocktail . " Scott Plagenhoef from Pitchfork Media felt that Gaga had morphed into Madonna on the song . Nick Levine from Digital Spy commented that " ' Dance in the Dark ' is the sort of song that , well , makes you want to dance with your top off in a grotty German bondage basement . " Edna Gunderson from USA Today called the song " campy " . 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented that " ' Bad Romance ' and ' Dance in the Dark ' are stacked with towering new @-@ wave synths and seemingly endless hooks ; if melodies could be time @-@ stamped , these would have " ' 80s " branded on their asses . [ ... ] The song isn 't a cautionary tale per say [ sic ] , but a call to arms to misfits everywhere . " She went on to declare the song as one of the highlights of The Fame Monster but added that " After a stuttering intro of orgasmic groans it becomes a little bit Gaga @-@ by @-@ numbers , which is a shame given the standard of the early tracks " . Ben Patashnik from NME felt that " Dance in the Dark " , along with another song " Monster " , was " slightly disposable " . Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH complimented the song for its " monumental chorus and some Madonna @-@ esque spoken @-@ word moments , including this shout out to a lost Royal : ' You will never fall apart Diana , you 're still in our hearts / Never let you fall apart / Together we 'll dance in the dark . ' " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Hungary , the song debuted on the Mahasz Single Top 10 lista chart at number nine on November 30 , 2009 but fell off the chart the next week . In the United Kingdom , " Dance in the Dark " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 89 on December 12 , 2009 , but was present on the chart for one week . In Canada , the song charted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 88 on the issue dated November 11 , 2009 . " Dance in the Dark " debuted at number 93 on the Australian Singles Chart , after it was released to Australian radio , moving to number 43 and then to a peak of number 24 in the following weeks . In France , the song entered the French Digital Singles Chart at forty and has thus far reached a peak of thirty . On the Billboard issue dated August 21 , 2010 , " Dance in the Dark " debuted on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 22 , and on the Hot Dance / Electronic Digital Songs at number nine , on the issue dated October 9 , 2010 . As of September 2010 , " Dance in the Dark " has sold 120 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States , according to Nielsen Soundscan . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed " Dance in the Dark " as the opening song of The Monster Ball Tour . The show began with Gaga appearing behind a giant , green laser lit video screen featuring scrim lights , in a futuristic silver jewelled jumpsuit with bulbs on it . She had matching eye makeup and wore a mask , beginning to sing " Dance in the Dark " , " while dancers dressed in white balaclavas and white jumpsuits moved around her . " The scrim resembled an electric math grid which was lifted during the performance . Jane Stevenson from Toronto Sun felt that it was not until Gaga had moved on to the next song after " Dance in the Dark " , that the Monster Ball " was alive " . In the revamped 2010 @-@ 11 shows of The Monster Ball tour , the song was once again added as the opening song of the setlist , as a part of the segment titled " City " . Gaga performed it in a set , reminiscent of New York City night scene , with flickering neon signs displaying the words " Ugly " , " Sexy " and " Liquor " , fire escape stairwells and a broken yellow taxi . 
 Gaga performed " Dance in the Dark " at the BRIT Awards on February 16 , 2010 , at Earls Court Exhibition Centre . The performance was inspired by the recent death of her friend , fashion designer Alexander McQueen . Initially she had planned a different version of the performance , but changed the concept at the last minute , since she wanted to pay tribute to McQueen . Hence she chose acoustic versions of her songs " Telephone " and " Dance in the Dark " . She started the performance by sitting in front of a piano and announcing " This is for Alexander McQueen . " The whole performance was low @-@ key compared to her previous ones . The stage was decked out in white , and perched on a pedestal was a statue of Gaga wearing a piano skirt and the lobster @-@ claw heels she wore in her " Bad Romance " music video . After finishing an acoustic performance of " Telephone " , she got up from her piano as the disco groove of " Dance in the Dark " was heard throughout the room . She wore a lace bodysuit and a large bouffant wig , took to a giant keytar and performed a techno rendition of the track . After the show , she posted a message on her Twitter account : " Tonight 's performance is inspired by our friend . Mask by Phillip Treacy , Sculpture by Nick Knight , Music by Lady Gaga . We miss you . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Dance in the Dark " – 4 : 49 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter , co @-@ producer , additional instrumentation and arrangement 
 Fernando Garibay – songwriter , producer , instrumentation , programming and arrangement 
 Jonas <unk> – recording and tracking engineer 
 Dan Parry – recording and tracking engineer 
 Christian Delano – recording and tracking engineer 
 Recorded at Metropolis Studios , London , England 
 Tracked at Paradise Studios , Hollywood , Los Angeles , California 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing at Sarm Studios , London , England 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Credits adapted from The Fame Monster album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Je Souhaite = 
 " Je Souhaite " is the twenty @-@ first and penultimate episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 2000 . It was written and directed by Vince Gilligan . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Je Souhaite " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 2 , being watched by 12 @.@ 79 million people in its initial broadcast , and received mostly positive reviews from critics . The title means " I Wish " in French . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully encounter a man and his physically disabled brother who lead the agents to an indifferent genie whose willingness to grant wishes belies a deeper motive . 
 " Je Souhaite " was Gilligan 's directorial debut . Originally , the script was supposed to be a " stark and scary " story , but Gilligan relented and wrote a humorous tale about a genie . The episode featured several elaborate " genie effects " that were created through digital technology ; this included manipulating stock footage of former American president Richard Nixon and Italian dictator Benito Mussolini . One scene in the episode required the producers to shut down eight blocks of downtown Los Angeles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In St. Louis , Anson Stokes , an apathetic employee at a self storage facility , is yelled at by his boss to clean out an old and dusty storage locker . To his surprise , he finds a woman wrapped in a rug . His boss comes to check on him ; while he is yelling for Anson , his mouth disappears . FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) speak with the boss , Jay Gilmore , after surgery to fix his mouth , which has left him disfigured and with a speech impediment . They question Stokes ' brother Leslie at their mobile home , which inexplicably has a large boat in its tiny front yard . The woman from the storage container is in the Stokes brothers ' kitchen . Mulder and Scully search the container and find old antiques and a picture of the previous owner with the woman from the apartment . 
 The woman is revealed to be a genie . Stokes is angry that he wasted his first two wishes ; Stokes had previously wished for his boss to stop talking ( which caused Gilmore 's mouth to disappear ) and for a boat . The boat , however , was not placed in water and Stokes is still forced to pay taxes on it . The genie suggests that Anson should give his physically handicapped brother the ability to walk as his third wish ; but he instead wishes for the ability to be turned invisible . Anson , now invisible , runs out into the street and is killed by a truck as he crosses the road . 
 Scully does the autopsy on the invisible body by covering it in powder . Mulder , meanwhile , researches the owner of the container . He learns that the man in the picture was an extremely wealthy and lucky for a short period , before he died with a giant oversized penis . Mulder believes the woman in the picture is responsible for everything , and determines she is a jinniyah , or a female jinn . Mulder goes to the Stokes residence and asks Leslie to hand her over , presuming her to be kept in a box . It turns out , however , that she is not in the box , but back in the storage facility , where Mulder also finds pictures of the jinniyah next to Benito Mussolini in the 1930s and next to Richard Nixon in the 1960s , two men that had a lot of power and lost it in a bad way . 
 Leslie takes possession of the jinniyah and asks for his brother to be returned to life . Anson is returned , but in a decaying state , complete with injuries from the crash . Leslie 's second wish is for Anson to talk , which results in Anson screaming at the top of his lungs and telling his brother that he is cold . Back at the morgue , Scully finds the body has disappeared and Mulder suspects it is because of Leslie 's wish . They go to the Stokes residence and Anson blows the house up trying to light the stove in an attempt to warm up . Mulder questions Jenn , the jinniyah , who says she 's 500 years old . According to her , she gained her powers after wishing for great power and long life from another genie . She also says that Mulder unrolled her so he now has three wishes of his own . Mulder wishes for peace on earth and she wipes out the entire human population . With his second wish , Mulder undoes his first wish . Mulder then writes down his third wish to be very specific . However , just before making the final wish , Scully helps Mulder realize that the power of a genie should not be used to force people to be good , and so he ultimately wishes for Jenn to be free . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and directing = = = 
 The episode — whose title means " I wish " in French — was written and directed by long @-@ time X @-@ Files contributor Vince Gilligan . Gilligan noted that , " from the very beginning I always had the intention of directing an episode , but I kept putting it off because I figured I didn 't know enough . " Gilligan , however , soon learned directing techniques from his four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of experience on the show . As season seven neared its end and the rumors that the season would be the show 's last , Gilligan decided to finally direct an episode . After approaching series creator Chris Carter , an episode set to be written and directed by Gilligan was green @-@ lit . Initially , Gilligan 's first script was a " stark and scary " outing for the show . However , as the deadline for the script grew closer , he relented and decided to write a more humorous episode . 
 In the DVD commentary for the episode , Gilligan revealed that he wrote the character of the genie , Jenn , with Janeane Garofalo in mind , but she was unavailable at the time of filming . However , he was ultimately very pleased with Paula Sorge 's performance , stating " In fact , she was even better than how I had written the character . In Paula 's audition , she came off like a world @-@ weary wise @-@ ass who was not only tough and smart , but had a heart of gold . She made it a really fun character . " The casting process to find an actress for the part took so long that an idea Gilligan had to give the character double pupils had to be scrapped when the production team ran out of time to source them . Instead , she wore contacts over her already blue eyes to make them brighter , and a blue jewel on her cheekbone . 
 After deciding upon the idea to use a genie , Gilligan approached Carter for feedback . Carter was impressed with the story , saying , " Vince had been playing around with somebody finding something in a storage locker . He played around with several different ideas and one day he came in with one idea of a genie and three wishes . The one thing I noticed right away was that the relationship between Mulder and the genie was very sweet . " After finalizing his script , Gilligan began to worry that he had " painted himself in a corner " : " I did not intend to write a hard episode to direct [ ... ] But before I realize it , I was blowing up a trailer , having a truck hit an invisible man , and all sorts of genie effects . [ ... ] I looked at all the people on the set [ ... ] and thought , ' Oh man , I 'm going to be exposed as an impostor . ' " Luckily , the cast and crew helped the new director ease into his position . In addition , many of the members of production noted that the work environment under Gilligan was largely stress @-@ free . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The scene that features Scully applying a yellow powder to the invisible body of Anson Stokes made use of various digital techniques . The first shot of the scene used a blue head cast of Kevin Weisman , the actor who portrayed Stokes . Gillian Anderson then added the yellow dust onto the cast . The second shot used motion control in order to match the film up exactly . Anderson then attempted to match her movements so that , when the two strips of film were combined , they would create the illusion of one complete scene . Finally , various close @-@ ups of the blue head cast were filmed , with the blue color being removed via chroma keying . Paul Rabwin later called the scene " very effective . " 
 During the episode , Mulder shows Scully several bits of historical footage of Richard Nixon and Benito Mussolini that includes footage of the genie . In order to create the Nixon scene , the production crew used a real clip of Nixon , his wife , and daughter . The crew then cut a matte in order to replace certain parts ; Nixon 's daughter was removed to make room for the genie . Paula Sorge , who played Jenn , was then blue screened and the subsequent shot was " dirtied up " to properly age the film . The scenes were then combined . 
 During the scene where Mulder wanders the deserted city , the production crew had to shut down eight blocks of downtown Los Angeles . The only practical way of doing this was to shoot on a Sunday morning . Filming the scene did not go as planned : a homeless person walked right through the " perfect take , " according to producer Harry Bring . Luckily , using digital technology , the man was erased from the final cut of the scene . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Je Souhaite " first aired in the United States on May 14 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 12 @.@ 79 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on August 6 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 72 million viewers , making it the fourth most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Be careful what you wish for . " 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews with one detractor . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " and called it his " favorite episode of season seven " and that he wished that " it had been the series finale " for The X @-@ Files . VanDerWerff argued that the episode possessed a " warmth and tenderness " that was missing from the following two seasons , after Duchovny left the series as a full @-@ time star . He concluded that " the genius of ' Je Souhaite ' lies in how it embraces the inherent weirdness of the world this show is set in . " Rob Bricken from Topless Robot named " Je Souhaite " the second most funny X @-@ Files episode , writing , " Best line : When Scully , ever the skeptic , begins trying to rationalize her examination of an invisible body , Mulder replies with an exasperated , ' Oh ! ' It 's what most of us had been thinking for years about Scully 's refusal to acknowledge all the strange crap she had seen . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five . The two praised the writing and noted that " if [ ' Je Souhaite ' ] had been the final stand @-@ alone episode of the series , as it so easily might have been , it 'd have been nevertheless appropriate . [ ... ] it marks the end of an era ; it 's a perfect note of bliss which the series will never be able to capture again . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She called Paula Sorge " one of the best guest actors of the season " and praised her acting , noting that she delivers her lines " with snap , bite , and wonderful dark humor . " Vitaris , however , did note that the episode " would have worked better if it had consisted of a half @-@ hour encounter between Mulder , Scully , and Jenn , and ripped the guest cast of stereotypic poor Southerners . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Kenneth Silber from Space.com wrote , " ' Je Souhaite ' offers a few laughs but little drama and no intellectual substance . The episode seems designed to stall for time while negotiations drag on over David Duchovny 's contract and the series ' future . X @-@ Files viewers will wish for — and deserve — better material than this I Dream of Jeannie rehash . " 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Hōshō = 
 Hōshō ( <unk> , literally " phoenix in flight " ) was the world 's first commissioned ship that was designed and built as an aircraft carrier , and the first aircraft carrier of the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) . Commissioned in 1922 , the ship was used for testing carrier aircraft operations equipment , techniques , such as take @-@ offs and landings , and carrier aircraft operational methods and tactics . The ship provided valuable lessons and experience for the IJN in early carrier air operations . Hōshō 's superstructure and other obstructions to the flight deck were removed in 1924 on the advice of experienced aircrews . 
 Hōshō and her aircraft group participated in the Shanghai Incident in 1932 and in the opening stages of the Sino @-@ Japanese War in late 1937 . During those two conflicts , the carrier 's aircraft supported Imperial Japanese Army ground operations and engaged in aerial combat with aircraft of the Nationalist Chinese Air Force . The small size of the ship and her assigned <unk> ( usually around 15 aircraft ) limited the effectiveness of her contributions to combat operations . As a result , the carrier was placed in reserve after her return to Japan from China and she became a training carrier in 1939 . 
 During World War II , Hōshō participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 in a secondary role . After the battle , the carrier resumed her training role in Japanese home waters for the duration of the conflict and survived the war with only minor damage from air attacks . She was used as a repatriation transport after the war , making nine trips to bring some 40 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers and civilians to Japan from overseas locations . Hōshō was scrapped in Japan beginning in 1946 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Construction of a seaplane carrier was authorized by the Japanese government in its " eight @-@ six " fleet program of 1918 . A planned sister ship , named <unk> , was cancelled in 1922 before any construction started . Hōshō was the second warship , after the British HMS Hermes , to be designed from the keel up as an aircraft carrier , but was launched and completed earlier than Hermes . 
 Hōshō was planned as a seaplane carrier like the British HMS Campania with a forward flying @-@ off deck , 32 aircraft , four low @-@ angle 14 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and four anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns . The plan was revised after reports were received from Japanese observers with the Royal Navy in Europe about the desirability to be able to land aircraft on the ship . The new requirements were modeled on HMS Furious after she received her rear flight deck in 1918 . The ship was to be capable of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) and fitted with a forward flight deck , superstructure and funnels amidships , and a large hangar aft . Shortly thereafter based on observations of landing trials on Furious and HMS Argus , the world 's first flush @-@ decked aircraft carrier , Hōshō 's flight deck design was revised in April 1919 . The superstructure was removed and the funnels were moved to one side to create an unobstructed , full @-@ length flight deck , and the ship was reclassified as an aircraft carrier . The ship 's hull was based on that of a large cruiser and she was given a small island . Her three funnels were mounted on the starboard side and swiveled to lie horizontal during flight operations . Hōshō 's designed speed was reduced to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) , based on British experiences during World War I. 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Hōshō was completed with an overall length of 168 @.@ 25 meters ( 552 ft 0 in ) . She had a beam of 17 @.@ 98 meters ( 59 ft 0 in ) and a mean draft of 6 @.@ 17 meters ( 20 ft 3 in ) . The ship displaced 7 @,@ 470 long tons ( 7 @,@ 590 t ) at standard load , and 9 @,@ 494 long tons ( 9 @,@ 646 t ) at normal load . Her crew totaled 512 officers and men . The ship was almost completely unarmored . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Hōshō had two Parsons geared turbine sets with a total of 30 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) driving two propeller shafts . Eight Kampon Type B water @-@ tube boilers with a working pressure of 18 @.@ 3 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 790 kPa ; 260 psi ) and a temperature of 138 ° C ( 280 ° F ) provided steam to the turbines , although only four were oil @-@ fired . The other four used a mix of oil and coal . The ship 's designed speed was 25 knots , but she made 26 @.@ 66 knots ( 49 @.@ 37 km / h ; 30 @.@ 68 mph ) from 31 @,@ 117 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 204 kW ) on her sea trials on 30 November 1922 . She carried 2 @,@ 700 long tons ( 2 @,@ 700 t ) of fuel oil and 940 long tons ( 960 t ) of coal , an extraordinary total for such a small ship , to give her a range of 8 @,@ 680 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 080 km ; 9 @,@ 990 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 To reduce rolling and increase stability for aircraft operations , a <unk> produced by the American Sperry Gyroscope Company was installed . The installation initially proved unreliable as the Japanese technicians were badly trained by Sperry , but eventually the system proved its worth as the technicians gained experience . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Hōshō 's flight deck was 168 @.@ 25 meters ( 552 ft 0 in ) long and 22 @.@ 62 meters ( 74 ft 3 in ) wide . The forward end sloped down at an angle of − 5 ° to help aircraft accelerate during takeoff . A small island was mounted well forward on the starboard side and contained the ship 's bridge and air operations control center . The island was fitted with a small tripod mast intended to mount the ship 's fire @-@ control system . Fifteen different types of landing equipment were evaluated before the British longitudinal wire system was adopted . Low landing speeds of the time meant that aircraft had little difficulty in stopping , but their light weight made them vulnerable to wind gusts that could blow them over the side of the carrier , and the longitudinal wires helped to prevent that . Forward of the island was a collapsible crane for loading aircraft into the forward hangar . 
 The flight deck , unlike those on Royal Navy carriers , was superimposed on the ship 's hull rather than constructed as a strength deck supporting the carrier 's hull structure . A system of lights and mirrors along the flight deck assisted pilots in landing on the carrier . 
 Hōshō was the only Japanese aircraft carrier with two hangars . The forward hangar was 67 @.@ 2 by 9 @.@ 5 meters ( 220 ft 6 in by 31 ft 2 in ) and only one deck in height as it was intended to house nine small aircraft , such as fighters . The two @-@ story rear hangar measured 16 @.@ 5 by 14 meters ( 54 ft 2 in by 45 ft 11 in ) at the forward end and 29 @.@ 4 by 12 meters ( 96 ft 5 in by 39 ft 4 in ) at the rear end . It was designed to house six large aircraft , such as torpedo bombers , as well as six reserve aircraft . Each hangar was served by an aircraft elevator . The forward elevator was 10 @.@ 35 by 7 @.@ 86 meters ( 34 @.@ 0 by 25 @.@ 8 ft ) and the aft elevator measured 13 @.@ 71 by 6 @.@ 34 meters ( 45 ft 0 in by 20 ft 10 in ) . 
 = = = Air group = = = 
 Hōshō had a normal capacity of fifteen aircraft , subject to the limitations of her hangars . She was first commissioned with an air group of nine Mitsubishi <unk> ( Type 10 ) fighters and three to six Mitsubishi B1M3 ( Type 13 ) torpedo bombers . In 1928 , the fighters were replaced by the <unk> ( Type 3 ) . Three years later the air group consisted of Nakajima A2N ( Type 90 ) fighters and Mitsubishi <unk> ( Type 89 ) torpedo bombers . In 1938 Nakajima A4N ( Type 95 ) fighters and Yokosuka <unk> ( Type 92 ) bombers flew from the ship . In 1940 the air group was modernized with Mitsubishi A5M ( Type 96 ) " Claude " fighters and Yokosuka <unk> ( Type 96 ) " Jean " bombers . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Hōshō was armed with four 50 @-@ caliber 14 cm / 50 3rd Year Type guns , two on each side . The two forward guns had a firing arc of 150 ° , including straight ahead , while the rear guns could fire 120 ° on either side . They fired 38 @-@ kilogram ( 84 lb ) projectiles at a rate of six to ten rounds per minute with a muzzle velocity of about 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) ; at 35 ° , they had a maximum range of 19 @,@ 750 m ( 21 @,@ 600 yd ) . A heavy gun armament was provided for Hōshō ; as carrier doctrine was just evolving at this time , the impracticability of carriers engaging in gun duels had not yet been realized . Her large flight deck and lack of armor made her a vulnerable target in surface battles . 
 A pair of 40 @-@ caliber 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type guns on disappearing mounts provided Hōshō 's only anti @-@ aircraft defense . They were positioned on the flight deck , just forward of the rear elevator . These guns fired 5 @.@ 67 – 5 @.@ 99 @-@ kilogram ( 12 @.@ 5 – 13 @.@ 2 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of about 680 m / s ( 2 @,@ 231 ft / s ) ; at 45 ° , this provided a maximum range of 10 @,@ 800 meters ( 11 @,@ 800 yd ) , and they had a maximum ceiling of 7 @,@ 200 meters ( 23 @,@ 600 ft ) at 75 ° elevation . Their effective rate of fire was 13 to 20 rounds per minute . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Hōshō 's keel was laid down by the Asano Shipbuilding Company in <unk> @-@ ku , Yokohama , on 16 December 1920 . She was launched on 13 November 1921 and towed to Yokosuka Naval Arsenal for completion on 10 January 1922 . Hōshō was delayed by repeated design changes and late deliveries of equipment , pushing the commissioning date from March to 27 December 1922 . She was commissioned lacking much of her aviation equipment , and did not begin landing trials until 22 February 1923 . The first landings were made by British pilots under contract , who were quickly replaced by Japanese pilots trained by the British Aviation Mission . 
 After Hōshō was commissioned , experienced aircrews requested changes , and the ship was modified by the Yokosuka Navy Arsenal from 6 June to 20 August 1924 . The island , tripod mast , and aircraft crane were removed since they partially obstructed the flight deck and obscured pilot visibility . The forward part of the flight deck was made horizontal , and the 8 cm AA guns were moved forward , close to the position of the former island and out of the way of landing operations . After the island was removed , the carrier 's flight operations were controlled from a platform extending from the side of the flight deck , a design that would be repeated in subsequent Japanese aircraft carriers . The ship was then assigned to the 1st Fleet until 15 November 1924 . 
 Hōshō was fitted with a net used as a crash barrier aft of the forward elevator between 10 March and 2 July 1925 . The barrier was intended to prevent landing aircraft from colliding with aircraft preparing to take off , and stop them from falling into the open elevator well . The barrier was hydraulically operated and could be erected in three seconds . 
 As the first of her kind , Hōshō provided valuable experience and insight into carrier air operations for the IJN . The ship was used for testing aircraft and equipment , particularly various types of arresting gear and optical landing aids . The lessons learned influenced the design and construction of Ryūjō and the subsequent conversions of Akagi and Kaga into aircraft carriers . Hōshō was actively used to develop carrier operational methods and tactics for the IJN during the 1920s . She was assigned to the First Carrier Division with Akagi on 1 April 1928 . During the 1930s Hōshō was fitted with three different types of transverse arresting gear for trials . 
 = = = Shanghai = = = 
 Along with Kaga , Hōshō was assigned to the First Carrier Division and sent to China during the Shanghai Incident that began in January 1932 . Operating with the Third Fleet , Hōshō arrived at the mouth of the Yangtze River on 1 February . Her aircraft participated in the IJN 's first aerial combat on 5 February when three fighters , escorting two attack aircraft , were engaged by nine Chinese fighters ; one Chinese fighter was damaged . Two days later , the two carriers sent some of their aircraft to Kunda Airfield where they flew ground attack missions in support of the Imperial Japanese Army . Between 23 and 26 February , Kaga and Hōshō bombers attacked Chinese airfields at Hangzhou and Suzhou , destroying a number of Chinese aircraft on the ground . On 26 February , six fighters from Hōshō , escorting nine attack aircraft from Kaga on one of the bombing raids , shot down two of five Chinese fighters that engaged them . The First Carrier Division rejoined the Combined Fleet on 20 March , after a ceasefire had been declared on 3 March . 
 = = = Fourth Fleet Incident = = = 
 Hōshō participated in the Combined Fleet Maneuvers of 1935 where she was attached to the IJN Fourth Fleet . The fleet was caught out in a typhoon on 23 September . The carrier and a number of other Japanese ships were badly damaged in what was referred to as the " Fourth Fleet Incident . " The ship 's forward flight deck collapsed and part had to be cut away before the carrier could proceed to Yokosuka for repairs . The Fourth Fleet Incident and the Tomozuru Incident of 1934 , in which a top @-@ heavy torpedo boat capsized in heavy weather , caused the Japanese command to investigate the stability of all their ships , resulting in a number of design changes to improve stability and increase hull strength . 
 While the Hōshō was at the dockyard between 22 November 1935 and 31 March 1936 , her stability was improved ; the forward flight deck 's supports were reinforced and increased in number ; the ship 's AA guns , aircraft crane and upper deck aviation fuel tanks were removed ; the funnels were fixed in the horizontal position with their mouths angled slightly downwards ; the front sides of Hōshō 's forward hangar and bridge were reinforced ; and the ship 's hull was reinforced in the vicinity of her rear hangar to increase her longitudinal strength . At full load , her metacentric height after these changes was 1 @.@ 11 meters ( 3 ft 8 in ) . Six twin 13 @.@ 2 mm Type 93 Hotchkiss machine guns were also fitted . 
 = = = Sino @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 During the Sino @-@ Japanese War , Hōshō returned to the Third Fleet and supported land operations of the army in China around August or October 1937 with Ryūjō , later joined by Kaga . Hōshō 's air unit began flying ground support missions in the Shanghai area on 16 July . Three of the ship 's Nakajima A2N fighters engaged two Martin B @-@ 10 heavy bombers on 25 July , shooting down one of them . 
 The ship departed on 1 September to refuel , but did not return to the Shanghai area . Accompanied by Ryūjō , she sailed to the South China coast and began operations against Chinese forces near Canton on 21 September . On that day , Hōshō contributed six fighters to escort bombers attacking airfields at <unk> and <unk> . They claimed six enemy aircraft shot down , but the range proved to be too long . Five of the fighters ran out of fuel and had to ditch in the sea , although the aircrews were rescued . Hōshō and Ryūjō bombers continued with almost daily attack missions until the end of September . Hōshō and Ryūjō returned to the Shanghai area on 3 October and Hōshō 's aircraft were temporarily transferred to Kunda airfield to support ground operations . On 17 October , Hōshō transferred all of her aircraft to Ryūjō and returned to Japan . 
 Hōshō was placed in reserve on 1 December 1937 . Her aircraft elevators were enlarged in 1939 : the forward elevator to 12 @.@ 8 by 8 @.@ 5 meters ( 42 by 28 ft ) and the rear elevator to 13 @.@ 7 by 7 meters ( 45 by 23 ft ) . On 12 August 1939 Hōshō was deemed useful as a training carrier and , in critical battles , as a platform for A4N1 ( Type 95 ) fighters and <unk> ( Type 96 ) torpedo bombers , for as long as those planes remained serviceable . A later investigation determined on 23 December 1940 that she could not operate the latest aircraft types like the Mitsubishi A6M Zero , the Aichi D3A " Val " , or the Nakajima B5N " Kate " in combat . Also , the small size of the carrier 's <unk> limited the ship 's potential value to the fleet in any future conflicts . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Pearl Harbor and Midway = = = = 
 Hōshō began the Pacific War in the Third Carrier Division assigned to the 1st Fleet under Vice Admiral Shirō Takasu . The carrier , captained by <unk> Umetani , was tasked along with Zuihō to provide air support , including scouting , anti @-@ submarine patrols , and combat air patrol for the Combined Fleet 's " Main Body " battle @-@ line of six battleships : Nagato , Mutsu , Fusō , Yamashiro , Ise , and Hyūga . With the Main Body , Hōshō sortied from the Inland Sea on 7 December 1941 to provide distant cover for the carrier forces under Chūichi Nagumo which were attacking Pearl Harbor . The battleship force turned back 300 nautical miles ( 556 km ) east of Japan , but Hōshō became separated on 10 December due to radio silence restrictions while conducting anti @-@ submarine air operations . The carrier was located by scout aircraft the next day 500 nautical miles ( 926 km ) east of the Main Body and returned to port at Kure on 12 December . 
 On 29 May 1942 , Hōshō sortied from Japan with the rest of the fleet for the operation which resulted in the Battle of Midway , providing modest air protection , scouting , and anti @-@ submarine support for the Main Body , now consisting of the battleships Yamato , Nagato , and Mutsu . Her aircraft complement for the operation consisted of eight obsolete Yokosuka B4Y carrier attack aircraft ( torpedo bombers ) . 
 With the Main Body trailing 300 nautical miles ( 556 km ) behind the carrier striking force , Hōshō missed the major portion of the battle in which Nagumo 's four fleet carriers were ambushed and fatally damaged by US carrier aircraft on 4 June . The next day , Hōshō aircraft helped guide the remnants of Nagumo 's force to a rendezvous with the Main Body . Around the same time , one of Hōshō 's aircraft , crewed by pilot Shigeo Nakamura and observer Kiyoshi <unk> , discovered the burning , sinking Hiryū . Photographs of the abandoned carrier taken by <unk> have been described as " among the most dramatic of the war in the Pacific " . With the battle lost , a significant strategic defeat for Japan , the carrier returned to Japan with the rest of the fleet , arriving at the Hashirajima anchorage on 14 June . 
 = = = = Training ship = = = = 
 After her return to Japan , Hōshō was transferred to the Third Fleet , unofficially assigned to the training fleet ( later called the Mobile Force Training Force ) , and officially assigned in October . She conducted flight training in the Inland Sea for aircraft that flew in from shore bases , since no aircraft were based on board Hōshō . On 15 January 1943 , the 50th Air Flotilla was created for carrier aircrew training and both Hōshō and Ryūhō were assigned to the new unit . The two ships provided carrier landing training and served as target ships for torpedo training . In January 1944 , Hōshō was reassigned to the 12th Air Fleet , then to the Combined Fleet , but continued to perform the same mission of training fleet carrier pilots in the Inland Sea . In this role , Hōshō shuttled back and forth between Kure and the Western Inland Sea , spending equal amounts of time at each location . 
 In order to service new and larger aircraft like the Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bomber and the Yokosuka D4Y " Judy " dive bomber , the flight deck was extended over 6 meters ( 19 ft 8 in ) at each end to a total length of 180 @.@ 8 meters ( 593 ft 2 in ) from 27 March to 26 April 1944 . Hōshō also received new arresting gear and a new crash barrier . The additional weight high up in the ship adversely affected her stability and she was restricted from operations in bad weather lest she capsize . At some point during the war the ship 's 14 cm guns were removed and she received about twenty 25 @-@ millimeter Type 96 autocannons in single mounts . They fired .25 @-@ kilogram ( 0 @.@ 55 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 900 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) ; at 50 ° , this provided a maximum range of 7 @,@ 500 meters ( 8 @,@ 202 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) . The 15 @-@ round magazines needed to be changed frequently , and the maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute . 
 After the modifications , Hōshō continued to provide training to navy pilots in the Inland Sea , including acting as a target ship for torpedo training . At 05 : 30 on 19 March 1945 , possibly while berthed at Kure , the carrier was caught in an air raid by carrier aircraft from the United States Task Force 58 . Hōshō 's flight deck was damaged by three bomb hits which killed six crewmen . Emergency repairs were made and her captain was ordered to keep her in readiness on 10 April . However , this order was revoked two days later and the carrier became a " 4th reserve ship " with most of her crew transferred elsewhere . Hōshō was taken out of reserve as a " special guard ship " on 1 June and many of her crew were transferred back . During this time , the ship remained moored and camouflaged off <unk> at Kure . 
 Hōshō was slightly damaged by a single bomb or aerial rocket hit when the Allies attacked Kure again in July 1945 . Information is scarce on the extent of the ship 's involvement in the action , but it appears the carrier 's participation was minimal , as it embarked no aircraft at the time . Hōshō was repaired within 15 days , but the termination of hostilities in September 1945 found the carrier still docked at Kure . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the war , Hōshō served as a repatriation transport to retrieve Japanese servicemen and civilians stationed overseas and return them to Japan . In October and November 1945 , accompanied by the cruiser Kashima , she carried 700 passengers from Wotje Atoll , 311 from Jaluit Atoll , and an undocumented number from Enewetak Atoll to Uraga , Kanagawa . 
 In December 1945 , Hōshō 's overhanging flight deck at the bow was cut off and her hangars were modified to carry more passengers . Thereafter , she undertook more repatriation missions beginning with one to Wewak on 5 January 1946 and subsequent trips to China . In total , the carrier made nine repatriation trips before 15 August 1946 and transported about 40 @,@ 000 passengers . 
 Hōshō was transferred to the Ministry of the Interior on 31 August for disposal . She was scrapped in Osaka from 2 September 1946 to 1 May 1947 by the <unk> Shipbuilding Company . 
 = Mary Kom ( film ) = 
 Mary Kom is a 2014 Indian biographical sports film directed by Omung Kumar and produced by Sanjay Leela Bhansali . The film stars Priyanka Chopra in the lead role of the eponymous boxer , with Darshan Kumar and Sunil Thapa in supporting roles as her husband and mentor , respectively . The film depicts Kom 's journey of becoming a boxer to her victory at the 2008 World Boxing Championships in Ningbo . Chopra made her first appearance as a Hindi playback singer with the lullaby , " Chaoro " , in the film . 
 The feature was developed by writer Saiwyn Quadras , who suggested the storyline to Kumar when Kom , despite her numerous achievements , was not a familiar name in India . Kumar met Kom to ask her permission for the film , much before her bronze medal victory at the 2012 Summer Olympics , which brought her recognition . Chopra underwent extensive physical training for three months to attain a muscular physique . She also trained for Kom 's distinct boxing styles . Principal photography started in June 2013 at Filmistan Studio , where only the boxing sequences were filmed continuously for twenty days . After the plans to shoot in Kom 's hometown Manipur were dropped due to safety concerns , the film was shot in Dharamshala and Manali , where a major portion of Manipur was recreated . 
 The film premiered at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival , becoming the first Hindi film to be screened on the opening night of the festival . The film was released on 5 September 2014 to generally positive reviews from critics , with Chopra receiving critical acclaim . Made on a budget of ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) , the film grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( US $ 15 million ) at the box @-@ office , emerging as a commercial success . Mary Kom received several accolades at award ceremonies across India . The film won the Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment honor at the 62nd National Film Awards and was nominated at the 60th Filmfare Awards in the Best Film and the Best Actress ( Chopra ) categories . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with a pregnant <unk> <unk> Kom ( Priyanka Chopra ) , heading towards the hospital with her husband Onler Kom ( Darshan <unk> ) . Onler is mistaken for an insurgent and beaten when he tries to find a vehicle despite a curfew . The film then shifts to a flashback with Kom , finding boxing gloves in the remains of an air crash in 1991 , which prompted her interest in boxing despite her father 's disapproval . During an early fight , she chases a boy and ends up in a boxing gym . After realising <unk> Singh ( Sunil Thapa ) , coach of the gym , and of the Asian champion <unk> Singh , Kom tells him about her boxing aspirations . He asks her to visit the gym for the next thirty days and says that he will only teach her if she is deserving enough . She starts visiting the gym , informing her mother but not her father . Days pass but her coach does not enquire about her . Due to Kom 's dedication and stubbornness , Singh starts training her , suggesting she change her name to Mary Kom . 
 After winning the state level championship , her father confronts her for keeping about her involvement in the sport from him . Her father asks her to choose between him and boxing : she chooses the sport . Kom has to fight a wrestler to arrange money to get her household cow back , which is where she meets the footballer Onler Kom . 
 After watching her victorious 2002 Women 's World Amateur Boxing Championships match on television , Kom reconciles with her father , who apologises to her for not understanding her passion for the sport . Meanwhile , Onler proposes to her and agrees never to ask her to quit boxing . After she wins the 2006 Women 's World Amateur Boxing Championships , Kom agrees to marry him ; however , her coach shows his unhappiness towards the decision . After the marriage , Kom gets pregnant and gives up her career to look after her family . 
 Kom gives birth to twins and applies for a government job . However , she refuses the position of a police constable , feeling that as a world @-@ champion boxer , she is above that . It devastates her to learn that people no longer recognise her . Onler encourages her to revive her boxing training . She joins the gym again , leaving her husband to look after the twins at home . Her coach is still upset about her decision to marry , but Kom makes a comeback in the National Boxing Championship . Despite performing better than her opponent , she loses the match due to the apparent partiality of the judges . Kom throws a chair in anger towards them , resulting in a ban . She later writes an apology letter , and the official accepts it , not without insulting her . 
 Kom then asks Coach Singh to train her , as she thinks that he is the one who can get the best out of her . He starts training her with gruelling activities and she reaches the finals of the 2008 AIBA Women 's World Boxing Championships . Meanwhile , Onler Kom informs her about one of her children having ventricular septal defect . In the subsequent fight , Kom fails to defend herself . After a knockout punch from her opponent , Kom hallucinates about her husband and children in the audience . She regains her strength and fights back , winning the 2008 Women 's World Amateur Boxing Championships . On the podium while accepting the medal , she learns that her son 's surgery was successful and she is given the nickname " Magnificent Mary " . The film ends with the Indian flag waving and the Indian national anthem . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During his work as an art director on Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's Saawariya ( 2007 ) , Omung Kumar started writing two scripts simultaneously for his directorial debut . However , neither of the films were made . He then asked writer Saiwyn Quadras to look for a woman @-@ oriented biographical subject for his first film , specifying " a role that no actress would turn down . " He added that he " wanted to make a film that would be like the Mother India of someone 's career . " Historical personalities such as Rani Laxmi Bai and Queen Elizabeth I of England came up for discussion ; however they did not inspire Kumar . Quadras put forward the name of five @-@ time world boxing champion Mary Kom , who despite numerous achievements , was at that time an unfamiliar name in India . Kumar admitted that he felt disgusted after being told of Kom 's achievements as he was unaware of her existence . After Quadras approached Kumar with the script for Mary Kom , Kumar decided to make his directorial debut with a film about Kom . 
 Quadras , who was interested in sports , started writing the screenplay for the film in 2011 , which took two years to complete . Quadras arranged a meeting with Kom via her manager in the year he started writing the script . Kumar went to Manipur to meet Kom and to seek her permission to make the film . However , Kom was surprised by the development as the sport , especially women 's boxing , was not well known in India . However , she was enthusiastic about the idea . 
 Research for the film was done through sources , online information , and newspaper archives . Her videos played a key role in the research . The writer also had several telephone and email conversations with Kom and her manager regarding her biography . In her interactions with Quadras and Kumar , Kom was honest and forthcoming when it came to the details of her life , and had significant input in the screenplay . However , Quadras 's main challenge was to make the film authentic and cinematic , explaining that he wrote the film in a manner that showed the struggles Kom went through as a female sportsperson who had to confront opposition from her father , politics and making a comeback after a long career break . The film only shows the period from her early struggles and her comeback after motherhood . The fifth World Boxing Championship and the London Olympics were left out because of a contract that permitted to depict Kom 's life up to 2008 . The contract for the film was signed at that time when Kom was not even qualified for the London Olympics . 
 In a 2012 meeting with Sanjay Leela Bhansali , on being asked by Bhansali about his plans , Kumar told him about the film , explaining that this was not " his kind of cinema " , given Bhansali 's signature work . Still , he wanted to hear the story and was also enthusiastic towards the project . After hearing the script , he liked it and immediately agreed to produce the film . However , Kumar 's colleagues were not sure if a film based in Manipur would be well received by the audience . This concern evaporated after the 2012 Summer Olympics , where Kom won a bronze medal . Her win also brought the recognition of her previous achievements . After the news of the development of the film broke in the media , the makers clarified that the film was in development since 2011 , much before the Olympics , and they were not influenced by her recent success . In an interview with Press Trust of India , Bhansali revealed that the story of the film was so inspiring , it touched his heart and described the film as " a rare experiment " . He added , " Not many films are based on biopics of living people . I am proud that I am part of this film . " 
 = = = Casting and characters = = = 
 Priyanka Chopra was Omung Kumar 's and Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's original choice for the title role . In early November 2012 , media reports suggested that Chopra entered negotiations to star in the film , which the actress denied initially . Later in that month , it was confirmed that she had been cast for the part . She was initially skeptical about the film due to the demanding nature of the character , which included training , muscle building and learning the sport . She later agreed to appear in the film because of Kumar 's confidence in her . After Chopra was cast for the title role , Mary Kom revealed her own satisfaction with the choice of actor , calling her the " perfect choice " . In an interview with Daily News and Analysis , Mary Kom said " I don 't think anybody could have done it as well as Priyanka . She is the best actress to play me . Acting anybody can do , but boxing will be different as one needs a certain type of body structure . She suits that . Her body is very structured , like that of a boxer . " 
 In contrast , it took the casting directors Shruti Mahajan and Parag Mehta several months of auditions to finalize the appropriate supporting actors for the film . In May 2013 , It was reported that Danny Denzongpa was approached to play Kom 's coach <unk> Singh in the film . Instead , Sunil Thapa was cast for the role of Kom 's coach . Darshan Kumar was finalized as Kom 's husband , footballer Onler Kom , after a series of auditions which included three different looks representing three different stages in his life . Robin Das , a National School of Drama professor , was cast in the role of Kom 's father . 
 Before the shooting of the film began , Chopra prepared for three months . The preparations included building the physique of a boxer and learning the sport . Samir <unk> , who previously trained Farhan Akhtar for Bhaag Milkha Bhaag was brought to train Chopra . Before agreeing to meet her , he saw Kom 's fight videos to understand her body language . Chopra , at that time , was busy with her other works — filming for Gunday , and dubbing for Krrish 3 . It was then decided that <unk> would accompany her to film shoots , so that continuity in training could be maintained . Though he did not get a chance to meet Kom , he prepared a workout plan with the help of her videos . She started training in April 2013 to develop body like a boxer . Chopra found it hard to train vigorously to attain a boxer 's physique . She was put on a low @-@ carb , high @-@ protein diet . In an Interview with Deccan Chronicle , she said " As a girl it was very difficult to build those muscles . I had to build in three months what Mary did in 15 years . " 
 Chopra got a fifteen days break from her other commitments to train continuously for the film . She relocated to her bungalow in Goa , where she would train for five hours every day . After completing workouts , which included weights and circuit training , she insisted on training for boxing . Later , boxing was made a part of her daily workout . She was particularly trained by Kom 's coaches to learn her distinct boxing style . Chopra explained that she did not have to act like a boxer , but had to become one and said " To learn boxing was a religion . Today , I can play the sport as I know the rules , body posture , foot work , I can hit , I can defend . I know the game . " 
 Chopra described Mary Kom as being a very special and personal film due to the inspiring theme . She revealed that she channelled grief of father 's death into the film saying " I started this film at the hardest point in my life , four days after my father passed away . All my grief , everything , I have shoved into this movie . A part of my soul has gone into it . " In an interview with Daily News and Analysis , Chopra revealed that since she could not look like her , she did not try to imitate Kom as her main focus was to represent Kom 's spirit and personality . In July 2013 , Chopra visited Kom 's home town of Manipur to learn more about her life . As a part of her research , Chopra stayed with Kom and her family for three to four days , went to her boxing academy and church to learn more about her and called Kom for details . Kom stated " When she came to Manipur , she knew about boxing so I gave her tips as a mother and a wife , how I went about managing my home and profession , how I live with my family – basically she got to know aspects of my family life . " 
 Darshan Kumar described his character as an " encouraging husband " , who is the pillar of strength in Kom 's life . He found the character challenging due to contrasting personalities . Unlike Chopra , Kumar did not met Onler Kom before the film , working mainly from videos provided by Kom to the makers , and helping the actor to understand the nuances of his character . For the role , he had to undergo training to learn the Manipuri accent , which was difficult for him being a Punjabi . Kumar had to lose 12 kg to look convincing , and followed a strict , grilled chicken and oil @-@ free fish protein diet for three months . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 The production design was handled by Kumar 's wife Vanita , who had worked with her husband for several years . After plans to shoot in Manipur were dropped because of safety concerns , extensive research was done to find locations similar to Manipur . Their search ended in Himachal Pradesh , Manali , where a major portion of the state was created . Vanita used a real structure instead of a set to show Kom 's childhood home in <unk> . She recreated the look and feel of Manipur in Dharamsala and Manali . 
 During the search , she found two houses that were similar to the houses where Kom spent her childhood and where she lived after her marriage . For authenticity , the house was filled with items similar to those found at Kom 's house such as indigenous short stools and woven curtains sourced from Manipur . The designers also created a room for her awards and trophies ; Kom has a separate trophy room where all her awards are kept . Quotes from the Bible were added on the walls . A 19th @-@ century church in Dharamsala was chosen for the wedding sequence . Vanita noted that " the cinematic realism , was a different experience from the grandeur of Bhansali 's sets . " However , Vanita found difficult to recreate the run @-@ down gym where Kom was trained . A place was chosen with minimal facilities and water leaking onto the walls . She revealed that her sets had to feel authentic rather than artificially created . Designer Rajat <unk> handled costuming and visited Manipur to study fabric used in local clothing . <unk> used photographs from Kom 's childhood to create clothing which ranged from traditional to sporty and athletic attires . For Kom 's wedding sequence in the film , the designer created an exact replica of the wedding gown that Kom wore for her wedding . 
 The Hollywood @-@ based makeup artist Mark <unk> was selected to work on Chopra 's makeup . At first , they wanted her to look exactly like Kom by using prosthetic makeup . Chopra did a prosthetic test in the United States which included heavier eyelids for a more East @-@ Asian look . However , the final result did not appeal to the makers . Also , the prosthetic would not hold during filming of the heavy @-@ action boxing scenes . It was later reported that Chopra 's look would be created post production by using Visual effects . However , the results were unsatisfactory and hence , this idea was also dropped . Chopra said " We tried a bunch of stuff – Visual effects , prosthetics , makeup , [ but ] it looked too gimmicky . That 's when we decided to go with just carrying the essence of the film , rather than the outer , cosmetic part . " Later , Uday <unk> ( Chopra 's makeup artist since Agneepath ) was hired . For creating boxing scars , makeup artist Subhash Shinde was employed . His biggest challenges was to make the fight marks look as realistic as possible as it required a lot of time and detailing . He stated , " Every punch or scar needed to look real , change colour and age with time on screen , and shouldn 't look like they were created using makeup . " He did some research by visiting hospitals to understand more about skin injuries . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography started in June 2013 at Filmistan , Mumbai . Hindustan Times reported that the set was ready at Filmistan studio , but following Chopra 's father 's death , the plans for shooting were put on hold . To make the boxing scenes as authentic as possible some of the crew members , including Kumar , learnt boxing to get the necessary understanding of the sport to film the fight scenes . Initially , the makers had planned to use actors and teach them boxing to film the boxing scenes . However , they realised that it would become a task to teach boxing to actors , which would consume time . They also thought that if both Chopra and her opponents were not real boxers , it would not look convincing enough . Finally , professional boxers were employed to film the boxing sequences for giving a more natural feel and convincing look . Chopra found it very difficult filming the boxing scenes as she got hurt several times saying , " They are real boxers and they don 't know how to fake a punch , they had to really hit you . So I had to get hit a lot and that was really hard . " Robert Miller , the sports coordinator for films such as Bhaag Milkha Bhaag and Chak De ! India , was hired to choreograph the fight sequences . 
 The second schedule commenced in Manali in late March 2014 , after Chopra was done with her other film commitments . Before filming , Chopra had to re @-@ train herself all over again to build muscles . Bhansali planned an elaborate schedule for her , which would ensure that her physicality and agility were suitable before she started shooting for the film . While filming a sequence in a marketplace , more than ten thousand people gathered on the sets . Limited security arrangements had been made , which were not able to handle the crowds in what was not believed to be a heavily @-@ populated area . When Chopra stepped out of her van , some fans tried to approach her , causing the general loss of control . Finally , the shoot was cancelled and crew had to leave . Filming in Manali continued till early April 2014 , before shifting to Dharamshala . During filming one of the fight sequences in Dharamsala , Chopra suffered an eye injury , which the makeup team exaggerated for effect . The filming in Dharamshala continued till 19 April 2014 . Cinematographer Keiko Nakahara used a hand @-@ held camera during the shooting of the film . The film was shot in 57 days over the course of two years . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of the film consists of seven original songs composed by Shashi @-@ Shivam ( Pathak ) . They were written by Prashant <unk> , Sandeep Singh and Bijou <unk> ( Manipuri Lyrics ) ; Priyanka Chopra made her first appearance as a Hindi playback singer for a lullaby , " Chaoro " . The song " Salaam India " , composed by Shivam Pathak was chosen as the official song at the 2014 Asian Games , held in South Korea . 
 The Times of India noted that the soundtrack is both , " inspirational and soul @-@ stirring " , describing the opening track " <unk> Dil " as a " clear winner that could lift anyone 's spirits in a time of distress . " Bollywood Hungama gave it a rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , and said that the composers did justice to the theme of the film . Writing for Rediff.com , Joginder Tuteja gave the soundtrack a rating of 3 out of 5 , calling it " motivational " , and that " Mary Kom 's soundtrack may not be an instant chart @-@ buster , but it holds its own . " The Koimoi review stated that all the songs on the album are an " absolute delight to hear " . They added that " The Mary Kom album is a good blend of romantic and inspirational numbers . The classic mix of excellent singers by composers Shashi Suman and Shivam has given the album some great numbers . " The Financial Express wrote " the music of Mary Kom performs well [ ... ] , the music composers have done a fairly good job " . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The first poster for the film was revealed on 14 July 2014 by Chopra through her Twitter account . It portrayed a muscular Priyanka Chopra as Mary Kom in sports clothing , with her hair tied in a pony tail , punching a bag . It received positive feedback from film critics , industry professionals , and audiences alike . The Hindustan Times noted that " [ w ] ith well @-@ built muscles and a completely toned body , Priyanka looks fierce in the poster where she is posing with a punch . " The poster went viral on social media , with the hashtag " # <unk> " trending in India and worldwide . On 15 July , Chopra tweeted another poster for the film , which was also well @-@ received and the final poster was released the same day . The first teaser was released on Chopra 's birthday , 18 July , which showed the actor as Kom getting ready for her boxing match with the tagline " Most Champions Make Their Name . She Made History " . The trailer release was highly anticipated , with media reporting that it would be unveiled on 24 July 2014 . However , it was released the day before at an event on 23 July and had positive reception from media and critics . On 27 August 2014 , a special screening was held for selected members of media , trade and critics , where 20 minutes of raw footage from the film was previewed , creating a positive buzz . As a part of promotional strategy , Bhansali Productions released a doll , which looked like Chopra as Mary Kom . 
 The film was originally scheduled for release on 2 October 2014 ( on Gandhi Jayanti ) , however , it was announced that the film was postponed to an uncertain date to revamp the film to feature more events surrounding Kom 's life . The media reported that the makers were working on two different versions , a longer version for the Indian market and another for the international market . After the uncertainty of a release date for a month , it was announced that the film would be finally released on 5 September ( Teacher 's Day ) and clashing with Chopra 's cousin Parineeti Chopra starrer Daawat @-@ e @-@ Ishq . Yash Raj Films requested Bhansali to shift the release date , which he refused due to previous release date changes of the film and start of promotional activities . Later , Yash Raj Films postponed Daawat @-@ e @-@ Ishq release date by two weeks . 
 Mary Kom had its world premiere at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on 4 September 2014 . It became the first Hindi film to be screened on the opening night of the film festival . It was initially released to 1500 screens worldwide . The film was released in overseas markets by Eros International as part of a four @-@ film deal between Eros and Viacom 18 studios . The rights to television broadcasting belongs to <unk> 's flagship general entertainment channel Colors . The film was not released in Kom 's home state of Manipur because of the ban on Bollywood films by the Imphal @-@ based separatist militant group , Revolutionary Peoples Front ( RPF ) since 2000 . In an interview with Press Trust of India , Kom expressed her sadness that people from her own state won 't be able to see her biopic . However , unauthorized DVDs and VCDs flooded the state , with the DVD format being in great demand as the only option for native people to watch the film . 
 Made on a budget of ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) including , production , prints and advertising , Mary Kom earned ₹ 200 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 0 million ) , and before release recouped more than its cost from brand tie @-@ ups . The film made profits of ₹ 50 million ( US $ 740 @,@ 000 ) before the release . Partnership was arranged in a way that the products from brands were either showcased in the film or the brands promoted the film in their advertising . The satellite rights of the film were sold for ₹ 140 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 1 million ) and music rights for ₹ 30 million ( US $ 450 @,@ 000 ) . The film was released in DVDs on 15 October 2014 across all regions in a one @-@ disc pack in NTSC format . Distributed by Shemaroo Entertainment , it contained behind @-@ the @-@ scene footage and deleted scenes . The VCD and Blu @-@ ray versions were released at the same time . The Mary Kom Blu @-@ ray is the first Blu @-@ ray title in India to feature a Dolby Atmos soundtrack . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Chopra received critical acclaim for her performance as Kom . Subhash K. Jha awarded the film 5 stars out of 5 describing it as the film as " a motivational masterpiece " and said , " From first frame to last it grips your senses and irrigates the parched corridors of your heart like very few bio @-@ pics in recent times . Debutant director <unk> Kumar weaves seamlessly in and out of Ms Kom 's remarkable life creating a work that is as dramatic as Mehboob 's Mother India and as inspiring as Attenborough 's Gandhi . " Rediff.com rated the film 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , noting it as a victory for its protagonist Chopra , scriptwriter Saiwyn Quadras , and director Omung Kumar and writing , " Mary 's story is delivered with a sincerity that makes it irresistible . " Sonia Chopra from Sify described the film as a " thrilling ringside view " , saying that " Mary Kom is an important film that 's hugely inspiring . But more importantly , it 's also great fun to watch . " The Times of India gave the film a rating of 4 stars out of 5 calling it as Bollywood 's answer to Academy Award @-@ winning film Million Dollar Baby ( 2004 ) . Bollywood Hungama gave it 4 stars , stating " Omung Kumar certainly deserves an ovation for having shown the guts to make a biopic on Mary Kom , something which will surely go down in the history of exemplary biopics on Indian celluloid . " Namrata Joshi from Outlook rated the film with 3 stars out of 4 and commented on the simple , unpretentious storyline that dramatized important events from the champion 's life . 
 Bhawana Somaaya rated the film 4 stars out of 5 , stating that film was not solely a medium for entertainment and that the main purpose of Mary Kom was to depict courage , stability , truth and innocence . The Economic Times gave a rating of 4 stars out of 5 , noting that the film is well on its way to being one of the most praised sports @-@ based films since Chak De India and Bhaag Milkha Bhaag and wrote " This is one of those boxing movies which is much more than boxing . It takes you to a place which is beyond ruptured cheeks , cracked jaws , and fractured ribs of the protagonist . " Yahoo ! India rated the film 4 stars out of 5 and noted that it evoked many emotions , calling it a " must watch " . Writing for Hindustan Times , Anupama Chopra rated the film 3 out of 5 noted it as a " worthy attempt " and said that the film had sincerity and was crafted with care . Mayank Shekhar also rated the film with 3 stars , stating that his biggest concern before getting into the film was that the film @-@ makers ( Sanjay Leela Bhansali ) would excessively " Bollywood @-@ ise " Kom 's story . He commented that this fear was " thankfully " unfounded . 
 On the contrary , Business Standard criticized the film for not showing enough about boxing in general rather than Kom in particular . It stated that " while Mary Kom is entertaining , it should have aspired to be more . " Rajeev Masand wrote that the film was " watchable , but never great like it should 've been " . Shubhra Gupta from The Indian Express gave a rating of two and half noting " Film gets bloated by extraneous songs " and criticized the product placements calling them a " distraction from the story . " The India Today reviewer , Rohit Khilnani criticized Kumar 's direction and wrote " The story is predictable from the word go and there are absolutely no surprise elements . A lot could have been done with such a strong protagonist but the director doesn 't experiment . " Sudhish Kamath from The Hindu criticized the film , saying the film should be only watched for Chopra , but that the script was generic and predictable , and the plot was actually manipulative . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film collected ₹ 85 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) on its opening day . Following the positive word of mouth , Saturday collections showed a growth of 20 % from Friday and went on to collect ₹ 90 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) . The collection on Sunday showed an additional 20 % growth from Saturday , collecting approximately ₹ 110 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) . The film collected ₹ 275 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 1 million ) net over its first weekend . For a film featuring a female protagonist , the film recorded the highest collections of all time . The film had a drop of 55 % on its first Monday and went on to collect ₹ 36 million ( US $ 530 @,@ 000 ) , making a four @-@ day total of ₹ 305 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 million ) . The collections on Tuesday were of ₹ 33 million ( US $ 490 @,@ 000 ) . It collected approximately ₹ 400 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 9 million ) nett in its first week . The film collected ₹ 110 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) in its second week , crossing the ₹ 500 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) mark at the domestic box @-@ office . The film 's domestic nett collection was over ₹ 610 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 1 million ) . Mary Kom grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( US $ 15 million ) at the box @-@ office and was a commercial success . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Mary Kom won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment at the 62nd National Film Awards . At the 60th Filmfare Awards , the film was nominated for Best Film and Best Actress for Chopra . The film received eight nominations at the 21st Screen Awards , where it won Best Actress for Chopra . It received ten nominations at the Producers Guild Film Awards , including nominations for Best Film and Best Director and won five awards : Best Actress in a Leading Role for Chopra , Best Debut Director for Kumar , Dialogue of the Year and the President 's Award for Best Film . Additionally , it was nominated for the Best Film and Best Actress at the 16th IIFA Awards , winning the Best Debut Director for Kumar . 
 = The Fourth Horseman ( Millennium ) = 
 " The Fourth Horseman " is the twenty @-@ second episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on May 8 , 1998 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Dwight Little . " The Fourth Horseman " featured guest appearances by Kristen Cloke and Glenn Morshower . 
 In this episode , offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) investigates the initial outbreak of a deadly virus , and discovers that his employers , the Millennium Group may pose a danger to his safety . 
 " The Fourth Horseman " was written under the belief that the series would soon be cancelled , and inspired in part by the outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United Kingdom . The episode has earned positive responses from critics , and was seen by approximately 4 @.@ 61 million households during its initial broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a farm in Baraboo , Wisconsin in 1986 , a farmer finds his entire warehouse of chickens dead , the floor soaked in blood . He attempts to run , but collapses dead , bleeding profusely and covered in dark lesions . 
 Twelve years later , Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) is visited by a retired Federal Bureau of Investigation agent , Richard Gilbert ( Glenn Morshower ) . Gilbert hopes to <unk> Black for his new private security firm , The Trust . Their meeting abruptly ends when Black receives word that his father has died . At the funeral , Black explains the notion of death to his young daughter ; later that day , he unsuccessfully tries to contact fellow Group member Lara Means ( Kristen Cloke ) , with whom he has lost contact . 
 Black meets with another Group member , Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) to investigate the death of a man found surrounded by six pints of spilt blood , with no evidence of murder . A coroner determines that the man drowned when his lungs filled with his own blood , surmising the cause to be a viral infection . Everyone who came into contact with the corpse is isolated in quarantine , waiting to be tested for exposure to any pathogen . While quarantined , Black accuses Watts and the Millennium Group of knowing more about the virus than is apparent . Watts simply responds by quoting the Bible 's Book of Revelation . The pair are examined by mysterious doctors in protective suits ; shortly afterwards , they are cleared to leave quarantine . Black contacts Gilbert and expresses his wish to leave the Millennium Group and join The Trust — however , he first wishes to " rescue " his friends within the Group . 
 Elsewhere , a family sit down to dinner together , before spontaneously collapsing and bleeding profusely ; further victims of the virus . At home , Black learns that his daughter has been having vivid nightmares about the end of the world , in which she and her parents are isolated in a woodland cabin . Black admits to his wife that he has come to accept the Group as a cult , and wishes to leave . He arranges to see a doctor , wishing to be tested but wanting the results to remain secret . 
 Gilbert <unk> Watts , finding that the latter has been in contact with Means . Black travels to where Means is living , where he remotely observes a cult @-@ like ceremony in which Means is ritually inducted into the Group . He contacts Watts , divulging the results of his tests — they were injected with a vaccine while quarantined . Black warns Watts that the Group is dangerous ; Watts neither confirms nor denies this , but predicts the arrival of an earthquake , urging Black that should this prediction come to pass , he should accept full membership of the Group . That night , Black answers a telephone call from Means , who tells him that the Group mean no harm . The line suddenly cuts , and the tremors of an earthquake begin just as Watts had predicted . Black moves through his home , noticing that his pet bird is dead in its cage , covered in blood . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Fourth Horseman " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong . The duo would pen a total of fifteen episodes throughout the series ' run . The pair had also taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers for the season . The episode was the second of three to be directed by Dwight Little , who had previously helmed " Midnight of the Century " , and would return in the third season for " Borrowed Time " . 
 Written simultaneously with the concluding episode , " The Time Is Now " , the episode 's script went through several different versions before a final plot was decided upon , as Morgan and Wong believed the series would not be renewed for a third season and wished to write a suitable ending . The idea of depicting an apocalyptic scenario as being the result of a virus came from Morgan 's research into possible end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ world scenarios , and was influenced by the outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United Kingdom . The build @-@ up to , and depiction of , the viral outbreak was seen by the writing staff as conclusive proof that the series would be cancelled , leading to several writers beginning to look for work on other projects while still officially under contract to work on Millennium . 
 Actress Brittany Tiplady , who portrays Black 's young daughter Jordan , has cited " The Fourth Horseman " as one of the episodes which she considered to have caused her to grow as an actress . Tiplady described her role in the episode as not being " just the cute Jordan Black with easy scenes and lots of giggling " , and added that the increased depth her character was given served to heighten her interest in acting . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Fourth Horseman " was first broadcast on the Fox network on May 8 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 7 during its original broadcast , meaning that 4 @.@ 7 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 4 @.@ 61 million households , and left the episode the eighty @-@ fifth most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 " The Time Is Now " received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an " A " . VanDerWerff felt that the two @-@ part finale was " at once haunting and terrifying " , finding both " The Fourth Horseman " and " The Time Is Now " to be Millennium 's most frightening instalments . VanDerWerff noted that the episode 's plotting and symbolism were not always subtle , but felt that this directness suited the series ' tone . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 5 out of 5 . Gibron felt that both Cloke and O 'Quinn gave particularly strong performances in both this episode and its follow @-@ up . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Fourth Horseman " five stars out of five . 
 = Åndalsnes Station = 
 Åndalsnes Station ( Norwegian : Åndalsnes stasjon ) is a railway station in the town of Åndalsnes , the administrative centre of Rauma Municipality in Møre og Romsdal county , Norway . It has been the terminal station of the <unk> railway line since the line was extended to Åndalsnes on 30 November 1924 . The station was designed by Gudmund Hoel and is located on reclaimed land along the Isfjorden . To get the line to the station , a cutting had to be built . In addition to a station building , the station has an engine shed and a bus station ; the station building is next to a cruise ship port . It serves four passenger trains per day , and has correspondence by bus onwards to the nearby towns of Molde and Ålesund . The station is manned and features a chapel within a retired train carriage . 
 = = History = = 
 The area where the station is located is built on reclaimed land , as the Åndalsnes side of Isfjorden is sufficiently shallow . The earthwork for the reclaiming was taken from a cutting built to allow the line access to Åndalsnes . The earthwork was transported using temporary 90 and 60 centimetres ( 35 and 24 in ) gauge railways . In 1912 , tests were done in the area of the cutting to establish if it should be a cutting or a tunnel . Work with excavation started in 1915 , with the cutting up to 16 meters ( 52 ft ) deep . It was necessary to move one house to make room for the line through Åndalsnes . The station building was built in 1923 and 1924 , and had an area of 316 @.@ 2 square meters ( 3 @,@ 404 sq ft ) . It cost NOK 254 @,@ 836 to build . Both the main station building and the auxiliary buildings were designed by Gudmund Hoel of NSB Arkitektkontor , the in @-@ house architecture firm for the Norwegian State Railways , who were responsible for construction . 
 The station also received an engine shed in natural stone brick . Built from mid to late 1924 , it cost NOK 107 @,@ 000 . The classic style brick buildings on the station stuck out from the other station buildings on the Rauma Line . To secure a sufficient water supply for the steam locomotives , a new water pool needed to be built at <unk> . By damming up a pool , it was possible to supply 120 cubic meters ( 4 @,@ 200 cu ft ) of water per day to the station . This was built by NSB , but was then given free of charge to the municipality who operated it , in exchange for the railway receiving the allocated amount of water free for all eternity . Because of delayed delivery of parts from Germany , the water system was not opened until 10 February 1925 . On 29 November 1924 , Norsk Spisevognselskap established a restaurant in the station . As one of the larger railway station restaurants in the country , it included an outdoor patio . Åndalsnes Station was opened on 30 November 1924 , when the Rauma Line was extended from Verma Station . 
 The train chapel was opened on 10 June 2003 . On 8 June 2011 , a renovation project for the station was completed . This included better transfer between trains and buses and cruise ships , a new park , and raising of the platforms . Including upgrades to the track , the upgrades cost NOK 19 million . The station building has received an elevator and a renovation of the lobby . The station is considered worthy of preservation and the renovation was done in cooperation with the preservation authorities . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Åndalsnes Station is located in downtown Åndalsnes at 4 meters ( 13 ft ) above mean sea level and is 457 kilometers ( 284 mi ) from Oslo Central Station . The station building is owned by Rom Eiendom , a subsidiary of NSB , while the infrastructure is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . Åndalsnes Station has a manned ticket sale and has a waiting room , lockers , a kiosk , a bicycle rack and parking for 15 cars . It is located next to the cruise ship terminal . The part of the station building not used for train operations is rented out to businesses . At the station is a train chapel , a retired B3 carriage which has been converted to a chapel . It has kept the original seating of the train , but there is incorporated an altar . It is run as a cooperation between the Church of Norway , the Salvation Army and the Pentecostal Church . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways operates passenger train services on the line . Using Class 93 trains , they operate four services in each direction per day . From the station , there is correspondence with buses to the nearby towns of Ålesund and Molde . During the summer , from June through August , NSB operates the trains as tourists trains , limiting the service from Åndalsnes to Bjorli . 
 = RAAF area commands = 
 Area commands were the major operational and administrative formations of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) between 1940 and 1954 . Established in response to the outbreak of World War II , they underpinned the Air Force 's geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system for the duration of the conflict and into the early years of the Cold War , until being superseded by a functional control system made up of Home , Training , and Maintenance Commands . 
 The area commands and their responsibilities evolved over time according to changing circumstances . The RAAF established four commands to begin with in 1940 – 41 : Southern Area , Central Area , Western Area , and Northern Area . They oversaw almost all operations , training and maintenance within their boundaries . A concession to functional control occurred in mid @-@ 1941 , when the Air Force formed two groups that assumed the training role of the southern and eastern states ; Central Area itself was disbanded and most of its units taken over by Northern and Southern Areas , and the newly formed No. 2 ( Training ) Group . The area structure was further revised in 1942 , following the outbreak of the Pacific War . Northern Area was split into North @-@ Eastern Area and North @-@ Western Area , and a new command , Eastern Area , was created , making a total of five commands . The same year , the RAAF formed two functional groups that assumed the maintenance role of the area commands ; the latter focussed on operations until the end of hostilities . A new area command covering RAAF units in New Guinea , Northern Command , was formed in 1944 and dissolved soon after the war . 
 By the early 1950s , most operational units were based within Eastern Area Command , most Air Force training was controlled by Southern Area Command , and maintenance was the responsibility of Maintenance Group . The area command structure was no longer considered appropriate for delivering the concentration of force necessary for combat , and the Federal government decided to replace it with a functional command @-@ and @-@ control system . In 1953 , Eastern Area Command was re @-@ formed as Home Command ( controlling operations ) , Southern Area Command was re @-@ formed as Training Command , and Maintenance Group was re @-@ designated Maintenance Command . The three remaining area commands ceded their authority to the functional commands in 1954 , and were disbanded by the end of 1956 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin and purpose = = = 
 On the eve of World War II , the RAAF comprised twelve flying squadrons , two aircraft depots and a flying school , situated at five air bases . An air force of this size did not require large @-@ scale operational formations such as wings , groups , or commands , as all units could be directly administered and controlled by RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . With the onset of war in September 1939 , the Australian Air Board decided to implement a decentralised form of command , commensurate with an envisioned increase in manpower and units . The RAAF 's initial move in this direction was to create Nos. 1 and 2 Groups in November 1939 , the former based in Melbourne to control units in Victoria , and the latter in Sydney to control units in New South Wales . 
 In January 1940 , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal Jimmy Goble , proposed organising the RAAF along functional lines with Home Defence , Training , and Maintenance Commands , but the Federal government did not take up this plan . Goble was replaced in February by a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) officer , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , who focussed on rapid expansion of the RAAF to meet the needs of the Empire Air Training Scheme and believed that Australia 's huge land mass would make a functional command system unwieldy . He proceeded to reorganise the Air Force into a geographically based " area " system . The roles of each area command were the same : air defence ; protection of adjacent sea lanes ; and aerial reconnaissance . Each area was led by an Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) who was responsible for the administration and operations of all bases and units within his boundary . Exceptions to this policy included aircraft depots and the Central Flying School that trained flying instructors , as their range of responsibilities crossed area boundaries and therefore came under the direct control of RAAF Headquarters . The static area system was primarily defensive in nature , but considered well suited to training new pilots , who could be instructed at flying schools and mentored through their initial squadron postings , all within the same geographical region . 
 = = = Evolution and control = = = 
 The RAAF planned four area commands initially : Southern Area , covering all units in Victoria , Tasmania , South Australia and the southern Riverina district of New South Wales ; Central Area , covering units in New South Wales except southern Riverina and the north of the state ; Western Area , covering units in Western Australia ; and Northern Area , covering units in northern New South Wales , Queensland , Northern Territory and Papua . The first two commands established , in March 1940 , were Southern Area , which essentially took over the role and headquarters of No. 1 Group in Melbourne , and Central Area , which evolved from No. 2 Group in Sydney . Western and Northern Areas eventually followed in January and May 1941 , respectively ; pending their formation , units in Queensland were temporarily controlled by Central Area Command , and those in Western Australia , Northern Territory and Papua came under the direct control of RAAF Headquarters . 
 By mid @-@ 1941 , RAAF Headquarters had determined to form training units in the southern and eastern states into semi @-@ geographical , semi @-@ functional groups separate to the area commands . This led to the establishment in August of No. 1 ( Training ) Group in Melbourne , covering Victoria , Tasmania and South Australia , and No. 2 ( Training ) Group in Sydney , covering New South Wales and Queensland . Central Area was then disbanded and its responsibilities " divided as convenient " , according to the official history of the war , between Southern Area , Northern Area , and No. 2 ( Training ) Group . Western Area retained responsibility for training , as well as operations and maintenance , within its boundaries . 
 With the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 , Northern Area was split the following month into North @-@ Western and North @-@ Eastern Areas , to counter distinct Japanese threats to Northern Australia and New Guinea , respectively . Southern Area was also considered appropriate for subdivision owing to its size , so Eastern Area was established in May 1942 to take over control of operational units in New South Wales and southern Queensland . These arrangements stabilised the number of area commands at five . Of necessity , the two northerly commands were primarily responsible for bombing and air defence , while the other commands focussed on maritime patrol and anti @-@ submarine warfare . Further convergence of command @-@ and @-@ control responsibilities along semi @-@ geographical , semi @-@ functional lines took place between June and September 1942 , when authority over maintenance units was transferred from the area commands to the newly formed No. 4 ( Maintenance ) Group in Melbourne and No. 5 ( Maintenance ) Group in Sydney . Some finetuning of the area boundaries occurred in August : as well as the Northern Territory , North @-@ Western Area was given responsibility for the portion of Western Australia north of a line drawn south @-@ east from Yampi Sound to the Northern Territory border , and part of Queensland adjacent to the Barkly Tableland . 
 Until 1942 , RAAF Headquarters exercised complete operational and administrative control over the area commands . In April that year , Allied Air Forces ( AAF ) Headquarters was established under General Douglas Macarthur 's South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , with operational authority over all RAAF combat infrastructure , including the area commands . In September the new AAF commander , Major General George Kenney , formed the majority of his US flying units into Fifth Air Force , and most of their Australian counterparts into RAAF Command , led by Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock . Bostock exercised control of Australian air operations through the area commands , although RAAF Headquarters continued to hold overarching administrative authority , meaning that Bostock and his area commanders were ultimately dependent on the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones in Melbourne , for supplies and equipment . 
 To help overcome the static nature of the area command system , in September 1942 the RAAF created a large mobile formation known as No. 9 ( Operational ) Group , a self @-@ contained tactical air force that could keep pace with Allied advances north through New Guinea and towards Japan . By April 1944 , No. 9 Group had become a garrison force in New Guinea and lost its mobile function to No. 10 ( Operational ) Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . No. 9 Group was therefore re @-@ formed as a dedicated area command covering air units in New Guinea ; Bostock had recommended calling it Northern Area , before RAAF Headquarters settled on Northern Command . In August that year , RAAF Headquarters proposed to disband the training and maintenance groups formed in 1941 – 42 and return their functions to the control of the area commands , but no action was taken . The same month , the Air Board recommended carving a new Central Area Command out of Eastern Area , which it considered too large to be controlled by one headquarters . This proposed Central Area would have been responsible for units in southern Queensland but the War Cabinet deferred its decision , as it had when a similar concept was raised in October 1943 . 
 Near the end of the war , No. 11 Group was formed as a " static command " headquartered on Morotai in the Dutch East Indies , using elements of Northern Command and the First Tactical Air Force ; this freed the latter from garrison duties following the liberation of Borneo . In recommending the Morotai garrison 's establishment , Bostock explained that while it shared the static characteristic of an area command , it differed in that the area commands were part of the permanent structure of the Air Force and situated within the borders of Australia 's mainland and overseas territories , whereas the new formation was a temporary wartime measure , headquartered on foreign territory . 
 = = = Post @-@ war organisation and supersession = = = 
 Following the end of the Pacific War in August 1945 , SWPA was dissolved and RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne again assumed full control of all its operational formations , including the area commands . Nos. 1 and 2 ( Training ) Groups , and No. 5 ( Maintenance ) Group in Sydney , were disbanded between January and March 1946 . Northern Command , having been re @-@ designated Northern Area in December 1945 , was disbanded in February 1947 . The other area commands continued to function with essentially the same boundaries as during the war , except that North @-@ Western Area no longer covered the Dutch East Indies . 
 By the 1950s , a geographically based area command system was considered outmoded , and calls came to replace it with a system based on function . With hindsight , the area commands were judged adequate for the organisation of the Air Force in the early years of World War II , but not for the rapid response times and concentration of force necessary to properly prepare for attacks on Australia following the start of the Pacific War , nor for conducting offensive operations from 1943 onwards . Air Marshal Jones , who had retained his position as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) following the war , resisted pressure to replace the area structure . He was persuaded by his staff to set up a conference to discuss the possibility of change , but participation by the CAS , who had been satisfied with the wartime structure , and the area commanders themselves , whose positions were on the line , was half @-@ hearted at best . Jones did suggest reducing the number of area commands to three ( Northern Area to cover Queensland and the Northern Territory , Eastern Area to cover New South Wales , and Southern Area to encompass Western Australia , South Australia , Victoria and Tasmania ) as part of a much larger proposal to restructure the post @-@ war RAAF , but this never eventuated . 
 The Federal government retired Jones in 1952 and replaced him with an RAF officer , Air Marshal Donald Hardman , who was well versed in the functional command system employed in Britain . Hardman believed that restructuring the Air Force would remove inefficiencies and duplication , and permit commanders greater autonomy , allowing more effective concentration of strength in a potential combat situation . He declared that the RAAF was " the one force that could quickly strike for Australia 's and the Commonwealth 's defence in South East Asia " . To this end he identified three major functions : operations , covering home defence and mobile task forces ; training , including all permanent , reserve and national service recruitment and instruction ; and maintenance , responsible for supply , equipment and other logistical services . The three functions were duly constituted in October 1953 as Home , Training , and Maintenance Commands , respectively . 
 Home Command was re @-@ formed from the existing Eastern Area Command , which was considered a de facto operational organisation owing to the preponderance of such forces within its boundaries . Training Command was re @-@ formed from Southern Area Command , as it was already the hub of training services , controlling those in New South Wales and Queensland as well as Victoria and South Australia . Maintenance Command was re @-@ formed from the extant Maintenance Group headquarters in Melbourne . The transition to a functional system was completed in February 1954 , when the three new commands assumed control of all operations , training and maintenance from Western , North @-@ Western , and North @-@ Eastern Area Commands . These three area commands remained in existence , but only as " remote control points " for Home Command . North @-@ Western Area Command was disbanded in June 1955 , Western Area Command in November 1956 , and North @-@ Eastern Area Command in December 1956 . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The functional commands established in 1953 – 54 were revised in 1959 . Home Command was renamed Operational Command , and Training and Maintenance Commands merged to become Support Command . Operational Command was renamed Air Command in 1987 , and three years later Support Command split into Logistics Command and Training Command . In 1997 , logistics management became the responsibility of Support Command ( Air Force ) , the RAAF component of the Defence @-@ wide Support Command Australia ( later subsumed by the Defence Materiel Organisation ) . Training Command was re @-@ formed as Air Force Training Group , a force element group under Air Command , in 2006 . Air Command thus became the sole command @-@ level organisation in the RAAF . 
 = = Summary of area commands formed = = 
 The RAAF raised eight area commands over the course of World War II , and five of them continued to operate into the 1950s : 
 = Bart the Fink = 
 " Bart the Fink " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 11 , 1996 . In this episode , Bart ruins Krusty the Clown 's career by accidentally exposing Krusty as one of the biggest tax cheats in American history . Driven to despair , Krusty fakes a suicide in order to start life anew as a sailor ; feeling guilty for what he did , Bart convinces Krusty to become a television clown again . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and Bob Kushell , and directed by Jim Reardon . American actor Bob Newhart guest starred in it as himself . The episode 's title is a play on the 1991 film Barton Fink . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews by television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , and was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the death of great aunt Hortense , the Simpson family attends a will reading . Each member of the family discovers they will receive $ 100 to do with as they like , but only after spending the night in a haunted house ( which is surprisingly pleasant ) . Though Bart wishes to buy a hundred tacos from the <unk> and Lisa to contribute to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , Marge has them open bank accounts at the Bank of Springfield . Bart is excited with his new checking account , and begins writing checks for his friends . 
 Bart attempts to get Krusty the Clown 's autograph , but Krusty is having a new sandwich named after him and has to leave . Just before he does , Bart slips a check for twenty @-@ five cents into Krusty 's pocket , figuring that he will receive a copy of it endorsed with Krusty 's signature with his monthly bank statement . However , when Bart receives the check , it is endorsed with a stamp ( " Cayman Islands Off @-@ Shore Holding Corporation " ) instead of a signature ; dismayed , Bart takes the check back to the bank so that they can force Krusty to sign it . The bank teller informs Bart that stamping the back of a check is perfectly legal , but becomes suspicious after analyzing the stamp and excuses himself to make a phone call . Four minutes later , Krusty is arrested for tax evasion , though Bart is not made aware of this for several hours . 
 The IRS takes control of Krusty 's assets and his show ( renaming it Herschel Krustofsky 's Clown @-@ Related Entertainment Show and turning Krusty Burger into IRS Burger , with meals named with tax @-@ related terms and a six @-@ to @-@ eight @-@ week wait to the customers , who apparently must report their income with every order as Homer asked Marge how much she lost on gambling ) , reducing his lifestyle to that of an average citizen . One evening , as the town watches , a depressed Krusty pilots his airplane into a mountainside . He is later pronounced dead . 
 A memorial service is held for Krusty at which Bob Newhart offers condolences . While everyone assumes that Krusty is dead , Bart believes otherwise when he begins to see a Krusty look @-@ alike all over town . With Lisa 's help , he soon discovers that Krusty has gone into hiding under the disguise of Rory B. Bellows , a grizzled old longshore worker . With Krusty leaving on a boat heading for the ocean , they supposedly convince him to return to his former life . However , Krusty had insured the life of his pseudonym and rigged his boat with explosives ; returning to shore with Bart and Lisa , " Bellows " ' s boat explodes , allowing Krusty to collect the insurance cash and end his tax woes . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bart the Fink " was written by John Swartzwelder , but Bob Kushell came up with the idea for it . The episode was based on the " big tax problems " that American country singer Willie Nelson had at the time . The idea of Krusty faking his own death was an idea the production team had wanted to do for a long time , and it was inspired by the rumored fake death of American actor Andy Kaufman . Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , the show runners of The Simpsons ' seventh and eighth season , thought the beginning of the episode in which the family spends the night in a haunted house would have been " the <unk> beginning of any cruddy thing " , if they had not added the twist that the family did not encounter any ghosts in the house and had their " best night 's sleep ever " . The twist was Oakley 's idea and he thought it " worked out great " . 
 The episode was directed by Jim Reardon . Consultant David Mirkin suggested that the animators should add " some funny things " to the episode to " spice it up " , such as the gorilla suit that one of the bank employees wear . After the audio recording of the script by the Simpsons cast , the episode ended up too long . Weinstein said one of the reasons for it was that Krusty talks very slowly , which drags out the time . They were only allowed to send twenty minutes worth of audio to Film Roman for them to animate , but the audio track for the episode was twenty @-@ six minutes long . American actor Bob Newhart guest starred in the episode as himself . Oakley said Newhart also talked very slowly and they had to cut out more than half of his recorded lines . Many of the writers were big fans of Newhart and everybody wanted to see him record his lines . Oakley and Weinstein decided to shut down production so that the whole writing staff could go to the recording studio . The episode was recorded in a big room so everyone had to be really quiet . It took Newhart two and a half minutes to record his first take , and , as no one was allowed to laugh during that time , there was an " explosion " of laughter in the room when he finished . Parts of Phil Hartman 's appearance as Troy McClure were also cut from the episode due to time limits . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a play on the 1991 film Barton Fink . After losing his show and money , Krusty takes the bus home . An advertisement on the bus reads " Are you missing Mad About You right now ? NBC Must See TV Sundays at 8 p.m. " Krusty 's airplane , " I 'm @-@ on @-@ a @-@ <unk> @-@ Gay " , that he uses to stage his death is a spoof of the Enola Gay B @-@ 29 airplane that dropped the atomic bomb on the Japanese city Hiroshima in World War II . Krusty 's illegal Cayman @-@ Islands " accountant " is modeled on the actor Sydney Greenstreet , particularly on his role in the film Casablanca , considering his line " Oh , it 's too hot today ! " Swartzwelder is seen attending Krusty 's funeral , who appears with a Kermit the Frog puppet on his hand . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart the Fink " finished sixty @-@ fourth in the ratings for the week of February 5 – 11 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 . The episode was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Melrose Place , The X @-@ Files , Beverly Hills , 90210 and Married ... With Children . 
 " Bart the Fink " received generally positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson called the episode a " winner " and praised it for the " one hundred tacos for $ 100 " joke . Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict said that the best part of the episode is when Homer comforts Bart after Krusty 's death by assuring him that he , too , could wake up dead tomorrow . In the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Unofficial " Simpsons " Guide by Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , they comment that " Bart the Fink " is " very fast and very good , with plenty of gags and effective set pieces . Bob Newhart 's eulogy to Krusty is especially memorable . " The authors of Media , home , and family , Stewart Hoover , Lynn Schofield Clark , and Diane Alters wrote that " Krusty ultimately expertly proves the truth about the IRS : ruining the financial and emotional life of many [ people ] . " William Irwin , author of The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer also praised the use of IRS in " Bart the Fink " to convey the message that " none of us can escape the unavoidable taxes " . In addition , Chris Turner claims " Bart the Fink " offers a " pointed answer to the question of why such a manifestly miserable world of phonies and cheats would be so enticing to many . " 
 In July 2014 , Channel 4 accidentally aired the scene where Krusty ( as Rory ) says " bastard " . The station apologized to Ofcom for airing the scene before 9pm . 
 = Future Husband = 
 " Future Husband " is the fourteenth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was directed by series producer Don Scardino , and written by Jon Haller and Tracey Wigfield . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on March 11 , 2010 . Elizabeth Banks , James Rebhorn , and Michael Sheen guest star in the episode , and there are cameo appearances by Jack Welch and Brian Williams . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) finds a mysterious number in her phone under the name " Future Husband . " At the same time , Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for General Electric ( GE ) , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is informed that a cable company is rumored to buy out NBC . Elsewhere , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) stages a one @-@ man show in an attempt to win a Tony Award , as part of his EGOT quest . The episode makes reference to the real @-@ life acquisition of NBC Universal by the cable company network Comcast . 
 " Future Husband " received generally mixed reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 894 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) comes across an unrecognized contact in her cellphone listed as " future husband " , and realizes that it must be a man she met at her dental appointment with Dr. Kaplan ( James Rebhorn ) , while awakening from anesthesia in the recovery room after root canal surgery ( seen in the previous episode ) . She calls the number , pretends to be the Jamaican dental receptionist , and asks the man to come back to see Dr. Kaplan . At the appointed time , she returns to the dentist 's office , but does not recognize anyone there ; so she calls the number again . When the man ( Michael Sheen ) answers , she sees him and hangs up . Unbeknownst to Liz , her number is already listed in his cellphone under " future wife " . He calls her back upon seeing she called , and they arrange a date ; she learns that his name is Wesley . On their date , the two fail to hit it off : they find each other annoying and share many flaws but few interests . Later , at the 30 Rock studios , Liz discovers that Wesley was the person who retrieved NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) wallet , after Kenneth threw it out of a window earlier . Because of this coincidence , Liz and Wesley decide to go on another date . 
 At the same time , Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) aspirations of becoming CEO of General Electric ( GE ) comes to a halt when his girlfriend and CNBC host , Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) informs him that the Philadelphia @-@ based cable company Kabletown is rumored to be buying NBC . Jack — who serves as Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for GE — insists that no sale is pending , as he believes that his mentor and GE CEO Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) would not agree to such a deal . As rumors persist , Jack panics , but things get worse when he learns from former GE chairman Jack Welch ( as himself ) that Don Geiss has been dead for weeks and that the company negotiated a takeover with Kabletown . Welch kept Geiss 's death a secret while negotiations took place . Liz comforts Jack when he admits his dream of running GE is crushed . The next day , on Avery Jessup 's program , The Hot Box , Jessup confirms that the buyout has gone forward , praising Jack Donaghy as a wise choice to lead Kabletown 's new acquisition . Jack , who is watching the program , is cheered by this . 
 Elsewhere , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) performs a one @-@ man show on Broadway so that he can be considered for a Tony Award as part of his EGOT quest . His show receives positive reviews , and Tracy is convinced that he will win a Tony , but Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) tells him that in order for him to qualify for the award he must do his one @-@ man show eight times , which worries Tracy , as he is unable to perform anything the same way twice . Despite initial reluctance to help him , Jenna eventually agrees to coach Tracy in the principles of acting , but this leads nowhere , resulting in the two arguing and Jenna telling him he can go on his show and read the phone book for all she cares . At the end of the episode , Tracy does read the phone book at his show , making Jenna very proud of him , and inexplicably drawing high praise from the audience . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Future Husband " was directed by series producer Don Scardino , and was written by Jon Haller and Tracey Wigfield . This was Haller 's first penned script , and was Wigfield 's second writing credit , having co @-@ written " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " for the show 's third season . " Future Husband " originally aired in the United States on March 11 , 2010 , on NBC as the fourteenth episode of the fourth season . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on December 17 , 2009 . 
 In December 2009 , it was confirmed that actress Elizabeth Banks would guest star on the show , and in this episode , she played right @-@ wing CNBC anchor Avery Jessup , and love interest to the Jack Donaghy character , played by Alec Baldwin . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Banks revealed that she approached the 30 Rock staff about making an appearance as she is a fan of the show . " I definitely put feelers out , like , ' I would love to be on your show . ' And they did it . They made it happen ! I 'm a huge fan , so this is a dream come true . " She also revealed that she had no intention on becoming a series regular , explaining that she has been having " too much fun " making movies to commit to a television show full @-@ time . Banks made her debut as Avery Jessup in the previous episode " Anna Howard Shaw Day " . In January 2010 , it was announced that actor Michael Sheen would guest star as a love interest for Liz Lemon , played by series creator Tina Fey . In this episode , he made his debut as the character Wesley . Liz and Wesley 's story arc continued in the episodes " Don Geiss , America and Hope " , " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " , and " I Do Do " . 
 In " Future Husband " , Jack learns from former GE chairman Jack Welch that current GE CEO Don Geiss , played by Rip Torn , has died . Torn did not make any appearances in this season , marking his last role as Don Geiss in the episode " Larry King " that aired on February 26 , 2009 , during the third season . Television writer Bob Sassone of TV Squad wondered if Torn was written out of the series due to an alcohol @-@ related incident that occurred to Torn in January 2010 . Welch appeared as himself here and was chairman and CEO of GE from 1981 until 2001 . Actor James Rebhorn , best known for his current role as a special agent in the USA Network crime comedy @-@ drama White Collar , made his debut as the character Dr. Kaplan , Liz and Wesley 's dentist . This was news anchor Brian Williams ' third guest appearance as himself . In the scene in which he appears , Williams engages in smack talk in the CNBC offices , telling Avery and her colleagues that his news program NBC Nightly News " rules " . 
 The storyline in " Future Husband " involving the fictitious Philadelphia @-@ based cable company Kabletown purchasing NBC is based on the acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast in November 2009 . After winning her fourth Screen Actors Guild Award as her television character at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards in January 2010 , Fey was asked whether or not 30 Rock would make reference to the Comcast acquisition to which she said that it would be dealt with . " The sale of NBC to another company is integral to our show and it will be hard for Jack . " In April 2010 , the NBC network created a website for Kabletown . When asked by a contributor from The Philadelphia Inquirer why the characters on 30 Rock refer to the network 's new owner as " Kabletown , with a K " , co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock revealed that the reason for this was that the staff writers came up with the name " <unk> " , however , they later learned that there was a real company with a similar name , so NBC 's legal team department " wanted to emphasize the difference , and after a while , everyone just liked the sound of it . " 
 This was the second time the series referenced the Tracy Jordan character trying to get his EGOT . This plot first began in the December 3 , 2009 , episode " Dealbreakers Talk Show " in which Tracy finds a diamond encrusted " EGOT " necklace and sets a new life goal to achieve EGOT status by winning four major awards : an Emmy , a Grammy , an Oscar , and a Tony . In the episode , Tracy performs a one @-@ man show so that he can get a Tony Award . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of this episode , Liz asks where Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) is , as he is one of her staff writers and she wants him to write some Winter Olympics sketches . This results in Liz breaking the fourth wall — a term used when a character in a television show , film or on stage directly addresses the audience — where she mouths speech that is unintelligible , while her voice is heard saying " Lindsey <unk> ! " who won the " gold medal for skiing ! " 
 Kenneth references the 1987 thriller film Fatal Attraction after encouraging Liz to meet with her " future husband " and deeming it a romantic situation , saying " Just like that movie I only saw the first 10 minutes of , Fatal Attraction ! " . The movie is about a married man who has a weekend affair with a woman who refuses to end the affair as she becomes obsessed with him . In addition , Jane Krakowski appeared in Fatal Attraction . Kenneth later has a dream that seems to be influenced by the movie The Shining , telling Jenna , " Late at night these two little twin girls told me they wanted to play with me forever . " He also references the story of Lot and his daughters from the Bible , and a vignette from Saved by the Bell involving characters Samuel " Screech " Powers and Lisa Turtle . 
 Wondering why he has not seen any of his GE colleagues , Jack 's office assistant Jonathan ( Maulik Pancholy ) suggests that maybe they are the last people on Earth , as he references the 2007 film I Am Legend , " You 're Will Smith and I 'm the dog ! " In I Am Legend , Will Smith 's character is the last healthy human in New York City and lives with his dog . In order to figure out what is going on , Jonathan does investigative work and downloads Don Geiss 's schedule while self @-@ narrating to the theme music of Mission Impossible ( 1996 ) . After Kenneth convinces her to call her " future husband " , Liz , who speaks in a Jamaican accent as Dr. Kaplan 's dental assistants are Jamaican women , tells the man he needs to come into Dr. Kaplan 's office for some work , and Liz ends the call with " Cool Runnings , man ! Bobsled ! " This is a reference to the comedy movie Cool Runnings ( 1993 ) in which the Jamaica national bobsled team 's made their debut the 1988 Winter Olympics . In another scene , Liz 's ringtone is the song " Fuck the Pain Away " by Canadian electronic musician Peaches . 
 While giving elocution lessons to Tracy , Jenna quotes the song " I Am So Proud " from Gilbert and Sullivan 's The Mikado when she asks him to repeat the phrase , " To sit in solemn silence in a dull dark dock / Awaiting the sensation of a short , sharp , shock . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Future Husband " was watched by 5 @.@ 894 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . During its original broadcast , " Future Husband " ranked fourth in its 9 : 30 p.m. slot , behind CBS 's crime drama CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , ABC 's medical series Grey 's Anatomy , and Fox 's reality show Kitchen Nightmares . 
 Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club was not positive in his review , describing " Future Husband " as the " laziest " episode of the fourth season . Nonetheless , Pierce responded favorably to Tracy 's one @-@ man show , calling it the " shortest and best of the plots " and " even manages to get a laugh out of that old ' I 'd watch him reading the phone book ' chestnut . " Sean Gandert for Paste magazine said in his recap that part of this episode was disappointing , writing that the main plot was not " too awful , [ it was ] just comparatively dull . " Though , he was positive towards the show 's interpretation of the NBC and Kabletown storyline , saying it was a nice " little riff " on the actual merger between NBC and Comcast . Gandert was appreciative to Elizabeth Banks ' small part , and hoped to see her in future episodes . Entertainment Weekly contributor Margaret Lyons opined it was a " strange " episode of 30 Rock , and concluded " It 's not that ' Future Husband ' was radically terrible or anything , but wow , that episode just did not click into place . " Bob Sassone of TV Squad did not enjoy Jenna 's involvement in Tracy 's story , and that overall he did not find their antics " too funny " . Nonetheless , Sassone enjoyed Brian Williams ' cameo . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning wrote that the NBC / Comcast reference here " wasn 't exactly a well of laughs , but Baldwin 's Donaghy kept the story entertaining enough to want to follow it . " He enjoyed Banks ' appearance , noting that her standout moment came when Avery and Jack argued over the direction of NBC " and for that brief moment Banks stole the show from Baldwin . " In conclusion , Canning gave it an 8 out of 10 rating . James Poniewozik of Time magazine said that the main story " played more like a subplot even though it gave the episode its title " . He added that there were some fine moments , and that overall Liz and Jack 's plots " have the potential to give the show some interesting forward movement " . Los Angeles Times contributor Meredith Blake felt that Michael Sheen was " underused " in his role , and observed that Jack and Avery 's relationship showcased here seemed " remarkably convincing . " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that the episode 's storytelling was " better than it 's been in recent weeks " , however , was not complimentary towards Liz meeting Sheen 's Wesley , as he felt that their plot fell flat . 
 = Armando Galarraga 's near @-@ perfect game = 
 In a Major League Baseball game played on June 2 , 2010 , at Comerica Park in Detroit , Michigan , Detroit Tigers pitcher Armando Galarraga nearly became the 21st pitcher in Major League history to throw a perfect game . Facing the Cleveland Indians , Galarraga retired the first 26 batters he faced , but his bid for a perfect game was ended one out short when first base umpire Jim Joyce incorrectly ruled that Indians batter Jason Donald reached first base safely on a ground ball . Galarraga instead finished with a one @-@ hit shutout in a 3 – 0 victory . He faced 28 batters and threw 88 pitches ( 67 strikes and 21 balls ) , striking out three . The game is sometimes referred to as the " 28 @-@ out perfect game " , the " Imperfect Game " , or simply the " Galarraga game " . 
 Joyce was tearful and apologetic to Galarraga after the game upon realizing he had made the incorrect call . Galarraga was forgiving and understanding of the mistake . Without irony , he told reporters after the game , " Nobody 's perfect . " Galarraga was the most prominent of the many people throughout Major League Baseball who subsequently voiced their support for Joyce . Unusually , the umpire met with both the pitcher and the media after the game to apologize for his error . The sportsmanship demonstrated by Galarraga and Joyce earned them both widespread praise for their handling of the incident . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Detroit scored a run on a second @-@ inning solo home run by Miguel Cabrera . Two more runs scored in the eighth inning when Austin Jackson singled , then advanced on an infield hit by Johnny Damon . Jackson and Damon both then scored on a single by Magglio Ordóñez and a throwing error by Shin @-@ Soo Choo . 
 In the top of the ninth inning , Tigers ' center fielder Austin Jackson executed an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder catch on the run to retire Cleveland 's Mark <unk> for the first out and preserve the perfect game , a play that has been compared to DeWayne Wise 's leaping catch at the wall in the ninth @-@ inning that preserved Mark Buehrle 's perfect game in 2009 . Mike Redmond grounded out to make the second out of the inning . Jason Donald then hit a soft ground ball that first baseman Miguel Cabrera had to range far to his right to retrieve . Donald was ruled safe , giving him an infield single , but video replay showed that Cabrera 's throw to Galarraga , who was covering first base , beat Donald to the bag . Donald advanced to second and third base on defensive indifference during Trevor Crowe 's at @-@ bat , until Crowe grounded out to Brandon Inge , ending the game in a 3 – 0 victory for the Tigers . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = Boxscore = = = 
 Source : MLB.com 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Only four days before Galarraga 's near @-@ perfect outing , Roy Halladay pitched a perfect game for the Philadelphia Phillies , and just twenty days prior to that , Dallas Braden threw a perfect game for the Oakland Athletics . Halladay 's and Braden 's perfect games had been the first pair of such games to occur in the same season during the modern era , let alone the same month . Joyce served as the second base umpire for Braden 's perfect game . 
 The twenty days between Braden 's perfect game and Halladay 's was the shortest span between two perfect games since 1880 and there was a chance that for the first time in MLB history there would be three perfect games in such short succession . Had Galarraga 's game been correctly called , the four @-@ day span since Halladay 's perfect game would have broken that 130 @-@ year @-@ old record , and marked the only time that three consecutive no @-@ hitters had been perfect games , the only time that three perfect games had occurred in one season ( since done in 2012 by Philip Humber , Matt Cain and Félix Hernández ) , the only time that three perfect games had occurred in a span shorter than a month , the only time four perfect games had occurred in a span shorter than a year ( as Mark Buehrle of the Chicago White Sox threw a perfect game in July 2009 ) , and the only time that four perfect games had occurred within a stretch of five no @-@ hitters . 
 This would have also marked the first perfect game in the Tigers ' 110 @-@ year history . The 83 pitches thrown before the blown call would have been the fewest pitches in a perfect game since 1908 . Galarraga 's near @-@ perfect game was the first such game since Mike Mussina 's bid for a perfect game on September 2 , 2001 , which was broken up by 27th batter Carl Everett . It was also the third time for a Tigers pitcher to come so close to a perfect game , as Milt Wilcox also missed getting the 27th straight batter out on April 15 , 1983 , and Tommy Bridges missed the 27th batter on August 5 , 1932 . 
 Galarraga 's near @-@ perfect game was the tenth time in major league history that the 27th batter in a game broke up what was ( to that point ) a perfect game . One other instance of this occurrence also involved a missed call by an umpire , who later admitted to his mistake . On July 4 , 1908 , Hooks Wiltse of the New York Giants , perfect through 26 batters , hit Philadelphia Phillies pitcher George McQuillan on a 2 – 2 count in a scoreless game . Umpire Cy Rigler later admitted that he should have called the previous pitch strike three , which would have ended the inning . Wiltse pitched on , winning 1 – 0 in ten innings , with the hit @-@ batsman the only lapse separating him from a perfect game . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Armando Galarraga and Jim Joyce = = = 
 On tagging first base after Cabrera 's relay , Galarraga began celebrating his accomplishment . His immediate reaction to Joyce 's on @-@ field ruling was a momentary pause followed by a wry smile at the umpire before returning to the mound . Galarraga told reporters after the game that the outing " was my best game , so far " , and said that Joyce " probably feels more bad than me . Nobody 's perfect . Everybody 's human . I understand . I give the guy a lot of credit for saying , ' I need to talk to you . ' You don 't see an umpire tell you that after a game . I gave him a hug . " He also told reporters , " I know that I pitched a perfect game , I believe I got it . I said before , I got a perfect game . I 'm going to show my son . Maybe it 's not in the book , but I 'm going to tell my son , ' One time I got a perfect game . ' I 'll show him the CD , " further calling his effort " the first 28 @-@ out perfect game " . Tigers ' manager Jim Leyland added , " It 's a crying shame . Jim [ Joyce ] is a class guy . This sounds crazy , but after looking at the play , nobody is going to feel worse than he does . I yelled a bit after the game because emotions are high . You just want it so bad for the kid . I don 't think you 're as mad at the umpire as mad the kid didn 't get it — and he did deserve it . " Leyland also said that Joyce 's call was part of the " human element of the game " . 
 Joyce , a 22 @-@ year veteran , tearfully admitted after reviewing video of the play after the game that " I did not get the call correct " , insisting that he " took a perfect game away from that kid over there that worked his ass off all night " . Joyce called the Donald ruling " the biggest call of my career " , claiming that " I thought [ Donald ] beat the throw . I was convinced he beat the throw , until I saw the replay " . The umpire later said , " I didn 't want this to be my 15 minutes of fame . I would have liked my 15 minutes to be a great call in the World Series . Hopefully , my 15 minutes are over now " . 
 Just prior to the next day 's game , a tearful Joyce met Galarraga at home plate to receive the Tigers ' lineup card . The two shook hands and Joyce gave the pitcher a pat on the shoulder , with a warm reception from the audience . Joyce 's accountability and regret , and Galarraga 's sportsmanship were widely praised for turning the unfortunate situation into a positive . 
 = = = The rest of MLB = = = 
 Many people within Major League Baseball spoke out in support of Joyce , offering their sympathies and noting his exceptional reputation . New York Yankees pitcher Mariano Rivera said , " It happened to the best umpire we have in our game . The best . And a perfect gentleman . ... It 's a shame for both of them , for the pitcher and for the umpire . But I 'm telling you he is the best baseball has , and a great guy . It 's just a shame . " Former Chicago Cubs pitcher Milt Pappas said , " I would tell [ Galarraga ] , ' I feel for you . There have been only 20 perfect games in the history of baseball . The umpire situation was the same one I had — they blew it . At least I had the satisfaction of getting the no @-@ hitter . You don 't . I feel for you . You pitched a tremendous game . At least you have the satisfaction of the umpire saying he was sorry . But that doesn 't help your situation as far as a perfect game . " Pappas ' own bid for a perfect game on September 2 , 1972 , was spoiled when umpire Bruce Froemming called a borderline 3 @-@ and @-@ 2 pitch to 27th @-@ batter Larry Stahl a ball , issuing a walk to the pinch @-@ hitter . Former Yankees pitcher Don Larsen — who threw the fourth perfect game of the modern era and the only one in World Series history on October 8 , 1956 — said , " I feel sorry for the umpire , and I just feel real badly for the kid . He 's probably wondering right now whose side God is on . " 
 The incorrect call led many baseball writers to call for the increased use of instant replay in baseball , which was used only to review disputed boundaries on home runs during the 2010 season . Many journalists also advocated for MLB commissioner Bud Selig to overturn Joyce 's call and award a perfect game to Galarraga . On June 3 , Selig announced that Major League Baseball would look at expanded replay and umpiring , but he did not specifically address Joyce 's call . A baseball official familiar with the decision confirmed to The Associated Press that the call was not being reversed . For his efforts in this game , Galarraga was named the American League Player of the Week on June 7 . Also , first base , a ball used in the game , and Galarraga 's spikes were sent to the Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 Less than two weeks after the controversial game , ESPN The Magazine released an anonymous poll of 100 current MLB players that named Joyce as the best umpire in Major League Baseball . Joyce was named on 53 % of ballots , 19 ballots ahead of second @-@ place Tim McClelland . One player was quoted as saying , " The sad thing about the Galarraga game is , Jim Joyce is seriously one of the best umpires around ... He always calls it fair , so players love him . Everyone makes mistakes , and it 's terrible that this happened to him . " Furthermore , the players in this poll overwhelmingly endorsed ( 86 % ) Selig 's decision not to overturn the call , and were overwhelmingly against ( 77 % ) instituting replay for calls on the bases . 
 = = = Outside baseball = = = 
 On June 3 , White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said during his morning press briefing , " I hope that baseball awards a perfect game to that pitcher " , joking that the White House was " going to work on an executive order " to that effect . He elaborated , " To watch an umpire take responsibility and to watch a pitcher do what he did , the type of sportsmanship that was exhibited there — I think that gives a lot of heart ( ... ) I think it 's tremendously heartening to see somebody understand that they made a mistake and somebody accept the apology from somebody who made that mistake . I think that 's a good lesson in baseball . " Michigan state Governor Jennifer Granholm also issued a gubernatorial proclamation stating , in part , " I , Jennifer M. Granholm , governor of the state of Michigan , do hereby declare Armando Galarraga to have pitched a perfect game . " 
 Former SportsCenter co @-@ host Keith Olbermann dedicated a special edition of the " Worst Person in the World " segment of his political commentary show Countdown to lambasting Bud Selig 's refusal to reverse Joyce 's call . While Olbermann ordinarily lists three " <unk> " , Selig alone was awarded the title because " there can only be one Worst Person tonight " . Olbermann went on to cite Lee MacPhail 's handling of George Brett 's 1983 Pine Tar Incident as an example of a commissioner overruling an umpire 's call , and discussed the matter with both Governor Granholm and documentarian Ken Burns . 
 The day after the botched call , in a ceremony before the Tigers game , General Motors presented Galarraga with a red 2010 Chevy Corvette Grand @-@ Sport convertible , recognizing his outstanding performance on and off the field . GM North American President Mark Reuss said the way the pitcher had handled the situation deserved to be recognized . Galarraga was presented with a " Medal of <unk> " by Jon Stewart at the Rally to Restore Sanity and / or Fear for his measured response . On July 14 , 2010 , Joyce and Galarraga together presented the ESPY Award for Best Moment at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles . The winner was the stoppage @-@ time goal scored by Landon Donovan for the US National Team versus Algeria at the 2010 World Cup . 
 = = = Book release and resulting MLB rule = = = 
 Armando Galarraga and Jim Joyce , along with Daniel <unk> , released a book titled Nobody 's Perfect , chronicling their experiences during and after the game . In June 2011 , one year after the near @-@ perfect game , Major League Baseball put a rule into effect that Joyce cannot umpire any games in which Galarraga 's team plays . Due to the book release , the two are now business partners , and this relationship could affect Joyce 's impartiality while umpiring Galarraga 's team . It is similar to the policy that prevents umpire Jim Wolf from being the plate umpire in games that his younger brother Randy pitches in . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Singer @-@ songwriter Dan Bern composed and recorded a song , " Joyce and Galarraga " , about the game . It appears on his 2012 album of baseball @-@ themed songs , <unk> . 
 = Stampesletta = 
 Stampesletta is a multi @-@ use stadium complex in Lillehammer , Norway . Owned and operated by Lillehammer Municipality , it consists of a track and field venue , an artificial turf football field , three natural grass football fields , a gravel field and natural grass training pitches . In addition , it features a club house , locker facilities and a grandstand between the athletics and artificial turf fields . The venue is located about 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) from the town center , and serves as the home ground for the Second Division side Lillehammer FK , Lillehammer KFK , <unk> IL in football , and Lillehammer IF in athletics . 
 Construction of Stampesletta started in 1946 and the grass football field opened in 1949 . A now removed equestrian exhibition area opened in 1958 , and in 1973 the track and field venue opened . The latter received a hard surface in 1982 . During the 1994 Winter Olympics , Stampesletta itself was used for medal ceremonies , attracting crowds of up to 30 @,@ 000 people . The area around Stampesletta was sometimes referred to as the Olympic Park , as it also has in its immediate vicinity the ice hockey venues Håkons Hall and Kristins Hall , the ski jumping hill Lysgårdsbakken , and Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena . The two halls are often regarded as part of Stampesletta . The arena is used as the goal are for Birkebeinerrittet and <unk> , and from 1932 to 1992 for Birkebeinerrennet . Stampesletta hosted the Norwegian Athletics Championships in 1977 , 1995 and 2009 , and annually hosts Norway 's second @-@ largest track and field tournament , <unk> . Stampesletta is scheduled to host the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics . 
 = = History = = 
 The area around Stampesletta , which is located along the creek <unk> , and means " the plain beside a mill " . The area , which traditionally had been called Myra , was originally part of the farm Lysgård , with Stampesletta being its own croft . The area was bought by Lillehammer Municipality in 1933 . The hillside further up , at Kanthaugen and Lysgård , featured ski activities from the turn of the 20th century . Plans to use one of the few flat places in Lillehammer for sports was launched by the municipal planning office in 1941 . However , the German occupation of Norway caused an interruption in the plans , and a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp for Russians , Lager Edelweiss , was located there instead . 
 Construction of the grass field started in 1946 , after the municipality had decided to build a multi @-@ sport complex . The original stadium was by the contemporary capital press described as having " international proportions " . The venue was planned built in several stages , and the plans called for a main football field with grass turf and a main athletics field . Additional plans called for an outdoor swimming pool , tennis courts , an indoor arena for handball and gymnastics , and a club house . The grass pitch was officially opened by Mayor Einar Hansen in 1949 , and had a spectator capacity for 12 @,@ 000 people . Two years later , a hostel , owned by the municipality and with room for 108 people , opened beside the venue . 
 In 1958 , an equestrian exhibition area was built at Stampesletta to host the state 's mare exhibition , which had previously been held in Lillehammer from 1887 to 1940 . It was by Agricultural Director Aslak <unk> as the country 's most modern . The venue also became home of the state 's stallion display . The exhibition grounds covered an area of 4 hectares ( 10 acres ) , cost NOK 190 @,@ 000 and included two stables . The show remained at Lillehammer until the opening of <unk> <unk> . 
 The track and field venue opened in 1973 , with a capacity for 6 @,@ 000 people . The following year Lillehammer IF moved from Sportsplassen i Lillehammer to Stampesletta , with the old venue being retired in 1975 . In 1977 , Stampesletta hosted the Norwegian Athletics Championships . It was the last time the championships were held on gravel , and this caused problems because excessive rain drowned the venue , and the fire department had to pump off the water . The club started planning fixed surface on the venue in 1980 , and was granted a loan for NOK 500 @,@ 000 . On 18 August 1981 , the municipal council voted to grant NOK 200 @,@ 000 for the upgrade . The work was largely done with voluntary work , and the new surface was inaugurated on 28 August 1982 with the Norwegian Relay Athletics Championship . 
 In 1970 , the plans for an indoor arena , primarily for handball , was launched again , but the cost of NOK 6 million was not able to be financed . Following the work with the Lillehammer bid for the 1992 Winter Olympics , the plans resurfaced , this time with an ice hockey rink to be the centerpiece . In 1985 , Lillehammer Municipal Council accepted an agreement with the Norwegian Confederation of Sports ( NIF ) , which offered to finance 50 % of a new multi @-@ use arena in Lillehammer . The venue opened in December 1988 and cost NOK 65 million . After Lillehammer was awarded the 1994 Winter Olympics in 1988 , it became necessary to build a larger venue to hold the Olympic ice hockey matches . In June 1989 , the municipal council voted to locate most of the Lillehammer venues to the Stampesletta area , and to put Håkons Hall adjacent to Kristins Hall . This was controversial among the politicians , and many councilors voted in support of the originally @-@ planned decentralized plan , with the venues spread out through the municipality . Håkons Hall cost NOK 238 million and it opened on 1 February 1993 . Prior to the Olympics , the power lines across the fields were dug down to give better television images . The bid for the Olympics had also included using Stampesletta for the speed skating events , but with the demands for an indoor venue , it was instead decided to build Vikingskipet in Hamar . 
 The running track was renovated in 2003 , and received a new surface layer and paint job . In 2005 , the club house was completed by the women 's football club . In 2006 , the gravel ice rink received an artificial ice machine to secure stable ice conditions throughout the winter . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The sports complex consists of a track and field venue , a main artificial turf football field with a grandstand , three natural grass football fields , a gravel field and warm @-@ up / practice fields with grass . The track and field venue has eight lanes around the full course , as well as a start allowing 110 meter hurdling . 
 Kristins Hall consists of two halls , one featuring an ice hockey rink and one with a handball court . The arena also has a curling rink and a running track . The ice hockey rink has room for 3 @,@ 197 spectators and is the home venue of GET @-@ ligaen side Lillehammer IK . Håkons Hall is a multi @-@ sport arena which is used for international handball and ice hockey matches , as well as conferences , conventions and banquets . The venue has a capacity for 11 @,@ 500 , making it the largest handball and ice hockey venue in the country . It can make use of the main hall for two handball or football field , or six volleyball or badminton courts . In addition , there is a permanent health club , a climbing wall , an aerobics room , a golf center with two golf simulators and a putting green , and two badminton courts . The hall also features a 370 meters ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) long sprinting track and the Norwegian Olympic Museum The Olympics ski jumping hill Lysgårdsbakken and Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena are located a few hundred meters from Stampesletta . Collectively , the area is sometimes referred to as the Olympic Park . 
 = = Events = = 
 The football fields are used by Lillehammer FK , Lillehammer KFK , and <unk> IL 's senior teams . As of 2012 , Lillehammer FK 's first @-@ team plays in the Second Division . The track and field venue is used by Lillehammer IF . <unk> is an annual track and field tournament held at Stampesletta . In 2010 it had 1 @,@ 150 participants and is organized by Lillehammer IF , Gausdal <unk> and <unk> IL . The tournament is the second @-@ largest track and field event in Norway , after <unk> . Lillehammer IF has hosted the Norwegian Athletics Championships three times , in 1977 , 1995 and 2009 . They have also hosted a series of other Norwegian championships , such as the Norwegian Junior Athletics Championships in 1958 , 1987 and 2002 , and the Norwegian Relay Athletics Championships in 1960 , 1974 , 1976 , 1982 , 1991 and 1999 . 
 From 1932 to 1992 , Birkebeinerrittet , a mass ski marathon between Rena and Lillehammer , has used Stampesletta as a start or goal area , depending on if the race ran from Lillehammer to Rena or in the opposite direction . Since 1992 , the goal area was moved to Birkebeineren Ski Stadium . Birkebeinerrittet , a cycle version of the ski marathon , has its goal area at Stampesletta . The half @-@ marathon terrain race <unk> uses Stampesletta as its start and goal area . During the 1994 Winter Olympics , Stampesletta was used for medal ceremonies for all non @-@ skating events . The backdrops for the podium was built using ice and snow , with the podium itself being made from ice from the glacier <unk> . This contrasted with the surrounding pine elements . Attendance was free , and between 25 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 people attended the medal ceremonies . Lillehammer is scheduled to host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics . The Stampesletta area will be used for the opening and closing ceremonies with a spectator capacity of 6 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 ; existing and new buildings nearby will be used for the Olympic Village . 
 = Hurricane Edouard ( 1996 ) = 
 Hurricane Edouard was the strongest hurricane in the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season , reaching winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on its path . Edouard remained a major hurricane for eight days , an unusually long amount of time . A Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane , the storm formed near the coast of Africa in the middle of August . It moved westward then curved northward , and persisted until early September when it became extratropical to the southeast of New England . Edouard was originally forecast to strike the northeast United States , but it produced hurricane @-@ force gusts to portions of southeastern Massachusetts while remaining offshore . The winds caused minor damage totaling $ 20 million . In addition , the hurricane generated strong waves and rip currents to coastlines , killing two people in New Jersey and causing numerous injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 19 , accompanied with spiral bands of convection around an area of low pressure . A large circulation quickly developed once it reached the Atlantic Ocean , and the system organized into Tropical Depression Four late on August 19 while located 345 mi ( 555 km ) southeast of Cape Verde . Initial forecasts predicted for great intensification , including one forecast for the depression to strengthen to a hurricane within three days . However , the depression remained disorganized , and slowly intensified to attain tropical storm status on August 22 . 
 After becoming a tropical storm , Edouard quickly strengthened due to the establishment of an upper @-@ level anticyclone over the storm . The storm moved to the west in response to a strong subtropical ridge to its north , and Edouard strengthened into a hurricane on August 23 . Due to very favorable conditions , the hurricane rapidly strengthened on August 24 and August 25 to peak as a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Scale . A weakness in the subtropical ridge allowed for a motion more to the west @-@ northwest , and the hurricane passed about 250 mi ( 400 km ) north of the Lesser Antilles on August 28 . For three days during this time , Edouard maintained Category 4 intensity , though weakened late on August 28 due to an eyewall replacement cycle and vertical shear . 
 Late on August 29 , Hurricane Edouard developed three concentric eyewalls , an unusual occurrence coinciding with an increase in strength to 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . A mid @-@ tropospheric trough turned the hurricane to the north to an area of unfavorable conditions , and Edouard weakened to a Category 3 hurricanes on August 31 . On September 1 , the hurricane passed about midway between Bermuda and Cape Hatteras , and turned to the north @-@ northeast . Edouard continued to weaken as it turned to the northeast , and on September 2 passed about 95 mi ( 150 km ) to the southeast of Nantucket , Massachusetts as an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) hurricane , its closest point of approach to the United States . Edouard weakened to tropical storm status on September 3 , and became extratropical shortly thereafter while located to the south of Nova Scotia . As an extratropical storm , Edouard turned to the east , then moved around the periphery of a larger extratropical storm until becoming absorbed by the storm early on September 7 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 A high pressure system over New England resulted in the possibility that Edouard would track to the west and strike the United States . One computer model predicted the hurricane would strike near Atlantic City , New Jersey with winds of over 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) on Labor Day . This caused Cape May County officials to contemplate ordering an evacuation for the busiest tourist weekend of the year , though an evacuation never occurred . Due to the possibility for a landfall on the East Coast of the United States , officials at the National Hurricane Center issued Tropical Storm and Hurricane Watches and Warnings from Cape Lookout , North Carolina to Eastport , Maine at various times . Tropical storm warnings existed from North Carolina to Watch Hill , Rhode Island and from the mouth of the Merrimack River to the United States / Canada border , while hurricane warnings existed from Watch Hill , Rhode Island to Merrimack River , Massachusetts . Hurricane watches were also issued for the tropical storm warning area . 
 In North Carolina , Cape Lookout was closed and evacuated prior to the storm 's passage . Because a Hurricane Watch existed for the New York City metropolitan area , New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani urged citizens to take preparations . In addition , city officials set up a hurricane helpline , activated the city 's Emergency Command Center at the Police Headquarters , and distributed leaflets to flood @-@ prone areas . Near New Bedford , Massachusetts , where landfall was predicted to occur , schools were prepared as shelters in case of a direct hit . New Bedford Mayor issued a state of emergency for the city . However , few people stayed in shelters during the storm 's passage . On Cape Cod , thousands of tourists and summer residents evacuated in preparation for the storm , resulting in an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) traffic backup . As a result , many beach resorts lost millions in potential revenue . Of those who remained on Cape Cod , 900 stayed in emergency shelters when the storm passed the area . In Boston 's Logan International Airport , numerous flights were cancelled or delayed to move planes to safety . Many sailors removed their boats from the water prior to the storm . At one time in <unk> Harbor , workers removed boats at a rate of one every eight minutes . In Maine , the Red Cross opened several emergency shelters , though they were never used . Like in Massachusetts , sailors removed their boats , and due to media coverage , residents were well @-@ prepared for the hurricane . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Despite initial predictions , Edouard 's effects were much less than expected . Strong waves struck much of the East Coast of the United States , killing 2 and injuring numerous others . In 2011 the National Hurricane Center reported that Edouard had caused a total of US $ 20 million with the greatest damage occurring on Cape Cod , where moderate wind gusts resulted in $ 4 @.@ 6 million ( 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = Carolinas and Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 In South Carolina , minor beach erosion was reported in Charleston and Colleton Counties . Swells of up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) , in combination with strong waves , caused overwash on Route 12 on Hatteras Island . Minor beach erosion occurred . Moderate winds of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) blew down a few trees and caused shingle damage to buildings . In Delaware , rough surf closed numerous coastal beaches , while storm tides and waves flooded a campground near the Indian River in Sussex County . Strong waves in New Jersey killed two people and seriously injured another . Lifeguards made numerous rescues along the coast , while other beaches were closed or had restrictions on bathing . Winds were minor along the Jersey coastline , peaking at less than 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) . 
 In New York , Edouard produced strong waves and storm tides of one to two ft ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 6 m ) , causing overwash along southern Long Island due to high tide . Coastal flooding occurred , including in Hampton Bays where the waves flooded one road and covered another with sand . The flooding trapped six cars , while the strong waves forced several beaches to close . Because the hurricane moved through the New York Shipping Channel , numerous ships reported winds of over hurricane status , though winds remained below tropical storm force on land . A boat capsized off the coast of Jones Beach Island , though its passengers were not injured . A Celebrity Cruises cruise ship suffered damage from 30 to 50 ft ( nine to 15 m ) waves , injuring several passengers and crew members . Rainfall was minimal , peaking at less than a half of an inch in eastern Long Island . 
 = = = New England and Canada = = = 
 Hurricane Edouard passed about 95 miles ( 150 km / h ) southeast of Nantucket while moving at only 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) , much slower than previous New England hurricanes . This resulted in several hours of strong waves , winds , and rain . The hurricane produced wave heights of up to 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) , which washed twelve boats ashore and damaged numerous others . The strong waves and a storm surge of up to 2 @.@ 1 feet ( .6 m ) in Nantucket flooded a few coastal roads . Edouard also produced tropical storm force winds across much of Massachusetts , as well as one hurricane @-@ force gust on Nantucket . In addition , there were unofficial reports of stronger gusts , including 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) on Cape Cod , 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) on Martha 's Vineyard , and 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) on Nantucket . The strong winds caused power outages to 2 / 3 of Nantucket , all of Martha 's Vineyard for six hours , and most of Cape Cod for several hours . Power outages , effecting 35 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 were reported throughout Massachusetts , though far from the power outages caused by Hurricane Bob five years prior . The winds also downed numerous trees , and blew off the roof of the fire station in Hyannis . Rainfall was moderate from the slow @-@ moving hurricane , peaking at 6 @.@ 37 inches ( 162 mm ) in West Dennis with many other locations reporting over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . The rainfall produced minor street flooding . Damage on Cape Cod totaled to $ 3 @.@ 5 million ( 1996 USD , $ 4 @.@ 6 million 2007 USD ) . 
 In New Hampshire , the hurricane produced winds gusts of up to 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) and around 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain along the coast . In Maine , heavy surf closed several beaches and injured two people . Waves also damaged several boats . Winds were moderate near the coast , peaking at 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) with gusts to 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) at Mount Desert Island . The winds knocked over several trees and caused sporadic power outages throughout the state , including loss of power for 1 @,@ 900 Portland residents . In Kittery , water fell through an office building , damaging computer equipment . Rainfall was minor , peaking at 1 @.@ 23 inches ( 31 @.@ 24 mm ) in Eastport . 
 In southern Nova Scotia , Edouard produced heavy rainfall from 3 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 95 to 140 mm ) . Winds were moderate , peaking at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) in Cape Breton Highlands . The hurricane also caused beach erosion on southeastern Nova Scotia . 
 = Ant = 
 Ants are eusocial insects of the family Formicidae and , along with the related wasps and bees , belong to the order Hymenoptera . Ants evolved from wasp @-@ like ancestors in the Cretaceous period , about 99 million years ago and diversified after the rise of flowering plants . More than 12 @,@ 500 of an estimated total of 22 @,@ 000 species have been classified . They are easily identified by their elbowed antennae and the distinctive node @-@ like structure that forms their slender waists . 
 Ants form colonies that range in size from a few dozen predatory individuals living in small natural cavities to highly organised colonies that may occupy large territories and consist of millions of individuals . Larger colonies consist mostly of sterile , wingless females forming castes of " workers " , " soldiers " , or other specialised groups . Nearly all ant colonies also have some fertile males called " drones " and one or more fertile females called " queens " . The colonies are described as superorganisms because the ants appear to operate as a unified entity , collectively working together to support the colony . 
 Ants have colonised almost every landmass on Earth . The only places lacking indigenous ants are Antarctica and a few remote or inhospitable islands . Ants thrive in most ecosystems and may form 15 – 25 % of the terrestrial animal biomass . Their success in so many environments has been attributed to their social organisation and their ability to modify habitats , tap resources , and defend themselves . Their long co @-@ evolution with other species has led to mimetic , commensal , parasitic , and mutualistic relationships . 
 Ant societies have division of labour , communication between individuals , and an ability to solve complex problems . These parallels with human societies have long been an inspiration and subject of study . Many human cultures make use of ants in cuisine , medication , and rituals . Some species are valued in their role as biological pest control agents . Their ability to exploit resources may bring ants into conflict with humans , however , as they can damage crops and invade buildings . Some species , such as the red imported fire ant ( Solenopsis invicta ) , are regarded as invasive species , establishing themselves in areas where they have been introduced accidentally . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " ant " is derived from ante , <unk> of Middle English which are derived from <unk> of Old English , and is related to the dialectal Dutch <unk> and the Old High German <unk> , hence the modern German <unk> . All of these words come from West Germanic * <unk> , and the original meaning of the word was " the biter " ( from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> , " off , away " + * <unk> " cut " ) . The family name Formicidae is derived from the Latin <unk> ( " ant " ) from which the words in other Romance languages , such as the Portuguese <unk> , Italian formica , Spanish <unk> , Romanian <unk> , and French <unk> are derived . It has been hypothesised that a Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European word * <unk> was used , cf . Sanskrit <unk> , Latin <unk> , Greek μύρμηξ <unk> , Old Church Slavonic <unk> , Old Irish <unk> , Old Norse <unk> , Dutch <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The family Formicidae belongs to the order Hymenoptera , which also includes sawflies , bees , and wasps . Ants evolved from a lineage within the aculeate wasps , and a 2013 study suggests that they are a sister group of the Apoidea . In 1966 , E. O. Wilson and his colleagues identified the fossil remains of an ant ( Sphecomyrma ) that lived in the Cretaceous period . The specimen , trapped in amber dating back to around 92 million years ago , has features found in some wasps , but not found in modern ants . Sphecomyrma possibly was a ground forager , while <unk> and <unk> , related genera in subfamily Sphecomyrminae , are reconstructed as active arboreal predators . Older ants in the genus <unk> have been found in 99 million year @-@ old amber from Myanmar . After the rise of flowering plants about 100 million years ago they diversified and assumed ecological dominance around 60 million years ago . Some groups , such as the <unk> and <unk> , are suggested to have diversified from early primitive ants that were likely to have been predators underneath the surface of the soil . 
 During the Cretaceous period , a few species of primitive ants ranged widely on the Laurasian supercontinent ( the Northern Hemisphere ) . They were scarce in comparison to the populations of other insects , representing only about 1 % of the entire insect population . Ants became dominant after adaptive radiation at the beginning of the Paleogene period . By the Oligocene and Miocene , ants had come to represent 20 – 40 % of all insects found in major fossil deposits . Of the species that lived in the Eocene epoch , around one in 10 genera survive to the present . Genera surviving today comprise 56 % of the genera in Baltic amber fossils ( early Oligocene ) , and 92 % of the genera in Dominican amber fossils ( apparently early Miocene ) . 
 Termites , although sometimes called ' white ants ' , are not ants . They belong to the sub @-@ order Isoptera within the order Blattodea . Termites are more closely related to cockroaches and mantids . Termites are eusocial , but differ greatly in the genetics of reproduction . The similarity of their social structure to that of ants is attributed to convergent evolution . Velvet ants look like large ants , but are wingless female wasps . 
 = = Distribution and diversity = = 
 Ants are found on all continents except Antarctica , and only a few large islands , such as Greenland , Iceland , parts of Polynesia and the Hawaiian Islands lack native ant species . Ants occupy a wide range of ecological niches and exploit many different food resources as direct or indirect herbivores , predators and scavengers . Most ant species are omnivorous generalists , but a few are specialist feeders . Their ecological dominance is demonstrated by their biomass : ants are estimated to contribute 15 – 20 % ( on average and nearly 25 % in the tropics ) of terrestrial animal biomass , exceeding that of the vertebrates . 
 Ants range in size from 0 @.@ 75 to 52 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 030 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) , the largest species being the fossil Titanomyrma giganteum , the queen of which was 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long with a wingspan of 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) . Ants vary in colour ; most ants are red or black , but a few species are green and some tropical species have a metallic lustre . More than 12 @,@ 000 species are currently known ( with upper estimates of the potential existence of about 22 @,@ 000 ) ( see the article List of ant genera ) , with the greatest diversity in the tropics . Taxonomic studies continue to resolve the classification and systematics of ants . Online databases of ant species , including <unk> and the Hymenoptera Name Server , help to keep track of the known and newly described species . The relative ease with which ants may be sampled and studied in ecosystems has made them useful as indicator species in biodiversity studies . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 Ants are distinct in their morphology from other insects in having elbowed antennae , metapleural glands , and a strong constriction of their second abdominal segment into a node @-@ like petiole . The head , mesosoma , and metasoma are the three distinct body segments . The petiole forms a narrow waist between their mesosoma ( thorax plus the first abdominal segment , which is fused to it ) and gaster ( abdomen less the abdominal segments in the petiole ) . The petiole may be formed by one or two nodes ( the second alone , or the second and third abdominal segments ) . 
 Like other insects , ants have an exoskeleton , an external covering that provides a protective casing around the body and a point of attachment for muscles , in contrast to the internal skeletons of humans and other vertebrates . Insects do not have lungs ; oxygen and other gases , such as carbon dioxide , pass through their exoskeleton via tiny valves called spiracles . Insects also lack closed blood vessels ; instead , they have a long , thin , perforated tube along the top of the body ( called the " dorsal aorta " ) that functions like a heart , and pumps haemolymph toward the head , thus driving the circulation of the internal fluids . The nervous system consists of a ventral nerve cord that runs the length of the body , with several ganglia and branches along the way reaching into the extremities of the appendages . 
 = = = Head = = = 
 An ant 's head contains many sensory organs . Like most insects , ants have compound eyes made from numerous tiny lenses attached together . Ant eyes are good for acute movement detection , but do not offer a high resolution image . They also have three small ocelli ( simple eyes ) on the top of the head that detect light levels and polarization . Compared to vertebrates , most ants have poor @-@ to @-@ mediocre eyesight and a few subterranean species are completely blind . However , some ants , such as Australia 's bulldog ant , have excellent vision and are capable of discriminating the distance and size of objects moving nearly a metre away . 
 Two antennae ( " feelers " ) are attached to the head ; these organs detect chemicals , air currents , and vibrations ; they also are used to transmit and receive signals through touch . The head has two strong jaws , the mandibles , used to carry food , manipulate objects , construct nests , and for defence . In some species , a small pocket ( <unk> chamber ) inside the mouth stores food , so it may be passed to other ants or their larvae . 
 = = = Legs = = = 
 All six legs are attached to the mesosoma ( " thorax " ) and terminate in a hooked claw . 
 = = = Wings = = = 
 Only reproductive ants , queens , and males , have wings . Queens shed their wings after the nuptial flight , leaving visible stubs , a distinguishing feature of queens . In a few species , wingless queens ( <unk> ) and males occur . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The metasoma ( the " abdomen " ) of the ant houses important internal organs , including those of the reproductive , respiratory ( tracheae ) , and excretory systems . Workers of many species have their egg @-@ laying structures modified into stings that are used for subduing prey and defending their nests . 
 = = = Polymorphism = = = 
 In the colonies of a few ant species , there are physical castes — workers in distinct size @-@ classes , called minor , median , and major workers . Often , the larger ants have disproportionately larger heads , and correspondingly stronger mandibles . Such individuals are sometimes called " soldier " ants because their stronger mandibles make them more effective in fighting , although they still are workers and their " duties " typically do not vary greatly from the minor or median workers . In a few species , the median workers are absent , creating a sharp divide between the minors and majors . Weaver ants , for example , have a distinct bimodal size distribution . Some other species show continuous variation in the size of workers . The smallest and largest workers in <unk> <unk> show nearly a 500 @-@ fold difference in their dry @-@ weights . Workers cannot mate ; however , because of the haplodiploid sex @-@ determination system in ants , workers of a number of species can lay unfertilised eggs that become fully fertile , haploid males . The role of workers may change with their age and in some species , such as honeypot ants , young workers are fed until their gasters are distended , and act as living food storage vessels . These food storage workers are called repletes . For instance , these replete workers develop in the North American honeypot ant <unk> mexicanus . Usually the largest workers in the colony develop into repletes ; and , if repletes are removed from the colony , other workers become repletes , demonstrating the flexibility of this particular polymorphism . This polymorphism in morphology and behaviour of workers initially was thought to be determined by environmental factors such as nutrition and hormones that led to different developmental paths ; however , genetic differences between worker castes have been noted in <unk> sp . These polymorphisms are caused by relatively small genetic changes ; differences in a single gene of Solenopsis invicta can decide whether the colony will have single or multiple queens . The Australian jack jumper ant ( Myrmecia pilosula ) has only a single pair of chromosomes ( with the males having just one chromosome as they are haploid ) , the lowest number known for any animal , making it an interesting subject for studies in the genetics and developmental biology of social insects . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The life of an ant starts from an egg . If the egg is fertilised , the progeny will be female diploid ; if not , it will be male haploid . Ants develop by complete metamorphosis with the larva stages passing through a pupal stage before emerging as an adult . The larva is largely immobile and is fed and cared for by workers . Food is given to the larvae by trophallaxis , a process in which an ant regurgitates liquid food held in its crop . This is also how adults share food , stored in the " social stomach " . Larvae , especially in the later stages , may also be provided solid food , such as trophic eggs , pieces of prey , and seeds brought by workers . 
 The larvae grow through a series of four or five moults and enter the pupal stage . The pupa has the appendages free and not fused to the body as in a butterfly pupa . The differentiation into queens and workers ( which are both female ) , and different castes of workers , is influenced in some species by the nutrition the larvae obtain . Genetic influences and the control of gene expression by the developmental environment are complex and the determination of caste continues to be a subject of research . Winged male ants , called drones , emerge from pupae along with the usually winged breeding females . Some species , such as army ants , have wingless queens . Larvae and pupae need to be kept at fairly constant temperatures to ensure proper development , and so often , are moved around among the various brood chambers within the colony . 
 A new worker spends the first few days of its adult life caring for the queen and young . She then graduates to digging and other nest work , and later to defending the nest and foraging . These changes are sometimes fairly sudden , and define what are called temporal castes . An explanation for the sequence is suggested by the high casualties involved in foraging , making it an acceptable risk only for ants who are older and are likely to die soon of natural causes . 
 Ant colonies can be long @-@ lived . The queens can live for up to 30 years , and workers live from 1 to 3 years . Males , however , are more transitory , being quite short @-@ lived and surviving for only a few weeks . Ant queens are estimated to live 100 times as long as solitary insects of a similar size . 
 Ants are active all year long in the tropics , but , in cooler regions , they survive the winter in a state of dormancy or inactivity . The forms of inactivity are varied and some temperate species have larvae going into the inactive state , ( diapause ) , while in others , the adults alone pass the winter in a state of reduced activity . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 A wide range of reproductive strategies have been noted in ant species . Females of many species are known to be capable of reproducing asexually through thelytokous parthenogenesis . Secretions from the male accessory glands in some species can plug the female genital opening and prevent females from re @-@ mating . Most ant species have a system in which only the queen and breeding females have the ability to mate . Contrary to popular belief , some ant nests have multiple queens , while others may exist without queens . Workers with the ability to reproduce are called " gamergates " and colonies that lack queens are then called gamergate colonies ; colonies with queens are said to be queen @-@ right . 
 Drones can also mate with existing queens by entering a foreign colony . When the drone is initially attacked by the workers , it releases a mating pheromone . If recognized as a mate , it will be carried to the queen to mate . Males may also patrol the nest and fight others by grabbing them with their mandibles , piercing their exoskeleton and then marking them with a pheromone . The marked male is interpreted as an invader by worker ants and is killed . 
 Most ants are univoltine , producing a new generation each year . During the species @-@ specific breeding period , new reproductives , females , and winged males leave the colony in what is called a nuptial flight . The nuptial flight usually takes place in the late spring or early summer when the weather is hot and humid . Heat makes flying easier and freshly fallen rain makes the ground softer for mated queens to dig nests . Males typically take flight before the females . Males then use visual cues to find a common mating ground , for example , a landmark such as a pine tree to which other males in the area converge . Males secrete a mating pheromone that females follow . Males will mount females in the air , but the actual mating process usually takes place on the ground . Females of some species mate with just one male but in others they may mate with as many as ten or more different males , storing the sperm in their spermathecae . 
 Mated females then seek a suitable place to begin a colony . There , they break off their wings and begin to lay and care for eggs . The females can selectively fertilise future eggs with the sperm stored or lay unfertilized haploid eggs to produce workers . The first workers to hatch are weak and smaller than later workers , but they begin to serve the colony immediately . They enlarge the nest , forage for food , and care for the other eggs . Species that have multiple queens may have a queen leaving the nest along with some workers to found a colony at a new site , a process akin to swarming in honeybees . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Ants communicate with each other using pheromones , sounds , and touch . The use of pheromones as chemical signals is more developed in ants , such as the red harvester ant , than in other hymenopteran groups . Like other insects , ants perceive smells with their long , thin , and mobile antennae . The paired antennae provide information about the direction and intensity of scents . Since most ants live on the ground , they use the soil surface to leave pheromone trails that may be followed by other ants . In species that forage in groups , a forager that finds food marks a trail on the way back to the colony ; this trail is followed by other ants , these ants then reinforce the trail when they head back with food to the colony . When the food source is exhausted , no new trails are marked by returning ants and the scent slowly dissipates . This behaviour helps ants deal with changes in their environment . For instance , when an established path to a food source is blocked by an obstacle , the foragers leave the path to explore new routes . If an ant is successful , it leaves a new trail marking the shortest route on its return . Successful trails are followed by more ants , reinforcing better routes and gradually identifying the best path . 
 Ants use pheromones for more than just making trails . A crushed ant emits an alarm pheromone that sends nearby ants into an attack frenzy and attracts more ants from farther away . Several ant species even use " propaganda pheromones " to confuse enemy ants and make them fight among themselves . Pheromones are produced by a wide range of structures including Dufour 's glands , poison glands and glands on the hindgut , pygidium , rectum , sternum , and hind tibia . Pheromones also are exchanged , mixed with food , and passed by trophallaxis , transferring information within the colony . This allows other ants to detect what task group ( e.g. , foraging or nest maintenance ) other colony members belong to . In ant species with queen castes , when the dominant queen stops producing a specific pheromone , workers begin to raise new queens in the colony . 
 Some ants produce sounds by stridulation , using the gaster segments and their mandibles . Sounds may be used to communicate with colony members or with other species . 
 = = = Defence = = = 
 See also Insect defences 
 Ants attack and defend themselves by biting and , in many species , by stinging , often injecting or spraying chemicals , such as formic acid in the case of <unk> ants , alkaloids and <unk> in fire ants , and a variety of protein components in other ants . Bullet ants ( Paraponera ) , located in Central and South America , are considered to have the most painful sting of any insect , although it is usually not fatal to humans . This sting is given the highest rating on the Schmidt Sting Pain Index . 
 The sting of jack jumper ants can be fatal , and an antivenom has been developed for it . 
 Fire ants , Solenopsis spp . , are unique in having a venom sac containing <unk> alkaloids . Their stings are painful and can be dangerous to hypersensitive people . 
 Trap @-@ jaw ants of the genus Odontomachus are equipped with mandibles called trap @-@ jaws , which snap shut faster than any other predatory appendages within the animal kingdom . One study of Odontomachus bauri recorded peak speeds of between 126 and 230 km / h ( 78 and 143 mph ) , with the jaws closing within 130 microseconds on average . The ants were also observed to use their jaws as a catapult to eject intruders or fling themselves backward to escape a threat . Before striking , the ant opens its mandibles extremely widely and locks them in this position by an internal mechanism . Energy is stored in a thick band of muscle and explosively released when triggered by the stimulation of sensory organs resembling hairs on the inside of the mandibles . The mandibles also permit slow and fine movements for other tasks . Trap @-@ jaws also are seen in the following genera : <unk> , <unk> , and Strumigenys , plus some members of the <unk> tribe , which are viewed as examples of convergent evolution . 
 A Malaysian species of ant in the Camponotus <unk> group has enlarged mandibular glands that extend into their gaster . When disturbed , workers rupture the membrane of the gaster , causing a burst of secretions containing <unk> and other chemicals that immobilise small insect attackers . The worker subsequently dies . 
 Suicidal defences by workers are also noted in a Brazilian ant , <unk> pusillus , where a small group of ants leaves the security of the nest after sealing the entrance from the outside each evening . 
 In addition to defence against predators , ants need to protect their colonies from pathogens . Some worker ants maintain the hygiene of the colony and their activities include undertaking or <unk> , the disposal of dead nest @-@ mates . <unk> acid has been identified as the compound released from dead ants that triggers <unk> behaviour in Atta mexicana while workers of Linepithema humile react to the absence of characteristic chemicals ( <unk> and iridomyrmecin ) present on the cuticle of their living nestmates to trigger similar behaviour . 
 Nests may be protected from physical threats such as flooding and overheating by elaborate nest architecture . Workers of <unk> <unk> , an arboreal species that lives in plant hollows , respond to flooding by drinking water inside the nest , and excreting it outside . Camponotus <unk> , which nests in the cavities of wood in mangrove habitats , deals with submergence under water by switching to anaerobic respiration . 
 = = = Learning = = = 
 Many animals can learn behaviours by imitation , but ants may be the only group apart from mammals where interactive teaching has been observed . A knowledgeable forager of Temnothorax albipennis will lead a naive nest @-@ mate to newly discovered food by the process of tandem running . The follower obtains knowledge through its leading tutor . The leader is acutely sensitive to the progress of the follower and slows down when the follower lags and speeds up when the follower gets too close . 
 Controlled experiments with colonies of <unk> <unk> suggest that an individual may choose nest roles based on her previous experience . An entire generation of identical workers was divided into two groups whose outcome in food foraging was controlled . One group was continually rewarded with prey , while it was made certain that the other failed . As a result , members of the successful group intensified their foraging attempts while the unsuccessful group ventured out fewer and fewer times . A month later , the successful foragers continued in their role while the others had moved to specialise in brood care . 
 = = = Nest construction = = = 
 Complex nests are built by many ant species , but other species are nomadic and do not build permanent structures . Ants may form subterranean nests or build them on trees . These nests may be found in the ground , under stones or logs , inside logs , hollow stems , or even acorns . The materials used for construction include soil and plant matter , and ants carefully select their nest sites ; Temnothorax albipennis will avoid sites with dead ants , as these may indicate the presence of pests or disease . They are quick to abandon established nests at the first sign of threats . 
 The army ants of South America , such as the Eciton burchellii species , and the driver ants of Africa do not build permanent nests , but instead , alternate between nomadism and stages where the workers form a temporary nest ( bivouac ) from their own bodies , by holding each other together . 
 Weaver ant ( Oecophylla spp . ) workers build nests in trees by attaching leaves together , first pulling them together with bridges of workers and then inducing their larvae to produce silk as they are moved along the leaf edges . Similar forms of nest construction are seen in some species of Polyrhachis . 
 Formica <unk> , among other ant species , constructs nests that maintain a relatively constant interior temperature that aids in the development of larvae . The ants maintain the nest temperature by choosing the location , nest materials , controlling ventilation and maintaining the heat from solar radiation , worker activity and metabolism , and in some moist nests , microbial activity in the nest materials . 
 Some ant species , such as those that use natural cavities , can be opportunistic and make use of the controlled micro @-@ climate provided inside human dwellings and other artificial structures to house their colonies and nest structures . 
 = = = Cultivation of food = = = 
 Most ants are generalist predators , scavengers , and indirect herbivores , but a few have evolved specialised ways of obtaining nutrition . It is believed that many ant species that engage in indirect herbivory rely on specialized symbiosis with their gut microbes to upgrade the nutritional value of the food they collect and allow them to survive in nitrogen poor regions , such as <unk> canopies . <unk> ants ( Atta and <unk> ) feed exclusively on a fungus that grows only within their colonies . They continually collect leaves which are taken to the colony , cut into tiny pieces and placed in fungal gardens . Workers specialise in related tasks according to their sizes . The largest ants cut stalks , smaller workers chew the leaves and the smallest tend the fungus . <unk> ants are sensitive enough to recognise the reaction of the fungus to different plant material , apparently detecting chemical signals from the fungus . If a particular type of leaf is found to be toxic to the fungus , the colony will no longer collect it . The ants feed on structures produced by the fungi called <unk> . Symbiotic bacteria on the exterior surface of the ants produce antibiotics that kill bacteria introduced into the nest that may harm the fungi . 
 = = = Navigation = = = 
 Foraging ants travel distances of up to 200 metres ( 700 ft ) from their nest and scent trails allow them to find their way back even in the dark . In hot and arid regions , day @-@ foraging ants face death by desiccation , so the ability to find the shortest route back to the nest reduces that risk . Diurnal desert ants of the genus Cataglyphis such as the Sahara desert ant navigate by keeping track of direction as well as distance travelled . Distances travelled are measured using an internal <unk> that keeps count of the steps taken and also by evaluating the movement of objects in their visual field ( optical flow ) . Directions are measured using the position of the sun . They integrate this information to find the shortest route back to their nest . Like all ants , they can also make use of visual landmarks when available as well as olfactory and tactile cues to navigate . Some species of ant are able to use the Earth 's magnetic field for navigation . The compound eyes of ants have specialised cells that detect polarised light from the Sun , which is used to determine direction . These polarization detectors are sensitive in the ultraviolet region of the light spectrum . In some army ant species , a group of foragers who become separated from the main column may sometimes turn back on themselves and form a circular ant mill . The workers may then run around continuously until they die of exhaustion . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 The female worker ants do not have wings and reproductive females lose their wings after their mating flights in order to begin their colonies . Therefore , unlike their wasp ancestors , most ants travel by walking . Some species are capable of leaping . For example , Jerdon 's jumping ant ( <unk> saltator ) is able to jump by synchronising the action of its mid and hind pairs of legs . There are several species of gliding ant including Cephalotes atratus ; this may be a common trait among most arboreal ants . Ants with this ability are able to control the direction of their descent while falling . 
 Other species of ants can form chains to bridge gaps over water , underground , or through spaces in vegetation . Some species also form floating rafts that help them survive floods . These rafts may also have a role in allowing ants to colonise islands . Polyrhachis <unk> , a species of ant found in Australian mangrove swamps , can swim and live in underwater nests . Since they lack gills , they go to trapped pockets of air in the submerged nests to breathe . 
 = = = Cooperation and competition = = = 
 Not all ants have the same kind of societies . The Australian bulldog ants are among the biggest and most basal of ants . Like virtually all ants , they are eusocial , but their social behaviour is poorly developed compared to other species . Each individual hunts alone , using her large eyes instead of chemical senses to find prey . 
 Some species ( such as <unk> <unk> ) attack and take over neighbouring ant colonies . Others are less expansionist , but just as aggressive ; they invade colonies to steal eggs or larvae , which they either eat or raise as workers or slaves . Extreme specialists among these slave @-@ raiding ants , such as the Amazon ants , are incapable of feeding themselves and need captured workers to survive . Captured workers of the enslaved species Temnothorax have evolved a counter strategy , destroying just the female pupae of the slave @-@ making <unk> americanus , but sparing the males ( who don 't take part in slave @-@ raiding as adults ) . 
 Ants identify kin and nestmates through their scent , which comes from hydrocarbon @-@ laced secretions that coat their exoskeletons . If an ant is separated from its original colony , it will eventually lose the colony scent . Any ant that enters a colony without a matching scent will be attacked . Also , the reason why two separate colonies of ants will attack each other even if they are of the same species is because the genes responsible for pheromone production are different between them . The Argentine ant , however , does not have this characteristic , due to lack of genetic diversity , and has become a global pest because of it . 
 Parasitic ant species enter the colonies of host ants and establish themselves as social parasites ; species such as Strumigenys <unk> are entirely parasitic and do not have workers , but instead , rely on the food gathered by their Strumigenys perplexa hosts . This form of parasitism is seen across many ant genera , but the parasitic ant is usually a species that is closely related to its host . A variety of methods are employed to enter the nest of the host ant . A parasitic queen may enter the host nest before the first brood has hatched , establishing herself prior to development of a colony scent . Other species use pheromones to confuse the host ants or to trick them into carrying the parasitic queen into the nest . Some simply fight their way into the nest . 
 A conflict between the sexes of a species is seen in some species of ants with these <unk> apparently competing to produce offspring that are as closely related to them as possible . The most extreme form involves the production of clonal offspring . An extreme of sexual conflict is seen in <unk> <unk> , where the queens produce diploid daughters by thelytokous parthenogenesis and males produce clones by a process whereby a diploid egg loses its maternal contribution to produce haploid males who are clones of the father . 
 = = = Relationships with other organisms = = = 
 Ants form symbiotic associations with a range of species , including other ant species , other insects , plants , and fungi . They also are preyed on by many animals and even certain fungi . Some arthropod species spend part of their lives within ant nests , either preying on ants , their larvae , and eggs , consuming the food stores of the ants , or avoiding predators . These inquilines may bear a close resemblance to ants . The nature of this ant mimicry ( <unk> ) varies , with some cases involving Batesian mimicry , where the mimic reduces the risk of predation . Others show Wasmannian mimicry , a form of mimicry seen only in inquilines . 
 Aphids and other hemipteran insects secrete a sweet liquid called honeydew , when they feed on plant sap . The sugars in honeydew are a high @-@ energy food source , which many ant species collect . In some cases , the aphids secrete the honeydew in response to ants tapping them with their antennae . The ants in turn keep predators away from the aphids and will move them from one feeding location to another . When migrating to a new area , many colonies will take the aphids with them , to ensure a continued supply of honeydew . Ants also tend mealybugs to harvest their honeydew . <unk> may become a serious pest of pineapples if ants are present to protect mealybugs from their natural enemies . 
 <unk> ( ant @-@ loving ) caterpillars of the butterfly family Lycaenidae ( e.g. , blues , coppers , or <unk> ) are herded by the ants , led to feeding areas in the daytime , and brought inside the ants ' nest at night . The caterpillars have a gland which secretes honeydew when the ants massage them . Some caterpillars produce vibrations and sounds that are perceived by the ants . Other caterpillars have evolved from ant @-@ loving to ant @-@ eating : these <unk> caterpillars secrete a pheromone that makes the ants act as if the caterpillar is one of their own larvae . The caterpillar is then taken into the ant nest where it feeds on the ant larvae . Fungus @-@ growing ants that make up the tribe <unk> , including leafcutter ants , cultivate certain species of fungus in the Leucoagaricus or <unk> genera of the Agaricaceae family . In this ant @-@ fungus mutualism , both species depend on each other for survival . The ant <unk> <unk> has evolved a three @-@ way association with the host plant , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , and a sticky fungus which is used to trap their insect prey . 
 Lemon ants make devil 's gardens by killing surrounding plants with their stings and leaving a pure patch of lemon ant trees , ( <unk> hirsuta ) . This modification of the forest provides the ants with more nesting sites inside the stems of the <unk> trees . Although some ants obtain nectar from flowers , pollination by ants is somewhat rare . Some plants have special nectar exuding structures , extrafloral nectaries , that provide food for ants , which in turn protect the plant from more damaging herbivorous insects . Species such as the bullhorn acacia ( Acacia <unk> ) in Central America have hollow thorns that house colonies of stinging ants ( Pseudomyrmex ferruginea ) who defend the tree against insects , browsing mammals , and epiphytic vines . Isotopic labelling studies suggest that plants also obtain nitrogen from the ants . In return , the ants obtain food from protein- and lipid @-@ rich <unk> bodies . Another example of this type of <unk> comes from the Macaranga tree , which has stems adapted to house colonies of Crematogaster ants . 
 Many tropical tree species have seeds that are dispersed by ants . Seed dispersal by ants or myrmecochory is widespread and new estimates suggest that nearly 9 % of all plant species may have such ant associations . Some plants in fire @-@ prone grassland systems are particularly dependent on ants for their survival and dispersal as the seeds are transported to safety below the ground . Many ant @-@ dispersed seeds have special external structures , elaiosomes , that are sought after by ants as food . 
 A convergence , possibly a form of mimicry , is seen in the eggs of stick insects . They have an edible elaiosome @-@ like structure and are taken into the ant nest where the young hatch . 
 Most ants are predatory and some prey on and obtain food from other social insects including other ants . Some species specialise in preying on termites ( Megaponera and <unk> ) while a few <unk> prey on other ants . Some termites , including Nasutitermes <unk> , form associations with certain ant species to keep away predatory ant species . The tropical wasp <unk> <unk> coats the pedicel of its nest with an ant @-@ repellent chemical . It is suggested that many tropical wasps may build their nests in trees and cover them to protect themselves from ants . Other wasps such as A. <unk> defend against ants by blasting them off the nest with bursts of wing buzzing . <unk> bees ( <unk> and <unk> ) use chemical defences against ants . Certain species of ants have the power to drive certain wasps , such as <unk> occidentalis to extinction if they attack more than once and the wasps cannot keep up with rebuilding their nest . 
 Flies in the Old World genus <unk> ( Calliphoridae ) prey on ants and are kleptoparasites , snatching prey or brood from the mandibles of adult ants . <unk> and legless females of the Malaysian phorid fly ( <unk> <unk> ) live in the nests of ants of the genus <unk> and are cared for by the ants . 
 Fungi in the genera Cordyceps and <unk> infect ants . Ants react to their infection by climbing up plants and sinking their mandibles into plant tissue . The fungus kills the ants , grows on their remains , and produces a fruiting body . It appears that the fungus alters the behaviour of the ant to help disperse its spores in a microhabitat that best suits the fungus . <unk> parasites also manipulate their ant host to climb grass stems , to help the parasite find mates . 
 A nematode ( <unk> <unk> ) that infects canopy ants ( Cephalotes atratus ) causes the black @-@ coloured gasters of workers to turn red . The parasite also alters the behaviour of the ant , causing them to carry their gasters high . The conspicuous red gasters are mistaken by birds for ripe fruits , such as <unk> <unk> , and eaten . The droppings of the bird are collected by other ants and fed to their young , leading to further spread of the nematode . 
 South American poison dart frogs in the genus Dendrobates feed mainly on ants , and the toxins in their skin may come from the ants . 
 Army ants forage in a wide roving column , attacking any animals in that path that are unable to escape . In Central and South America , Eciton burchellii is the swarming ant most commonly attended by " ant @-@ following " birds such as antbirds and woodcreepers . This behaviour was once considered mutualistic , but later studies found the birds to be parasitic . Direct kleptoparasitism ( birds stealing food from the ants ' grasp ) is rare and has been noted in Inca doves which pick seeds at nest entrances as they are being transported by species of <unk> . Birds that follow ants eat many prey insects and thus decrease the foraging success of ants . Birds indulge in a peculiar behaviour called anting that , as yet , is not fully understood . Here birds rest on ant nests , or pick and drop ants onto their wings and feathers ; this may be a means to remove ectoparasites from the birds . 
 Anteaters , aardvarks , pangolins , echidnas and numbats have special adaptations for living on a diet of ants . These adaptations include long , sticky tongues to capture ants and strong claws to break into ant nests . Brown bears ( Ursus arctos ) have been found to feed on ants . About 12 % , 16 % , and 4 % of their faecal volume in spring , summer , and autumn , respectively , is composed of ants . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Ants perform many ecological roles that are beneficial to humans , including the suppression of pest populations and aeration of the soil . The use of weaver ants in citrus cultivation in southern China is considered one of the oldest known applications of biological control . On the other hand , ants may become nuisances when they invade buildings , or cause economic losses . 
 In some parts of the world ( mainly Africa and South America ) , large ants , especially army ants , are used as surgical sutures . The wound is pressed together and ants are applied along it . The ant seizes the edges of the wound in its mandibles and locks in place . The body is then cut off and the head and mandibles remain in place to close the wound . The large heads of the soldiers of the <unk> ant Atta cephalotes are also used by native surgeons in closing wounds . 
 Some ants have toxic venom and are of medical importance . The species include Paraponera clavata ( <unk> ) and <unk> spp . ( false <unk> ) of South America and the Myrmecia ants of Australia . 
 In South Africa , ants are used to help harvest <unk> ( <unk> linearis ) , which are small seeds used to make a herbal tea . The plant disperses its seeds widely , making manual collection difficult . Black ants collect and store these and other seeds in their nest , where humans can gather them en masse . Up to half a pound ( 200 g ) of seeds may be collected from one ant @-@ heap . 
 Although most ants survive attempts by humans to eradicate them , a few are highly endangered . These tend to be island species that have evolved specialized traits and risk being displaced by introduced ant species . Examples include the critically endangered Sri Lankan relict ant ( <unk> <unk> ) and <unk> <unk> of Madagascar . 
 It has been estimated by E.O. Wilson that the total number of individual ants alive in the world at any one time is between one and ten quadrillion ( short scale ) ( i.e. between 1015 and 1016 ) . According to this estimate , the total biomass of all the ants in the world is approximately equal to the total biomass of the entire human race . Also , according to this estimate , there are approximately 1 million ants for every human on Earth . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Ants and their larvae are eaten in different parts of the world . The eggs of two species of ants are used in Mexican <unk> . They are considered a form of insect caviar and can sell for as much as US $ 40 per pound ( $ 90 / kg ) because they are seasonal and hard to find . In the Colombian department of Santander , <unk> <unk> ( roughly interpreted as " large @-@ bottomed ants " ) Atta laevigata are toasted alive and eaten . 
 In areas of India , and throughout Burma and Thailand , a paste of the green weaver ant ( Oecophylla smaragdina ) is served as a condiment with curry . Weaver ant eggs and larvae , as well as the ants , may be used in a Thai salad , yam ( Thai : <unk> ) , in a dish called yam khai mot <unk> ( Thai : <unk> ่ <unk> ) or red ant egg salad , a dish that comes from the <unk> or north @-@ eastern region of Thailand . Saville @-@ Kent , in the Naturalist in Australia wrote " Beauty , in the case of the green ant , is more than skin @-@ deep . Their attractive , almost <unk> @-@ like translucency possibly invited the first essays at their consumption by the human species " . Mashed up in water , after the manner of lemon squash , " these ants form a pleasant acid drink which is held in high favor by the natives of North Queensland , and is even appreciated by many European palates " . 
 In his First Summer in the Sierra , John Muir notes that the Digger Indians of California ate the tickling , acid gasters of the large jet @-@ black carpenter ants . The Mexican Indians eat the replete workers , or living honey @-@ pots , of the honey ant ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = As pests = = = 
 Some ant species are considered as pests , primarily those that occur in human habitations , where their presence is often problematic . For example , the presence of ants would be undesirable in sterile places such as hospitals or kitchens . Some species or genera commonly categorized as pests include the Argentine ant , pavement ant , yellow crazy ant , banded sugar ant , Pharaoh ant , carpenter ants , odorous house ant , red imported fire ant , and European fire ant . Some ants will raid stored food , others may damage indoor structures , some can damage agricultural crops directly ( or by aiding sucking pests ) , and some will sting or bite . The adaptive nature of ant colonies make it nearly impossible to eliminate entire colonies and most pest management practices aim to control local populations and tend to be temporary solutions . Ant populations are managed by a combination of approaches that make use of chemical , biological and physical methods . Chemical methods include the use of insecticidal bait which is gathered by ants as food and brought back to the nest where the poison is inadvertently spread to other colony members through trophallaxis . Management is based on the species and techniques can vary according to the location and circumstance . 
 = = = In science and technology = = = 
 Observed by humans since the dawn of history , the behaviour of ants has been documented and the subject of early writings and fables passed from one century to another . Those using scientific methods , <unk> , study ants in the laboratory and in their natural conditions . Their complex and variable social structures have made ants ideal model organisms . Ultraviolet vision was first discovered in ants by Sir John Lubbock in 1881 . Studies on ants have tested hypotheses in ecology and sociobiology , and have been particularly important in examining the predictions of theories of kin selection and evolutionarily stable strategies . Ant colonies may be studied by rearing or temporarily maintaining them in <unk> , specially constructed glass framed enclosures . Individuals may be tracked for study by marking them with dots of colours . 
 The successful techniques used by ant colonies have been studied in computer science and robotics to produce distributed and fault @-@ tolerant systems for solving problems , for example Ant colony optimization and Ant robotics . This area of <unk> has led to studies of ant locomotion , search engines that make use of " foraging trails " , fault @-@ tolerant storage , and networking algorithms . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 <unk> ants have often been used in fables and children 's stories to represent industriousness and cooperative effort . They also are mentioned in religious texts . In the Book of Proverbs in the Bible , ants are held up as a good example for humans for their hard work and cooperation . Aesop did the same in his fable The Ant and the Grasshopper . In the Quran , Sulayman is said to have heard and understood an ant warning other ants to return home to avoid being accidentally crushed by Sulayman and his marching army . [ Quran 27 : 18 ] In parts of Africa , ants are considered to be the messengers of the deities . Some Native American mythology , such as the Hopi mythology , considers ants as the very first animals . Ant bites are often said to have curative properties . The sting of some species of Pseudomyrmex is claimed to give fever relief . Ant bites are used in the initiation ceremonies of some Amazon Indian cultures as a test of endurance . 
 Ant society has always fascinated humans and has been written about both humorously and seriously . Mark Twain wrote about ants in his 1880 book A Tramp Abroad . Some modern authors have used the example of the ants to comment on the relationship between society and the individual . Examples are Robert Frost in his poem " Departmental " and T. H. White in his fantasy novel The Once and Future King . The plot in French entomologist and writer Bernard Werber 's Les <unk> science @-@ fiction trilogy is divided between the worlds of ants and humans ; ants and their behaviour is described using contemporary scientific knowledge . H.G. Wells wrote about intelligent ants destroying human settlements in Brazil and threatening human civilization in his 1905 science @-@ fiction short story , The Empire of the Ants . In more recent times , animated cartoons and 3 @-@ D animated films featuring ants have been produced including Antz , A Bug 's Life , The Ant Bully , The Ant and the Aardvark , Ferdy the Ant and Atom Ant . Renowned myrmecologist E. O. Wilson wrote a short story , " Trailhead " in 2010 for The New Yorker magazine , which describes the life and death of an ant @-@ queen and the rise and fall of her colony , from an ants ' point of view . 
 From the late 1950s through the late 1970s , ant farms were popular educational children 's toys in the United States . Later versions use transparent gel instead of soil , allowing greater visibility . In the early 1990s , the video game <unk> , which simulated an ant colony , won the 1992 <unk> award for " Best Simulation Program " . 
 Ants also are quite popular inspiration for many science @-@ fiction insectoids , such as the <unk> of Ender 's Game , the Bugs of Starship Troopers , the giant ants in the films Them ! and Empire of the Ants , Marvel Comics ' super hero Ant @-@ Man , and ants mutated into super @-@ intelligence in Phase IV . In computer strategy games , ant @-@ based species often benefit from increased production rates due to their single @-@ minded focus , such as the <unk> in the Master of Orion series of games or the <unk> in Deadlock II . These characters are often credited with a hive mind , a common misconception about ant colonies . 
 = Transformers ( film ) = 
 Transformers is a 2007 American science fiction action film based on the Transformers toy line . The film , which combines computer animation with live @-@ action , is directed by Michael Bay , with Steven Spielberg serving as executive producer . It is the first installment of the live @-@ action Transformers film series . It stars Shia LaBeouf as Sam Witwicky , a teenager who gets caught up in a war between the heroic Autobots and the villainous Decepticons , two factions of alien robots who can disguise themselves by transforming into everyday machinery , primarily vehicles . The Autobots intend to use the AllSpark , the object that created their robotic race , in an attempt to rebuild Cybertron and end the war while the Decepticons desire control of the AllSpark with the intention of using it to build an army by giving life to the machines of Earth . Tyrese Gibson , Josh Duhamel , Anthony Anderson , Megan Fox , Rachael Taylor , John Turturro , and Jon Voight also star while voice actors Peter Cullen and Hugo Weaving voice Optimus Prime and Megatron respectively . 
 The film was produced by Don Murphy and Tom DeSanto . They developed the project in 2003 , and DeSanto wrote a treatment . Steven Spielberg came on board the following year , hiring Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman to write the screenplay . The U.S. Armed Forces and General Motors ( GM ) loaned vehicles and aircraft during filming , which saved money for the production and added realism to the battle scenes . 
 Hasbro 's promotional campaign for the film included deals with hundreds of companies . Advertising included a viral marketing campaign , coordinated releases of prequel comic books , toys , and books , as well as product placement deals with GM , Burger King , and eBay . 
 Transformers received mixed to positive reviews from critics and fans , and is the forty @-@ fifth highest @-@ grossing film and the fifth highest @-@ grossing film of 2007 , grossing approximately $ 709 million worldwide , with an estimated 46 million tickets sold in the US . The film won four awards from the Visual Effects Society and was nominated for three Academy Awards , for Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Visual Effects . LaBeouf 's performance was praised by Empire , and Cullen 's reprisal of Optimus Prime from the 1980s television series was well received by fans . A sequel , Revenge of the Fallen , was released on June 24 , 2009 . A third film , Dark of the Moon , was released on June 29 , 2011 , in 3 @-@ D and went on to gross over $ 1 billion . A fourth entry , Age of Extinction , was released on June 27 , 2014 , which also grossed over $ 1 billion . A fifth installment , titled Transformers : The Last Knight , is scheduled for a Summer 2017 release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Several thousand years ago , the planet Cybertron was consumed by a civil war by the two Transformer factions , the Autobots led by Optimus Prime and the Decepticons led by Megatron . Optimus jettisoned the AllSpark , a mystical artifact that brings life to the planet , into space , but Megatron pursued it . Megatron crashed in the Arctic Circle and froze , and was discovered in 1895 by explorer Archibald Witwicky . Witwicky activated Megatron ’ s navigational system , which scanned the AllSpark ’ s coordinates into his glasses . The glasses end up in the possession of his great @-@ great @-@ grandson Sam Witwicky . In the present , Sam buys his first car , a rusting Chevrolet Camaro , but discovers it has a life of its own . 
 In modern Qatar , Blackout attacks and destroys a U.S. military base in a failed attempt to hack the military network to find information on Megatron and the AllSpark . A team of soldiers led by Captain William Lennox escape across the desert , pursued by Blackout ’ s drone Scorponok . They fight Scorponok off , aided by aerial reinforcements and travel home with Scorponok ’ s stinger , discovering sabot rounds damaged the armor . At the Pentagon , Secretary of Defense John Keller leads the investigation into the attack . Sound analyst Maggie Madsen catches another Decepticon , Frenzy , hacking into the network while onboard Air Force One . While the hack is thwarted , Frenzy downloads files on Archibald ’ s glasses , tracking down Sam with Barricade , disguised as a police car . 
 Sam and his high school crush Mikaela Banes are rescued by the Camaro who turns out to be Autobot scout Bumblebee , but he is mute and has to communicate through his car radio . Previously sending a beacon to his fellow Autobots , Bumblebee takes Sam and Mikaela to meet the new arrivals – Optimus , Jazz , Ironhide , and Ratchet . Optimus explains the details of their situation , revealing if Megatron gained the AllSpark he would transform Earth ’ s machinery into a new army and exterminate mankind . Sam , Mikaela , and the Autobots travel to Sam ’ s house to retrieve the glasses , but the teenagers are captured by agents of Sector Seven , a top secret government branch led by Seymour Simmons . The Autobots stop the agents , but Simmons calls for backup , who take Sam , Mikaela , and Bumblebee into custody with Optimus obtaining the glasses . 
 The respective groups connected to the Transformers are gathered together at Hoover Dam by Sector Seven ’ s director Tom Banachek . Inside , the group discover the frozen Megatron and the AllSpark , but Frenzy , who smuggled away in Mikaela ’ s bag , summons the other Decepticons to attack . Bumblebee is released to protect the AllSpark , shrinking it down to a handheld size so it can be transported to safety . Megatron escapes the dam after thawing out . A lengthy battle occurs in Los Angeles , with most of the Decepticons being killed , but Megatron murders Jazz . He prevents Sam ’ s attempted escape with the AllSpark , and begins to fight Optimus . After a long brawl Megatron seems to get the upper hand . Optimus then tells Sam to push the cube into his chest , but Sam rams it into Megatron 's chest instead , extinguishing his spark . Starscream is the only Decepticon to escape , but Barricade remains on Earth . 
 Optimus salvages a shard of the AllSpark from Megatron ’ s body . The U.S. government shuts down Sector Seven , disposing of the dead Decepticons in the Laurentian Abyss . Sam and Mikaela then start a relationship while the Autobots secretly hide out on Earth , Optimus sends a transmission into space inviting any surviving Autobots to join them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Humans = = = 
 Shia LaBeouf as Sam Witwicky , the young descendant of an Arctic explorer who stumbles on a big secret which becomes the last hope for Earth . 
 Tyrese Gibson as Sgt. Robert Epps , a U.S. Air Force Combat Controller and technical sergeant of a Special Operations team based at the U.S. SOCCENT base in Qatar . 
 Josh Duhamel as Capt. William Lennox , the leader of Epps 's Special Operations team in Qatar . 
 Anthony Anderson as Glen <unk> , a hacker recruited by the U.S. Defense Department . 
 Megan Fox as Mikaela Banes , a classmate of Sam who assists him in his mission by using skills she learned as a juvenile car thief . She is also Sam 's love interest . 
 Rachael Taylor as Maggie Madsen , a Pentagon analyst friend of Glen 's . 
 John Turturro as <unk> . Seymour Simmons , a member of Sector 7 Advanced Research Division . 
 Jon Voight as John Keller , the U.S. Secretary of Defense . 
 Michael O 'Neill as Tom Banachek , head of Sector 7 . 
 Kevin Dunn as Ron Witwicky , Sam 's father . 
 Julie White as Judy Witwicky , Sam 's mother . 
 Amaury Nolasco as <unk> Jorge " Fig " Figueroa , a Special Operations soldier who survives the destruction of the SOCCENT base in Qatar and was also a member of Captain Lennox 's team . 
 Zack Ward as First Sergeant Donnelly , a member of Captain Lennox 's team . 
 W. Morgan Sheppard as Captain Archibald Witwicky , Sam 's great @-@ great @-@ grandfather who accidentally activates Megatron 's navigational system . 
 Bernie Mac as Bobby Bolivia , a used cars salesman . 
 John Robinson as Miles Lancaster , Sam 's best friend . 
 Travis Van Winkle as Trent DeMarco , Mikaela 's ex @-@ boyfriend . 
 Glenn Morshower as Colonel Sharp ( credited as " SOCCENT sergeant " ) 
 = = = Transformers = = = 
 = = = = Autobots = = = = 
 Peter Cullen as Optimus Prime , the leader of the Autobots who transforms into a blue and red 1994 Peterbilt 379 semi @-@ trailer truck . Peter Cullen had previously voiced Optimus Prime in the original 1980s cartoon and was chosen to reprise his role , which was warmly welcomed by audiences and considered one of the film 's best aspects . 
 Mark Ryan as Bumblebee , the Autobot scout and Sam 's new guardian who transforms into a yellow and black 2006 Chevrolet Camaro . 
 Darius McCrary as Jazz , Optimus 's second @-@ in @-@ command who transforms into a silver 2006 Pontiac Solstice . 
 Robert Foxworth as Ratchet , the Autobot medic who transforms into a yellow 2004 search and rescue Hummer H2 ambulance . 
 Jess Harnell as Ironhide , the Autobot weapons expert who transforms into a black 2005 GMC <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = = Decepticons = = = = 
 Hugo Weaving as Megatron , the leader of the Decepticons who transforms into a silver Cybertronian jet . Originally Frank Welker ( voice of Megatron in the original series ) was considered but according to DVD commentary , Bay thought his voice didn 't fit , so Weaving was chosen instead . 
 Charlie Adler as Starscream , Megatron 's second @-@ in @-@ command who transforms into a Lockheed Martin F @-@ 22 Raptor . Adler had previously voiced several characters in the original series , most noticeably <unk> . 
 Blackout , Megatron 's third @-@ in @-@ command who transforms into a MH @-@ <unk> Pave Low III . 
 Jess Harnell as Barricade , the Decepticon scout and interrogator who transforms into a black <unk> <unk> police car . 
 Jim Wood as Bonecrusher , the Decepticon mine sweeper who transforms into a Buffalo H Mine @-@ Protected vehicle . 
 Brawl , the Decepticon demolition specialist who transforms into a dark green M1 Abrams . 
 Reno Wilson as Frenzy , the Decepticon hacker and Barricade 's minion , who transforms into a <unk> Boombox , and later a Nokia 8800 . 
 Scorponok , a scorpion Decepticon and Blackout 's minion . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Don Murphy was planning a G.I. Joe film adaptation , but when the United States launched the invasion of Iraq in March 2003 , Hasbro suggested adapting the Transformers franchise instead . Tom DeSanto joined Murphy because he was a fan of the series . They met with comic book writer Simon Furman , and cited the Generation 1 cartoon and comics as their main influence . They made the Creation Matrix their plot device , though Murphy had it renamed because of the film series The Matrix . DeSanto chose to write the treatment from a human point of view to engage the audience , while Murphy wanted it to have a realistic tone , reminiscent of a disaster film . The treatment featured the Autobots Optimus Prime , Ironhide , Jazz , Prowl , Arcee , Ratchet , Wheeljack , and Bumblebee , and the Decepticons Megatron , Starscream , Soundwave , Ravage , Laserbeak , Rumble , Skywarp and Shockwave . 
 Steven Spielberg , a fan of the comics and toys , signed on as executive producer in 2004 . John Rogers wrote the first draft , which pitted four Autobots against four Decepticons , and featured the Ark spaceship . Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman , fans of the cartoon , were hired to rewrite the script in February 2005 . Spielberg suggested that " a boy and his car " should be the focus . This appealed to Orci and Kurtzman because it conveyed themes of adulthood and responsibility , " the things that a car represents in the United States " . The characters of Sam and Mikaela were the sole point of view given in Orci and Kurtzman 's first draft . The Transformers had no dialogue , as the producers feared talking robots would look ridiculous . The writers felt that even if it would look silly , not having the robots speak would betray the fanbase . The first draft also had a battle scene in the Grand Canyon . Spielberg read each of Orci and Kurtzman 's drafts and gave notes for improvement . The writers remained involved throughout production , adding additional dialogue for the robots during the sound mixing ( although none of this was kept in the final film , which ran fifteen minutes shorter than the initial edit ) . Furman 's The Ultimate Guide , published by Dorling Kindersley , remained as a resource to the writers throughout production . Prime Directive was used as a fake working title . This was also the name of Dreamwave Productions ' first Transformers comic book . 
 Michael Bay was asked to direct by Spielberg on July 30 , 2005 , but he dismissed the film as a " stupid toy movie " . Nonetheless , he wanted to work with Spielberg , and gained a new respect for the concept upon visiting Hasbro . Bay considered the first draft " too kiddie " , so he increased the military 's role in the story . The writers sought inspiration from G.I. Joe for the soldier characters , being careful not to mix the brands . Bay based Lennox ' struggle to get to the Pentagon <unk> while struggling with an unhelpful operator from a real account he was given by a soldier when working on another film . 
