 Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph ( STIS ) 
 Wide Field and Planetary Camera ( WFPC ) 
 Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 ( WFPC2 ) 
 Wide Field Camera 3 ( WFC3 ) 
 = California spiny lobster = 
 The California spiny lobster ( Panulirus interruptus ) is a species of spiny lobster found in the eastern Pacific Ocean from Monterey Bay , California to the Gulf of Tehuantepec , Mexico . It typically grows to a length of 30 cm ( 12 in ) and is a reddish @-@ brown color with stripes along the legs , and has a pair of enlarged antennae but no claws . The interrupted grooves across the tail are characteristic for the species . 
 Females can carry up to 680 @,@ 000 eggs , which hatch after 10 weeks into flat phyllosoma larvae . These feed on plankton before the metamorphosis into the juvenile state . Adults are nocturnal and migratory , living among rocks at depths of up to 65 m ( 213 ft ) , and feeding on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . The spiny lobster is eaten by various fish , octopuses and sea otters , but can defend itself with a loud noise produced by its antennae . The California spiny lobster is the subject of both commercial and recreational fishery in both Mexico and the United States , with sport fishermen using hoop nets and commercial fishermen using lobster traps . 
 = = Description = = 
 In common with all spiny lobsters , the California spiny lobster has two large , spiny antennae , but no large claws on its legs . The California spiny lobster is one of the largest spiny lobster species , and grows up to 60 centimeters ( 24 in ) long , but does not usually exceed 30 cm ( 12 in ) . Males can weigh up to 7 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 16 lb ) . , with the record being a 16 lbs . , 1 oz. male caught off Catalina island in 1968 . The upper side of the animal is brownish red , without the paler bands or spots seen in some other spiny lobsters . The legs are a similar color , but with one or more lighter streaks running along their length . 
 Males and females of all ages can be distinguished by the position of the two round genital openings or gonopores . In females , they are at the bases of the third pair of pereiopods , while in males they are at the base of the fifth ( last ) pereiopods , furthest from the head and the closest to the abdomen . Mature females have a small claw on the fifth pereiopod , and enlarged pleopods . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The California spiny lobster is found in parts of the Gulf of California , and along the Pacific coast of the length of the Baja California peninsula , extending as far north as San Luis Obispo Bay , California . There are occasional records from Monterey Bay , but the water there is too cold for the California spiny lobster to breed , and it is thought that any adult found in Central California arrived as a larva during El Niño years . 
 California spiny lobsters live on rocky substrates , at depths of up to 65 meters ( 213 ft ) . Although they can be found in shallow water , including tide pools , they are more frequent in deeper waters . Juveniles generally inhabit rocky habitats at a depth of 0 – 4 m ( 0 – 13 ft ) with dense plant cover , especially the surf grass <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 California spiny lobsters are nocturnal , hiding in crevices during the day , with only the tips of their long antennae showing , as a means of avoiding predators . Towards dawn , the spiny lobsters form aggregations , which they maintain until dusk . At night , they emerge and feed on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . This activity is important in limiting sea urchin populations , and so maintaining healthy seabed communities . 
 Natural predators of the California spiny lobster include bony fish such as the California sheepshead , giant sea bass and <unk> , sharks including the horn shark and leopard shark , octopuses and sea otters . In response to an approaching predator , spiny lobsters including the California spiny lobster can produce a loud noise using the stick @-@ slip phenomenon , akin to a bowed instrument . The bases of the antennae act as a plectrum , which is rubbed over a file on the edge of the <unk> plate . If a predator is very close , spiny lobsters will flex their muscular tail in order to escape the predator , backwards . 
 There is an annual migration , in which spiny lobsters enter shallower water in spring and summer , and head out to deeper water in fall and winter , reaching depths as great as 240 ft ( 73 m ) , perhaps to avoid the effects of winter storms . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Female California spiny lobsters reach sexual maturity at a length of 65 – 69 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 7 in ) , which is typically at an age of 5 – 9 years ; males are sexually mature after 3 – 6 years . Because all the hard parts are lost at each molt , the life span of mature spiny lobsters is uncertain ; they are thought to live for 50 years or more . 
 Spiny lobsters do not have the gonopods ( first pleopods modified for reproduction ) that occur in clawed lobsters and crabs , and females do not have a deep pocket on the sternum in which to store sperm . Instead , a spermatophore is transferred directly from one of the male 's gonopores to the sternum of the female . The male gonopore is , however , adorned with a " penile process " , which is straight and serrated , with a small " hairbrush " . The sternum of mature females has three " windows " on the last three segments , which uniquely among Panulirus species , span both halves of the sternum . These windows are softer than the rest of the exoskeleton , and are thought to help the male locate the correct location to place the tar @-@ like spermatophore . 
 After mating , the fertilized eggs are carried on the female 's pleopods until they hatch , with between 120 @,@ 000 and 680 @,@ 000 carried by a single female . The eggs begin coral red , but darken as they develop to a deep maroon . When she is carrying the eggs , the female is said to be " berried " . The eggs are ready to hatch after 10 weeks , and spawning takes place from May to August , The larvae that hatch ( called phyllosoma larvae ) do not resemble the adults . Instead , they are flat , transparent animals around 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) long , but as thin as a sheet of paper . The larvae feed on plankton , and grow through ten molts into ten further larval stages , the last of which is around 30 – 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 3 in ) long . The full series of larval molts takes around 7 months , and when the last stage molts , it metamorphoses into the <unk> state , which is a juvenile form of the adult , albeit still transparent . The <unk> larvae settle to the sea floor when the water is near its maximum temperature , which in Baja California is in the fall . 
 The diet of the juveniles is varied , but comprises mostly amphipods and isopods , together with coralline algae and the plant <unk> . When available , the juveniles prefer to eat crabs . 
 = = Fishery = = 
 In his original description , John Witt Randall noted that the California spiny lobster is " used as food by the natives " of Upper California . The California spiny lobster is now the most economically important lobster on the American West Coast . Sport fishing may account for up to half the entire catch , while most of the commercial catch comes from lobster traps , with smaller amounts coming from the use of trammel nets or by trawling . The major fishing area is west of Baja California , and imports from Mexico to the United States are twice the amount produced in California . 
 = = = Sport fishing in California = = = 
 Recreational fishermen are allowed to catch lobsters with hoop nets or by SCUBA diving or free @-@ diving ; almost all come from California , with only small numbers from other U.S. states . The California Department of Fish and Game estimates that recreational fishers caught more than 200 @,@ 000 spiny lobsters in the first half of the 2008 / 2009 season , amounting to around 280 @,@ 000 pounds ( 130 @,@ 000 kg ) , compared to commercial fishermen , who caught a total of 580 @,@ 000 lb ( 260 @,@ 000 kg ) in the same time . 
 The California Department of Fish and Game sets and enforces a number of regulations pertaining to recreational fishing of spiny lobsters : 
 Open season for California spiny lobster runs from the Saturday before the first Wednesday in October until the first Wednesday after March 15 . 
 No implements other than hoop nets may be used ; no one person may have more than 5 nets and no vessel may use more than 10 hoop nets . When fishing from land , each fisherman is limited to two hoop nets . 
 Lobster fishers may not land more than seven California spiny lobsters on any given day , and may not have more than seven in their possession at any time . 
 Fishers must carry a lobster gauge , and any lobster smaller than the minimum landing size must be returned to the sea immediately . The minimum size is a carapace length of 3 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 82 @.@ 6 mm ) , measured along the midline from the rear of the eye socket between the horns , to the end of the carapace . This is equivalent to a total body length of 20 centimeters or 7 @.@ 9 inches . 
 To fish for spiny lobster south of Point Arguello , a sport fishing license with ocean enhancement stamp must be displayed or kept nearby . 
 A report card for the season must be bought , filled in and returned before April 30 after the season ends . 
 Commercial and recreational traps must not be interfered with . 
 = = = Commercial fishing in California = = = 
 The open season for commercial fishing begins on the first Wednesday in October and runs until the first Wednesday after the 15th of March . Commercial fishermen may use individually buoyed traps , but may not dive for lobsters . 
 For those using lobster traps , the fishing effort is greatest at the beginning of the permitted season in California , and peters out towards the end of the season , 24 weeks later . Although the fishing effort becomes better concentrated on areas with more spiny lobsters during the season , the fishing efficiency ( catch per unit effort ) nonetheless decreases throughout the season . 
 = = = Fishing in Mexico = = = 
 In Mexico , spiny lobsters are an important commercial resource , representing the fifth most valuable fishery , worth US $ 18 million . Three species are exploited along the Pacific coast of the Baja California peninsula , but the catch of 744 t of the California spiny lobster makes up 95 % – 97 % of the total , with only small quantities of Panulirus <unk> and Panulirus gracilis . The fishing rights are held by 26 local co @-@ operatives . 
 The main legal restrictions on fishing for California spiny lobster in Mexico are a minimum landing size of 82 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 25 in ) , the prohibition of catching berried females , and a closed season : from February 16 to November 15 , fishing for spiny lobsters is prohibited in a region which moves south along Mexico 's Pacific coast during the season . 
 The Mexican fishery for the California spiny lobster was the first Latin American fishery to be awarded the Marine Stewardship Council 's sustainable fishery <unk> , and the species is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Names = = 
 Panulirus interruptus is called the California spiny lobster by the Food and Agriculture Organization , but a number of other local , vernacular names exist , including California lobster , California marine crayfish , and red lobster in the United States , and <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> in Mexico . The preferred common name of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service is simply spiny lobster . 
 John Witt Randall described the species in the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia in 1840 , based on material given to him by Thomas Nuttall . The exact locality is not known , being given only as " Upper California " , but the most likely sources are the places where Nuttall was most active , namely Santa Barbara and San Diego . The specific epithet interruptus refers to the grooves on the abdominal tergites , which are interrupted in this species . Although originally placed in the genus Palinurus , the California spiny lobster was later transferred to Adam White 's new genus Panulirus , together with other spiny lobsters that have long flagella on their first antennae . 
 = = Related species = = 
 The California spiny lobster is one of 19 species in the genus Panulirus , which is one of several genera of spiny lobsters whose names are anagrams of the original spiny lobster genus , Palinurus . Its closest relatives are not the other species that occur in the East Pacific , but rather Panulirus argus from the Caribbean Sea and West Pacific species such as Panulirus japonicus , Panulirus marginatus , Panulirus <unk> , Panulirus <unk> and Panulirus longipes ; this relationship has been recovered from comparative studies of adult and larval morphology , as well as from molecular phylogenetics , using the sequences from cytochrome c oxidase and 16S ribosomal RNA genes . 
 The California spiny lobster can be differentiated from the other species in the genus by the interrupted grooves across the abdomen ; other species either lack grooves , or have grooves which span the entire body segment . 
 = Hybrid Theory = 
 Hybrid Theory is the debut album by the American rock band Linkin Park , released on October 24 , 2000 through Warner Bros. Records . The album was a commercial success , having been certified Diamond for sales of over 11 million units in the United States alone as of 2010 , peaking at number two on the Billboard 200 , and also reaching high positions on other charts worldwide . 
 Recorded at NRG Recordings in North Hollywood , California , and produced by Don Gilmore , the album 's lyrical themes deal with problems lead vocalist Chester Bennington experienced during his adolescence , including drug abuse and the constant fighting and divorce of his parents . Hybrid Theory takes its title from the previous name of the band as well as the concept of music theory and combining different styles . 
 Four singles were released from the album : " One Step Closer " , " Crawling " , " Papercut " , and " In the End " , all of them being responsible for launching Linkin Park into mainstream popularity . While " In the End " was the most successful of the four , all of the singles in the album remain some of the band 's most successful songs to date . Although " Runaway " , " Points of Authority " , and " My December " from the special edition bonus disc album were not released as singles , they were minor hits on alternative rock radio stations thanks to the success of all of the band 's singles and the album . At the 2002 Grammy Awards , Hybrid Theory was nominated for Best Rock Album . The album is listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . It was ranked # 11 on Billboard 's Hot 200 Albums of the Decade . A special edition of Hybrid Theory was released March 11 , 2002 , a year and a half after its original pressing . Hybrid Theory has sold over 28 million copies worldwide , which makes it the best selling debut album of the 2000s . Linkin Park performed the album in its entirety for the first time at the Download Festival on June 14 , 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Linkin Park was founded in 1996 as the rap rock band , Xero : lead guitarist Brad Delson , vocalist and rhythm guitarist Mike Shinoda , drummer Rob Bourdon , turntablist Joe Hahn , lead vocalist Mark Wakefield and bassist Dave Farrell ( who was not with the band during this point to tour with Tasty <unk> ) . In 1999 , after Wakefield 's departure , lead vocalist Chester Bennington joined the five members Xero and the band was renamed to Linkin Park . Bennington 's previous band , Grey Daze , had recently disbanded , so his lawyer recommended him to Jeff Blue , vice president of A & R coordination for Zomba , who at the time was seeking a lead vocalist for Xero . Blue sent Bennington two tapes of Xero 's unreleased recordings — one with vocals by former Xero member Mark Wakefield , and the other with only the instrumental tracks — asking for his " interpretation of the songs " . Bennington wrote and recorded new vocals over the instrumentals and sent the tapes back to Blue . As Delson recalls , " [ Bennington ] really was kind of the final piece of the puzzle [ ... ] We didn 't see anything close to his talent in anybody else . " After Bennington joined , the group first renamed itself to Hybrid Theory and released a self @-@ titled EP . Legal complications with Welsh electronic music group Hybrid prompted a second name change , thus deciding on " Linkin Park " . Throughout 1999 , Linkin Park was a regular act at the Los Angeles club , The Whisky . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 The music that would ultimately become the Hybrid Theory album was first produced by Linkin Park in 1999 as a nine @-@ track demo tape . The band sent this tape to various recording companies and played forty @-@ two different showcases for recording industry representatives , including performances for Los Angeles promoter and impresario , Mike Galaxy 's showcase at The Gig on <unk> . However , they were initially turned down by most of the major labels and several independent record labels . The band was signed by Warner Bros. Records in 1999 , due in large part to the constant recommendations of Jeff Blue , who had joined the label after resigning from Zomba . 
 Despite initial difficulties in finding a producer willing to take charge of the debut album of a newly signed band , Don Gilmore ultimately agreed to head up the project , with Andy Wallace hired as the mixer . Recording sessions , which mostly involved re @-@ recording the songs off the demo tape , began at NRG Recordings in North Hollywood , California in early 2000 and lasted four weeks . Shinoda 's rapping sections in most of the songs were significantly altered from the original , while most choruses remained largely unchanged . Due to the absence of Dave Farrell and Kyle <unk> , who took part in the 1999 extended play , the band hired Scott <unk> and Ian Hornbeck as stand @-@ in bassists ; Delson also played bass throughout most of the album . The Dust Brothers provided additional beats for the track “ With You ” . 
 Bennington and Shinoda wrote the lyrics of Hybrid Theory based in part on early demos with Mark Wakefield . Shinoda characterized the lyrics as interpretations of universal feelings , emotions , and experiences , and as “ everyday emotions you talk about and think about . ” Bennington later described the songwriting experience to Rolling Stone magazine in early 2002 : 
 = = Composition = = 
 The music of Hybrid Theory draws from diverse inspirations . Bennington 's singing style is influenced by acts such as Depeche Mode and Stone Temple Pilots , while the riffs and playing techniques of guitarist Brad Delson are modeled after Deftones , Guns N ' Roses , U2 , and The Smiths . Mike Shinoda 's rapping , present in seven tracks , is very close to The Roots ' style . The lyrical content of the songs primarily touches upon the problems that Bennington encountered during his childhood , including child abuse , constant and excessive drug and alcohol abuse , the divorce of his parents , isolation , disappointments , and the aftermath feelings of failed relationships . Stylistically , the album has been described as nu metal , rap metal and alternative metal . 
 The album eventually produced four singles . " One Step Closer " , the album 's second track and first single , was gradually recorded in increments after Linkin Park struggled with " Runaway " , and features a guitar riff and electronic percussion in the introduction transitioning into a bridge with distortion @-@ heavy guitars and aggressive drums . It is also infamous for the " Shut up when I 'm talkin ' to you ! " refrain screamed by Bennington one minute and 48 seconds into the song . The music video for " One Step Closer " was shot in a Los Angeles subway and became an instant hit , eventually receiving heavy rotation on MTV and other music television networks . Stand @-@ in bassist Scott <unk> is shown performing with the band in the video . 
 The second single was " Crawling " . Lyrically , the song focuses on Bennington 's personal experiences with child abuse — the physical violence , the difficulty in breaking the cycle of abuse , and the subsequent loss of self @-@ esteem . This concept is echoed in the music video , in which a girl ( Katelyn <unk> ) is abused by her father and can be seen in the beginning of the video with several visible bruises . 
 " Papercut " was the album 's third single , and its lyrics describe paranoia . The music video for " Papercut " features the band performing in a hallway opposite a completely dark room on the walls of which are scribbled the song 's lyrics . Various supernatural themes are present in the video , and special effects are used to create eerie renditions , such as the " stretching " of Shinoda 's fingers and the “ melting ” of Bourdon 's face . 
 The fourth single to come from Hybrid Theory was " In the End " , which prominently features a signature piano riff performed by Shinoda . His rapping also dominates the verses of the song and is later joined by Bennington 's vocals in the chorus . The song 's concept is mainly based on one person 's failure . It is considered symbolic of an ending relationship , however , it can also represent broken trust in a once long @-@ lasting friendship . The music video for " In the End " was shot at various stops along the 2001 Ozzfest tour and was directed by Nathan " Karma " Cox and the band 's DJ Joe Hahn , who would go on to direct many of Linkin Park 's future videos ( the two also directed the music video for " Papercut " ) . Although the background for the " In the End " video was filmed in a California desert , the band itself performed on a studio stage in Los Angeles , with prominent CGI effects and compositing being used to create the finished version . Performing on a studio stage allowed Hahn and Cox to set off water pipes above the stage near the end and drench the band . The music video won the Best Rock Video award at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 " Points of Authority " , the fourth track on the album , has its own music video that can be found on Frat Party at the <unk> Festival , the band 's first DVD . Drummer Rob Bourdon describes the recording process of the song : “ Brad wrote this riff , then went home . Mike decided to cut it up into different pieces and rearranged them on the computer [ ... ] Brad had to learn his own part from the computer . ” Regarding the song , Delson praised Shinoda 's skill , describing him as “ a genius ” and “ Trent Reznor @-@ talented ” . On live performances of the song , when Shinoda raps the line , " Forfeit the game " verse for the third time in the song , Bennington would rap the verse along with Mike . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 With Hybrid Theory being Linkin Park 's first album , Mike Shinoda , who had worked as a graphic designer before becoming a professional musician , has stated that the band had looked through books for inspiration on how to present themselves for the first time . The result was a winged @-@ soldier which Shinoda illustrated himself . According to Chester Bennington , the idea of the soldier with dragonfly wings was to describe the blending of hard and soft musical elements by the use of the jaded looks of the soldier and frail touches of the wings . The art style was largely influenced by stencil graffiti , including early works by Banksy . The cover also features scrambled lyrics of the album 's songs within the background , though the lyrics of " One Step Closer " are the most prominent . A different version of the soldier can be seen on some of the album 's singles . The cover of Reanimation , a remix album of Hybrid Theory , features a robotic version of the soldier that is similar in appearance to a mobile suit Gundam , a line of robotic combat machines that are featured in the popular Gundam Wing anime series . 
 = = Release = = 
 Hybrid Theory was released in the United States on October 24 , 2000 following radio airplay of " One Step Closer " . Hybrid Theory also sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , entering the U.S. Billboard 200 charts at # 16 in late 2000 , and was certified gold by the RIAA five weeks after its release . In 2001 , Hybrid Theory sold 4 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States , making it the best @-@ selling album of the year , and it was estimated that the album continued selling 100 @,@ 000 copies per week in early 2002 . Throughout the following years , the album continued to sell at a fast pace and was certified diamond by the RIAA in 2005 for shipment of 10 million copies in the US . As of June 2014 , the album has sold 10 @,@ 222 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 Four singles from the album were released throughout 2001 ( though " Points of Authority " was released as a promotional single ) , three of which were chart successes on the US Billboard Modern Rock Tracks charts . The single " In the End " was the highest charting single from the album , which peaked at # 1 on the Modern Rock Tracks charts and appearing on charts worldwide . The success of " In the End " was partly responsible for Hybrid Theory 's chart success ; it reached # 2 in the Billboard 200 in early 2002 behind <unk> by Creed and by J to tha L – O ! : The Remixes by Jennifer Lopez . Hybrid Theory was the 11th best performing album on the Billboard 200 during the decade , the album reached the top ten in its 38th week on the chart and stayed in the top ten for 34 weeks . The album spent 105 weeks on the chart ( roughly 2 years ) and re entered at # 167 in February 2011 . The album also charted in 11 other countries at fairly high positions and ranked among the top ten in the charts of the United Kingdom , Sweden , New Zealand , Austria , Finland , and Switzerland . At the 44th Grammy Awards in 2002 , Linkin Park won Best Hard Rock Performance for their song " Crawling " . Additional nominations for Best New Artist and Best Rock Album lost out to Alicia Keys and All That You Can 't Leave Behind by U2 . 
 Following the success of Hybrid Theory , Linkin Park received invitations to perform at various rock concerts and tours , including Ozzfest , the Family Values Tour , KROQ @-@ FM 's Almost Acoustic Christmas , and the band 's self @-@ created tour , Projekt Revolution , which was headlined by Linkin Park and featured other bands such as Cypress Hill and Adema . During this time , Linkin Park reunited with their original bassist , Dave “ Phoenix ” Farrell . The band kept an online journal on their official website throughout their 2001 and 2002 touring regime , in which each band member made a respective notation . Although the notes are no longer on their website , they are available on fansites . Linkin Park played 324 shows in 2001 . 
 = = = Special editions = = = 
 A two @-@ disc special edition of Hybrid Theory was released on March 11 , 2002 in Asia . The first disc contains the original album , and the second disc features live performances of " Papercut " , " Points of Authority " , and " A Place for My Head " recorded at the Docklands Arena for BBC Radio 1 . Also featured on the second disc are two studio tracks : " My December " — a song written after the release of Hybrid Theory for inclusion on KROQ 's " Slim Santa " CD , and " High Voltage " , a remix of the song originally on the Hybrid Theory EP . 
 On August 12 , 2014 , the band released a Live CD of the Download Festival 2014 performance where they played their debut album in its entirely , " Hybrid Theory : Live at Download Festival 2014 " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Hybrid Theory received generally positive reviews from critics . Stephanie Dickison of PopMatters commented that the band was a " far more complex and talented group than the hard rock boy bands of late " , and claimed that " they will continue to fascinate and challenge music 's standard sounds . " Q magazine gave Hybrid Theory four out of five stars . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote that “ the men don 't know what the angry boys understand ” , and gave the album a " two @-@ star honorable mention rating " , citing " Papercut " and " Points of Authority " as highlights of the album . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone gave the album two and a half stars and commented that Hybrid Theory had " as much potency as albums by Limp Bizkit or Korn " and called it an album that " reflects the frustration of life " . 
 AllMusic writer William Ruhlmann said that " Linkin Park sounds like a Johnny @-@ come @-@ lately to an already overdone musical style " and called " One Step Closer " " a typical effort " , referring to the lyrics of the song 's chorus . Johan Wippsson from Melodic praised Don Gilmore 's production and described the albums as " destructive and angry but always with a well controlled melodic feeling all over . " NME 's Noel Gardner commented that " otherwise damn fine soaring emo @-@ <unk> like ' With You ' and ' A Place for My Head ' are pointlessly jazzed up with tokenistic scratching , " giving the album a score of six out of ten . Tyler Fisher at Sputnikmusic gave the album a 3 @.@ 0 / 5 , saying " Hybrid Theory stands as a defining mainstream album at the turn of the century , and for good reason . " , but calling the guitar riffs " often bland and unoriginal " . Mike Ross of Jam ! declares the albums as a combination of the best of hip hop and heavy metal . He goes on to state " ... they can actually rap . They can actually crank out a ferocious , head @-@ banging groove . They can write introspective lyrics with intelligence . It adds up to one of the finest new rap metal bands I 've ever heard . " 
 Later in 2002 , Linkin Park released an album entitled Reanimation . It included the songs of Hybrid Theory remixed and reinterpreted by nu metal and underground hip hop artists . Contributors to the album included Black Thought , <unk> <unk> , Jonathan Davis , Stephen Carpenter , and Aaron Lewis . The sound of later Linkin Park albums would involve experimentation with classical instruments such as strings and piano , both of which , along with the same elements of electronica from Hybrid Theory , are prominently included in the band 's second studio album Meteora . As Shinoda explains the difference in the sound between Hybrid Theory and Meteora : " That electronic element has always been there in the band – it 's just that sometimes we bring it closer to the front . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Hybrid Theory found itself in several " must have " lists that were compiled by various music publications , networks , and other media . In 2012 , Rock Sound named Hybrid Theory the best modern classic album of the last 15 years . In 2013 , Loudwire ranked it at # 10 in its Best Hard Rock Debut Albums list . Some of the more prominent of these lists to feature Hybrid Theory are shown below : 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Hybrid Theory – Live Around the World = = 
 Hybrid Theory – Live Around the World is a live album which features live versions of eight songs from the debut studio album , Hybrid Theory . They were recorded in various cities around the world from 2007 to 2010 . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Linkin Park , except " A Place for My Head " Linkin Park , Wakefield , Farrell . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Linkin Park 
 Chester Bennington – lead vocals 
 Mike Shinoda – lead vocals , rapping , rhythm guitar , keyboard , piano 
 Brad Delson – lead guitar , bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Joe Hahn – turntables , samples , programming , backing vocals 
 Rob Bourdon – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 An en @-@ dash ( – ) denotes countries in which the singles were not released or did not chart . 
 = Eurasian wryneck = 
 The Eurasian wryneck ( Jynx torquilla ) is a species of wryneck in the woodpecker family . This species mainly breeds in temperate regions of Europe and Asia . Most populations are migratory , wintering in tropical Africa and in southern Asia from Iran to the Indian Subcontinent , but some are resident in northwestern Africa . It is a bird of open countryside , woodland and orchards . 
 Eurasian wrynecks measure about 16 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) in length and have bills shorter and less dagger @-@ like than those of other woodpeckers . Their upperparts are barred and mottled in shades of pale brown with rufous and blackish bars and wider black streaks . Their underparts are cream speckled and spotted with brown . Their chief prey is ants and other insects , which they find in decaying wood or on the ground . The eggs are white as is the case with many birds that nest in holes and a clutch of seven to ten eggs is laid during May and June . 
 These birds get their English name from their ability to turn their heads through almost 180 degrees . When disturbed at the nest , they use this snake @-@ like head twisting and hissing as a threat display . This odd behaviour led to their use in witchcraft , hence to put a " jinx " on someone . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The Eurasian wryneck was first described by Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae in 1758 . The type species came from Sweden . 
 The genus name Jynx is from the Ancient Greek name for this bird , <unk> . The specific torquilla is Medieval Latin derived from <unk> , to twist , referring to the strange snake @-@ head movements . The bird was used a a charm to bring back an errant lover , the bird being tied to a piece of string and whirled around . The English " wryneck " refers to the same twisting movement and was first recorded in 1585 . 
 The <unk> family has four subfamilies , the Picinae ( woodpeckers ) , the Picumninae ( <unk> ) , the Jynginae ( wrynecks ) and the monotypic <unk> ( Antillean <unk> ) . Based on morphology and behaviour , the Picumninae was considered to be the sister clade of the Picinae . This has now been confirmed by phylogenetic analysis and the Jynginae are placed basal to the Picinae , <unk> and Picumninae . 
 Jynginae includes one genus ( Jynx ) and two species , the Eurasian wryneck and the red @-@ throated wryneck ( Jynx ruficollis ) , resident in sub @-@ Saharan Africa . There are six subspecies of Jynx torquilla : 
 Jynx torquilla chinensis Hesse , 1911 
 Jynx torquilla <unk> Vaurie , 1959 
 Jynx torquilla <unk> Rothschild , 1909 
 Jynx torquilla <unk> Loudon , 1912 
 Jynx torquilla torquilla Linnaeus , 1758 
 Jynx torquilla tschusii O. Kleinschmidt , 1907 
 = = Description = = 
 The Eurasian wryneck grows to about 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) in length . The subspecies Jynx torquilla tschusii weighs 26 to 50 g ( 0 @.@ 92 to 1 @.@ 76 oz ) . It is a slim , elongated @-@ looking bird with a body shape more like a thrush than a woodpecker . The upperparts are barred and mottled in shades of pale brown with rufous and blackish bars and wider black streaks . The rump and upper tail coverts are grey with speckles and irregular bands of brown . The rounded tail is grey , speckled with brown , with faint bands of greyish @-@ brown and a few more clearly defined bands of brownish @-@ black . The cheeks and throat are buff barred with brown . The underparts are creamy white with brown markings shaped like arrow @-@ heads which are reduced to spots on the lower breast and belly . The flanks are buff with similar markings and the under @-@ tail coverts are buff with narrow brown bars . The primaries and secondaries are brown with rufous @-@ buff markings . The beak is brown , long and slender with a broad base and sharp tip . The irises are hazel and the slender legs and feet are pale brown . The first and second toes are shorter than the others . The first and fourth toes point backwards and the second and third point forwards , a good arrangement for clinging to vertical surfaces . 
 The call of the Eurasian wryneck is a series of repeated harsh , shrill notes quee @-@ quee @-@ quee @-@ quee lasting for several seconds and is reminiscent of the voice of the lesser spotted woodpecker . Its alarm call is a short series of staccato " tuck " s and when disturbed on the nest it hisses . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Eurasian wryneck has a palearctic distribution . The breeding range of the nominate subspecies includes all of Europe from Britain to the Urals . In the north it reaches the Arctic Circle and the range includes Spain in the southwest . In the south and east it intergrades with J. t. tschusii ( smaller and more reddish brown ) which is found in Corsica , Italy , Dalmatia and parts of the Balkans . J. t. <unk> ( also smaller than the nominate form , light , with whitish throat and breast ) is resident in Algeria and Morocco and possibly also the Balearic Islands , Sardinia and parts of Sicily . J. t. <unk> ( considerably paler than the nominate with fainter markings ) occurs in the Urals and then in a wide strip of Asia through southern Siberia , Central Asia , including the north @-@ western Himalayas to the Pacific coast . J. t. chinensis breeds in eastern Siberia and northeastern and central China while J. t. <unk> breeds in Pakistan and the northwestern Himalayas . Eurasian wrynecks also inhabit the island of Sakhalin , Japan and the coastal areas of southern China . 
 The Eurasian wryneck is the only European woodpecker to undertake long distance migrations . The wintering area of European species is located south of the Sahara , in a wide strip across Africa extending from Senegal , Gambia and Sierra Leone in the west to Ethiopia in the east . Its southern limit extends to the Democratic Republic of Congo and Cameroon . The populations from West Asia use the same wintering areas . The Central and East Asian breeding birds winter in the Indian subcontinent or southern East Asia including southern Japan . 
 During the summer the bird is found in open countryside , parkland , gardens , orchards , heaths and hedgerows , especially where there are some old trees . It may also inhabit deciduous woodland and in Scandinavia it also occurs in coniferous forests . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The Eurasian wryneck sometimes forms small groups during migration and in its winter quarters but in the summer is usually found in pairs . It characteristically holds its head high with its beak pointing slightly upwards . A mutual display that occurs at any time of year involves two birds perched facing each other with their heads far back and beaks wide open , bobbing their heads up and down . Sometimes the head is allowed to slump sideways and hang limply . On other occasions , when excited , the head is shaken and twisted about violently . When disturbed on the nest or held in the hand , the neck contorts and twists in all directions . The bird sometimes feigns death and hangs limply with eyes closed . 
 On returning to the breeding area after migration , the birds set up territories . On farmland in Switzerland it has been found that old pear orchards with large numbers of ant nests are preferentially selected over other <unk> . Areas used for vegetable cultivation provided useful habitat when they include areas of bare ground on which the birds can forage . Territories are not chosen at random as arriving birds favoured certain areas over others with the same territories being colonised first year after year . The presence of other Eurasian wrynecks in the vicinity is also a positive influence . Orchards in general , and older ones in particular , provide favoured territories , probably because the dense foliage is more likely to support high numbers of aphids and the ground beneath has scant vegetation cover , both of which factors increase the availability of ants , the birds ' main prey . Despite some territories being consistently chosen over others , reproductive success in these territories was no higher than in others . Limiting factors for such crevice @-@ nesting species as Eurasian wrynecks are both the availability of nesting sites and the number of ants and their ease of discovery . Modern farming practices such as the removal of hedges , forest patches and isolated trees and the increasing use of fertilisers and pesticides are disadvantageous to such birds . 
 The diet of the Eurasian wryneck consists chiefly of ants but beetles and their larvae , moths , spiders and woodlice are also eaten . Although much time is spent in the upper branches of trees , the bird sometimes perches in low bushes and mostly forages on the ground , moving around with short hops with its tail held in a raised position . It can cling to tree trunks , often moving obliquely , and sometimes pressing its tail against the surface as a prop . It does not make holes in bark with its beak but picks up prey with a rapid extension and retraction of its tongue and it sometimes catches insects while on the wing . Its flight is rather slow and undulating . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 The nesting site is variable and may be in a pre @-@ existing hole in a tree trunk , a crevice in a wall , a hole in a bank , a sand martin 's burrow or a nesting box . In its search for a safe , protected site out of reach of predators , it sometimes evicts a previous occupant , its eggs and nestlings . It uses no nesting material and a clutch of normally seven to ten eggs is laid ( occasionally five , six , eleven or twelve ) . The eggs average 20 @.@ 8 by 15 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 82 in × 0 @.@ 61 in ) and weigh about 0 @.@ 2 g ( 0 @.@ 007 oz ) . They are a dull white colour and partially opaque . Both sexes are involved in incubation which takes twelve days , but the female plays the greater part . Both parents feed the chicks for about twenty days before they fledge . There is usually a single brood . 
 = = Status = = 
 The IUCN lists the Eurasian wryneck as being of " Least Concern " in its Red List of Threatened Species . This is because it has a world population estimated at up to fifteen million individual birds and a very wide geographical range . The population may be decreasing to a certain extent but not at such a rate as to make the bird reach the threshold for a more threatened category . In continental Europe , the largest populations are in Spain , Italy , Germany , Poland , Romania , Hungary , Belarus and Ukraine , and only in Romania is the population trend believed to be upward . In Russia , where there are believed to be 300 @,@ 000 to 800 @,@ 000 individuals , the population trend is unknown . In the United Kingdom the numbers of bird are on the decrease and it is protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and is listed on Appendix II of the Bern Convention . It is protected as a migratory species under the Birds Directive in the European Union . 
 = Dream a Little Dream of Me ( Supernatural ) = 
 " Dream a Little Dream of Me " is the tenth episode of the paranormal drama television series Supernatural 's third season . It was first broadcast on The CW on February 7 , 2008 . The narrative follows series protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they enter the dreamscape to rescue the comatose Bobby Singer ( Jim Beaver ) . 
 Developed by Sera Gamble and Cathryn Humphris , the episode was written by the latter and directed by Steve <unk> . It delves into the backstory of Bobby , and also features a major turning point in Dean 's search for self @-@ worth . Many dream sequences had to be altered due to production issues , though series creator Eric Kripke believes it ultimately benefited the episode . 
 Critics gave generally positive reviews that praised Ackles for his dual performance and the production staff for their work on the dream sequences . However , they heavily criticized the actions of character Bela Talbot ( Lauren Cohan ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Within a dreamscape , hunter Bobby Singer ( Beaver ) searches around an old house and is suddenly attacked by a woman ( Elizabeth Marleau ) . A maid tries to no avail to wake him up in his motel room . Meanwhile , Dean Winchester ( Ackles ) finds his brother Sam ( Padalecki ) drinking at a bar in the middle of the afternoon . When Dean questions him about it , a drunken Sam admits that he is upset about not being able to save Dean from his demonic pact , which left him only a year to live . What bothers Sam even more is that Dean , who has little self @-@ worth , is not even concerned about his fate . Their conversation is interrupted by a call from the hospital . 
 After the brothers visit Bobby , who is in an unexplainable coma , they search his motel room and find a newspaper article about a doctor who suffered a sleep @-@ related death . Dean visits the doctor 's office , and learns that he was conducting secret dream experiments for his study on sleep disorders . Dean tracks down Jeremy , a young man who was part of the sleep study because he could not dream . While they talk , Jeremy offers Dean a beer , and he drinks it . Jeremy ( G. Michael Gray ) reveals that the experiment allowed him to dream by drinking a yellow tea , but the dreams scared him so much that he dropped out of the study . Sam , who has been busy conducting research , later tells Dean that a plant known as " African Dream Root " allegedly allows a person to enter and manipulate others ' dreams ; they believe someone killed the doctor in this manner and is now targeting Bobby . As a terrified Bobby hides in a closet within his dream , Dean suggests to Sam that they themselves use the dream root to save him . 
 The brothers contact Bela Talbot ( Cohan ) — a thief and frequent thorn in the Winchesters ' sides — to supply them with dream root . She enters the motel room wearing a trench coat , and removes it to reveal the lingerie underneath . She begins to passionately kiss Sam , and they lie on the bed . However , Sam is soon awakened from his dream by Dean , and Bela arrives moments later . She gives them the dream root without argument — she claims Bobby saved her life in Flagstaff — but is then kicked out . The brothers use the root to make tea , and soon find themselves in a clean version of Bobby 's house . Sam goes outside into brightly lit scenery of flowers and singing birds , but becomes locked out of the house . Inside , Dean locates Bobby , who does not believe that he is dreaming . A woman with stab wounds approaches them , and Bobby reveals that she is his wife . Years prior , she became possessed , and Bobby was forced to stab her because he did not know how to exorcise the demon from her ; her death led him to become a hunter . As Sam is attacked outside by an angry Jeremy , Bobby takes control of the dream , and they awaken . 
 Bobby explains that the man who attacked Sam is Jeremy Frost ; he was unable to dream because his father brutally hit him in the head with a baseball bat . The target 's DNA is a required ingredient for the dream @-@ root tea , and Jeremy acquired Bobby 's by offering him a beer . Dean realizes that he made the same mistake . Vulnerable to Jeremy , they both stay awake for two days while attempting to track him down . Unable to endure it any longer , Dean goes to sleep to face Jeremy , and Sam uses the dream root to enter his dream . The brothers encounter a dream version of Lisa Braeden ( Cindy Sampson ) — Dean 's former love interest — <unk> on a blanket with a picnic basket . She invites Dean to join her , and tells him that she loves him before disappearing . Though Dean denies ever having that dream before , it is an obvious lie . Sam then sees Jeremy nearby and chases after him , and Dean finds himself in a long hallway . He enters his motel room , and comes face @-@ to @-@ face with a dream version of him ; he is his own worst nightmare . The Dream Dean comments on the real Dean 's feelings of worthlessness and self @-@ loathing ; he also deems Dean to be as " mindless and obedient as an attack dog " , noting that his possessions , personality , and motives all stem from his father . When the Dream Dean calls him a " good soldier and nothing else " , the real Dean reacts violently and exclaims that he did not deserve the burdens that his father put onto him and that he does not deserve to go to Hell . The real Dean shoots his doppelganger with a shotgun , but he returns to life as a demon . The Dream Dean taunts him that he cannot escape his fate , and reminds him that exposure to Hell will transform him into a demon . 
 Elsewhere , Sam finds and confronts Jeremy . The latter manipulates the dreamscape to his favor , but Sam retaliates by summoning the form of Jeremy 's father . A terrified Jeremy is distracted , and Sam kills him with a baseball bat . The brothers then awaken from their dreams . When they find that Bela lied about Bobby saving her life , they realize that she stole the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything — from them . As the brothers prepare to leave to hunt her down , Dean admits that he does not want to die . Sam promises him that they will figure out a way to save him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Deemed by series creator Eric Kripke to be his homage to the film Dreamscape , the episode was the culmination of many previous pitches . Series writer Sera Gamble had been suggesting a dream @-@ based episode since the show 's first season , but it was not until the third season that the writers found the concept feasible . Although Cathryn Humphris was selected to pen " Dream a Little Dream of Me " due to her position on the writers ' rotation , she was teamed with Gamble to develop the story . On this pairing , Humphris commented , " I think that we complement each other well . Sera 's great at the really scary moments , and I think I 'm pretty good at some of the connective tissue and putting stuff together in the larger landscape . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Dream a Little Dream of Me " delves into the backstory of hunter Bobby Singer . The writers always knew his history would be " grounded in family " . Reflecting this , the original teaser depicted the supernatural deaths of Bobby 's children ; while eating dinner with his family , his children 's throats are supernaturally slit , and they would ask him , " Why , daddy , why did you let this happen ? " However , the writers could not determine where to go from there . Following Humphris ' earlier pitch of Bobby being an expert exorcist because of a previous failed exorcism , the focus changed to Bobby 's torment about killing his demonically possessed wife . 
 Other planned dream sequences were drastically altered due to production issues . One such scene , made to look like 80 's @-@ style film stock , had Dean being confronted by serial killer Jason Voorhees of the Friday the 13th film series . After production cleared the rights to use the character , Kripke made everyone view Friday the 13th : The Final Chapter to help them create the " perfect facsimile " of Jason . However , the film studio that had granted permission realized a few days before filming that it did not actually own the rights . In dire need of a new concept , the writers recalled Sam 's dream sequence with Bela ; since Sam is revealed to be a " horn dog " underneath , the writers wanted Dean to be the opposite . Dean secretly desires a normal family , so they had Cindy Sampson reprise her role as Lisa Braeden — Dean 's love interest from " The Kids are Alright " . On retrospect , Kripke preferred this scene over Jason because it is more illuminating of Dean 's character . 
 Dean 's other dream is a major turning point in the character 's storyline , after which he starts gaining self @-@ respect and realizes that he truly wants to live . He begins the season with little self @-@ worth , and the writers realized that this outlook stems from his father , John Winchester . Initially , they planned to have Jeffrey Dean Morgan reprise his role as John , who would browbeat Dean within the dreamscape . When they learned that Morgan was busy filming Watchmen , the writers instead found inspiration in the junkyard scene from the film Superman III , in which good and evil versions of Superman confront one another . Kripke noted , however , that the conversation between the two Deans still focuses on John . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal filming took place in Vancouver , British Columbia , with Bobby 's hospital scenes being filmed at Eagle Ridge Hospital in Port Moody , British Columbia . To distinguish the dream sequences , director of photography Serge Ladouceur used full blue lighting in the backgrounds — he normally uses half . The seamless transitions between dream scenes were accomplished by compressing the background with a long lens . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its initial broadcast , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 68 million viewers . It received generally positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide was happy to see Jim Beaver become more involved in the storyline , and praised Ackles for his " amazing job " during the confrontation between the two Deans . She described the latter scenes as " seamless , yet painful to watch " . Although Charles was happy to see the Colt get stolen — she thought the weapon was " too easy " and had lost its mystique — she noted her annoyance that the brothers continue to " look ridiculous " because Bela is able to steal things from them . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune gave the episode an A- . Despite the " sluggish pacing " of the first half , the " paternal baggage " and monster of the week " built up enough emotional resonance to triumph " . She noted the actors ' performances , such as the " great Winchester moment " in which Sam discusses Dean 's demonic pact ; for Peterson , " ... the dark , wounded look in Jared Padalecki 's eyes totally sells it " . The " brutally good character writing " and " truly impressive work " done for Dean 's dream @-@ encounter with himself was also lauded , with Peterson writing , " Ackles gives two of his best performances in the history of the show . At the same time . " Like Charles , however , she pointed out how " uncharacteristically stupid about Bela " the Winchesters have been . She commented , " Bela appears to have eaten the writers ' brains for breakfast . " The episode received a score of 7 out of 7 from TV Squad 's Brett Love . Bobby 's backstory at first was a " bit of a shock " for him , but he eventually came to realize that it " fits very well " . Love also thought that the dream root aspect " worked out great " , and deemed the dreamscapes " creepy and unsettling " . 
 = W. S. Gilbert = 
 Sir William <unk> Gilbert ( 18 November 1836 – 29 May 1911 ) was an English dramatist , librettist , poet and illustrator best known for the fourteen comic operas ( known as the Savoy operas ) produced in collaboration with the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan . The most famous of these include H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance and one of the most frequently performed works in the history of musical theatre , The Mikado . These , as well as several of the other Savoy operas , continue to be frequently performed in the English @-@ speaking world and beyond by opera companies , repertory companies , schools and community theatre groups . Lines from these works have become part of the English language , such as " short , sharp shock " , " What , never ? Well , hardly ever ! " , and " Let the punishment fit the crime " . 
 Gilbert also wrote the Bab Ballads , an extensive collection of light verse accompanied by his own comical drawings . His creative output included over 75 plays and libretti , numerous stories , poems , lyrics and various other comic and serious pieces . His plays and realistic style of stage direction inspired other dramatists , including Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw . According to The Cambridge History of English and American Literature , Gilbert 's " lyrical facility and his mastery of metre raised the poetical quality of comic opera to a position that it had never reached before and has not reached since " . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Gilbert was born at 17 Southampton Street , Strand , London . His father , also named William , was briefly a naval surgeon , who later became a writer of novels and short stories , some of which were illustrated by his son . Gilbert 's mother was the former Anne Mary Bye Morris ( 1812 – 1888 ) , the daughter of Thomas Morris , an apothecary . Gilbert 's parents were distant and stern , and he did not have a particularly close relationship with either of them . They quarrelled increasingly , and following the break @-@ up of their marriage in 1876 , his relationships with them , especially his mother , became even more strained . Gilbert had three younger sisters , two of whom were born outside England because of the family 's travels during these years : Jane Morris ( b . 1838 in Milan , Italy – 1906 ) , who married Alfred <unk> , a miniatures painter ; Anne Maude ( 1845 – 1932 ) and Mary Florence ( b . 1843 in Boulogne , France – 1911 ) , neither of whom married . Gilbert was nicknamed " Bab " as a baby , and then " <unk> " , after his father 's godparents . 
 As a child , Gilbert travelled to Italy in 1838 and then France for two years with his parents , who finally returned to settle in London in 1847 . He was educated at Boulogne , France from the age of seven ( he later kept his diary in French so that the servants could not read it ) , then at Western Grammar School , Brompton , London , and then at the Great Ealing School , where he became head boy and wrote plays for school performances and painted scenery . He then attended King 's College London , graduating in 1856 . He intended to take the examinations for a commission in the Royal Artillery , but with the end of the Crimean War , fewer recruits were needed , and the only commission available to Gilbert would have been in a line regiment . Instead he joined the Civil Service : he was an assistant clerk in the Privy Council Office for four years and hated it . In 1859 he joined the Militia , a part @-@ time volunteer force formed for the defence of Britain , with which he served until 1878 ( in between writing and other work ) , reaching the rank of Captain . In 1863 he received a bequest of £ 300 that he used to leave the civil service and take up a brief career as a barrister ( he had already entered the Inner Temple as a student ) , but his legal practice was not successful , averaging just five clients a year . 
 To supplement his income from 1861 on , Gilbert wrote a variety of stories , comic rants , grotesque illustrations , theatre reviews ( many in the form of a parody of the play being reviewed ) , and , under the pseudonym " Bab " ( his childhood nickname ) , illustrated poems for several comic magazines , primarily Fun , started in 1861 by H. J. Byron . He published stories , articles , and reviews in papers such as the Cornhill Magazine , London Society , Tinsley 's Magazine and Temple Bar . In addition , Gilbert was the London correspondent for L <unk> Russe and a drama critic for the Illustrated London Times . In the 1860s he also contributed to Tom Hood 's Christmas annuals , to Saturday Night , the Comic News and the Savage Club Papers . The Observer newspaper in 1870 sent him to France as a war correspondent reporting on the Franco @-@ Prussian War . 
 The poems , illustrated humorously by Gilbert , proved immensely popular and were reprinted in book form as the Bab Ballads . He would later return to many of these as source material for his plays and comic operas . Gilbert and his colleagues from Fun , including Tom Robertson , Tom Hood , Clement Scott and F. C. Burnand ( who defected to Punch in 1862 ) frequented the Arundel Club , the Savage Club , and especially Evans 's café , where they had a table in competition with the Punch ' Round table ' . 
 After a relationship in the mid @-@ 1860s with novelist Annie Thomas , Gilbert married Lucy Agnes Turner , whom he called " Kitty " , in 1867 ; she was 11 years his junior . He wrote many affectionate letters to her over the years . Gilbert and Lucy were socially active both in London and later at Grim 's Dyke , often holding dinner parties and being invited to others ' homes for dinner , in contrast to the picture painted by <unk> such as the film Topsy @-@ Turvy . The Gilberts had no children , but they had many pets , including some exotic ones . 
 = = = First plays = = = 
 Gilbert wrote and directed a number of plays at school , but his first professionally produced play was Uncle Baby , which ran for seven weeks in the autumn of 1863 . 
 In 1865 – 66 , Gilbert collaborated with Charles Millward on several pantomimes , including one called Hush @-@ a @-@ Bye , Baby , On the Tree Top , or , Harlequin <unk> , King Frog of Frog Island , and the Magic Toys of Lowther Arcade ( 1866 ) . Gilbert 's first solo success , however , came a few days after Hush @-@ a @-@ Bye Baby premiered . His friend and mentor , Tom Robertson , was asked to write a pantomime but did not think he could do it in the two weeks available , and so he recommended Gilbert instead . Written and rushed to the stage in 10 days , <unk> , or the Little Duck and the Great Quack , a burlesque of Gaetano Donizetti 's L 'elisir d 'amore , proved extremely popular . This led to a long series of further Gilbert opera burlesques , pantomimes and farces , full of awful puns ( traditional in burlesques of the period ) , though showing , at times , signs of the satire that would later be a defining part of Gilbert 's work . For instance : 
 This was followed by Gilbert 's penultimate operatic parody , Robert the Devil , a burlesque of Giacomo Meyerbeer 's opera , Robert le diable , which was part of a triple bill that opened the Gaiety Theatre , London in 1868 . The piece was Gilbert 's biggest success to date , running for over 100 nights and being frequently revived and played continuously in the provinces for three years thereafter . 
 In Victorian theatre , " [ to degrade ] high and beautiful themes ... had been the regular proceeding in burlesque , and the age almost expected it " However , Gilbert 's burlesques were considered unusually tasteful compared to the others on the London stage . Isaac Goldberg wrote that these pieces " reveal how a playwright may begin by making burlesque of opera and end by making opera of burlesque . " Gilbert would depart even further from the burlesque style from about 1869 with plays containing original plots and fewer puns . His first full @-@ length prose comedy was An Old Score ( 1869 ) . 
 = = = German Reed entertainments and other plays of the early 1870s = = = 
 Theatre , at the time Gilbert began writing , had fallen into disrepute . Badly translated and adapted French operettas and poorly written , prurient Victorian burlesques dominated the London stage . As Jessie Bond vividly described it , " stilted tragedy and vulgar farce were all the would @-@ be playgoer had to choose from , and the theatre had become a place of evil repute to the righteous British householder . " 
 From 1869 to 1875 , Gilbert joined with one of the leading figures in theatrical reform , Thomas German Reed ( and his wife Priscilla ) , whose Gallery of Illustration sought to regain some of theatre 's lost respectability by offering family entertainments in London . So successful were they that by 1885 Gilbert stated that original British plays were appropriate for an innocent 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl in the audience . Three months before the opening of Gilbert 's last burlesque ( The Pretty <unk> ) , the first of his pieces for the Gallery of Illustration , No Cards , was produced . Gilbert created six musical entertainments for the German Reeds , some with music composed by Thomas German Reed himself . 
 The environment of the German Reeds ' intimate theatre allowed Gilbert quickly to develop a personal style and freedom to control all aspects of production , including set , costumes , direction and stage management . These works were a success , with Gilbert 's first big hit at the Gallery of Illustration , Ages Ago , opening in 1869 . Ages Ago was also the beginning of a collaboration with the composer Frederic Clay that would last seven years and produce four works . It was at a rehearsal for Ages Ago that Clay formally introduced Gilbert to his friend , Arthur Sullivan . The Bab Ballads and Gilbert 's many early musical works gave him much practice as a lyricist even before his collaboration with Sullivan . 
 Many of the plot elements of the German Reed Entertainments ( as well as some from his earlier plays and Bab Ballads ) would be reused by Gilbert later in the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . These elements include paintings coming to life ( Ages Ago , used again in Ruddigore ) , a deaf nursemaid binding a respectable man 's son to a " pirate " instead of to a " pilot " by mistake ( Our Island Home , 1870 , reused in The Pirates of Penzance ) , and the forceful mature lady who is " an acquired taste " ( Eyes and No Eyes , 1875 , reused in The Mikado ) . During this time , Gilbert perfected the ' topsy @-@ turvy ' style that he had been developing in his Bab Ballads , where the humour was derived by setting up a ridiculous premise and working out its logical consequences , however absurd . Mike Leigh describes the " Gilbertian " style as follows : " With great fluidity and freedom , [ Gilbert ] continually challenges our natural expectations . First , within the framework of the story , he makes bizarre things happen , and turns the world on its head . Thus the Learned Judge marries the Plaintiff , the soldiers metamorphose into aesthetes , and so on , and nearly every opera is resolved by a deft moving of the goalposts ... His genius is to fuse opposites with an imperceptible sleight of hand , to blend the surreal with the real , and the caricature with the natural . In other words , to tell a perfectly outrageous story in a completely deadpan way . " 
 At the same time , Gilbert created several ' fairy comedies ' at the Haymarket Theatre . This series of plays was founded upon the idea of self @-@ revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference . The first was The Palace of Truth ( 1870 ) , based partly on a story by Madame de Genlis . In 1871 , with Pygmalion and Galatea , one of seven plays that he produced that year , Gilbert scored his greatest hit to date . Together , these plays and their successors such as The Wicked World ( 1873 ) , Sweethearts ( 1874 ) , and Broken Hearts ( 1875 ) , did for Gilbert on the dramatic stage what the German Reed entertainments had done for him on the musical stage : they established that his capabilities extended far beyond burlesque , won him artistic credentials , and demonstrated that he was a writer of wide range , as comfortable with human drama as with farcical humour . The success of these plays , especially Pygmalion and Galatea , gave Gilbert a prestige that would be crucial to his later collaboration with as respected a musician as Sullivan . 
 During this period , Gilbert also pushed the boundaries of how far satire could go in the theatre . He collaborated with Gilbert Arthur à Beckett on The Happy Land ( 1873 ) , a political satire ( in part , a parody of his own The Wicked World ) , which was briefly banned because of its unflattering caricatures of Gladstone and his ministers . Similarly , The Realm of Joy ( 1873 ) was set in the lobby of a theatre performing a scandalous play ( implied to be the Happy Land ) , with many jokes at the expense of the Lord Chamberlain ( the " Lord High <unk> " , as he 's referred to in the play ) . In Charity ( 1874 ) , however , Gilbert uses the freedom of the stage in a different way : to provide a tightly @-@ written critique of the contrasting ways in which Victorian society treated men and women who had sex outside of marriage , which anticipated the ' problem plays ' of Shaw and Ibsen . 
 = = = As a director = = = 
 Once he became established , Gilbert was the stage director for his plays and operas and had strong opinions on how they should best be performed . He was strongly influenced by the innovations in ' stagecraft ' , now called stage direction , by the playwrights James Planché and especially Tom Robertson . Gilbert attended rehearsals directed by Robertson to learn this art firsthand from the older director , and he began to apply it in some of his earliest plays . He sought realism in acting , settings , costumes and movement , if not in content of his plays ( although he did write a romantic comedy in the " naturalist " style , as a tribute to Robertson , Sweethearts ) , shunned self @-@ conscious interaction with the audience , and insisted on a style of portrayal in which the characters were never aware of their own absurdity , but were coherent internal wholes . 
 In Gilbert 's 1874 burlesque , Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , the character Hamlet , in his speech to the players , sums up Gilbert 's theory of comic acting : " I hold that there is no such <unk> fellow as your <unk> hero who doth so earnestly spout forth his folly as to make his hearers believe that he is unconscious of all incongruity " . Robertson " introduced Gilbert both to the revolutionary notion of disciplined rehearsals and to mise @-@ en @-@ scène or unity of style in the whole presentation – direction , design , music , acting . " Like Robertson , Gilbert demanded discipline in his actors . He required that his actors know their words perfectly , enunciate them clearly and obey his stage directions , which was something quite new to many actors of the day . A major innovation was the replacement of the star actor with the disciplined ensemble , " raising the director to a new position of dominance " in the theatre . " That Gilbert was a good director is not in doubt . He was able to extract from his actors natural , clear performances , which served the Gilbertian requirements of outrageousness delivered straight . " 
 Gilbert prepared meticulously for each new work , making models of the stage , actors and set pieces , and designing every action and bit of business in advance . Gilbert would not work with actors who challenged his authority . Even during long runs and revivals , Gilbert closely supervised the performances of his plays , making sure that the actors did not make unauthorised additions , deletions or paraphrases . Gilbert was famous for demonstrating the action himself , even as he grew older . Gilbert himself went on stage in a number of productions throughout his lifetime , including several performances as the Associate in Trial by Jury , as substitute for an ailing actor in his play Broken Hearts , and in charity matinees of his one @-@ act plays , such as King Claudius in Rosencrantz and Guildenstern . 
 = = Collaboration with Sullivan = = 
 = = = First collaborations amidst other works = = = 
 In 1871 , John Hollingshead commissioned Gilbert to work with Sullivan on a holiday piece for Christmas , Thespis , or The Gods Grown Old , at the Gaiety Theatre . Thespis outran five of its nine competitors for the 1871 holiday season , and its run was extended beyond the length of a normal run at the Gaiety , However , nothing more came of it at that point , and Gilbert and Sullivan went their separate ways . Gilbert worked again with Clay on Happy Arcadia ( 1872 ) , and with Alfred Cellier on Topsyturveydom ( 1874 ) , as well as writing several farces , operetta libretti , extravaganzas , fairy comedies , adaptations from novels , translations from the French , and the dramas described above . Also in 1874 , he published his last contribution for Fun magazine ( " Rosencrantz and Guildenstern " ) , after a gap of three years , then resigned due to disapproval of the new owner 's other publishing interests . 
 It would be nearly four years after Thespis was produced before the two men worked together again . In 1868 , Gilbert had published a short comic sketch libretto in Fun magazine entitled " Trial by Jury : An Operetta " . In 1873 , Gilbert arranged with the theatrical manager and composer , Carl Rosa , to expand the piece into a one @-@ act libretto . Rosa 's wife was to sing the role of the plaintiff . However , Rosa 's wife died in childbirth in 1874 . Later in 1874 Gilbert offered the libretto to Richard D 'Oyly Carte , but Carte could not use the piece at that time . By early 1875 , Carte was managing the Royalty Theatre , and he needed a short opera to be played as an afterpiece to Offenbach 's La Périchole . He contacted Gilbert , asked about the piece , and suggested Sullivan to set the work . Sullivan was enthusiastic , and Trial by Jury was composed in a matter of weeks . The little piece was a runaway hit , outlasting the run of La Périchole and being revived at another theatre . 
 Gilbert continued his quest to gain respect in and respectability for his profession . One thing that may have been holding dramatists back from respectability was that plays were not published in a form suitable for a " gentleman 's library " , as , at the time , they were generally cheaply and <unk> published for the use of actors rather than the home reader . To help rectify this , at least for himself , Gilbert arranged in late 1875 for publishers Chatto and Windus to print a volume of his plays in a format designed to appeal to the general reader , with an attractive binding and clear type , containing Gilbert 's most respectable plays , including his most serious works , but mischievously capped off with Trial by Jury . 
 After the success of Trial by Jury , there were discussions towards reviving Thespis , but Gilbert and Sullivan were not able to agree on terms with Carte and his backers . The score to Thespis was never published , and most of the music is now lost . It took some time for Carte to gather funds for another Gilbert and Sullivan opera , and in this gap Gilbert produced several works including Tom Cobb ( 1875 ) , Eyes and No Eyes ( 1875 , his last German Reed Entertainment ) , and Princess Toto ( 1876 ) , his last and most ambitious work with Clay , a three @-@ act comic opera with full orchestra , as opposed to the shorter works for much reduced accompaniment that came before . Gilbert also wrote two serious works during this time , Broken Hearts ( 1875 ) and Dan 'l Druce , Blacksmith ( 1876 ) . 
 Also during this period , Gilbert wrote his most successful comic play , Engaged ( 1877 ) , which inspired Oscar Wilde 's The Importance of Being Earnest . Engaged is a parody of romantic drama written in the " topsy @-@ turvy " satiric style of many of Gilbert 's Bab Ballads and the Savoy Operas , with one character pledging his love , in the most poetic and romantic language possible , to every single woman in the play ; the " innocent " Scottish rustics being revealed to be making a living through throwing trains off the lines and then charging the passengers for services , and , in general , romance being gladly thrown over in favour of monetary gain . Engaged continues to be performed today by both professional and amateur companies . 
 = = = Peak collaborative years = = = 
 Carte finally assembled a syndicate in 1877 and formed the Comedy Opera Company to launch a series of original English comic operas , beginning with a third collaboration between Gilbert and Sullivan , The Sorcerer , in November 1877 . This work was a modest success , and H.M.S. Pinafore followed in May 1878 . Despite a slow start , mainly due to a scorching summer , Pinafore became a red @-@ hot favourite by autumn . After a dispute with Carte over the division of profits , the other Comedy Opera Company partners hired thugs to storm the theatre one night to steal the sets and costumes , intending to mount a rival production . The attempt was repelled by stagehands and others at the theatre loyal to Carte , and Carte continued as sole impresario of the newly renamed D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company . Indeed , Pinafore was so successful that over a hundred unauthorised productions sprang up in America alone . Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte tried for many years to control the American performance copyrights over their operas , without success . 
 For the next decade , the Savoy Operas ( as the series came to be known , after the theatre Carte later built to house them ) were Gilbert 's principal activity . The successful comic operas with Sullivan continued to appear every year or two , several of them being among the longest @-@ running productions up to that point in the history of the musical stage . After Pinafore came The Pirates of Penzance ( 1879 ) , Patience ( 1881 ) , Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , Princess Ida ( 1884 , based on Gilbert 's earlier farce , The Princess ) , The Mikado ( 1885 ) , Ruddigore ( 1887 ) , The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) , and The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) . Gilbert not only directed and oversaw all aspects of production for these works , but he actually designed the costumes himself for Patience , Iolanthe , Princess Ida , and Ruddigore . He insisted on precise and authentic sets and costumes , which provided a foundation to ground and focus his absurd characters and situations . 
 During this time , Gilbert and Sullivan also collaborated on one other major work , the oratorio The Martyr of Antioch , premiered at the Leeds music festival in October 1880 . Gilbert arranged the original epic poem by Henry Hart Milman into a libretto suitable for the music , and it contains some original work . During this period , also , Gilbert occasionally wrote plays to be performed elsewhere – both serious dramas ( for example The Ne 'er @-@ Do @-@ Weel , 1878 ; and Gretchen , 1879 ) and humorous works ( for example Foggerty 's Fairy , 1881 ) . However , he no longer needed to turn out multiple plays each year , as he had done before . Indeed , during the more than nine years that separated The Pirates of Penzance and The Gondoliers , he wrote just three plays outside of the partnership with Sullivan . Only one of these works , Comedy and Tragedy , proved successful . 
 In 1878 , Gilbert realised a lifelong dream to play Harlequin , which he did at the Gaiety Theatre as part of an amateur charity production of The Forty Thieves , partly written by himself . Gilbert trained for Harlequin 's stylised dancing with his friend John D 'Auban , who had arranged the dances for some of his plays and would choreograph most of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . Producer John Hollingshead later remembered , " the gem of the performance was the grimly earnest and determined Harlequin of W. S. Gilbert . It gave me an idea of what Oliver Cromwell would have made of the character . " Another member of the cast recalled that Gilbert was tirelessly enthusiastic about the piece and often invited the cast to his home for dinner extra rehearsals . " A <unk> , more genial , or agreeable companion than he was it would have been difficult , if not impossible , to find . " In 1882 , Gilbert had a telephone installed in his home and at the prompt desk at the Savoy Theatre , so that he could monitor performances and rehearsals from his home study . Gilbert had referred to the new technology in Pinafore in 1878 , only two years after the device was invented and before London even had telephone service . 
 = = = Carpet quarrel and end of the collaboration = = = 
 Gilbert sometimes had a strained working relationship with Sullivan , partly because each man saw himself allowing his work to be subjugated to the other 's , and partly due to their opposing personalities . Gilbert was often confrontational and notoriously thin @-@ skinned , though prone to acts of extraordinary kindness , while Sullivan eschewed conflict . In addition , Gilbert imbued his libretti with " topsy @-@ turvy " situations in which the social order was turned upside down . After a time , these subjects were often at odds with Sullivan 's desire for realism and emotional content . In addition , Gilbert 's political satire often poked fun at those in the circles of privilege , while Sullivan was eager to socialise among the wealthy and titled people who would become his friends and patrons . 
 Throughout their collaboration , Gilbert and Sullivan disagreed several times over the choice of a subject . After both Princess Ida and Ruddigore , which were less successful than the seven other operas from H.M.S. Pinafore to The Gondoliers , Sullivan asked to leave the partnership , saying that he found Gilbert 's plots repetitive and that the operas were not artistically satisfying to him . While the two artists worked out their differences , Carte kept the Savoy open with revivals of their earlier works . On each occasion , after a few months ' pause , Gilbert responded with a libretto that met Sullivan 's objections , and the partnership continued successfully . 
 In April 1890 , during the run of The Gondoliers , however , Gilbert challenged Carte over the expenses of the production . Among other items to which Gilbert objected , Carte had charged the cost of a new carpet for the Savoy Theatre lobby to the partnership . Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone . Gilbert confronted Carte , who refused to reconsider the accounts . Gilbert stormed out and wrote to Sullivan that " I left him with the remark that it was a mistake to kick down the ladder by which he had risen " . Helen Carte wrote that Gilbert had addressed Carte " in a way that I should not have thought you would have used to an offending menial . " As scholar Andrew Crowther has explained : 
 After all , the carpet was only one of a number of disputed items , and the real issue lay not in the mere money value of these things , but in whether Carte could be trusted with the financial affairs of Gilbert and Sullivan . Gilbert contended that Carte had at best made a series of serious blunders in the accounts , and at worst deliberately attempted to swindle the others . It is not easy to settle the rights and wrongs of the issue at this distance , but it does seem fairly clear that there was something very wrong with the accounts at this time . Gilbert wrote to Sullivan on 28 May 1891 , a year after the end of the " Quarrel " , that Carte had admitted " an unintentional overcharge of nearly £ 1 @,@ 000 in the electric lighting accounts alone . " 
 Gilbert brought suit , and after The Gondoliers closed in 1891 , he withdrew the performance rights to his libretti , vowing to write no more operas for the Savoy . Gilbert next wrote The Mountebanks with Alfred Cellier and the flop Haste to the Wedding with George Grossmith , and Sullivan wrote Haddon Hall with Sydney Grundy . Gilbert eventually won the lawsuit and felt vindicated , but his actions and statements had been hurtful to his partners . Nevertheless , the partnership had been so profitable that , after the financial failure of the Royal English Opera House , Carte and his wife sought to reunite the author and composer . 
 In 1891 , after many failed attempts at reconciliation by the pair , Tom Chappell , the music publisher responsible for printing the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , stepped in to mediate between two of his most profitable artists , and within two weeks had succeeded . Two more operas resulted : Utopia , Limited ( 1893 ) and The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) . Gilbert also offered a third libretto to Sullivan ( His Excellency , 1894 ) , but Gilbert 's insistence on casting Nancy McIntosh , his protegée from Utopia , led to Sullivan 's refusal . Utopia , concerning an attempt to " anglicise " a south Pacific island kingdom , was only a modest success , and The Grand Duke , in which a theatrical troupe , by means of a " statutory duel " and a conspiracy , takes political control of a grand duchy , was an outright failure . After that , the partnership ended for good . Sullivan continued to compose comic opera with other librettists but died four years later . In 1904 , Gilbert would write , " ... Savoy opera was snuffed out by the deplorable death of my distinguished collaborator , Sir Arthur Sullivan . When that event occurred , I saw no one with whom I felt that I could work with satisfaction and success , and so I discontinued to write libretti . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 Gilbert built the Garrick Theatre in 1889 . The Gilberts moved to Grim 's Dyke in Harrow in 1890 , which he purchased from Robert Heriot , to whom the artist Frederick Goodall had sold the property in 1880 . In 1891 , Gilbert was appointed Justice of the Peace for Middlesex . After casting Nancy McIntosh in Utopia , Limited , he and Lady Gilbert developed an affection for her , and she eventually gained the status of an unofficially adopted daughter , moving to Grim 's Dyke to live with them . She continued living there , even after Gilbert 's death , until Lady Gilbert 's death in 1936 . A statue of Charles II , carved by Danish sculptor Caius Gabriel Cibber in 1681 , was moved in 1875 from Soho Square to an island in the lake at Grim 's Dyke , where it remained when Gilbert purchased the property . On Lady Gilbert 's direction , it was restored to Soho Square in 1938 . 
 Although Gilbert announced a retirement from the theatre after the poor initial run of his last work with Sullivan , The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) and the poor reception of his 1897 play The Fortune Hunter , he produced at least three more plays over the last dozen years of his life , including an unsuccessful opera , Fallen Fairies ( 1909 ) , with Edward German . Gilbert also continued to supervise the various revivals of his works by the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , including its London Repertory seasons in 1906 – 09 . His last play , The <unk> , produced just four months before his death , is a study of a young condemned thug in a prison cell . Gilbert shows sympathy for his protagonist , the son of a thief who , brought up among thieves , kills his girlfriend . As in some earlier work , the playwright displays " his conviction that nurture rather than nature often accounted for criminal behaviour " . The grim and powerful piece became one of Gilbert 's most successful serious dramas , and experts conclude that , in those last months of Gilbert 's life , he was developing a new style , a " mixture of irony , of social theme , and of grubby realism , " to replace the old " <unk> " of which he had grown weary . In these last years , Gilbert also wrote children 's book versions of H.M.S. Pinafore and The Mikado giving , in some cases , backstory that is not found in the librettos . 
 Gilbert was knighted on 15 July 1907 in recognition of his contributions to drama . Sullivan had been knighted for his contributions to music almost a quarter of a century earlier , in 1883 . Gilbert was , however , the first British writer ever to receive a knighthood for his plays alone — earlier dramatist knights , such as Sir William Davenant and Sir John Vanbrugh , were knighted for political and other services . 
 On 29 May 1911 , Gilbert was about to give a swimming lesson to two young women , Winifred Isabel Emery ( 1890 – 1972 ) , and 17 @-@ year @-@ old Ruby Preece in the lake of his home , Grim 's Dyke , when Preece lost her footing and called for help . Gilbert dived in to save her but suffered a heart attack in the middle of the lake and died . He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes buried at the Church of St. John the Evangelist , Stanmore . The inscription on Gilbert 's memorial on the south wall of the Thames Embankment in London reads : " His Foe was Folly , and his Weapon Wit " . There is also a memorial plaque at All Saints ' Church , Harrow Weald . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Gilbert was known for being prickly . Aware of this general impression , he claimed that " If you give me your attention " , the misanthrope 's song from Princess Ida , was a satiric self @-@ reference , saying : " I thought it my duty to live up to my reputation . " However , many people have defended him , often citing his generosity . Actress May Fortescue recalled , " His kindness was extraordinary . On wet nights and when rehearsals were late and the last buses were gone , he would pay the cab @-@ fares of the girls whether they were pretty or not , instead of letting them trudge home on foot ... He was just as large @-@ hearted when he was poor as when he was rich and successful . For money as money he cared less than nothing . Gilbert was no plaster saint , but he was an ideal friend . " Journalist Frank M. Boyd wrote : 
 I fancy that seldom was a man more generally given credit for a personality quite other than his own , than was the case with Sir W. S. Gilbert ... Till one actually came to know the man , one shared the opinion held by so many , that he was a gruff , disagreeable person ; but nothing could be less true of the really great humorist . He had rather a severe appearance ... and like many other clever people , he had precious little use for fools of either sex , but he was at heart as kindly and lovable a man as you could wish to meet . 
 Jessie Bond wrote that Gilbert " was quick @-@ tempered , often unreasonable , and he could not bear to be thwarted , but how anyone could call him unamiable I cannot understand . " George Grossmith wrote to The Daily Telegraph that , although Gilbert had been described as an autocrat at rehearsals , " That was really only his manner when he was playing the part of stage director at rehearsals . As a matter of fact , he was a generous , kind true gentleman , and I use the word in the purest and original sense . " 
 Aside from his occasional creative disagreements with , and eventual rift from , Sullivan , Gilbert 's temper led to the loss of friendships with a number of people . For instance , he quarrelled with his old associate C. H. Workman , over the firing of Nancy McIntosh from the production of Fallen Fairies , and with actress Henrietta Hodson . He also saw his friendship with theatre critic Clement Scott turn bitter . However , Gilbert could be extraordinarily kind . During Scott 's final illness in 1904 , for instance , Gilbert donated to a fund for him , visited nearly every day , and assisted Scott 's wife , despite having not been on friendly terms with him for the previous sixteen years . Similarly , Gilbert had written several plays at the behest of comic actor Ned Sothern . However , Sothern died before he could perform the last of these , Foggerty 's Fairy . Gilbert purchased the play back from his grateful widow . According to one London society lady : 
 [ Gilbert ] ' s wit was innate , and his rapier @-@ like retorts slipped out with instantaneous ease . His mind was naturally fastidious and clean ; he never asserted himself , never tried to make an effect . He was great @-@ hearted and most understanding , with an underlying poetry of fancy that made him the most delicious companion . They spoke of his quick temper , but that was entirely free from malice or guile . He was soft @-@ hearted as a babe , but there was nothing of the hypocrite about him . What he thought he said on the instant , and though by people of sensitive vanity this might on occasion be resented , to a sensitiveness of a finer kind it was an added link , binding one to a faithful , valued friend . 
 As the writings about Gilbert by husband and wife Seymour Hicks and Ellaline Terriss ( frequent guests at his home ) vividly illustrate , Gilbert 's relationships with women were generally more successful than his relationships with men . According to George Grossmith , Gilbert " was to those who knew him a courteous and amiable gentleman – a gentleman without veneer . " Grossmith and many others wrote of how Gilbert loved to amuse children : 
 During my dangerous illness , Mr. Gilbert never failed a day to come up and enquire after me ... and kept me in roars of laughter the whole time ... But to see Gilbert at his best , is to see him at one of his juvenile parties . Though he has no children of his own , he loves them , and there is nothing he would not do to please them . I was never so astonished as when on one occasion he put off some of his own friends to come with Mrs. Gilbert to a juvenile party at my own house . 
 Gilbert 's niece Mary Carter confirmed , " ... he loved children very much and lost no opportunity of making them happy ... [ He was ] the kindest and most human of uncles . " Grossmith quoted Gilbert as saying , " Deer @-@ stalking would be a very fine sport if only the deer had guns . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1957 , a review in The Times explained " the continued vitality of the Savoy operas " as follows : 
 [ T ] hey were never really contemporary in their idiom ... Gilbert and Sullivan 's [ world ] , from the first moment was obviously not the audience 's world , [ it was ] an artificial world , with a neatly controlled and shapely precision which has not gone out of fashion – because it was never in fashion in the sense of using the fleeting conventions and ways of thought of contemporary human society ... The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert 's plots is perfectly matched by his language ... His dialogue , with its primly mocking formality , satisfies both the ear and the intelligence . His verses show an unequalled and very delicate gift for creating a comic effect by the contrast between poetic form and prosaic thought and wording ... How deliciously [ his lines ] prick the bubble of sentiment . Gilbert had many imitators , but no equals , at this sort of thing ... [ Of ] equal importance ... Gilbert 's lyrics almost invariably take on extra point and sparkle when set to Sullivan 's music ... The two men together remain endlessly and incomparably delightful ... Light , and even trifling , though [ the operas ] may seem upon grave consideration , they yet have the shapeliness and elegance that can make a trifle into a work of art . 
 Gilbert 's legacy , aside from building the Garrick Theatre and writing the Savoy Operas and other works that are still being performed or in print over a hundred and twenty @-@ five years after their creation , is felt perhaps most strongly today through his influence on the American and British musical theatre . The innovations in content and form of the works that he and Sullivan developed , and in Gilbert 's theories of acting and stage direction , directly influenced the development of the modern musical throughout the 20th century . Gilbert 's lyrics employ punning , as well as complex internal and two and three @-@ syllable rhyme schemes , and served as a model for such 20th century Broadway lyricists as P.G. Wodehouse , Cole Porter , Ira Gershwin , and Lorenz Hart . 
 Gilbert 's influence on the English language has also been marked , with well @-@ known phrases such as " A policeman 's lot is not a happy one " , " short , sharp shock " , " What never ? Well , hardly ever ! " , and " let the punishment fit the crime " arising from his pen . In addition , biographies continue to be written about Gilbert 's life and career , and his work is not only performed , but frequently parodied , pastiched , quoted and imitated in comedy routines , film , television and other popular media . 
 Ian Bradley , in connection with the 100th anniversary of Gilbert 's death in 2011 wrote : 
 There has been much discussion about Gilbert 's proper place in British literary and dramatic history . Was he essentially a writer of burlesque , a satirist , or , as some have argued , the forerunner of the theatre of the absurd ? ... Perhaps he stands most clearly in that distinctively English satirical tradition which stretches back to Jonathan Swift . ... Its leading exponents lampoon and send up the major institutions and public figures of the day , wielding the weapon of grave and temperate irony with devastating effect , while themselves remaining firmly within the Establishment and displaying a deep underlying affection for the objects of their often merciless attacks . It is a combination that remains a continuing enigma . 
 = Ned Manning = 
 Ned Manning is an Australian playwright , actor and teacher , whose film credits include the lead role in Dead End Drive @-@ In ( 1986 ) and an appearance in the teen film Looking for Alibrandi ( 2000 ) . Manning 's television credits include Bodyline , The <unk> , " Prisoner " " , and Brides of Christ . His first major play was Us or Them , and its production by Griffin Theatre Company marked the company 's transition to being staffed by professional actors . Other plays have included Milo , Kenny 's Coming Home and Close to the Bone ; in 2007 Manning played the lead in his own play Last One Standing at the Old Fitzroy theatre in Sydney . The plays have received mixed reviews , with Last One Standing in particular being criticised for its formulaic and predictable narrative . Manning has written for the Bell Shakespeare Company 's Actors at Work program , a travelling community and schools theatrical education initiative . 
 At one time the husband of Indigenous Australian artist Bronwyn Bancroft , Manning has since remarried , to theatre director Marion Potts . His children include New South Wales Young Australian of the Year for 2010 , Jack Manning Bancroft . 
 = = Life = = 
 Ned Manning was born in 1950 and grew up on a property in <unk> , New South Wales . He married Bronwyn Bancroft , an Indigenous Australian artist , with whom he had two children , including New South Wales Young Australian of the Year for 2010 , Jack Manning Bancroft . Manning remarried to theatre director Marion Potts , with whom he had two children . In 2010 , they relocated from Sydney to Melbourne when she was appointed director of the Malthouse Theatre . 
 = = Playwright and author = = 
 Manning 's first play , Us or Them , was initially produced at the Childers Street Hall in Canberra on 1 November 1977 . It was then re @-@ written and performed in 1984 at the Stables Theatre for the Griffin Theatre Company , where it marked a turning point in Griffin 's history as the play 's success led to the cast and creatives being paid full professional rates . The play then transferred to the Philip St Theatre and on to the Q Theatre in Penrith . 
 Milo premiered at the Sydney Theatre Company 's Wharf 2 Theatre in October 1984 before productions at the Q Theatre , Theatre Up North in Townsville , Theatre South in Wollongong and regional performances . Milo has been recorded for Radio National , had numerous other productions , and also been published by Currency Press . However a 2001 production in Sydney was panned by the reviewer , who described it as " formulaic and obvious , complete with clunky and unconvincing pat ending " , and thought the play should be " put out to pasture " . The same year , The Australian 's reviewer was more positive , considering the performance to be " passionate and funny . Seven years after it first appeared , it remains one of the best plays written about the bush @-@ city divide " . 
 Manning 's next play , Kenny 's Coming Home ( 1991 ) , was performed at the Q Theatre , Penrith and was subsequently recorded for radio on ABC Radio National . The play is centred on a Rugby league footballer , Kenny , who gets caught up in a preselection battle between two of his family members . Kenny 's Coming Home included songs by Shane McNamara . 
 Close to the Bone was written in collaboration with the Indigenous students at the <unk> Centre for Performing and Visual Arts in Redfern , and first produced there in September 1991 . Luck of the Draw was produced by the Darwin Theatre Company in May 1999 and was the first play written by a non @-@ Indigenous writer to be produced by <unk> <unk> theatre company in Brisbane . Last One Standing was performed at Sydney theatre the Old Fitzroy in 2007 . Manning played lead character Joe in the Old Fitzroy production ; The Sydney Morning Herald 's reviewer Bryce Hallett described his performance as " terrific " , providing the play " with an emotional anchor " , but considered the play itself to be predictable , lacking in depth and with " nothing revelatory on offer " ; The Sun @-@ Herald reviewer was of a similar view . 
 Manning has created many works for young audiences . He has prepared scripts for ten works for The Bell Shakespeare Company 's Actors at Work program , a travelling community and schools theatrical education initiative . Other plays for young people have included Alice Dreaming , which is one of the Australian Script Centre 's anthology of large cast plays . In 2012 he contributed to a Federation Press anthology of monologues for drama students , No Nudity , Weapons or Naked Flames . His play Romeo and Juliet Intensive was nominated for a 2011 AWGIE Award . 
 In 2012 , <unk> Books published Manning 's memoir of a life of school teaching , Playground Duty . Reviewed by the New South Wales Writers ' Centre 's Amanda Calwell , it was described as showing " the value that one person with drive , ambition and compassion can offer by applying themselves to teaching " . 
 = = Television , film and directing = = 
 Manning 's film credits include the lead role in the 1986 Ozploitation film Dead End Drive @-@ In . Based on a Peter Carey short story called " Crabs " , Dead End Drive @-@ In is a post @-@ apocalyptic tale about a young man stranded in a small town 's drive @-@ in theater when the wheels are stolen off his car . He finds himself amongst a community of misfits trapped at the site , and seeks to break out . The film , directed by Brian Trenchard @-@ Smith , received mixed reviews : Tim <unk> writing for Eureka Street described it as " Mad Max @-@ lite " and said that the film " is an example of how <unk> of translation can result in the sacrifice of the story ’ s essence . The film is fun on its own terms , but much of the nuance and irony that lend ‘ Crabs ’ its magic are simply lost " . Philippa Hawker writing for The Age said the film was " an energetic , inventively designed , cheerfully satirical and entertaining film " , and it is one of American film director Quentin Tarantino 's favourites . The film received only a short box @-@ office season ; Manning was critical of the distributor Greater Union and worked with the film 's other actors to secure separate release in independent cinemas . Manning 's other film credits include an appearance in the teen film Looking for Alibrandi . He has also made a short film , Love Bites . Manning 's television credits include Bodyline , The <unk> and Brides of Christ . 
 In 1989 Manning directed the Belvoir St Theatre production of a play , Black Cockatoos , about the relationship between a white woman and an Aboriginal man . The script ( not by Manning ) was criticised by reviewer Angela Bennie , who nevertheless described Manning 's direction as delicate and perceptive in places , if also naive and self @-@ conscious . 
 = Burnside Burn = 
 The " Burnside Burn " was an event held on the Burnside Bridge in Portland , Oregon , starting at midnight on July 1 , 2015 , the day recreational marijuana became legal in the U.S. state of Oregon . It was organized by Portland NORML , the local chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , having originated from its executive director , who wanted to photograph himself in front of the White Stag sign in the moments after Oregon Ballot Measure 91 took effect . The crowd , larger than anticipated , numbered in the thousands and at times blocked traffic lanes on the bridge . Some attendees wanted to commemorate the moment , while others were motivated by announcements of free marijuana and seeds . No fines were issued for consumption in public . The event was covered by cannabis publications , local and national news outlets , and the HBO television series Vice . 
 = = Description = = 
 The " Burnside Burn " was organized by Portland NORML , the local chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , in celebration of the legalization of recreational marijuana use in Oregon and to circumnavigate a temporary limit on recreational sales . According to Russ Belville , the chapter 's executive director , the event began with the idea of taking a photograph in front of the White Stag sign . He recalled : " It evolved from me saying that when legalization happens , I want to take a photo under the Portland , Oregon sign . Other people said , ' Can we give marijuana away ? ' [ and ] I said , ' I can 't stop you ! ' " 
 On the evening of June 30 , beginning as early as 8pm , and into the morning of July 1 , 2015 , between a few hundred and a few thousand people gathered on the Burnside Bridge 's north sidewalk for the free event . The crowd sometimes spilled into the road and blocked multiple traffic lanes , resulting at one point in the complete blockage of west @-@ bound traffic . Activists chanted " Free the weed " and " Fuck the DEA " . Cannabis was shared and consumed openly . 
 The crowd was larger than anticipated and spanned the entire length of the 1 @,@ 400 @-@ foot ( 430 m ) Burnside Bridge . Belville had initially expected " between 50 and 5 @,@ 000 people " , but details of the event spread online and through word of mouth , and ultimately it was estimated that " thousands " had turned out . Some attendees said they were there to commemorate an historic moment , while others admitted having come for free marijuana and cannabis seeds . One man , known as " Pork Chop " ( or " Porkchop " ) , reportedly announced over a megaphone that he had 420 pounds of marijuana to distribute , though his claim was not supported by news outlets . Two women with Ideal Farms , who wished to " share the love " , distributed joints to attendees who could prove that they were of legal age . One man distributed drops of hash oil , and Belville himself shared an ounce of marijuana ( the maximum allowed under Oregon Ballot Measure 91 ) . Some participants did receive free marijuana , seeds , and / or starter plants , but many did not , due to the larger than expected crowd . Coupons were also distributed for later redemption . 
 Participants smoked openly and without fear . No fines were issued for consumption in public . Patrol vehicles drove by the scene a few times but did not stop . Prior to the event , police urged residents to avoid calling 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 to report public consumption , which they did not consider an emergency . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 The event was covered by cannabis publications , local and national media outlets , and the HBO documentary television series Vice . The Oregonian described the event as " loud and energetic " , attracting a diverse and " eclectic " crowd of activists , marijuana enthusiasts , and first @-@ time consumers , some from as far away as Canada and San Diego . According to Willamette Week , attendees ranged from <unk> to " tweens with rainbow hair " and the crowd was " generally happy " . The newspaper summarized , " All and all , the mood was celebratory as befit such an historic occasion . " 
 NORML 's <unk> Castille told The Huffington Post he was " happy to see a community able to come together — peacefully — over something positive . It 's great to see people from all walks of life out here , handing out joints to each other and getting to know their neighbors . " The Huffington Post 's Andy Campbell called the event a " smoke @-@ out with a message " and opined , " Legalization is so much more than being able to smoke a joint in your home without being a criminal . It 's a health care issue ; it 's a tax revenue issue ; it saves states millions in the court system ; and it ends the hidden costs of prosecution , which emerge when someone can 't get a job because there 's a possession charge on their record . " The Washington Post called the " Burnside Burn " an opportunity for marijuana enthusiasts to " celebrate their new freedom together " . 
 = Interstate 295 ( Delaware – New Jersey ) = 
 Interstate 295 ( abbreviated I @-@ 295 ) in New Jersey and Delaware is an auxiliary Interstate Highway , designated as a bypass around Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The route begins at a junction with I @-@ 95 south of Wilmington , Delaware , and runs to another junction with I @-@ 95 north of Trenton , New Jersey . The highway heads east from I @-@ 95 and crosses the Delaware River from Delaware to New Jersey on the Delaware Memorial Bridge concurrent with U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) . Upon entering New Jersey , the two routes split and I @-@ 295 runs parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike for most of its course in the state . After a concurrency with US 130 in Gloucester County , I @-@ 295 has an interchange with I @-@ 76 and Route 42 in Camden County . The freeway continues northeast toward Trenton , where it intersects I @-@ 195 and Route 29 before bypassing the city to the east and ending at US 1 in Lawrence Township , where the road becomes I @-@ 95 southbound . 
 Three portions of I @-@ 295 predate the Interstate Highway System : the Delaware Memorial Bridge and its approach , built in 1951 , a section in Salem County built in 1953 , and the part concurrent with US 130 , built in two sections that opened in 1948 and 1954 . The route was designated on these sections in New Jersey in 1958 and in Delaware in 1959 . The portion of I @-@ 295 connecting to I @-@ 95 in Delaware opened in 1963 while most of the route in New Jersey was finished by the 1980s . The last part of I @-@ 295 to be completed , near the interchange with I @-@ 195 and Route 29 , was finished in 1994 . I @-@ 95 was originally supposed to continue northeast from the routes ' junction near Trenton on the proposed Somerset Freeway , but this plan was canceled . I @-@ 295 previously extended a few miles past US 1 to where it would have met the Somerset Freeway ; in the 1990s , the section past US 1 became part of I @-@ 95 . As a result of the Pennsylvania Turnpike / Interstate 95 Interchange Project in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , I @-@ 295 will be extended along the existing I @-@ 95 freeway and connect to the Pennsylvania Turnpike at Bristol . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 295 begins at I @-@ 95 , I @-@ 495 , US 202 , and Delaware Route 141 ( DE 141 ) near Newport , Delaware and heads east over the Delaware River on the Delaware Memorial Bridge into New Jersey . The highway intersects the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike and runs northeast through suburban areas of South Jersey parallel to the turnpike , providing a bypass of Philadelphia and Camden . I @-@ 295 turns north and bypasses Trenton to the east and turns west as I @-@ 95 at the US 1 junction in Lawrence Township . The portion of I @-@ 295 running through New Jersey is sometimes referred to as the Camden Freeway by the New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire length of I @-@ 295 is a part of the National Highway System . 
 = = = Delaware = = = 
 I @-@ 295 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 95 ( Delaware Turnpike ) , I @-@ 495 , US 202 , and DE 141 south of Newport in New Castle County , Delaware . The northbound beginning of I @-@ 295 has direct ramps from both directions of I @-@ 95 , southbound I @-@ 495 , and southbound DE 141 , while the southern end of I @-@ 295 had direct ramps to both directions of I @-@ 95 , northbound I @-@ 495 , and northbound DE 141 . From this junction , the highway heads southeast on the Delaware Turnpike , an eight @-@ lane freeway maintained by the Delaware River and Bay Authority ( DRBA ) that passes to the northeast of suburban neighborhoods in Wilmington Manor . I @-@ 295 reaches an interchange with US 13 / US 40 . Here , the Delaware Turnpike ends and US 40 splits from US 13 by heading east concurrent with I @-@ 295 . The road has an eastbound ramp to Landers Lane before it passes between residential neighborhoods and has an interchange with DE 9 north of New Castle . This interchange provides access to Veterans Memorial Park , where a war memorial honoring veterans from Delaware and New Jersey is located . Past DE 9 , the median of the freeway widens to include the DRBA headquarters , with direct access to and from the southbound lanes while northbound access is provided by way of DE 9 . After this , the southbound direction comes to a toll plaza for the Delaware Memorial Bridge . I @-@ 295 / US 40 continues east and passes over Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary before crossing the Delaware River on the twin @-@ span Delaware Memorial Bridge . 
 = = = Pennsville to Westville = = = 
 Upon reaching the east bank of the Delaware River , I @-@ 295 / US 40 enters Pennsville Township in Salem County , New Jersey and heads east @-@ southeast through industrial areas . The freeway comes to an interchange with the southern terminus of US 130 and the western terminus of Route 49 , at which point it also meets the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike . Here , I @-@ 295 splits onto its own freeway maintained by NJDOT while US 40 continues along the New Jersey Turnpike for a short distance before it splits to the southeast . A short distance later , the roadway enters Carneys Point Township and CR 551 merges onto I @-@ 295 , with the four @-@ lane freeway heading northeast . The highway comes to a junction with Route 140 , where CR 551 splits from I @-@ 295 by continuing east along Route 140 . I @-@ 295 heads into wooded areas and features a rest area in the northbound direction . The freeway continues northeast and comes to a northbound weigh station before it reaches the Route 48 exit . The highway runs through a mix of farmland and woodland and enters Oldmans Township , where it comes to an interchange providing access to CR 643 . 
 I @-@ 295 crosses Oldmans Creek into Logan Township in Gloucester County and passes near some residential development and warehouses as it comes to the Center Square Road ( CR 620 ) exit . The road crosses Raccoon Creek and reaches an interchange serving US 322 / CR 536 . Following this , the highway runs through agricultural and wooded areas before northbound US 130 merges into the freeway . At this point , I @-@ 295 and US 130 head east as a six @-@ lane freeway with a narrow median and soon comes to the CR 684 exit . Continuing east , the freeway crosses into Greenwich Township and has a junction with CR 607 . After passing near Greenwich Lake , there are exits for CR 653 and CR 673 within a short distance of each other . I @-@ 295 / US 130 reaches an interchange with CR 680 on the border of Greenwich Township and East Greenwich Township . The road runs through a portion of East Greenwich Township before crossing back into Greenwich Township and coming to a junction with CR 678 and CR 667 on the border of Greenwich Township and Paulsboro . 
 Past this point , the freeway runs through marshy areas of Mantua Creek and continues into West Deptford Township . Here , there is an exit for CR 656 . Passing near more industrial areas , I @-@ 295 / US 130 has an interchange with the Mid @-@ Atlantic Parkway , which provides access to Route 44 as well as to CR 643 and CR 660 . Continuing northeast , the freeway reaches an interchange with Route 44 and CR 640 . At this point , Route 44 begins to parallel I @-@ 295 / US 130 on its northwest side as the two roads cross the Woodbury Creek . Route 44 ends at a cul @-@ de @-@ sac that has a ramp from the southbound direction of I @-@ 295 / US 130 prior to another exit that provides access to CR 644 . The freeway passes near some homes before US 130 splits from I @-@ 295 at an interchange that also has access to CR 642 . The median of I @-@ 295 becomes wider again and it continues east through woods , coming to a southbound exit and northbound entrance with Route 45 . The roadway passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Vineland Secondary and passes through a small strip of Deptford Township before it has a partial interchange with CR 551 , with a southbound exit and northbound entrance . The highway enters Westville and skirts near residential and commercial development , with another southbound exit and northbound entrance serving Route 47 . 
 = = = Bellmawr to Lawrence Township = = = 
 I @-@ 295 crosses the Big Timber Creek into Bellmawr in Camden County and runs northeast before it comes to the junction with the North @-@ South Freeway , which serves as the northern terminus of Route 42 and the eastern terminus of I @-@ 76 . At this point , the travel lanes of I @-@ 295 head north for a short distance along the outside of the North @-@ South Freeway , with the northbound lanes of I @-@ 295 having access from northbound Route 42 and eastbound I @-@ 76 and access to westbound I @-@ 76 while the southbound lanes of I @-@ 295 having access from eastbound I @-@ 76 and access to southbound Route 42 . Past this , I @-@ 295 continues east as a six @-@ lane freeway through wooded areas near suburban development , passing under Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's <unk> Industrial Track before reaching an interchange with Route 168 . The highway heads east along the border between Haddon Heights to the north and Barrington to the south and passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Beesleys Point Secondary before reaching the junction with US 30 near its junction with Route 41 / CR 573 . 
 The road fully enters Barrington before crossing into Lawnside , where it comes to a southbound exit and northbound entrance serving Warwick Road ( CR 669 ) . After this , I @-@ 295 curves northeast and passes through a corner of Tavistock before entering a part of Haddonfield and coming to a trumpet interchange providing access to the <unk> Station along the PATCO Speedline . At this point , the road becomes closely parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike to the southeast . The highway crosses into Cherry Hill and passes over the tracks carrying the PATCO Speedline and New Jersey Transit 's Atlantic City Line before it reaches the CR 561 exit . The roadway runs through wooded areas with suburban neighborhoods to the west and the New Jersey Turnpike to the east as it comes to a cloverleaf interchange at Route 70 . Past this , the highway curves north farther west from the turnpike . 
 I @-@ 295 enters Mount Laurel in Burlington County upon crossing Pennsauken Creek and runs northeast through woods near development , reaching a cloverleaf interchange with Route 73 that provides access to the New Jersey Turnpike to the east . Past this , the road passes east @-@ northeast near commercial areas to the southeast of Moorestown Mall before curving northeast to closely follow the turnpike . The highway runs through wooded areas and encounters the Route 38 junction . The roadway passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Pemberton Branch and CR 537 and runs through a mix of fields and trees with occasional development , with an exit serving CR 635 . I @-@ 295 crosses the Rancocas Creek into Westampton Township and runs through an area of warehouses , where it has a cloverleaf interchange at CR 626 . The highway runs north through rural land with nearby buildings and enters Burlington Township . Here , the road curves northeast and comes to a cloverleaf junction at CR 541 that provides access to a commercial area that includes the Burlington Center Mall along with the New Jersey Turnpike . The freeway runs through woodland and heads into Springfield Township , where it passes a pair of closed rest areas in each direction . I @-@ 295 crosses <unk> Creek into Florence Township and heads through a mix of farm fields and trees before it enters Mansfield Township and comes to a cloverleaf interchange at CR 656 that provides access to nearby CR 543 . The highway passes over the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike and continues through rural land into Bordentown Township , where a northbound exit and southbound entrance serves Rising Sun Road that provides access to US 206 and the New Jersey Turnpike . Past this , the road curves north and reaches the exit for US 130 west of Bordentown before passing through woodland and crossing over New Jersey Transit 's River Line . 
 I @-@ 295 crosses Crosswicks Creek into Hamilton Township in Mercer County and runs through woods and marshland a short distance east of the Delaware River . A scenic overlook of the river is located along the southbound side of the road ; access from the northbound lanes is provided by a pedestrian bridge over the highway . The freeway heads farther from the river and passes over the River Line again before it reaches a modified cloverleaf interchange serving the western terminus of I @-@ 195 and the southern terminus of the Route 29 freeway to Trenton . Following this junction , the road heads northeast near residential neighborhoods and comes to an interchange at Arena Drive ( CR 620 ) that provides access to nearby White Horse Avenue ( CR 533 ) . A short distance later , a southbound exit and northbound entrance provides access to northbound Olden Avenue ( CR 622 ) . I @-@ 295 continues through wooded areas with nearby development and curves north to come to an interchange at Route 33 and CR 606 . The next junction is a southbound exit and northbound entrance at CR 535 . The highway continues through woods and reaches a cloverleaf junction serving Sloan Avenue ( CR 649 ) . The roadway comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor and crosses into Lawrence Township , where it curves northwest and comes to a modified interchange with US 1 . At this point , I @-@ 295 ends and the freeway continues west as southbound I @-@ 95 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 39 was legislated to begin at the Yardley – <unk> Bridge and bypass Trenton to the north and east before continuing south to Hammonton along present @-@ day US 206 . Route 39 , which was not built around Trenton , was decommissioned in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . 
 Portions of I @-@ 295 in Salem and Gloucester counties predate the Interstate Highway System as part of freeway bypasses for the surface section of US 130 / Route 44 through Carneys Point and between Bridgeport and Westville . In 1948 , the first section of the US 130 / Route 44 bypass in Gloucester County between current exits 21 and 24 opened , with a second section between exits 14 and 21 opening in 1954 . The section of the present highway between the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike and the present @-@ day CR 618 bridge was built as part of the US 130 bypass of Carneys Point in 1953 . The concurrent Route 44 designation was removed from US 130 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , and was later assigned to the former surface alignment of US 130 through Carneys Point and between Bridgeport and Westville . In 1958 , the US 130 bypass of Carneys Point and the freeway in Gloucester County was designated as part of I @-@ 295 . 
 Construction on the Delaware Memorial Bridge began in 1949 . At the same time , work was underway on the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach in Delaware , a divided highway which would begin at a directional @-@ T interchange with US 13 in Farnhurst and head east to a cloverleaf interchange at New Castle Avenue ( present DE 9 ) before leading to the bridge . Construction on the US 13 interchange at Farnhurst began on July 12 , 1950 . On August 16 , 1951 , the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened to traffic . The Delaware Memorial Bridge and the approach road to US 13 became a part of US 40 following the opening of the bridge . I @-@ 295 was designated onto the New Jersey approach of the bridge in 1958 . That same year , construction began for a bridge at the Farnhurst interchange that would link the US 40 approach to the Delaware Memorial Bridge to the Delaware Turnpike that was proposed to run west to the Maryland border . A year later , the Farnhurst interchange and the bridge approach were upgraded to Interstate Highway standards , and it was designated as part of I @-@ 295 . Construction at the interchange connecting to the Delaware Turnpike at Farnhurst was completed in July 1961 . On November 14 , 1963 , the Delaware Turnpike opened to traffic , with I @-@ 295 extended west along that road to I @-@ 95 , which continued along the Delaware Turnpike towards Maryland . In the middle of 1964 , work began on a second span at the Delaware Memorial Bridge due to increasing traffic volumes . The second span of the bridge was opened to traffic in fall 1968 . 
 The remainder of I @-@ 295 through New Jersey was planned as Federal Aid Interstate Route 108 , which was created by NJDOT in 1956 . I @-@ 295 was built between the Big Timber Creek and Route 42 in 1958 . In 1960 , the section of the interstate between Route 42 and Warwick Road was finished . The highway was built between US 130 and Route 45 in 1960 and was extended east to the Big Timber Creek a year later . In 1963 , I @-@ 295 was completed between Warwick Road and just south of Route 70 . A year later , the roadway was extended north to Route 73 . The freeway was built between Route 73 and Route 38 in 1966 . In 1968 , the section of I @-@ 295 between Carneys Point and Bridgeport was finished . Following the completion of this section , US 130 reverted to its previous surface alignment through Carneys Point , replacing that portion of Route 44 . In 1972 , the highway was finished between Route 38 and CR 541 . I @-@ 295 was extended from CR 541 northward to US 130 near Bordentown a year later . I @-@ 295 was completed from US 1 west to a proposed interchange with I @-@ 95 in Hopewell Township in 1974 . In 1975 , the roadway was constructed from south of the Route 33 interchange north to US 1 . The section of I @-@ 295 between Arena Drive and south of Route 33 was finished in 1984 . In 1987 , I @-@ 295 was built between I @-@ 195 / Route 29 and Arena Drive , with the highway between I @-@ 195 / Route 29 and Route 33 opened to traffic on August 16 of that year . The final section of I @-@ 295 between US 130 in Bordentown and I @-@ 195 / Route 29 was finished in 1994 . 
 At its original northern terminus , the freeway continued west as I @-@ 95 toward the Scudder Falls Bridge while I @-@ 95 was proposed to head north along the Somerset Freeway . In 1983 , the Somerset Freeway portion of I @-@ 95 was cancelled as a result of community opposition . In the 1990s , the northern terminus of I @-@ 295 was moved to its current location at the US 1 interchange , with the route west of there replaced by an extended I @-@ 95 . Due to the cancellation of the Somerset Freeway , a gap exists along I @-@ 95 in New Jersey . To bridge the gap , motorists from northbound I @-@ 95 are directed to follow I @-@ 295 southbound and I @-@ 195 eastbound to reach the New Jersey Turnpike to continue north along I @-@ 95 , and vice versa . 
 In 1995 , the southbound rest area along I @-@ 295 in Burlington County was named for radio personality Howard Stern . Governor Christine Todd Whitman named the rest area after Stern as payback for him granting Whitman airtime during her 1993 gubernatorial campaign . A plaque proclaiming the rest area as the " Howard Stern Rest Stop " was installed , with an image of Stern poking his head from an outhouse . Days after the plaque was installed , it was stolen and later mailed to Stern . In 2003 , the rest areas along I @-@ 295 in Burlington County were closed as part of funding cuts in Governor Jim McGreevey 's budget , saving the state $ 1 million a year . 
 I @-@ 295 , like many other highways in New Jersey , once had solar @-@ powered emergency call boxes every mile ( about 1 @.@ 6 km ) ; the use of the call boxes became limited due to the increasing popularity of cell phones . To save on maintenance costs , NJDOT removed these call boxes in 2005 . 
 NJDOT has broken ground on the missing express connection between I @-@ 295 and Route 42 to provide an easier connection between the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area and points south to Atlantic City and vice versa . This project , dubbed the I @-@ 295 / I @-@ 76 / Route 42 Direct Connection , will reconstruct the dangerous and congested Route 42 / I @-@ 295 / I @-@ 76 interchange , which currently requires traffic on I @-@ 295 to use 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) ramps that merge onto the North – South Freeway for a short distance , among a series of other indirect connections . In 2007 , " Alternative D " for the reconstructed interchange was selected , calling for I @-@ 295 to cross over the North – South Freeway . This interchange is projected to cost $ 900 million . Construction began in 2013 and is scheduled to be complete in 2021 . 
 NJDOT has also announced another project to address the missing connections between I @-@ 295 and Route 42 . This project , dubbed the I @-@ 295 / Route 42 Missing Moves , will provide connections from I @-@ 295 northbound to Route 42 southbound and Route 42 northbound to I @-@ 295 southbound by constructing two ramps just south of the I @-@ 295 / I @-@ 76 / Route 42 interchange . The project is slated to begin in 2017 and is scheduled to be completed by 2020 . 
 = = Future = = 
 With the completion of the Pennsylvania Turnpike / Interstate 95 Interchange Project in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , I @-@ 95 will be redesignated along the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) to connect with the New Jersey Turnpike ( currently the northern section of I @-@ 95 ) at exit 6 , and the I @-@ 95 designation will be removed from the section north of the interchange in Pennsylvania . I @-@ 295 will be extended past its current terminus at US 1 along current I @-@ 95 , across the Scudder Falls Bridge , and into Pennsylvania to the new interchange . 
 Between September 2005 and May 2015 , the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania had an agreement that , instead , I @-@ 195 would be extended along this section of I @-@ 95 . This means that the extended I @-@ 195 would have replaced the portion of I @-@ 95 between the Pennsylvania Turnpike in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , and US 1 in Lawrence Township , New Jersey . It would have also replaced I @-@ 295 north of exit 60 in Hamilton Township , New Jersey ( its exit with I @-@ 195 ) , truncating I @-@ 295 at that junction . This option would have reduced the confusion of having I @-@ 295 parallel itself in New Jersey and Pennsylvania . Interchange renumbering would have also taken place that will coordinate with the future I @-@ 195 designation in Pennsylvania , as well as the new and current I @-@ 195 designation , from Ewing to Belmar in New Jersey . This proposal had received conditional approval from AASHTO . On May 20 , 2015 , it was decided to revert to the original decision to extend I @-@ 295 to the interchange . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 In Delaware , the exits are not numbered . 
 = Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques = 
 The Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques ( English : Bunker of Éperlecques , also referred to as " the Watten bunker " or simply " Watten " ) is a Second World War bunker , now part of a museum , near Saint @-@ Omer in the northern Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais département of France , and only some 14 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 8 @.@ 9 miles ) north @-@ northwest from the more developed La Coupole V @-@ 2 launch facility , in the same general area . The bunker , built by Nazi Germany under the codename Kraftwerk Nord West ( Powerplant Northwest ) between March 1943 and July 1944 , was originally intended to be a launching facility for the V @-@ 2 ( A @-@ 4 ) ballistic missile . It was designed to accommodate over 100 missiles at a time and to launch up to 36 daily . The facility would have incorporated a liquid oxygen factory and a bomb @-@ proof train station to allow missiles and supplies to be delivered from production facilities in Germany . It was constructed using the labour of thousands of prisoners of war and forcibly conscripted workers used as slave labourers . 
 The bunker was never completed as a result of the repeated bombing by the British and United States air forces as part of Operation Crossbow against the German V @-@ weapons programme . The attacks caused substantial damage and rendered the bunker unusable for its original purpose . Part of the bunker was subsequently completed for use as a liquid oxygen factory . It was captured by Allied forces at the start of September 1944 , though its true purpose was not discovered by the Allies until after the war . V @-@ 2s were instead launched from Meillerwagen @-@ based mobile batteries which were far less vulnerable to aerial attacks . Today , the bunker is preserved as part of a privately owned museum that presents the history of the site and the German V @-@ weapons programme . It has been protected by the French state as a monument historique since 1986 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The A @-@ 4 ballistic missile ( referred to as the V @-@ 2 from September 1944 ) was developed by the Germans between 1939 and 1944 . It was regarded by Adolf Hitler as a <unk> ( wonder weapon ) that he believed to be capable of turning the tide of the war . Its operational deployment was restricted by several factors . Large supplies of cryogenic liquid oxygen ( LOX ) were required as the oxidizer to fuel the missiles . LOX evaporates rapidly , necessitating a source reasonably close to the firing site in order to minimise loss through evaporation . Germany and the occupied countries did not at that time have sufficient manufacturing capacity for the amount of LOX required for a full @-@ scale A @-@ 4 campaign ; the total production capacity in 1941 and 1942 was about 215 tons daily , but each A @-@ 4 launch required about 15 tons . As the missile was intended for use against London and southern England , its operational range of 320 kilometres ( 200 mi ) meant that the launch sites had to be located fairly close to the English Channel or southern North Sea coasts , in northern France , Belgium or the western Netherlands . This was within easy reach of the Allied air forces , so any site would have to be able to resist or evade the expected aerial bombardments . 
 Various concepts were mooted for the A @-@ 4 's deployment in a March 1942 study by Walter Dornberger , the head of the A @-@ 4 development project at the Peenemünde Army Research Center . He suggested that the missiles should be based in heavily defended fixed sites of a bunker @-@ style design similar to the massive submarine pens then under construction in occupied France and Norway . The rockets could be stored in such sites , armed , fuelled from an on @-@ site LOX production plant , and launched . This offered significant technical advantages ; not only would the LOX loss be minimised , but the complex process of pre @-@ launch testing would be simplified . A high rate of fire could be sustained as the facility could effectively operate like a production line , sending a steady flow of missiles to the launch pads . 
 The submarine pens and other Atlantic Wall fortifications had been built in 1940 and 1941 , when the Germans had air superiority and could deter Allied air attacks . By 1942 this advantage had been lost to the United States Army Air Forces , which had begun deploying to England in May 1942 , and a greatly expanded Royal Air Force . The German Army preferred an alternative approach which would use trailer @-@ style mobile launch platforms called Meillerwagen accompanied by testing and fuelling equipment mounted on railway cars or trucks . Although this configuration was far less efficient and would have a much lower rate of fire , it would have the great advantage of presenting a much smaller target for the Allied air forces . The Army was not convinced that fixed bunkers could resist repeated air attacks and was particularly concerned about the vulnerability of the launch sites ' road and rail links , which were essential for resupplying them with missiles and fuel . 
 In November 1942 , Hitler and Minister of Munitions Albert Speer discussed possible launch configurations and examined models and plans of the proposed bunkers and mobile launchers . Hitler strongly preferred the bunker option , though he also gave the go @-@ ahead for the production of mobile launchers . Two different bunker designs had been prepared : the B.III @-@ 2a design envisaged preparing the missile for launch inside the bunker , then transporting it outside to a launch pad , while the B.III @-@ 2b design would see the missile being elevated from within the bunker to a launch pad on the roof . Speer gave orders that two bunkers were to be constructed by the Organisation Todt construction group to a " special fortification standard " ( <unk> ) , requiring a steel @-@ reinforced concrete ceiling 5 metres ( 16 ft ) thick and walls 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) thick . They would be built near the coasts opposite England , one on the Côte d <unk> near Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer and the other on the Cotentin Peninsula near Cherbourg . Each would be capable of launching 36 missiles a day , would hold sufficient supplies of missiles and fuel to last three days , and would be manned by 250 troops . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 In December 1942 , Speer ordered Peenemünde officers and engineers ( including Colonel Gerhard <unk> , Dr Ernst Steinhoff and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Georg Thom ) to tour the Artois region in northwest France and locate a suitable site for an A @-@ 4 launch facility . The site chosen was just to the west of the small town of Watten , in the Forest of Éperlecques , near Saint @-@ Omer in the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais department . It was given the cover name of Kraftwerk Nord West ( Northwest Power Plant ) . 
 The location was conveniently close to the main railway line between Calais and Saint @-@ Omer , the canalised River Aa , main roads and electric grid lines . Situated 177 kilometres ( 110 mi ) from London , it was far enough inland to be safe from naval guns and it was sheltered to an extent by a ridge that rises to a height of 90 metres ( 300 ft ) to the north . At nearby Saint @-@ Omer , there was a major Luftwaffe base which was capable of providing air defence for the area . There were existing gravel and sand quarries as well as cement works in the vicinity , which would help with the enormous amount of material that would be needed for the construction works . The quantities required were very substantial indeed ; 200 @,@ 000 tons of concrete and 20 @,@ 000 tons of steel would be required to build the facility . When US Army Major General Lewis H. Brereton inspected the site after it had been captured by the Allies , he described the bunker as " more extensive than any concrete constructions we have in the United States , with the possible exception of Boulder Dam . " 
 The Watten bunker was to be built to a design based on the B.III @-@ 2a bunker , though substantially larger . The Germans had originally planned to build a separate LOX plant at <unk> but this option was abandoned in favour of installing a LOX production facility within the Watten bunker . 
 The bunker consisted of three main elements . The main part of the building was a giant structure some 92 metres ( 302 ft ) wide and 28 metres ( 92 ft ) high , housing the LOX plant and a vault where missiles would be assembled and prepared . Its walls were up to 7 metres ( 23 ft ) thick and the bunker 's working levels descended 6 metres ( 20 ft ) below ground . The plant would house five <unk> compressors , each capable of producing about 10 tons of LOX per day . About 150 tons of LOX were to be stored in insulated tanks on @-@ site . The facility was intended to store up to 108 missiles and enough fuel to supply three days ' worth of launches . The Germans planned to fire up to 36 rockets a day from the site . 
 On the north side of the building was a fortified standard gauge railway station , linked to the main Calais @-@ Saint @-@ Omer line at Watten via a 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) spur line . Missiles , warheads and other components would be shipped to the station and transported on trucks into the main area of the bunker . Here the rockets were to be assembled , raised into a vertical position and fuelled and armed . From the arming halls , they would be moved to either end of the building through pivoting doors 18 metres ( 59 ft ) high . They would exit through the south face of the building and would be moved on tracks to the launch pads . There were no doors on the exit portals so chicanes were installed in the exit passage to deflect the blast of rockets being launched from outside . Launches would be overseen from a command tower located in the centre of the south side of the bunker , overlooking the launch pads . 
 To the north of the bunker , the Germans erected a bomb @-@ proof power station with a 2 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 1 @.@ 5 MW ) generating capacity . The site was initially powered from the main electricity grid , but it was intended that it would have its own independent power source to minimise the likelihood of disruption . Also associated with the Watten complex was a radar tracking site at <unk> , 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) south of Saint @-@ Omer . A Giant Würzburg radar system was installed there to follow the trajectories of V @-@ 2s being launched from Watten . The intention was to follow the trajectory for as long as possible so that the accuracy of the missile launches could be determined . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The site was designed in January and February 1943 by engineers from the Peenemünde research facility and the Organisation Todt . On 25 March 1943 the construction plans were presented to Hitler , who immediately gave the go @-@ ahead for the project to begin . The construction firm Holzman & Polanski was awarded the contract and 6 @,@ 000 workers from Building Battalion 434 started construction that same month using plans by Franz Xaver Dorsch , Construction Director at the Organisation Todt . It was envisaged that the structure would be ready by the end of July 1943 , though not its wiring and plant , and it was intended that it would be fully operational by 1 November 1943 . 
 The workforce consisted of a mixture of German specialists and forcibly conscripted Frenchmen from the Service du Travail <unk> ( STO ) . They were supplemented by Belgian , Dutch , French , Polish , Czech and Soviet prisoners of war and civilian conscripts , who were used as slave labour . The labour force also included many French political prisoners and Spanish Republicans who had fled to France after General Franco 's victory in the Spanish Civil War but had then been interned by the invading Germans . The non @-@ German workers lived in two camps officially known as Organisation Todt Watten <unk> 62 ( Forced Labour Camp 62 ) about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) distant from the site , near the village of Éperlecques . The camps were guarded by the French civil police with the assistance of Belgian and Dutch Nazis and Russian POWs who had volunteered for guard duty . Although escape attempts were punished by immediate execution , there were up to three escapes daily with external assistance . The commandant of the camp is said to have complained that it would have been easier to " guard a sack of fleas " . Over 35 @,@ 000 foreign workers passed through the camps during the period in which they were operational . 
 The labourers worked in 12 @-@ hour shifts of 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 men , with three 20 @-@ minute breaks during each shift . The work continued around the clock , seven days a week , under giant floodlights during the night . The living and working conditions were extremely harsh , especially for the political prisoners and the eastern Europeans , who were given especially punitive treatment due to their status as the most expendable members of the workforce . For the non @-@ German workers , falling ill or being unable to work through injury was the equivalent of a death sentence , as they would either be left to die or be transported back to the concentration camps from which they had been brought . A German commission that inspected the labour camps in the area in late 1943 commented : " The Eastern [ European ] worker is very tough . He works at his job until he falls flat on his face in the mire , and all that is left for the doctor to do is to issue the death certificate . " 
 A large supply dump was established at Watten next to the River Aa . This site was eventually used to store material required for all the V @-@ weapon sites in the Saint @-@ Omer area . Building materials were brought there by barges and trains where they were unloaded onto a Decauville narrow @-@ gauge railway for transportation to the construction site , where concrete mixers operated day and night . A 90 kV power line running to a transformer at <unk> north of Watten provided electricity . An old quarry at Wizernes codenamed Schotterwerk Nordwest ( Gravel Quarry Northwest ) , some 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) south of Watten , was also converted into a storage dump to supply the Watten facility . 
 = = Discovery , destruction and abandonment = = 
 In early April 1943 , an Allied agent reported " enormous trenches " being excavated at the Watten site , and on 16 May 1943 an RAF reconnaissance mission led to Allied photographic interpreters noticing unidentified activity there . Other large facilities were observed to be under construction elsewhere in the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais . The purpose of the construction works was very unclear ; Lord Cherwell , Winston Churchill 's scientific adviser , admitted that he had little idea what " these very large structures similar to gun emplacements " were but he believed that " if it is worth the enemy 's while to go to all the trouble of building them it would seem worth ours to destroy them " . 
 At the end of May , the British Chiefs of Staff ordered that aerial attacks be carried out against the so @-@ called " heavy sites " being built by the Germans . On 6 August , Duncan Sandys , who headed a high @-@ level Cabinet committee to coordinate the British defence against the German V @-@ weapons , recommended that the Watten site should also be attacked because of the progress being made in its construction . The British Chiefs of Staff noted that a daylight attack by US bombers was under consideration but they raised objections to the proposal , as the Air Staff thought that Watten had nothing to do with rockets , suggesting that instead it might be merely a " protected operations room " . 
 The timing of the first raid was influenced by advice given by Sir Malcolm McAlpine , the chairman of the construction company Sir Robert McAlpine , who suggested that the Watten site should be attacked while the concrete was still setting . On 27 August 1943 , 187 B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses of the US 8th Air Force attacked the site with devastating effect . The fortified train station on the north side of the bunker was especially badly damaged , as concrete had just been poured there . Dornberger later wrote that following the attack the site was " a desolate heap of concrete , steel , props and planking . The concrete hardened . After a few days the shelter was beyond saving . All we could do was roof in a part and use it for other work . " The bombing killed and injured hundreds of the slave workers on site ; although the Allies had sought to avoid casualties by timing the raid with what they thought was a change of shifts , the shift pattern had been changed by the Germans at the last minute to achieve the day 's work quota . 
 Only 35 % of the Watten bunker had been completed by this time . It was clearly no longer possible to use it as a launch site , but the Germans still needed LOX production facilities to supply V @-@ 2 sites elsewhere . After surveying the site in September and October 1943 , Organisation Todt engineers determined that the northern part of the facility was irretrievably damaged but decided to focus on completing the southern part to serve as a LOX factory . One of the OT 's engineers , Werner Flos , came up with an idea to protect the bunker from bombardment by building it up from the roof first . This was done by initially constructing a concrete plate , flat on the ground , which was 5 metres ( 16 ft ) thick and weighed 37 @,@ 000 tons . It was incrementally raised by hydraulic jacks and then supported by walls which were built underneath it as it was raised , becoming the roof . The resulting concrete cavern was intended to be used by the Germans as a bombproof liquid oxygen factory . The thickness of the roof was chosen on the assumption that Allied bombs were incapable of penetrating such a depth of concrete ; the Germans , however , were unaware of the British development of earthquake bombs . 
 The Germans ' main focus of attention switched instead to Schotterwerk Nordwest , the former quarry at nearby Wizernes , where work had been ongoing to build a bombproof V @-@ 2 storage facility . This project was expanded to turn the quarry into a fixed launch facility . Plans were put into effect to build a huge concrete dome – now open to the public as the museum of La Coupole – under which missiles would be fuelled and armed in a network of tunnels before being transported outside for launching . The Allies carried out further heavy bombing against both the Watten and Wizernes sites with little initial effect on the buildings themselves , although the rail and road network around them was systematically destroyed . On 3 July 1944 , Oberkommando West gave permission to stop construction at both sites , which had been so disrupted by bombing that work could no longer proceed . Three days later an Allied raid succeeded in wrecking the interior of the Watten bunker with a Tallboy bomb that brought down part of the roof . Finally , on 18 July 1944 , Hitler decreed that plans for launching missiles from bunkers need no longer be pursued . Dornberger 's staff subsequently decided to continue minor construction at Watten " for deception purposes " . The site itself was now useless , as the Germans recognised when they wryly codenamed it Concrete Lump , and the liquid oxygen generators and machinery were transferred to the <unk> V @-@ 2 factory in central Germany , well away from Allied bombers . 
 The Watten site was captured on 4 September 1944 by Canadian forces . The Germans had evacuated it a few days earlier and removed the pumps which kept the cavernous basement free from water ; not long afterwards it began to flood . This made a substantial amount of the bunker inaccessible to the Allies . 
 = = Subsequent investigations and utilisation = = 
 The bunker was inspected on 10 September 1944 by the French atomic scientist Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie , accompanied by Sandys . Following the visit , Sandys ordered a Technical Inter @-@ Services Mission under Colonel T.R.B. Sanders to investigate the sites at Mimoyecques , Siracourt , Watten , and Wizernes , collectively known to the Allies as the " Heavy Crossbow " sites . Sanders ' report was submitted to the War Cabinet on 19 March 1945 . 
 Despite the capture of Watten , it was still not known at this time what the site had been intended for . Sanders noted that " the purpose of the structures was never known throughout the period of intensive reconnaissance and attack " . Based on the discovery of large aluminium tanks installed in the main part of the bunker , he opined that the Germans had intended to use it as a factory for the production of hydrogen peroxide for use in the fuelling of V @-@ 1 and V @-@ 2 missiles . He ruled out the possibility that it could have been used for LOX production and concluded , erroneously , that " the site had no offensive role . " He recommended that ( unlike the Mimoyecques and Wizernes sites ) the Watten bunker presented no threat to the UK 's security and " there is thus no imperative need , on that account , to ensure the destruction of the workings . " 
 The bunker was targeted again by the Allies in February 1945 , this time to test the newly developed CP / RA Disney bomb – a 4 @,@ 500 lb ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ) concrete @-@ piercing rocket @-@ assisted bomb designed to double the normal impact velocity , and thereby increase the penetration , of the projectile . The site had been chosen for testing purposes in October 1944 as it had the largest accessible interior area of the targets under consideration and was furthest from an inhabited town . On 3 February 1945 , a B @-@ 17 of the US Eighth Air Force dropped a Disney bomb on the Watten bunker and scored a hit over the wall section , but the results were inconclusive and the Air Force was not able to determine how well the bomb had penetrated the concrete . Although Disney bombs were used operationally on a number of occasions , the weapon 's introduction came too late to be of any significance in the war effort . In January 2009 the body of the Disney bomb was extracted from the roof , where it had embedded itself . 
 The Watten bunker was inspected again on 20 June 1951 by an Anglo @-@ French commission to determine whether it was capable of being reused for military purposes . The British Assistant Military Attaché , Major W.C. Morgan , reported to the Director of Military Intelligence at the War Office that the main part of the bunker had not been significantly damaged by bombing and that although it was flooded , if it was patched and drained " the building could be quickly made ready to receive oxygen <unk> plant machinery , or for any other purpose requiring a large and practically bomb @-@ proof building . " 
 No further military use was made of the bunker and the land on which it stands reverted to private ownership . It was left abandoned for many years before the owners decided to redevelop the site . In 1973 , the bunker was opened to the public for the first time under the name of Le Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques . The ownership was taken over by Hubert de <unk> in the mid @-@ 1980s and on 3 September 1986 the French state declared it a monument historique . The area around the bunker has been re @-@ forested , though it is still heavily scarred by bomb craters , and various items of Second World War military equipment ( including a V @-@ 1 on a launch ramp ) are on display alongside paths around the site . An open @-@ air trail leads to and around the bunker with interpretative signs posted at various points to tell the story of the site and the German V @-@ weapons programme . In 2009 , the museum welcomed 45 @,@ 000 visitors . 
 = = Air raids on the Watten site = = 
 = Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia = 
 The Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia was signed by Alija Izetbegović , President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Franjo Tuđman , President of the Republic of Croatia , in Zagreb on 21 July 1992 during the Bosnian and Croatian wars for independence from Yugoslavia . It established cooperation , albeit inharmonious , between the two and served as a basis for joint defense against Serb forces . It also placed the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) under the command of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) . 
 Izetbegović , who had hoped to prevent Bosnia Herzegovina from falling under the influence of Croatia or Serbia , signed the agreement after Stjepan Kljuić , president of the Croatian Democratic Union 's ( HDZ ) branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina , was replaced by Tuđman with Mate Boban , who blocked the delivery of supplies to Sarajevo where a siege was under way and had proclaimed an independent Croatian Republic of Herzeg @-@ Bosnia ( HR @-@ HB ) . The agreement fell apart in October after a number of events including the assassination of Blaž Kraljević , leader of Croatian Defence Forces ( HOS ) in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the fall of the areas of Posavina , Bosanski Brod , and Jajce into the hands of the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) , and after a major battle broke out between the HVO and the ARBiH in Prozor . 
 = = Preparation for war = = 
 In 1990 and 1991 , Serbs in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina had proclaimed a number of " Serbian Autonomous Regions " with the intent of later unifying them to create a Greater Serbia . Serbs used the well equipped Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) in defending these territories . As early as September or October 1990 , the JNA had begun arming Bosnian Serbs and organizing them into militias . By March 1991 , the JNA had distributed an estimated 51 @,@ 900 firearms to Serb paramilitaries and 23 @,@ 298 firearms to Serbian Democratic Party ( SDS ) . The Croatian government began arming Croats in the Herzegovina region in 1991 and in the start of 1992 , expecting that the Serbs would spread the war into Bosnia and Herzegovina . It also helped arm the Bosniak community . From July 1991 to January 1992 , the JNA and Serb paramilitaries used Bosnian territory to wage attacks on Croatia . 
 On 25 March 1991 , Franjo Tuđman met with Serbian president Slobodan Milošević in <unk> , reportedly to discuss partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina . In November , the autonomous Croatian Community of Herzeg @-@ Bosnia ( HZ @-@ HB ) was established , it claimed it had no <unk> goal and that it would serve a " legal basis for local self @-@ administration " . It vowed to respect the Bosnian government under the condition that Bosnia and Herzegovina was independent of " the former and every kind of future Yugoslavia . " In December , Tuđman , in a conversation with Bosnian Croat leaders , said that " from the perspective of sovereignty , Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina has no prospects " and recommended that Croatian policy " support for the sovereignty [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] until such time as it no longer suits Croatia . " 
 In April 1992 , the siege of Sarajevo began , by which time the Bosnian Serb @-@ formed Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) controlled 70 % of Bosnia and Herzegovina . On 8 April , Bosnian Croats were organized into the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) . A sizable number of Bosniaks also joined . The Croatian Defence Forces ( HOS ) , led by Blaž Kraljević in Bosnia and Herzegovina , which " supported Bosnian territorial integrity much more consistently and sincerely than the HVO " was also created . On 15 April 1992 , the multi @-@ ethnic Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) was formed , with slightly over two @-@ thirds of troops consisting of Bosniaks and almost one @-@ third of Croats and Serbs . In the winter Bosniaks began leaving the HVO and joining the ARBiH which also began receiving supplies from Croatia . In May , HVO Major General Ante Roso declared that the only " legal military force " in HZ @-@ HB was the HVO and that " all orders from the TO [ Territorial Defense ] command [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] are invalid , and are to be considered illegal on this territory " . 
 = = Pressure and agreement = = 
 The Croatian government played a " double game " in Bosnia and Herzegovina and " a military solution required Bosnia as an ally , but a diplomatic solution required Bosnia as a victim " . Tuđman 's Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) party held important positions in the Bosnian government including the premiership and the ministry of defence , but despite this carried out a separate policy and refused for the HVO to be integrated into ARBiH . Jerko Doko , the Bosnian defence minister , gave the HVO priority in the acquisition of military weapons . In January 1992 , Tuđman had arranged for Stjepan Kljuić , president of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( HDZ BiH ) who favored cooperating with the Bosniaks towards a unified Bosnian state , to be ousted and replaced by Mate Boban , who favored Croatia to annex Croat @-@ inhabited parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina . A rift existed in the party between Croats from ethnically mixed areas of central and northern Bosnia and those from Herzegovina . Milivoj <unk> , prewar Croat mayor of Mostar and ally of Kljuić said : " The secessionist policy [ union with Croatia ] was consistently supported by the Herzegovina side , not by Sarajevo , Posavina , or Central Bosnia Croats . [ ... ] Croats from Central Bosnia and Posavina , as well as those from urban centers who lived with Muslims and Serbs , thought differently . But when the war picked up , Posavina Croats were attacked , Sarajevo was surrounded [ ... ] Kljuić was sidelined and Boban came in with idea [ the Croat separatist idea ] in this area . [ ... ] When they [ Croats in Sarajevo as well as Northern and Central Bosnia ] felt they could not survive any more they lifted their hands and accepted their fate . And the Herzegovina Croats promised them the stars in the sky and told them " come here and we will give you a place . " And what happened ? It resulted in an exodus . And all these miserable Croat refugee communities that look absolutely ugly . " 
 Izetbegović came under intense pressure from Tuđman to agree for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be in a confederation with Croatia ; however , Izetbegović wanted to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from coming under the influence of Croatia or Serbia . Because doing so would cripple reconciliation between Bosniaks and Serbs , make the return of Bosniak refugees to eastern Bosnia impossible and for other reasons , Izetbegović opposed . He received an ultimatum from Boban warning that if he did not proclaim a confederation with Tuđman that Croatian forces would not help defend Sarajevo from strongholds as close as 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) away . On 9 May , Boban , Josip Manolić , Tuđman 's aide and previously the Croatian Prime Minister , and Radovan Karadžić , president of the self @-@ proclaimed Republika Srpska , secretly met in Graz and formed an agreement on the division of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Graz agreement . Beginning in June , discussions between Bosniaks and Croats over military cooperation and possible merger of their armies started to take place . The Croatian government recommended moving ARBiH headquarters out of Sarajevo and closer to Croatia and pushed for its reorganization in an effort to heavily add Croatian influence . 
 In June and July , Boban increased pressure " by blocking delivery of arms that the Sarajevo government , working around a United Nations embargo on all shipments to the former Yugoslavia , has secretly bought . " On 3 July , Boban declared the independence of the Croatian Republic of Herzeg @-@ Bosnia ( HR @-@ HB ) . He was established as its president . It claimed power over its own police , army , currency , and education and extended its grasp to many districts where Bosniaks were the majority . It only allowed a Croat flag to be used , the only currency allowed was the Croatian kuna , its only official language was Croatian , and a Croat school curriculum was enacted . Mostar , a town where Bosniaks constituted a slight majority , was set as the capital . There was no mention on the defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's territorial integrity . 
 On 21 July , Izetbegović and Tuđman signed the " Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia " in Zagreb , Croatia . The agreement allowed them to " cooperate in opposing [ the Serb ] aggression " and coordinate military efforts . It placed the HVO under the command of the ARBiH . Cooperation was inharmonious , but enabled the transportation of weapons to ARBiH through Croatia in spite of the UN sanctioned arms embargo , reopening channels blocked by Boban . It established " economic , financial , cultural , educational , scientific and religious cooperation " between the signatories . It also stipulated that Bosnian Croats hold dual citizenship for both Bosnia and Herzegovina and for Croatia . This was criticized as Croatian attempts at " claiming broader political and territorial rights in the parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina where large numbers of Croats live " . After its signature Boban vowed to Izetbegović that HR @-@ HB would remain an integral part of Bosnia and Herzegovina when the war ended . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the summer of 1992 , the HVO started to purge its Bosniak members . At the same time armed incidents started to occur among Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina between the HVO and the HOS . The HOS was loyal to the Bosnian government and accepted subordination to the Staff of the ARBiH of which Kraljević was appointed a member . On 9 August , Kraljević and eight of his staff were assassinated by HVO soldiers under the command of Mladen <unk> , who supported a split between Croat and Bosniaks , after Kraljević 's HOS attacked the VRS near Trebinje . The HOS 's advance into eastern Herzegovina and occupation of Trebinje angered Boban who had affirmed to Karadžić that Croat forces were uninterested in the region . The HOS was disbanded , leaving the HVO as the only Croat force . Bosnian officials suspected that Tuđman 's government was involved . According to Manolić the order to kill Kraljević was given by Šušak and approved by Tuđman . Božidar Vučurević , the war @-@ time mayor of Trebinje , stated he safeguarded records showing that SDS and HDZ figures considered it a " task " that need to be carried out . 
 In late September , Izetbegović and Tuđman met again and attempted to create military coordination against the VRS , but to no avail . By October , the agreement had collapsed and afterwards Croatia diverted delivery of weaponry to Bosnia and Herzegovina by seizing a significant amount for itself . Boban had abandoned a Bosnian government alliance and ceased all hostilities with Karadžić . The dominant Croatian – Bosnian defense of Posavina fell apart after Tuđman and / or Gojko Šušak ordered the withdrawal of the Croatian Army ( HV ) , enabling the Serbs to gain control of the corridor and connect their captured territories in western and eastern Bosnia . On 8 October , the town of Bosanski Brod was abandoned by the HVO and left to the VRS . By that time , the HV and the HVO had sustained approximately 7 @,@ 500 casualties , out of 20 @,@ 000 troops committed to the battle to control Posavina . The pullout appeared to be a quid pro quo for the JNA withdrawal from Dubrovnik 's hinterland that took place in July . Still , a Central Intelligence Agency analysis concluded that there is no direct evidence of such arrangements . On 9 October , the HVO signed a cease @-@ fire with the VRS in Jajce in exchange for providing electricity . 
 The strained relations escalated rapidly and led to an armed clash between the two forces in Novi Travnik on 18 October . Low @-@ scale conflicts spread in the region , and the two forces engaged each other along the supply route to Jajce three days later , on 21 October , as a result of an ARBiH roadblock set up the previous day on authority of the " Coordinating Committee for the Protection of Muslims " rather than the ARBiH command . Just as the roadblock was dismantled , a new skirmish occurred in the town of Vitez the following day . On 29 October , the VRS captured Jajce due to the inability of ARBiH and HVO forces to construct a cooperative defense , against the VRS which held the advantage in troop size and firepower , staff work and planning was significantly superior to the defenders of Jajce . Six days prior the first major battle in the impending Croat – Bosniak war broke out when the HVO pushed ARBiH from Prozor and expelled the Bosniak population after carrying out rapes , attacking the local mosque , and torching the property of Bosniaks . Initial reports indicated about 300 Bosniaks were killed or wounded in the attack , but subsequent reports by the ARBiH made in November 1992 indicated eleven soldiers and three civilians were killed . Another ARBiH report , prepared in March 1993 , revised the numbers saying eight civilians and three ARBiH soldiers were killed , while 13 troops and 10 civilians were wounded . 
 = Wizards & Warriors = 
 Wizards & Warriors is a platforming video game developed by Rare Ltd. for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . It was published by Acclaim and released in North America in December 1987 and in Europe on January 7 , 1990 . It was also released in Japan by Jaleco on July 15 , 1988 , under the title Densetsu no Kishi Elrond ( <unk> ) . In the game , players control Kuros , the " Knight Warrior of the Books of Excalibur " , as he sets out in the Kingdom of Elrond to defeat the evil wizard Malkil , who holds the princess captive in Castle IronSpire , located deep within Elrond 's forests . During the game , players make their way through forests , tunnels , and caves , battling hordes of enemies and collecting treasure , magical items , and additional weaponry to get past the obstacles and hazards that lie in their path . It was Rare 's second game released for the NES , after Slalom . 
 Wizards & Warriors was featured in early video gaming magazines such as Nintendo Fun Club News , Nintendo Power , and VideoGames & Computer Entertainment in 1988 and 1989 . The main characters Kuros and Malkil would make appearances in the animated series The Power Team ( part of the TV video game reviewing show Video Power ) and Captain N : The Game Master . The game would also be novelized for the Worlds of Power series of NES game adaptations , created by Seth Godin . It received general praise for its graphics , sound , difficulty , and arcade @-@ style gameplay . Criticisms include the presence of unlimited continues , which allow players to restart the game right where they previously left off while retaining all items that were collected before . Retro Gamer called Wizards & Warriors " a unique experience for NES gamers in 1987 , and technically well ahead of other games for the console at the time " . The game also spawned three sequels : Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II , Wizards & Warriors III : Kuros : Visions of Power and Wizards & Warriors X : The Fortress of Fear . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Wizards & Warriors pits the story 's hero Kuros , the " Knight Warrior of the Books of Excalibur " , against the main antagonist , the evil wizard Malkil . He was considered one of the greatest wizards in the land , such that Merlin was one of his students . However , the aging Malkil has gone mad and has started using his magic for evil . As a result , Malkil has captured the princess and holds her prisoner in Castle IronSpire , deep within the forests of Elrond . The game 's protagonist , the brave knight Kuros , is summoned to venture through the forests of Elrond . He is armed with the legendary Brightsword , a sword that is powerful enough to beat demons , insects , undead , and the other creatures which have fallen under Malkil 's spell . With the sword , he ventures out through the forests of Elrond and the various caves and underground tunnels and to Castle IronSpire , where he must defeat Malkil and rescue the princess . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wizards & Warriors is a platformer in which players control Kuros as he makes his way through the forests of Elrond to Castle IronSpire , where he must defeat Malkil and rescue the princess . After starting the game , the map is briefly shown for players to look at ; afterwards , gameplay starts . Starting in the Elrond forest , players must explore the trees – both on top and inside – to find items and to make it into the caves and tunnels . There , players start collecting the various magical items and treasure ; they must make their way through caves filled with ice as well as lava . Afterwards , players fight through a second set of forests before arriving at Castle IronSpire , in which the player must go over the castle in order to enter it . The castle consists of a series of mazes in which players must use keys to open doors and possibly find other damsels which can be rescued . At the end lies the final confrontation with the wizard Malkil . 
 Players use the control pad to move horizontally and to crouch . Kuros can attack enemies by using his Brightsword or with other weapons and magic . He can also attack enemies while in the air or while standing by simply holding the sword in position . The objective of the game is to collect the various weapons and magic as well as the gems and treasure along the way ; players use these items to make it past the enemies and other obstacles and hazards . Players collect gems in order to " bribe " the creature who guards the entrance to the next level ; if players do not have enough gems , they cannot progress to the next level . At the end of each level is a boss creature which has been empowered by Malkil 's black magic . Bosses have an " Enemy 's Black Magic Power " meter which shows how difficult the boss is , how many hits are required to defeat it , and what type of weaponry needs to be used . Kuros has a life meter which decreases as time passes and when he sustains damage from enemies . Players loses a life when Kuros ' life meter runs out , but upon restarting they keep all the items they have obtained up to that point . The game ends when all three lives have been lost , but players have the choice to continue and restart at the level in which they lost their last life ; upon continuing , players keep all their items obtained up to that point , but their score goes back to zero . Along the way , players can replenish Kuros ' life meter by collecting pieces of meat scattered throughout the levels . 
 Along the way , players pick up many items which will help Kuros along his way . Acorns , torches , and treasure chests contain objects for players to collect . Chests are color @-@ coded and require a key of that matching color to open the chest ; the same color @-@ coded keys are used to open doors of matching colors . Some weapons and magic items are replaced once the player collects a new item , but others remain throughout the course of the game . Items include the following : " Boots of Force " which can kick open chests and doors ; magical potions which temporarily grant Kuros invulnerability , extra speed , or extra jumping ability ; gems to help bribe the end @-@ of @-@ level guardian ; a shield to protect from enemy attacks ; the " Potion of Levitation " which allows Kuros to float upwards ; the " Dagger of Throwing " and the " Battle Axe of <unk> " which are thrown at enemies and return like a boomerang ; the " Feather of Feather Fall " which slows Kuros ' falling speed ; the " Wand of Wonder " and " Staff of Power " which shoot out balls of ice and fire , respectively ; the " Cloak of Darkness " which makes Kuros invisible to enemies ; the " Boots of Lava Walk " which allows Kuros to walk on the lava ; " Exploding Eggs " which destroys all on @-@ screen enemies ; " Alarm Clocks " which stops all enemies for a brief period ; knife and axe upgrades and an item simply called a " horn " ( trumpet ) which had many players confused as it appeared to be useless , its purpose was to reveal hidden doors to gem caves in some places . Other valuable treasures increase the player 's score and include coins , orbs , chalices , and entire hoards of treasure . Rescuing the damsels in the levels also increase the player 's score . 
 = = Development and reception = = 
 Wizards & Warriors was developed by UK @-@ based video game company Rare for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was released by Acclaim in North American in December 1987 ; it would later be released by the same company in Europe on January 7 , 1990 . It was released in Japan by Jaleco under the title Densetsu no Kishi Elrond on July 15 , 1988 . The game would be Rare 's second NES release , after Slalom . The game 's soundtrack was composed by video game composer David Wise . 
 Wizards & Warriors was reviewed in Nintendo Fun Club News – the precursor to Nintendo Power – in which a brief overview of the gameplay was given . The game would be featured again in Nintendo Power 's November – December 1989 issue , where it was chosen as the best game to use with the NES Advantage controller , saying that the joystick would allow players to concentrate on other strategic gameplay elements . In 1989 , Wizards & Warriors was nominated by the magazine for " Best Graphics & Sound " and " Best Character " ( Kuros ) for its " Nintendo Power Awards ' 88 " , but it did not win in either category . It also received coverage in a 1989 issue of VideoGames & Computer Entertainment . The reviewer lauded the game 's challenge and need for problem solving – more particular the need to use different items aside from the Brightsword in order to defeat some enemies and progress in the game , and the need to find hidden rooms where required items are located . However , he noted that the high level of difficulty is offset by the ability to continue at exactly the same spot in which the player left off . Overall , the reviewer praised Wizards & Warriors for its " excellent graphics and sound " , arcade @-@ style gameplay , and overall challenge . German magazine Power Play praised the game 's good graphics , sound and extras , but criticized its " stale gameplay " . 
 In a retrospective of the entire Wizards & Warriors series , UK @-@ based magazine Retro Gamer gave a positive review of the first title , saying that " Kuros 's first adventure was a unique experience for NES gamers in 1987 , and technically well ahead of other games for the console at the time . " The review said that the game , while a platformer , placed much emphasis on finding treasure and items . The review said that most gamers found fault in relatively easy difficulty level , most symbolized by its unlimited continues in which players can continue at the point right where they left off . According to the retrospective , in 1988 , Rare showed Wizards & Warriors to Zippo Games , who was touring Rare and their NES library . Rare asked them to develop a sequel to the game , which would become Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II . In another retrospective of Rare as part of the company 's 25th anniversary , GamePro looked back on the game , calling it " unique at the time " due to the unlimited amount of continues players received . 
 Wizards & Warriors has received scant coverage from modern video gaming websites . Video gaming website GamesRadar named the opening theme for the game as " Game music of the day " , noting that the theme " suggests , from the moment you turn on the game , that knights , wizards , goblins and who knows what else are about to collide in a battle so epic it 's destined for a Frazetta painting . " JC Fletcher from Joystiq called the game " a simple action @-@ platformer about a guy in thick armor who kicks open treasure chests in order to bribe knights " . He also notes the variety of good and bad items such as the " Staff of Power " which inflicts much damage to enemies and conversely the " Cloak of Darkness " , which he says " makes Kuros invisible to you but not to enemies " . He said that the game has an arcade feel , with unlimited continues , a high @-@ score list , name entry for high scores , and good music . Houston Press ' Jef Rouner lauded the game 's music and animation , and noted its high difficulty level , especially during boss battles . IGN listed Wizards & Warriors at # 56 on its " Top 100 NES Games " list , reviewer Sam Claiborn said that the game was inspired by Dungeons & Dragons @-@ type RPGs , but it went further in incorporating action platforming elements along with more traditional RPG elements . Columnist and comedy writer <unk> humorously criticized the game for items that did not work as intended , including the " Cloak of Darkness " and the " Boots of Lava Walk " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Wizards & Warriors was ported as a standalone handheld game by Acclaim in September 1989 , as part of a series of handheld ports by the company which also included WWF WrestleMania Challenge , Knight Rider , 1943 : The Battle of Midway , and Rocky . Kuros and his nemesis Malkil were featured – along with the title characters from <unk> and <unk> , Tyrone from Arch Rivals , and characters from <unk> – in the 1990 animated series The Power Team , part of the video game reviewing show Video Power . Malkil appeared in an episode of Captain N : The Game Master called " Nightmare on Mother Brain 's Street " where the world of the game was referred to as " Excalibur " and not Elrond . 
 Wizards & Warriors was one of the eight games that were novelized for the Worlds of Power series of NES game adaptations , published by Scholastic Corporation ; the novelization was written by the series ' creator Seth Godin , under the pseudonym " F. X. Nine " . The book was the only one in the series in which no effort was made to edit out the protagonist 's weapons on the cover . However , on the cover , Kuros ' loincloth was airbrushed on both sides in order to more completely conceal his underside – which is more visible on the cover of the game itself . The novelization is about a boy named Matthew who is having trouble using his imagination for a creative writing class , when he accidentally brings his father 's knight figurine to life . He is then spirited away to the land of Elrond to help Kuros defeat Malkil . As with the other books in the series in which nobody actually " died " , all of the creatures that they killed were made from the lives of the people of Elrond , and whenever a creature was slain , a person was returned to their normal state . Further in the novel , the two save Kuros sister in the pink caves . While Matthew was invulnerable at the start of the mission , as the two drew closer to the evil wizard , he becomes more vulnerable to the attacks of Malkil 's villains . 
 = Disasterpieces = 
 Disasterpieces is the second video album by American metal band Slipknot . Released on November 26 , 2002 , a 2 @-@ disc case DVD features Slipknot performing a concert at London Dockland Arena , as well all of the band 's music videos until its release including songs from Slipknot and Iowa . 
 The concert was filmed by 26 cameras , including a camera on the headstock of Mick Thomson 's guitar and a " first person " point of view of several band @-@ members . The show was edited in part by band member Shawn Crahan who watched all of the footage recorded from the show . Disasterpieces was met with positive critical reception , with many citing the quick editing and high sound quality as strong points . In 2005 the DVD was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA and is the band 's highest selling DVD to date shipping at least 400 @,@ 000 units as a longform video . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Disasterpieces was recorded at the now defunct London Dockland Arena in England on February 16 , 2002 , it was one of the final dates on the band 's European tour which was subsequently their final tour until 2004 . The concert was shot with 26 different cameras under the direction of Matthew Amos and documents the show , backstage action and an in @-@ store signing in Paris , France . In addition to operated cameras each band member had an individual camera which was attached to the side of their masks , apart from Mick Thomson whose camera was attached to the headstock of his guitar . The concept behind these cameras was to allow the viewer to see the show from the band member 's point of view . However they did cause some discomfort and problems for some band members . Bassist Paul Gray removed his after four songs , explaining that " they gave us this big [ camera ] pack to wear around our waist . So when I was jumping around , the thing started sliding down my leg " . Also during the song " Spit It Out " DJ Sid Wilson had his camera stolen when he was in the crowd , however it was returned at the end of the show , all of this is documented on the DVD . 
 The performance was edited by percussionist Shawn Crahan and Paul Richardson . Crahan later explained that he didn 't have an outline when he began editing , to the disbelief of others closest to him he watched all the footage in order to find the most appropriate footage to help immerse the viewer in the show . Additional content on the two @-@ disc set includes all music videos by the band at the time of release and the track " Purity " , which was removed from Slipknot due to legal reasons , in audio form . The DVD also gives the ability to the viewer to use the remote to change the viewing angle during " Disasterpiece " and also to view the individual band member mask cameras during " People = Shit " and " The Heretic Anthem " . The DVD was unveiled at an advance screening in New York City on November 1 , 2002 and was released on November 22 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Disasterpieces was generally well received by critics . Kirk Miller of Rolling Stone complimented the multitude of camera angles and quick edits , writing that they helped to " [ take ] advantage of the masked metal giants ' sprawling live show " . Ottawa XPress reviewer Mitch Joel wrote that the sound was " mixed perfectly ... [ making ] songs like ' People = Shit ' , ' Spit It Out ' and ' Surfacing ' rocket " . Overall , he concluded , " Disasterpieces is an awesome and all @-@ embracing package . " 
 Disasterpieces peaked at number 3 in the Billboard Top Music Videos chart and rose to number 1 in Finland . On January 6 , 2003 the RIAA certified Disasterpieces platinum in the United States , and it was declared quadruple platinum on November 18 , 2005 . 
 It was honored with a 2002 Metal Edge Readers ' Choice Award for DVD / Home Video of the Year . 
 = = Contents = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Spike Spiegel = 
 Spike Spiegel ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is the central protagonist of the 1998 anime series Cowboy Bebop . Spike is a former member of the criminal Red Dragon Syndicate , who left by faking his death after falling in love with a woman called Julia . He is first introduced as the partner of Jet Black , captain of the spaceship Bebop : the two are legalized bounty hunters pursuing criminals across the populated worlds . During his adventures on board the Bebop , he is drawn back into a bitter feud with Vicious , a rival from the Syndicate who seeks to kill him . 
 Spike was created by Shinichirō Watanabe and Toshihiro Kawamoto as part of the production entity Hajime Yatate . Created as a mirror image of Watanabe and based on Yusaku Matsuda 's character in Tantei Monogatari , he was designed as someone who would expect others to follow his lead . Kawamoto deliberately designed him to appear " uncool " to create the opposite effect for viewers . His final confrontation with Vicious was planned well in advance . His portrayal in the later movie adaptation displayed the character 's softer side and inner thoughts . Spike is voiced in Japanese by Kōichi Yamadera . In the English dub , he is voiced by Steven Blum . 
 In addition to the series , Spike has been featured in two manga adaptations , and been the main protagonist of two video game adaptations . Reception of Spike has been positive in Japan and the West , with multiple reviewers praising his portrayal . He has appeared on multiple reader and critic lists of the best anime characters . In addition to the series , many reviewers of the movie positively noted his expanded portrayal in The Movie . Both actors have been praised for their performances , with Blum commenting that it boosted his voice acting career . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Spike is a fictional bounty hunter who was born on Mars on June 26 , 2044 : he is 27 years old , has fluffy dark @-@ green hair and brown eyes . His right eye is artificial , and consequently lighter than the other . He stands 6 ' 1 " and weighs 155 lbs . Spike is a heavy smoker , and is frequently seen smoking despite rain or " no smoking " signs . A skilled martial artist who practices Jeet Kune Do , he is a devote follower of the philosophies of Bruce Lee . He also owns a converted antique Asteroid racer called the Swordfish II . During gunfights , he most often uses a Jericho 941 . In his younger days before joining the Bebop , Spike was part of the Red Dragon Syndicate , a Chinese criminal organization : during his time there , he was impetuous and volatile , but after leaving he became a calm and collected character with a love for combat . While holding little value in money or justice , he always holds true to his own values and fulfills his obligations . He also generally does this his way rather than following orders , which generally gets him into trouble . Watanabe has said that Spike has a habit of being very indirect with his emotions ; for example , he may behave antagonistically towards someone he actually likes . He says that this could apply to Spike 's relationship with Faye Valentine . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Cowboy Bebop = = = 
 Years before the beginning of the series , Spike is a rising member of the Red Dragon crime syndicate . While there , he becomes a partner and friend of Vicious , another member of the Syndicate . Wounded from a gun battle , Spike is nursed back to health by Vicious ' girlfriend Julia , and the two fall in love . They plan to elope and escape the Syndicate , but Vicious finds out and attempts to force Julia to kill Spike or risk her own death . After Spike fakes his death to escape the Syndicate , Julia goes into hiding and does not meet up with him . Spike eventually met and teamed up with former Inter Solar System Police officer Jet Black . As legalized bounty hunters , they travel the Solar System 's inhabited worlds hunting criminals . 
 During his time on the Bebop , he and Jet are joined by Ein , an intelligent Welsh corgi ; Faye Valentine , a gambler and original resident of Earth woken from cryogenic sleep ; and Edward " Ed " Wong Hau Pepelu <unk> IV , an eccentric girl from Earth who is a master hacker . Spike also has run @-@ ins with Vicious on two occasions : in " Ballad of Fallen Angels " , while pursuing a Red Dragon executive , Spike and Vicious battle in a derelict church and Spike is nearly killed . Later , in " Jupiter Jazz " , Spike hears that Julia was seen on Callisto and abandons the Bebop to look for her . Once there , he stumbles into a drug deal orchestrated by Gren , a man Vicious betrayed who is seeking revenge . During their confrontation , a three @-@ way battle ensues : Vicious escapes , and Gren is fatally injured , but he succeeds in telling Spike that Julia is alive and in hiding . 
 During the final story of the series , " The Real Folk Blues " , Julia comes out of hiding and sends a message to Spike through Faye : the two meet and resolve to flee as originally planned . Vicious , having staged a coup d 'état and taken over the Red Dragon Syndicate , sends assassins after the two . During a battle , Julia is shot and killed . After saying his goodbyes to Jet and Faye , Spike storms the headquarters of the Syndicate and has a final confrontation with Vicious : Spike is severely wounded and Vicious is killed . Shortly after this , Spike walks into and collapses in the entrance hall . Spike 's ultimate fate was deliberately left ambiguous , with Watanabe eventually unable to say whether he lived or died . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Spike is the main protagonist of Cowboy Bebop : The Movie , a story set between Episodes 22 and 23 of the original series while the Bebop crew are still working together . The crew of the Bebop take on a massive bounty for Vincent Volaju , who releases a cloud of deadly protean @-@ based nanomachines in Mars ' capital city . During his pursuit , Spike initially fights then allies with Elektra Ovirowa , a former comrade of Vincent 's . 
 Spike appears along with the other main characters in the manga adaptation of Cowboy Bebop and the alternate manga Cowboy Bebop : Shooting Star . In the PlayStation Cowboy Bebop , players control Spike as he pilots the Swordfish II during aerial battles through pre @-@ set courses . Spike appears as one of the playable characters in the PlayStation 2 action / beat ' em up video game Cowboy Bebop : <unk> no Serenade , a game set within the continuity of the series . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 During the first work by Shinichirō Watanabe on Cowboy Bebop , the first image that came to him was of Spike . Prior to that , Watanabe had the character of Spike in mind for a long time beforehand . From that point on , Watanabe " tried to build a story around him , trying to make him cool . " Watanabe created Spike as a mirror image of himself : in Watanabe 's words , " I don 't smoke or drink or fight , but I want to – so Spike does . " Spike forms the main focus on the series , with the central theme being his past and its karmic effect on him . Spike was portrayed as a very old @-@ fashioned type of man , who would simply do what he wanted and expect others to follow his lead and watch him from the sidelines . Spike 's artificial eye was included as Watanabe wanted his characters to have flaws . He was originally going to give Spike an eye patch , but the producers vetoed it . In order to portray him as cool , Toshihiro Kawamoto designed Spike to look " uncool " : when he stands still , he has a hunched appearance . This meant that when the character was moving vigorously , he came across as " extra cool " . Spike 's appearance was primarily based on the main protagonist of Tantei Monogatari , portrayed by famous Japanese actor Yusaku Matsuda . Spike 's Swordfish II spaceship was created by mecha designer Kimitoshi Yamane . Yamane liked the English biplane torpedo @-@ bomber Fairey Swordfish , which led him to name the Swordfish II after the bomber . The conclusion of Spike 's story and his final battle with Vicious were planned by Watanabe well in advance , with each episode featuring them meant to shadow their final confrontation . Some of the staff were unhappy about this approach as a continuation of the series would be difficult . While he considered altering the ending , he eventually settled with his original idea . 
 Spike 's Japanese voice actor , Kōichi Yamadera , was pleased to have gotten the part , but <unk> Ishizuka , Jet 's voice actor , was surprised that Yamadera was not cast as Jet . Spike and Jet were designed to be opposites , with Spike being thin and wearing smart attire , while Jet was bulky and wore more casual clothing . His English voice actor , Steven Blum , used film noir imagery to get himself in the right frame of mind to voice the character convincingly . Blum had some difficulty portraying the character in scenes where he was showing vulnerability . He called Spike an " example of a character [ he ] didn 't fully appreciate until the series was over " , also adding that he would like to reprise his role as the character if given the chance . Spike 's portrayal was expanded in Cowboy Bebop : The Movie . Specifically , according to Yamadera , the character displayed more of his inner thoughts and showed a gentler side than he did in the series . This was because the team had more time available to express such details . Blum found his performance in the movie one of his most difficult from an emotional standpoint , as there were scenes where Spike was portrayed quite differently from the version he had been playing in the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Spike 's character has been well received in Japan . He won first place in the Best Male Character category at Animage 's annual Anime Grand Prix awards two consecutive times in 1998 and 1999 . In the August 2001 issue of Newtype , Spike was ranked first on the magazine 's list of " Top 10 Most Popular Male Anime Characters in Japan " . The next year in July 2002 , Spike was again placed at number one on Newtype 's anime list of " Favorite Male Character " . In a Newtype poll from March 2010 , Spike was voted by readers as the eighteenth most popular male anime character from the 1990s . In 2014 , Kōichi Yamadera was voted by fans as the third coolest " old guy " voice actor in a Goo Ranking poll , with his portrayal of Spike cited as one of the contributing factors . 
 Western critics have also directed significant praise towards Spike . In his review of Cowboy Bebop , Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol praised the character portrayals , especially Spike 's , stating that " Spike 's character in particular runs the gamut from goofy to blasé to teeth @-@ gnashing tough ; he is one of most three @-@ dimensional anime leads in recent memory . " Christi of THEM Anime Review 4 @.@ 0 complimented Spike 's story arc in the series , saying that " the underlying theme of Spike Spiegel and his motivations for what he does is absolutely intriguing . " DVDTalk 's Kyle Mills called Spike the epitome of a good lead protagonist , referring to him as " composed , always cool , and is essentially the ultimate badass " , although his true nature is gradually shown throughout the series . In an article in The Atlantic , writer Alex Suskind was positive about Spike 's portrayal and development , saying that the word " cool " was the most apt way of describing him and referring to him as " a space @-@ age samurai @-@ cum @-@ Marlboro Man " . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku , writing a retrospective on the series , praised the relationship between Spike and Faye , especially the way it evolved through the series without overt verbal expressions of affection . 
 His portrayal in The Movie has also received praise : IGN 's Andy Patrizio said that Spike " opens up his soul a little " during the film , while Chris Beveridge of Mania.com found Spike more likable in the film than in some parts of the series , comparing him to Lupin III and praising the moments where he could be himself and show more of his inner self . Carlos Ross of THEM Anime Review said that Spike 's portrayal was one of the things that worked in the film , and DVD Talk 's Neil Lumbard , alongside general praise of the characters , positively noted the further exploration of his personality . Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol was less enthusiastic , saying that while Spike was the only one who got much attention during the film , some sequences felt like they could work without him . 
 Blum 's portrayal as Spike has also drawn praise . Isler stated that " Steve Blum launched his career into new heights when he gave the performance of a lifetime in the English dub of the series , giving Spike a sense of smooth , effortless cool that many argue surpassed the original Japanese version . " While praising the whole principal cast of the series as one of the best English dubs , Serdar Yegulalp of About.com highlighted Blum as Spike as the standout performance of the series , stating that " Cynicism never sounded this suave or self @-@ assured " . Blum himself has called Spike a " gigantic benchmark " in his career and life , saying that " Spike changed everything " for him . He stated that his role as Spike opened up new opportunities for voicing characters , including <unk> on Toonami and Jamie on Megas XLR . 
 In 2009 and 2014 , IGN ranked Spike among the best anime characters of all time . In 2009 , Chris Mackenzie ranked Spike as the fourth greatest anime character behind Goku , Astro Boy , and Speed Racer . In 2014 , Ramsey Isler ranked him as second greatest behind Shinji Ikari of Neon Genesis Evangelion . At the 2005 Anime Awards from About.com , Spike was nominated in the category " Best Lead Male Character " , though he lost to Goku . In 2010 , Wired included Spike on its list of the " 6 Genre @-@ Tripping Gunfighters Jonah Hex Must Duel FTW ! " , with writer Scott Thill complimenting his abilities , while also commenting on his presence of heart compared to other equivalent protagonists . In 2013 , Complex ranked Spike the fourth most stylish anime character ever , with writer Jian DeLeon commenting that " The Mars @-@ born bounty hunter knows the benefit of a good uniform " . In 2014 , WatchMojo.com named Spike an honorable mention on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Anti @-@ Heroes " , and also ranked him at number nine on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Heroes " . 
 = No. 1 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 1 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) squadron headquartered at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . Controlled by No. 82 Wing , it is equipped with Boeing F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet multi @-@ role fighters . The squadron was formed under the Australian Flying Corps in 1916 and saw action in the Sinai and Palestine Campaigns during World War I. It flew obsolete Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s , <unk> , Martinsyde <unk> and <unk> , as well as Airco <unk> , Bristol Scouts and Nieuport 17s , before re @-@ equipping with the R.E.8 in October 1917 and finally the Bristol Fighter in December . Its commanding officer in 1917 – 18 was Major Richard Williams , later known as the " Father of the RAAF " . Disbanded in 1919 , No. 1 Squadron was re @-@ formed on paper as part of the RAAF in 1922 , and re @-@ established as an operational unit three years later . 
 During World War II , the squadron flew Lockheed Hudson bombers in the Malayan and Dutch East Indies campaigns , suffering severe losses before being reduced to cadre in 1942 . It was re @-@ formed with Bristol Beauforts the following year , and re @-@ equipped with de Havilland Mosquitos in 1945 for further operations in the Dutch East Indies . Reduced to cadre once more after the war ended , No. 1 Squadron was re @-@ established at Amberley in 1948 as an Avro Lincoln heavy bomber unit . From 1950 to 1958 it was based in Singapore , flying missions during the Malayan Emergency , where it bore the brunt of the Commonwealth air campaign against communist guerillas . When it returned to Australia it re @-@ equipped with English Electric Canberra jet bombers . It operated McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4E Phantoms from 1970 to 1973 , as a stop @-@ gap pending delivery of the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber . The F @-@ 111 remained in service for 37 years until replaced by the Super Hornet in 2010 . From September 2014 to March 2015 , a detachment of Super Hornets was deployed to the Middle East as part of Australia 's contribution to the military intervention against ISIL . 
 = = Role and equipment = = 
 No. 1 Squadron is located at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , and controlled by No. 82 Wing , which is part of Air Combat Group . Its mission responsibilities include air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ surface combat . The squadron is nicknamed the " Fighting First " . The blazon of its crest is " the Australian Kookaburra in a diving position superimposed on the cross of Jerusalem " , which symbolises the Victoria Cross @-@ winning action of No. 1 Squadron pilot Frank McNamara in Palestine during World War I. The unit motto is <unk> <unk> ( " We see and we strike " ) . 
 The squadron operates Boeing F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet multi @-@ role fighters , the first of which entered service in March 2010 . Nicknamed the " Rhino " , its missions include air superiority , fighter escort , land strike , maritime strike , close air support , and reconnaissance . The Super Hornet is larger than the " classic " McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet operated by the RAAF , carries more ordnance , and has a greater fuel capacity . It is fitted with a 20 mm cannon and can be armed with air @-@ to @-@ air and anti @-@ shipping missiles , as well as a variety of air @-@ to @-@ ground bombs and missiles . Flown by a crew of two , a pilot and an air combat officer ( ACO ) , it is capable of engaging targets in the air and on the surface simultaneously . It can be refuelled in flight by the RAAF 's Airbus KC @-@ 30A Multi Role Tanker Transports . The Super Hornets are serviced at the operating level by No. 1 Squadron technical staff ; heavier maintenance is conducted by Boeing Defence Australia and other contractors . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 No. 1 Squadron was established as a unit of the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) at Point Cook , Victoria , in January 1916 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel E.H. Reynolds . With a complement of 28 officers , 195 airmen , no aircraft and little training , it sailed for Egypt in mid @-@ March 1916 , arriving at Suez a month later . There it came under the control of the 5th Wing of the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) . After training in England and Egypt , the unit was declared operational at its new headquarters in Heliopolis on 12 June , when it took over aircraft belonging to No. 17 Squadron RFC . Its three flights were , however , operating in isolation at different bases in the Sinai Desert , and the squadron did not reunite until December . Flying primitive and poorly armed Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 two @-@ seat biplanes , its primary roles during this period of the Sinai Campaign were reconnaissance — including aerial photography — and artillery spotting for the British Army . No. 1 Squadron pilots attached to No. 14 Squadron RFC took part in the Battle of Romani in July and August . In September and October , B and C Flights , led by Captains Oswald Watt and Richard Williams respectively , undertook bombing and reconnaissance missions in support of the Australian Light Horse in northern Sinai . 
 On 12 September 1916 , the British began to refer to No. 1 Squadron as No. 67 ( Australian ) Squadron RFC . This practice continued until January 1918 , when the unit officially became known as No. 1 Squadron AFC . The relationship between airmen and ground crew was less formal than in British units ; squadron members recalled that " The CO is the only one who is ever called ' sir ' " and that officers did not demand " saluting and standing to attention and all that rot " . The unit received the first of several Martinsyde G.100 single @-@ seat fighters to augment the B.E.2s on 16 October ; although considered obsolete , the " <unk> " was substantially faster than the B.E.2 , and armed with forward @-@ firing machine guns . Shortly before the squadron took part in a bombing raid against Beersheba on 11 November , Lieutenant Lawrence Wackett managed to fix a machine gun to the top plane of one of the B.E.2s , using a mount he designed himself . Each flight was also assigned a Bristol Scout beginning in December , but it too was obsolete and under @-@ powered , and the squadron ceased operating the type within three months . Other older models issued to the unit included the Airco <unk> , Martinsyde <unk> and Nieuport 17 . On 17 December , the squadron 's flights were finally brought together at one base , <unk> . 
 Early March 1917 saw the heaviest bombing campaign carried out by the squadron to date ; short of its regular 20 @-@ pound ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) ordnance , the pilots improvised by dropping 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) howitzer shells on Turkish forces along the Gaza – Beersheba line . During one such mission on 20 March , Lieutenant Frank McNamara earned the Victoria Cross for landing his Martinsyde in the desert under enemy fire and rescuing a fellow pilot whose B.E.2 had been forced down . On 26 March , No. 1 Squadron took part in the First Battle of Gaza ; it suffered its first combat death the next day , when one of its B.E.2s was attacked by a German Rumpler . The unit participated in the Second Battle of Gaza on 19 April ; like its predecessor , the attack was a failure for the Allies . Williams , later to become known as the " Father of the RAAF " , assumed command of the squadron in May . Two <unk> were delivered the same month ; like the Martinsydes , they were armed with a forward @-@ firing machine gun and employed as escorts for the <unk> By June , mechanical issues caused by hot summer weather and the threat from new German Albatros scouts were rendering the B.E.2s largely ineffective , and Williams urgently requested newer models . Modern aircraft were eventually delivered , first the Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8 in October , and then the Bristol F.2 Fighter in December . " Now for the first time , " wrote Williams , " after 17 months in the field we had aircraft with which we could deal with our enemy in the air . " 
 No. 1 Squadron joined the 40th ( Army ) Wing of the RFC 's Palestine Brigade on 5 October 1917 . On 22 and 24 November , the squadron bombed Bireh village during the Battle of Jerusalem . The first of its 29 confirmed aerial victories , over an Albatros , occurred on 3 January 1918 . By month 's end , its complement of aircraft included five B.E.2s , five Martinsydes , two R.E.8s , and nine Bristol Fighters . The squadron supported the Capture of Jericho in February 1918 . It carried out air raids and reconnoitred prior to the First Transjordan attack on Amman in March and prior to the Second Transjordan attack on Shunet Nimrin and Es Salt a month later ; it also flew reconnaissance missions during the advance to and fighting near Es Salt and Jisr ed Damieh . By the end of March , it was equipped with 18 Bristol Fighters , which had replaced all the other types . As well as undertaking offensive operations , the Bristol Fighters served in the photo @-@ reconnaissance role . During the last week of April 1918 , the squadron moved its base forward from Mejdel to a new aerodrome outside Ramleh . Williams relinquished command in June to take over 40th Wing . 
 Beginning in August 1918 , members of No. 1 Squadron , including one of its aces , Lieutenant Ross Smith , were attached to Colonel T.E. Lawrence 's Arab army to protect it against German bombing . In September , the squadron began operating a Handley Page 0 / 100 , the only Allied heavy bomber in the Middle East and the only twin @-@ engined aircraft flown by the AFC . That month it joined the Bristol Fighters in the final offensive of the Palestinian Campaign , the Battle of Armageddon , inflicting what the Australian official history described as " wholesale destruction " on the Turkish Seventh Army . By October , the Bristol Fighters had moved forward from Ramleh to Haifa and by the middle of the month were required to patrol and reconnoitre an exceptionally wide area of country , sometimes between 500 and 600 miles ( 800 and 970 km ) , flying over Rayak , Homs , Beirut , Tripoli , Hama , Aleppo , Killis and Alexandretta . They bombed the German aerodromes at Rayak , where 32 German machines had been either abandoned or burnt , on 2 October . On 19 October , the first German aircraft was seen in the air since fighting over Deraa in mid @-@ September , just prior to the Battle of Sharon . Smith and another pilot forced a DFW two @-@ seater to land , and destroyed it on the ground by firing a Very light into the aircraft after the German pilot and observer had moved to safety . In the wake of the 31 October armistice with Turkey , the squadron relocated to Ramleh in December , and then in February 1919 to Kantara . There its members were personally farewelled by General Sir Edmund Allenby , who congratulated them for achieving " absolute supremacy of the air ... a factor of paramount importance " to the Allied campaign . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 No. 1 Squadron returned to Australia on 5 March 1919 , and was disbanded . In 1921 , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was established as a separate branch of the military , and on 1 January 1922 , the squadron was re @-@ formed on paper . Its planned strength , approved by the Air Board in December 1921 , was three officers and five airmen , operating four Airco <unk> Funding problems for the fledgling Air Force resulted in the disbandment on 1 July of No. 1 Squadron and other units established at the same time , their aircraft and personnel instead forming a single squadron of six flights under the control of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) at Point Cook . No. 1 Squadron was reactivated as an operational unit of the RAAF reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) , at Point Cook on 1 July 1925 . Its commanding officer was Flight Lieutenant Harry Cobby . 
 Like No. 3 Squadron , formed the same day at Point Cook but transferred to RAAF Richmond , New South Wales , three weeks later , No. 1 Squadron was a multi @-@ purpose or " composite " unit made up of three flights , each of which had a different role and comprised four aircraft : A Flight operated DH.9s for army cooperation , B Flight operated Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 fighters , and C Flight operated DH.9A bombers . A third of the squadron 's complement of 27 officers and 169 airmen was Permanent Air Force ( PAF ) , and the rest CAF . No. 1 Squadron relocated from Point Cook to nearby RAAF Laverton on 1 January 1928 . The RAAF retired its S.E.5s the same year , and in 1929 took delivery of Westland Wapiti general @-@ purpose aircraft to replace its DH.9s and <unk> Through the inter @-@ war years , No. 1 Squadron undertook various tasks including civil aid , flood and bushfire relief , search and rescue , aerial surveys , and air show demonstrations . In October 1930 , a de Havilland DH.60 Moth attached to the unit conducted Australia 's first crop @-@ dusting operation , at the behest of the Victorian Forestry Commission . 
 RAAF squadrons began adopting specialised roles in the early 1930s , No. 1 Squadron becoming No. 1 Single @-@ <unk> Bomber Squadron . By November 1935 it was made up of two flights of newly delivered Hawker Demon fighter @-@ bombers , and one of Wapitis . In December 1935 it was augmented by No. 1 FTS 's Fighter Squadron and its six Bristol Bulldogs , which were redesignated fighter @-@ bombers . Nos. 21 and 22 ( Cadre ) Squadrons were formed on 20 April 1936 at Laverton and Richmond , respectively , absorbing the CAF personnel of Nos. 1 and 3 Squadrons , which became PAF units . The same day , No. 1 Squadron was renamed No. 1 ( Fighter Bomber ) Squadron . This reorganisation temporarily denuded No. 1 Squadron of most of its aircraft , leaving only A Flight , with four Bulldogs and a Wapiti , in operation . The Wapiti was transferred to No. 1 FTS in July , and by the end of the month the squadron 's complement of aircraft stood at four Bulldogs and one Moth . 
 No. 1 Squadron began receiving new Demons in November 1936 . In January 1937 , it relinquished its Bulldogs to No. 21 Squadron , which was to hold them until they could be transferred to the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ formed No. 2 Squadron . By the end of February , No. 1 Squadron 's strength was 12 Demons and one Moth , 11 officers and 108 airmen . The unit was redesignated No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron in August 1937 . Towards the end of the year , it was plagued by several Demon accidents , resulting in a series of inquiries and a review of RAAF procedures in 1938 by Marshal of the RAF Sir Edward Ellington ; the so @-@ called Ellington Report and its criticism of air safety standards led to the removal of Air Vice @-@ Marshal Richard Williams from his position as Chief of the Air Staff , which he had held since the formation of the Air Force . No. 1 Squadron received the RAAF 's first three CAC Wirraways on 10 July 1939 . As the likelihood of war increased , the squadron 's role was altered to incorporate reconnaissance as well as bombing , resulting in the transfer out of all Demons and Wirraways and the transfer in from other units of nine Avro Ansons on 28 – 29 August 1939 ; at the end of the month its personnel comprised nine officers and 122 airmen . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War II , No. 1 Squadron 's Ansons were tasked with maritime patrol and convoy escort duties . In 1940 , the squadron became the RAAF 's inaugural Lockheed Hudson unit ; it received its first Hudson on 30 March , and by the end of May had transferred out the last of its Ansons and was operating 11 of the new aircraft . Deployed to Malaya to conduct maritime reconnaissance , No. 1 Squadron arrived at Sembawang , Singapore , on 4 July 1940 . It relocated to Kota Bharu , near the Malaya – Thailand border , in August 1941 . Two days before the attack on Malaya , its Hudsons spotted the Japanese invasion fleet but , given uncertainty about the ships ' destination and instructions to avoid offensive operations until attacks were made against friendly territory , Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke @-@ Popham did not allow the convoy to be bombed . Shortly after midnight , local time , on the night of 7 / 8 December , the Japanese force started landing on the beaches at Kota Bharu , close to the airfield , and from about 02 : 00 , No. 1 Squadron launched a series of assaults on the Japanese forces , becoming the first aircraft to make an attack in the Pacific War . The Hudsons sank a Japanese transport ship , the IJN <unk> Maru , and damaged two more transports , the <unk> Maru and Sakura Maru , for the loss of two Hudsons , an hour before the attack on Pearl Harbor . By the end of the day , Japanese ground forces had advanced to the outskirts of the airfield , forcing the squadron 's remaining airworthy aircraft to be evacuated to Kuantan , and from there back to Singapore . 
 By Christmas Eve 1941 , No. 1 Squadron had five serviceable aircraft . Together with No. 8 Squadron RAAF , also equipped with Hudsons , it was tasked with maritime patrols to the east of Singapore . On 26 January 1942 , two of the squadron 's Hudsons spotted a Japanese convoy heading for Endau , on the east coast of Malaya . It was decided to attack the convoy with all possible strength , including four Hudsons from No. 1 Squadron and five from No. 8 Squadron , together with obsolete Vickers Vildebeest and Fairey Albacore biplanes of Nos. 36 and 100 Squadrons RAF , and with what little fighter escort could be found . The convoy was strongly defended by Japanese fighters , and although all nine Hudsons returned to Singapore , several were badly shot up . The rest of the strike force did not fare as well ; 11 Vildebeests , two Albacores , two Hudsons ( of No. 62 Squadron RAF ) and three fighters were lost . By the end of the month , No. 1 Squadron had withdrawn to airfield <unk> on Sumatra , along with several other Commonwealth units including No. 8 Squadron . It continued to attack Japanese bases in Malaya and convoys in the Dutch East Indies , relocating to <unk> , Java , in mid @-@ February . At <unk> it took over the Hudsons of No. 8 Squadron and No. 65 Squadron RAF , giving it a strength of 25 aircraft ; at one stage it was to be renumbered as an RAF squadron , but this never occurred . Heavily outnumbered by Japanese air units , which raided Allied bases with impunity , No. 1 Squadron suffered heavy losses and was ordered to withdraw its four remaining Hudsons to Australia on 2 March 1942 , disbanding soon after . Although 120 of the squadron 's personnel were evacuated from Java , 160 men including the commanding officer , Wing Commander Davis , were unable to escape and were taken prisoner by the Japanese ; less than half survived captivity . 
 No. 1 Squadron was re @-@ formed with Bristol Beauforts on 1 December 1943 at <unk> , New South Wales . By March 1944 it had deployed to Gould , Northern Territory , where it was controlled by No. 79 Wing under North @-@ Western Area Command . Its strength at the beginning of the month was some 350 officers and men , and 19 Beauforts . The squadron commenced reconnaissance operations on 20 March , and undertook its first bombing mission on 4 April against <unk> , East Timor . It attacked other targets in Timor during May , losing two aircraft . Having undertaken 82 sorties in July , the Beauforts concentrated on maritime reconnaissance from August , using air @-@ to @-@ surface radar during operations from Gould and Gove . After re @-@ equipping with Mosquito fighter @-@ bombers at Kingaroy , Queensland , in January 1945 , the squadron deployed to Morotai in May and then Labuan Island in June – July . Now part of No. 86 ( Attack ) Wing , it flew only a few missions before the end of the war , losing one Mosquito . No. 1 Squadron returned to Australia in December 1945 and was disbanded at Narromine , New South Wales , on 7 August 1946 . 
 = = = Malayan Emergency = = = 
 No. 1 Squadron was re @-@ formed as a heavy bomber unit on 23 February 1948 , when No. 12 Squadron was re @-@ designated . Operating Avro Lincolns , it was based at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , where it formed part of No. 82 ( Bomber ) Wing . The wing 's aircraft were serviced by No. 482 ( Maintenance ) Squadron . From July 1950 to July 1958 — for the first two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years under the auspices of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing — it was based in Singapore , flying missions against communist guerrillas during the Malayan Emergency . Tasked by RAF Air Headquarters Malaya , the Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as strikes against pinpoint targets . They operated singly and in formations , sometimes in concert with RAF bombers , and often strafed targets with their machine guns and 20 mm cannon after dropping ordnance . The Lincolns were considered well suited to the campaign , owing to their range and ability to fly at low speeds to search for targets , as well as their firepower and heavy bomb load . Not having to contend with anti @-@ aircraft fire , they flew mainly by day , but No. 1 Squadron also operated by night , the only Commonwealth unit to do so . 
 The squadron carried out its own day @-@ to @-@ day maintenance in Malaya ; the Lincolns were rotated back to Australia for major work . Its original complement of six aircraft was increased to eight after the British Air Ministry requested in February 1951 that Australia augment its bomber force to partly offset the imminent withdrawal of the RAF 's Lincolns to Bomber Command in Europe . The squadron was awarded the Gloucester Cup for proficiency in 1950 – 51 and 1954 – 55 . It suffered no casualties during the campaign but two of its aircraft were written off : one that overshot the landing strip at Tengah in November 1951 , and another that crashed into the sea off Johore after striking trees on takeoff in January 1957 . 
 Although the original purpose of the bombing campaign in Malaya was to kill as many insurgents as possible , the impracticality of achieving this in operations over dense jungle resulted in a shift towards harassing and demoralising the communists , driving them out of their bases and into areas held by Commonwealth ground troops . Operation Kingly Pile , which involved two sorties by No. 1 Squadron and one by English Electric Canberra jet bombers of No. 12 Squadron RAF on 21 February 1956 , was considered the most successful of the more than 4 @,@ 000 missions conducted by the Lincolns , killing at least 14 communist troops . By the time it was withdrawn to Australia in July 1958 , the squadron had dropped over 14 @,@ 000 tonnes of bombs — 85 per cent of the total delivered by Commonwealth forces during the Emergency . Its service was recognised with the presentation of a Squadron Standard by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Far East Air Force , Air Marshal The Earl of Brandon . Until 2014 , the Malayan Emergency had marked the last occasion that the unit took part in combat operations . 
 = = = Jet era = = = 
 No. 1 Squadron re @-@ equipped with Canberra <unk> after returning to Australia . The RAAF 's first jet bomber , the Canberra was subsonic but had long range and was highly manoeuvrable . It had been procured partly for its capacity to deliver nuclear weapons , an ordnance option the government seriously contemplated but never acquired . Initially the Canberra 's envisaged mission profile was medium @-@ to @-@ high @-@ altitude area bombing but its primitive bombsight and light load made this a dubious proposition , and by mid @-@ 1961 crews were training in low @-@ level army cooperation tactics . No. 1 Squadron was awarded successive Gloucester Cups for its proficiency in 1959 – 60 and 1960 – 61 . As of January 1962 , its strength was eight aircraft and 53 personnel , including 18 officers . The unit effectively ceased operations in 1968 , to begin converting to the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C supersonic bomber , which was expected to enter service soon afterwards . Already controversial owing to its escalating cost , the F @-@ 111 program was heavily delayed by airworthiness concerns related to its swing @-@ wing technology . In September 1970 , as an interim measure while awaiting delivery of the F @-@ 111 , No. 1 Squadron relinquished its Canberras for leased McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4E Phantoms , which it operated until June 1973 . Although the Phantom had a multi @-@ role capability , the RAAF employed it as a strike aircraft to maintain compatibility with the proposed F @-@ 111 mission profile . One of No. 1 Squadron 's Phantoms was lost with its crew of two in June 1971 , the only fatalities and hull loss of the 24 aircraft leased to the RAAF . Though not as sophisticated an aircraft as the F @-@ 111 , the Phantom was a significant advance over the Canberra , and well regarded by its Australian crews . 
 No. 82 Wing accepted its first F @-@ 111Cs in June 1973 . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Charles Read , ordered that the new aircraft be flown with great caution initially , well within operational limits , to minimise the possibility of further damage to its reputation through early attrition . No. 1 Squadron was assigned 12 of the initial 24 aircraft delivered . It was No. 82 Wing 's lead strike force , while No. 6 Squadron was primarily tasked with crew conversion training . The wing employed a centralised servicing regime , whereby all aircraft and maintenance personnel were held by No. 482 Squadron , which released the F @-@ 111s in line with Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons ' joint flying program . In February 1981 , responsibility for operating @-@ level servicing of the F @-@ 111s was transferred to the flying squadrons , which for the first time took direct control of their F @-@ 111s . No. 482 Squadron continued to provide intermediate @-@ level servicing , while major upgrades and complex maintenance were carried out by No. 3 Aircraft Depot . These two organisations merged in 1992 to form No. 501 Wing , which handed over heavy maintenance of the F @-@ 111 to Boeing Australia in 2001 . Between 1977 and 1993 , the RAAF lost seven F @-@ 111Cs in crashes . Three of the accidents involved aircraft flown by No. 1 Squadron : in August 1979 , January 1986 and September 1993 , the last two killing both crew members . In July 1996 , No. 1 Squadron took responsibility for aerial reconnaissance using specially modified RF @-@ 111Cs previously operated by No. 6 Squadron . This gave No. 1 Squadron five mission types : land strike , maritime strike , close air support , long @-@ range air defence , and reconnaissance . In May 1999 the unit was again awarded the Gloucester Cup for proficiency . 
 Along with its revolutionary variable @-@ sweep wings , the F @-@ 111 was equipped with terrain @-@ following radar and an escape module that allowed the entire cockpit to be jettisoned in an emergency , instead of individual ejection seats . Its top speed was Mach 2 @.@ 5 and its combat radius gave it the capability of reaching targets in Indonesia from bases in northern Australia . Upon delivery in 1973 it was fitted with analogue avionics and could only drop unguided ( " dumb " ) bombs . In its 37 years of service with the RAAF the type went through several upgrades , including the Pave Tack infra @-@ red and laser @-@ guided precision weapons targeting system , Harpoon anti @-@ shipping missiles , and advanced digital avionics . Alan Stephens , in the official history of the post @-@ war Air Force , described the F @-@ 111 as " the region 's pre @-@ eminent strike aircraft " and the RAAF 's most important acquisition . The closest they came to being used in anger , however , was during Australian @-@ led INTERFET operations in East Timor commencing in September 1999 . Both F @-@ 111 squadrons were deployed to RAAF Base Tindal , Northern Territory , to support the international forces in case of action by the Indonesian military , and remained there until December ; six of No. 1 Squadron 's aircraft and approximately 100 personnel were involved . From 20 September , when INTERFET forces began to arrive in East Timor , the F @-@ 111s were maintained at a high level of readiness to conduct reconnaissance flights or air strikes if the situation deteriorated . As it happened , INTERFET did not encounter significant resistance , and F @-@ 111 operations were limited to reconnaissance by RF @-@ 111Cs from 5 November through 9 December . 
 In 2007 , the Australian government decided to retire the F @-@ 111s by 2010 , and acquire 24 Boeing F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets as an interim replacement , pending the arrival of the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning then being developed . The F @-@ 111 fleet was considered to be at risk due to fatigue , and too expensive to operate as each aircraft required 180 hours of maintenance for every hour of flying time . No. 1 Squadron ceased operating the F @-@ 111 in January 2009 , in preparation for converting to the Super Hornet . Former F @-@ 111 aircrew , familiar with side @-@ by @-@ side seating and a different performance envelope , found conversion more challenging than pilots experienced in the RAAF 's McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighters , which shared many characteristics with the newer model . No. 1 Squadron re @-@ equipped between 26 March 2010 and 21 October 2011 , making it the first Australian unit , and the first squadron outside the United States , to fly the Super Hornet . It became operational with its new aircraft on 8 December 2011 . The multi @-@ role Super Hornet allowed No. 1 Squadron to augment its previous offensive strike role with an air @-@ to @-@ air combat function . The RAAF attained full operational capability with the Super Hornet in December 2012 . 
 On 14 September 2014 , the Federal government committed to deploying up to eight Super Hornets of No. 1 Squadron to Al Minhad Air Base in the United Arab Emirates , as part of the Australian Air Task Group joining the coalition against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) forces in Iraq . Aircraft from the squadron conducted their first mission over Iraq on 5 October , and their first strike four days later . According to the Department of Defence , as of 20 December 2014 the Super Hornets had flown over 180 sorties , dropped 113 weapons , and destroyed 36 ISIL targets , damaging another six . In March 2015 , having flown almost 3 @,@ 000 hours in over 400 missions , the detachment was replaced by six F / A @-@ 18As from No. 75 Squadron . 
 = = Future = = 
 In May 2013 , the Federal government announced plans to purchase 12 Boeing EA @-@ 18G Growlers to supplement the Super Hornet fleet . No. 6 Squadron is expected to begin taking delivery of the Growlers in 2017 , at which point its Super Hornets will be transferred to No. 1 Squadron . In April 2014 , the government announced the purchase of 58 F @-@ 35s in addition to 14 already ordered , for the express purpose of replacing the 71 " classic " Hornets of Nos. 3 , 75 and 77 Squadrons and No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit . A government decision on whether to purchase a further 28 F @-@ 35s , to be based at Amberley , will depend on how long the Super Hornets are to be retained . According to Australian Aviation , continuing delays to the F @-@ 35 program have increased the likelihood that the Super Hornets of Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons will , rather than being disposed of early as originally planned , continue to be operated by the RAAF for their full service life of over 20 years . 
 = = Aircraft operated = = 
 = Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics = 
 The 2012 Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , was a wheelchair basketball team that played in the 2012 Summer Paralympics . The team of twelve included nine Paralympic veterans with fifteen Paralympic Games between them : Bridie Kean , Amanda Carter , Sarah Stewart , Tina McKenzie , Kylie Gauci , Katie Hill , Cobi Crispin , Clare Nott and Shelley Chaplin . There were three newcomers playing in their first Paralympics : Amber Merritt , Sarah Vinci and Leanne Del Toso . The Gliders had won silver at the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney and the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , but had never won gold . 
 The first stage of the Paralympic competition was the group stage , a round robin tournament . The Gliders faced a formidable task just to make the finals , as their pool included Brazil , Great Britain , Canada and the Netherlands , the last two of which had recently beaten them . After a narrow victory over Brazil and an easier one against Great Britain , the Gliders were again defeated by Canada , but they won their final match against the Netherlands to finish at the top of their pool . The Gliders went on to win in the quarterfinal against Mexico and the semifinal against the United States , but lost to Germany in the final , winning silver . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to 2012 , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , had won silver in the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney and the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , and bronze at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , but had never won gold . The official announcement of the membership of the Paralympic team was made on 5 July 2012 . The team of twelve included nine veterans with 15 Paralympic Games between them : Bridie Kean , Amanda Carter , Sarah Stewart , Tina McKenzie , Kylie Gauci , Katie Hill , Cobi Crispin , Clare Nott and Shelley Chaplin . Amber Merritt , Sarah Vinci and Leanne Del Toso were newcomers competing at their first Paralympics . Kean was selected as captain . 
 The oldest team member was Amanda Carter , aged 48 , who was coming back for a fourth Paralympic games having competed in the 1992 Summer Paralympics in Barcelona , the 1996 Summer Paralympics in Atlanta and the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney , at which she had been sidelined by a crippling elbow injury . She returned to the Gliders ' lineup in 2009 . The youngest , who had not even been born when Carter had played in Barcelona , was her 19 @-@ year @-@ old teammate Amber Merritt . British @-@ born Merritt was originally a swimmer , but had been recruited into basketball by the Paralympic Hall of Fame coach Frank Ponta . Merritt had averaged 20 points and 8 @.@ 4 rebounds per game in the Gliders World Challenge series against Japan , Germany and China in Sydney in July 2012 , including a game against Germany in which she scored 21 points and eight rebounds . Another young player from whom much was hoped was Cobi Crispin , whose performances in the Paralympic World Cup in Manchester and the Gliders World Challenge led to her being named Australian Women ’ s Wheelchair Basketball International Player of the Year . 
 Source : Basketball Australia ; International Games as at 29 August 2012 from Official Results Book , p . <unk> . 
 = = Group stage = = 
 The first part of the competition was the group stage . The Gliders ' pool included Brazil , Great Britain , Canada and the Netherlands . Canada had beaten them in the bronze medal game at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship in Birmingham in July 2010 , and the Netherlands had also beaten them recently . Australian Gliders head coach , John Triscari admitted that Canada would be hard to beat . He added : 
 We ’ ve worked really hard to improve the team ’ s shooting percentage , we ’ ve had strength and conditioning coaches working with the girls to up their fitness and we ’ ve increased the volume of shooting during training . Hopefully all the hard work the girls are putting in now , will pay off in London . 
 Qualified for quarterfinals 
 Eliminated 
 Key : Pld 
 = played , W = 
 won , L 
 = lost , PF = 
 points for , PA 
 = points against , PD = 
 points difference , Pts = competition points 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 Key : Pts 
 = points , <unk> = 
 rebounds , <unk> = assists 
 The Gliders ' first game was on 30 August in front of a crowd of 3 @,@ 288 at the Basketball Arena in Olympic Park in Stratford , London , also known as " the Marshmallow " . The Gliders had not played Brazil in four years , and what little they knew about them came from watching video tapes . 
 The scores were tied fifteen times , and at no point were the Australians more than five points in front . With six minutes to go in the final quarter , the Gliders were up by only two points , with the score 45 – 43 . Crispin was sent to the free throw line where she extended her team 's lead to 47 – 43 . A technical foul saw her straight back to the free throw line to make it 48 – 43 , the Glider 's biggest lead of the game . Brazil then struck back , scoring five unanswered points to tie the score again at 48 – 48 , but Merritt scored one from the paint to put the Gliders back in front . She followed by taking a defensive rebound and then another shot to make it 52 – 48 . Brazil scored once more , but time ran out , and the Gliders won , 52 – 50 . Leading scorers for the Gliders were Crispin with 18 points and Merritt with 16 . 
 Triscari said that they could have played better . " The chemistry in our team " , he said , " is fantastic . It 's good to get a win under your belt and then we 'll take it from there . But we didn 't play to our maximum today I don 't think . We made some mistakes passing the ball , turning the ball over so we 've got some improvement to do . We can work on a few things . " 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 The Gliders ' next match was against Great Britain , and was held at the North Greenwich Arena , which could accommodate a larger crowd than the Marshmallow . A crowd of 5 @,@ 331 saw a low @-@ scoring affair . The Gliders concentrated on defence , and led by only 11 – 5 at quarter time . By half time , they had extended their lead to 25 – 11 . The third quarter went badly for Team Great Britain , which only scored three more points to Australia 's 14 , making the score 39 – 14 at three @-@ quarter time . The final quarter was Great Britain 's best , but the score was still 51 – 24 . Merritt and Crispin were again the Gliders ' top scorers , with 10 and 8 points respectively , but they shared the ball around , and every Glider except McKenzie scored at least two points . The British coach was scathing about his team 's performance . " They know that 's not the way we play " , he said , " and I 'm disappointed for the crowd and them because they are tons better than that . It was an absolutely disgraceful effort out there . It really was bad . " 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 The Gliders returned to the Marshmallow the next day for a match against Canada , another team considered a strong chance for a medal , in front of a capacity crowd of 7 @,@ 200 . The Gliders squandered early opportunities , and Canada won the first quarter 20 – 12 . Strong defensive play by Nott and Gauci helped the Gliders reverse this in the second , and left Canada with only a one @-@ point 33 – 32 lead at half time . The second half saw Canada slowly increase their lead , keeping tied with Australia 4 – 4 in the first half of third , 6 – 4 in the last half of the third 6 – 4 in the first half of the fourth , and 8 – 6 in the last half of the fourth . Australia 's top players were Crispin , who had 13 points and 15 rebounds ; Merritt , who earned 16 points ; and Chaplin , with eight points , five rebounds and seven assists . The loss raised the prospect that Australia might not make the finals at all , but Crispin remained confident that they could . 
 Triscari identified the Gliders ' poor shooting as their critical problem . " That was a really tough game , " he said , " and full credit to Canada , but we can 't beat top teams in the world when we only shoot at 34 % , that was the key statistic . " Merritt , in her British accent , said that she had " the utmost respect for Canada . They 're a great team , but we 'll refocus on the game tomorrow and go out and play like we know we can , the Australian way . " 
 = = = Netherlands = = = 
 The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders needed a win against the Netherlands , considered one of the competition 's best teams , and one which had beaten Canada . Crispin told the media that " We will go out like we have in every other game and stick to our game plan and hopefully we 'll come out on top " . 
 The Netherlands scored first , but Kean soon equalised , assisted by Stewart . The Dutch team responded , but Gauci took two points with a fast break , and then assisted Crispin in putting Australia in the lead , one which the Gliders would not relinquish . Stewart made the next two scores , from outside the paint , and assisted Crispin to bring the score to 6 – 16 . The Dutch team fought back , but there was a six @-@ point 12 – 18 deficit at quarter time . The Australian defence shut down their opportunities in the second quarter , and the score was 20 – 30 in Australia 's favour at half time , and 29 – 40 by the end of the third quarter . The Dutch team redoubled their efforts in the final quarter , and won the quarter 20 – 18 , but the Gliders won the game , 39 – 58 . 
 Once again Merritt led Australia 's scoring , with 19 points , with a considerably improved accuracy of 9 shots from 14 attempts , while Crispin had ten points and seven rebounds . The rest of the team performed equally well . Stewart scored six points and five rebounds . Chaplin 's reputation as a play maker was burnished with four rebounds and seven assists . Gauci had eight points and six assists . Nott had played all 40 minutes of the game against Canada the night before , then over 32 minutes in this game , and was particularly active in the final quarter . Triscari praised both the Gliders and their opponents : 
 We wanted to get on top early and have them chasing us , so , in that respect , I suppose it did . We focused on stopping a lot of their big players , particularly Beijer [ Mariska Beijer ] , from getting into the keyway , and the girls did a sensational job . Gert [ <unk> van der Linden ] is very hard to coach against because he throws a lot of stuff at you . Tonight , he was the one having to make the changes . Another day , it will probably be me . 
 = = Finals = = 
 = = = Quarterfinal – Mexico = = = 
 The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders had won three out of four games , the same number as Canada and the Netherlands , but they were placed ahead of the Netherlands based on defeating them . Canada failed to defeat Great Britain by a sufficient margin , and therefore finished third . As a result , the Gliders topped their pool , and received a quarterfinal berth against Mexico , which had managed to qualify despite only winning one game . Triscari was confident , but was not taking the match lightly . He warned the media : 
 No game 's easy , you know . We finished on top , so the crossover with the other side is in our favour . But they are by no means easy . We only beat Brazil by two points and Brazil only beat Mexico by two in the <unk> ( Parapan championships ) play @-@ offs for third and fourth , so it 's going to be tough . " 
 The Gliders planned to dominate Mexico early , playing as aggressively against them as they had played against the Netherlands . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Australia 's first shots at goal were taken by Kean from the free throw line , but she missed both . Mexico 's Lucia Vazquez <unk> then opened the scoring to give Mexico a two @-@ point lead , which turned out to be their biggest of the game . Gauci then put points on the scoreboard for the Gliders . Mexico turned the ball over , and Crispin got her first from the paint , assisted by Gauci , which was repeated on the next play , with Stewart providing the assist this time . Mexico scored , but the Gliders responded with another shot from Crispin . On the next play , Gauci stole the ball and charged down the court , but failed to make the shot . Nott then took a defensive rebound , leading to Crispin scoring again . She was also fouled , but missed the resulting free throw . Shortly thereafter , Stewart drew another foul , and made both shots to bring the score to 14 – 4 . 
 The Gliders put Mexico under intense defensive pressure . Mexico had six team turnovers to the Gliders ' one , and wound up with 19 turnovers in total to Australia 's 6 . Australia scored 18 points from turnovers , compared to 6 for Mexico . Gauci , a two @-@ point player , took a three @-@ pointer to take the score to 17 – 8 . Mexico was unable to recover from Australia 's high scoring from Merritt , who ultimately scored 14 points with 70 per cent shooting , and Crispin , who scored twelve points with 67 per cent shooting . The two teams went into the quarter time break with the score 21 points to 10 . Mexico fell further behind in the second quarter . Amanda Carter immediately stole the ball from Mexico , which let Merritt score two points . A few minutes later , Carter , assisted by Chaplin , scored a basket from the paint , and was fouled in the process . A successful free throw made the score 36 – 16 . Another steal by Merritt led to a runaway break , bringing her contribution to ten points , and the score to 38 – 16 . At the half @-@ time break , the score was 44 – 20 . 
 In the third quarter , a team turnover and a series of missed shots by Hill , Kean and Crispin , allowed Mexico to outscore Australia by one point , leaving the score at 50 – 27 at the end of the quarter . The final quarter saw Australia 's Del Toso miss a shot at one end , and Mexico 's <unk> Estrada Bernal miss one at the other . Stewart also missed , before a Mexican turnover led to the first score of the quarter , by Stewart . Mexico 's Rocio Torres Lopez scored in response . Another shot by Stewart missed , but Carter took an offensive rebound , and scored . Turnovers by Kean and Del Toso allowed Mexico put four points on the board , but successive fouls sent Kean to the free throw line to score three points in response . 
 Merritt brought the score to 59 – 35 with her seventh scoring shot . As the game drew to a close , there were several missed shots by Sarah Vinci and Hill , but Mexico was unable to capitalise on the opportunities , continuing to miss shots and turn over the ball . With nineteen seconds of play remaining , Hill took a two @-@ point shot from inside the paint ; attracting a foul , she scored another point from a free throw . Although Mexico 's Wendy Garcia Amador scored the last two points of the game , her team lost to Australia 62 – 37 . 
 = = = Semifinal – United States = = = 
 In the semifinal , the Gliders had to beat the reigning champions , Team USA , in front of a small crowd of 4 @,@ 428 at the North Greenwich Arena . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Team USA had first possession and earned the first points of the game , but Gauci responded quickly . Then Team USA turned the ball over , but Nott lost it . Chaplin stole it back , but Kylie Gauci put the ball out of bounds . Nott stole it back again , but Gauci turned it over again . Team USA took a shot at the basket inside the paint , and missed , but took a rebound and scored . A Team USA free throw extended their lead to 2 – 6 . Thereafter both teams ' shooting was poor , and the score was only 10 – 12 at quarter time . 
 The second quarter started with Merritt scoring twice to give Australia the lead 14 – 12 . Team USA turned the ball over the Gliders several times , but they were unable to capitalise on their strong defence , leaving the score tied at 26 – 26 at half time . In the third quarter , an early goal by Gauci from outside the paint gave the Gliders the lead . A series of steals gave the Gliders additional shots , most of which they missed , but Team USA gave over a series of turnovers , and their shooting was worse than their rivals , resulting in a 10 – 0 run by the Gliders . Team USA were unable to score at all until the last minute of the quarter . A hurried goal with seconds to go by Hill saw the Gliders leading 38 – 28 . Team USA would ultimately post 28 turnovers to Australia 's 17 , and the Gliders would score 12 points from turnovers to Team USA 's three . 
 In the fourth quarter , the Australian defence remained strong , but their shooting did not improve . For the entire game , Crispin made only 3 out of 10 attempts , and Merritt just 4 out of 16 . Nott , who played the entire game , ended up being the team 's most accurate player , with four out of five attempts . Meanwhile , Team USA fought back to 40 – 39 . Three timeouts were taken in the last minute . Merritt was fouled twice , which sent her to the free throw line , but she missed both shots . The game went down to the last second , with Team USA 's Rose <unk> missing one from inside the paint just before the shot clock ran out . 
 = = = Gold medal match – Germany = = = 
 The Gliders had to defeat Germany in front of a capacity crowd of 12 @,@ 985 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal . Australia had narrowly defeated the German team 48 – 46 in the Gliders World Challenge in Sydney a few months earlier , and at that point had beaten them three of the previous four times they had played . 
 Once again , Stewart took the tap , and lost . A defensive rebound by Kean after Germany missed two free throw shots resulted in the Gliders scoring first , with Gauci assisting Crispin . The Gliders played Germany like they had played against and defeated the United States , with a strong defence against a normally high @-@ scoring team . At first , they were successful ; with three minutes to go in the quarter , despite several missed shots , Australia was ahead 10 – 4 . In the last minutes , Germany scored ten points that gave them a 10 – 14 lead at quarter time . 
 In the second quarter , Germany extended their lead to ten points , but Kean scored a point from a free throw , and then , with seconds left on the clock , stole the ball , enabling Crispin to score , so the Gliders were only seven points behind at half time . The Gliders won the third quarter in previous games in London , which happened again against Germany , but only by 9 – 8 . The Gliders had six points to make up , with strong defences from both teams . Gauci scored the most in this game , scoring 15 points , including a three @-@ pointer , with five assists and four rebounds . In the end , the Gliders lost by fourteen points , 44 – 58 . 
 Triscari felt that the Gliders did not put enough pressure on the Germans , and that their shooting was not accurate enough . In Australia , Basketball Australia CEO Kristina Keneally praised the Gliders ' efforts . " The Gliders have been nothing short of brilliant at the Paralympic Games , " she said , " and this Silver Medal is just reward for their outstanding performance . This is the Gliders ' fourth consecutive Paralympic Medal – a remarkable achievement . All of the players , coaches and support staff have done a fantastic job and we can ’ t wait to greet them on their return home . " In 2013 , Keneally announced a four @-@ year development program for the Gliders that included the appointment of a full @-@ time head coach for the first time , based at the National Wheelchair Centre of Excellence at the New South Wales Institute of Sport in Homebush , New South Wales . In May 2013 , Tom Kyle was appointed the Gliders ' new head coach . 
 " We have had the opportunity to play Germany a fair bit in our preparation so our game plan was to have strong defensive pressure and take it from there " , Kean told the media . " It started off really good for us , unfortunately they just got a couple more runs than us and that 's the way it goes sometimes . They played a great game . We stuck together 12 deep from the second the buzzer started , to that end buzzer and no one gave up . I think that we can hold our heads high because of that . I guess the plan is , next four years , Rio we go one more . " 
 It was not to be . The Gliders did not qualify for the 2016 Summer Paralympics after finishing second to China at the 2015 Asia Oceania Qualifying Tournament . 
 = 1892 Alabama Cadets football team = 
 The 1892 Alabama Cadets football team represented the University of Alabama in the 1892 college football season . The team was led by their head coach E. B. Beaumont and played their home games at Lakeview Park in Birmingham , Alabama . In what was the inaugural season of Alabama football , the team finished with a record of two wins and two losses ( 2 – 2 ) . 
 William Little of Livingston , Alabama is credited with being responsible for the introduction of football at the university . After playing the game in 1891 while in attendance at a northern prep school , Little returned to Alabama where he helped establish the first team at the university for the 1892 season . The first game in Alabama football history was played on November 11 , 1892 , against Birmingham High School and was won by the Cadets 56 – 0 . They then split a pair of games with the Birmingham Athletic Club , and closed out the season with a 32 – 22 loss in the first Iron Bowl against Auburn on February 22 , 1893 . After the season , Beaumont was fired as head coach and replaced by Eli Abbott for the 1893 season . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first college football game was played on November 6 , 1869 , between Rutgers and the College of New Jersey . Although the sport continued to grow , it was not introduced for another 23 years at Alabama . The man credited with the introduction of football at Alabama was William G. Little of Livingston . Little attended the Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire for the 1891 – 92 school year . It was there that he first played and became an advocate for football . Originally he intended to attend Yale University . However , after his brother died , Little returned to Livingston in 1892 and enrolled at Alabama . He proposed the university field a football team , which was introduced for the 1892 season . Alabama selected Little as the first team captain for the inaugural 1892 season . The team was called the " Cadets , " as the current " Crimson Tide " moniker was not used until 1907 . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Source : Rolltide.com : 1892 Alabama football schedule 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Birmingham High School = = = 
 In what was the first ever game played by the University of Alabama , a team of Birmingham @-@ area high school players lost to the Cadets 56 – 0 at Birmingham 's Lakeview Park . Played on November 11 , the game served as a practice game for Alabama 's contest against the Birmingham Athletic Club scheduled for the next day . Although details of the second half are unavailable , touchdowns in the first half were scored by David Grayson , G. H. Kyser , Dan Smith ( twice ) , William Little and T. S. Frazer . The play utilized most throughout the game was a rushing formation developed by Harvard earlier in the season called the flying wedge . 
 = = = Birmingham Athletic Club ( November ) = = = 
 A day after their victory over Birmingham High School , Alabama suffered their first all @-@ time loss against the Birmingham Athletic Club ( B.A.C. ) 5 – 4 . In a game noted for numerous fumbles by both squads , Alabama scored first and took a 4 – 0 lead on a William G. Little touchdown run late in the first half . However , the B.A.C. won the game 5 – 4 late in the second half when J. P. Ross successfully kicked a 63 @-@ yard field goal on a drop kick . Alabama would not lose another game by a single point until their 1947 game against Tulane . 
 = = = Birmingham Athletic Club ( December ) = = = 
 A month after their loss to the B.A.C. , Alabama returned to Lakeview Park and defeated the Athletics 14 – 0 . David Grayson scored first on a 65 @-@ yard touchdown run to give Alabama a 4 – 0 lead after a missed extra point . In the second half , both Robert Cope and Eli Abbott scored touchdowns and one G. H. Kyser extra point gave Alabama the 14 – 0 victory . 
 = = = Auburn = = = 
 Before 5 @,@ 000 fans at Birmingham 's Lakeview Park , Alabama lost to the Agricultural & Mechanical College of Alabama ( now known as Auburn University ) 32 – 22 in the first of what was subsequently dubbed the Iron Bowl . Auburn scored first on a 20 @-@ yard Rufus Dorsey touchdown run and again on a one @-@ yard Dorsey run and took an 8 – 0 lead early in the first half . Frank Savage then scored Alabama 's first touchdown on a 10 @-@ yard run and William B. Bankhead converted a successful extra point to cut the Auburn lead to 8 – 6 . After Auburn scored a third touchdown to go up 14 – 6 , Alabama responded with a 20 @-@ yard Dan Smith touchdown run and G. H. Kyser extra point to make the halftime score 14 – 12 in favor of Auburn . 
 In the second half , Auburn scored first again when Dorsey recovered an Alabama fumble and returned it 65 @-@ yards for a touchdown . After a successful extra point the blue and orange extended their lead to 20 – 12 . Alabama responded on their following possession with a 30 @-@ yard William Little touchdown run and Kyser extra point to cut the lead to 20 – 18 . Thomas Daniels then scored Auburn 's final two touchdowns on runs of one and 25 yards and also converted both extra points to give them a 32 – 18 lead . Smith scored the final points of the game late in the second half for Alabama on a short run that made the final score 32 – 22 . 
 = = Players = = 
 The following players were members of the 1892 football team according to the roster published in the 1893 edition of The Corolla , the University of Alabama yearbook . 
 = = After the season = = 
 Although they finished with a .500 record , after the completion of the season , E. B. Beaumont was fired as Alabama 's head coach . The 1894 edition of the university yearbook The Corolla stated of the Beaumont firing : 
 " We were unfortunate in securing a coach . After keeping him for a short time , we found that his knowledge of the game was very limited . We , therefore , ' got rid of ' him . " 
 After Beaumont 's departure , William G. Little continued the training of the team until Abbott was selected to serve as head coach for the 1893 season . Other notable players from the first Alabama team included William B. Bankhead who served as the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 1936 to 1940 and Bibb Graves who served as the 38th Governor of Alabama from 1927 to 1931 and again from 1935 to 1939 . 
 = Dungeons & Dragons = 
 Dungeons & Dragons ( abbreviated as D & D or <unk> ) is a fantasy tabletop role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) originally designed by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson , and first published in 1974 by Tactical Studies Rules , Inc . ( TSR ) . The game has been published by Wizards of the Coast ( now a subsidiary of Hasbro ) since 1997 . It was derived from miniature wargames with a variation of the Chainmail game serving as the initial rule system . D & D 's publication is commonly recognized as the beginning of modern role @-@ playing games and the role @-@ playing game industry . 
 D & D departs from traditional wargaming and assigns each player a specific character to play instead of a military formation . These characters embark upon imaginary adventures within a fantasy setting . A Dungeon Master serves as the game 's referee and storyteller , while maintaining the setting in which the adventures occur and playing the role of the inhabitants . The characters form a party that interacts with the setting 's inhabitants ( and each other ) . Together they solve dilemmas , engage in battles and gather treasure and knowledge . In the process the characters earn experience points to become increasingly powerful over a series of sessions . 
 The early success of Dungeons & Dragons led to a proliferation of similar game systems . Despite this competition , D & D remains the market leader in the role @-@ playing game industry . In 1977 , the game was split into two branches : the relatively rules @-@ light game system of Dungeons & Dragons and the more structured , rules @-@ heavy game system of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( abbreviated as AD & D or <unk> ) . AD & D 2nd Edition was published in 1989 . In 2000 , the original line of the game was discontinued and the AD & D version was renamed Dungeons & Dragons with the release of its 3rd edition with a new system . These rules formed the basis of the d20 System which is available under the Open Game License ( OGL ) for use by other publishers . Dungeons & Dragons version 3 @.@ 5 was released in June 2003 , with a ( non @-@ OGL ) 4th edition in June 2008 . A 5th edition was released during the second half of 2014 . 
 As of 2004 , Dungeons & Dragons remained the best @-@ known and best @-@ selling role @-@ playing game , with an estimated 20 million people having played the game and more than US $ 1 billion in book and equipment sales . The game has been supplemented by many pre @-@ made adventures as well as commercial campaign settings suitable for use by regular gaming groups . Dungeons & Dragons is known beyond the game for other D & D @-@ branded products , references in popular culture and some of the controversies that have surrounded it , particularly a moral panic in the 1980s falsely linking it to Satanism and suicide . The game has won multiple awards and has been translated into many languages beyond the original English . 
 = = Play overview = = 
 Dungeons & Dragons is a structured yet open @-@ ended role @-@ playing game . It is normally played indoors with the participants seated around a tabletop . Typically , each player controls only a single character , which represents an individual in a fictional setting . When working together as a group , these player characters ( PCs ) are often described as a " party " of adventurers , with each member often having their own area of specialty which contributes to the success of the whole . During the course of play , each player directs the actions of their character and their interactions with other characters in the game . This activity is performed through the verbal impersonation of the characters by the players , while employing a variety of social and other useful cognitive skills , such as logic , basic mathematics and imagination . A game often continues over a series of meetings to complete a single adventure , and longer into a series of related gaming adventures , called a " campaign " . 
 The results of the party 's choices and the overall storyline for the game are determined by the Dungeon Master ( DM ) according to the rules of the game and the DM 's interpretation of those rules . The DM selects and describes the various non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) that the party encounters , the settings in which these interactions occur , and the outcomes of those encounters based on the players ' choices and actions . Encounters often take the form of battles with " monsters " – a generic term used in D & D to describe potentially hostile beings such as animals , aberrant beings , or mythical creatures . The game 's extensive rules – which cover diverse subjects such as social interactions , magic use , combat , and the effect of the environment on PCs – help the DM to make these decisions . The DM may choose to deviate from the published rules or make up new ones if they feel it is necessary . 
 The most recent versions of the game 's rules are detailed in three core rulebooks : The Player 's Handbook , the Dungeon Master 's Guide and the Monster Manual . 
 The only items required to play the game are the rulebooks , a character sheet for each player , and a number of polyhedral dice . Many players also use miniature figures on a grid map as a visual aid , particularly during combat . Some editions of the game presume such usage . Many optional accessories are available to enhance the game , such as expansion rulebooks , pre @-@ designed adventures and various campaign settings . 
 = = = Game mechanics = = = 
 Before the game begins , each player creates their player character and records the details ( described below ) on a character sheet . First , a player determines their character 's ability scores , which consist of Strength , Constitution , Dexterity , Intelligence , Wisdom , and Charisma . Each edition of the game has offered differing methods of determining these statistics . The player then chooses a race ( species ) such as human or elf , a character class ( occupation ) such as fighter or wizard , an alignment ( a moral and ethical outlook ) , and other features to round out the character 's abilities and backstory , which have varied in nature through differing editions . 
 During the game , players describe their PC 's intended actions , such as punching an opponent or picking a lock , and converse with the DM , who then describes the result or response . Trivial actions , such as picking up a letter or opening an unlocked door , are usually automatically successful . The outcomes of more complex or risky actions are determined by rolling dice . Factors contributing to the outcome include the character 's ability scores , skills and the difficulty of the task . In circumstances where a character does not have control of an event , such as when a trap or magical effect is triggered or a spell is cast , a saving throw can be used to determine whether the resulting damage is reduced or avoided . In this case the odds of success are influenced by the character 's class , levels and ability scores . 
 As the game is played , each PC changes over time and generally increases in capability . Characters gain ( or sometimes lose ) experience , skills and wealth , and may even alter their alignment or gain additional character classes . The key way characters progress is by earning experience points ( XP ) , which happens when they defeat an enemy or accomplish a difficult task . Acquiring enough XP allows a PC to advance a level , which grants the character improved class features , abilities and skills . XP can be lost in some circumstances , such as encounters with creatures that drain life energy , or by use of certain magical powers that come with an XP cost . 
 Hit points ( HP ) are a measure of a character 's vitality and health and are determined by the class , level and constitution of each character . They can be temporarily lost when a character sustains wounds in combat or otherwise comes to harm , and loss of HP is the most common way for a character to die in the game . Death can also result from the loss of key ability scores or character levels . When a PC dies , it is often possible for the dead character to be resurrected through magic , although some penalties may be imposed as a result . If resurrection is not possible or not desired , the player may instead create a new PC to resume playing the game . 
 = = = Adventures , campaigns , and modules = = = 
 A typical Dungeons & Dragons game consists of an " adventure " , which is roughly equivalent to a single story . The DM can either design an adventure on their own , or follow one of the many pre @-@ made adventures ( also known as " modules " ) that have been published throughout the history of Dungeons & Dragons . Published adventures typically include a background story , illustrations , maps and goals for PCs to achieve . Some include location descriptions and handouts . Although a small adventure entitled " Temple of the Frog " was included in the Blackmoor rules supplement in 1975 , the first stand @-@ alone D & D module published by TSR was 1978 's Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , written by Gygax . 
 A linked series of adventures is commonly referred to as a " campaign " . The locations where these adventures occur , such as a city , country , planet or an entire fictional universe , are referred to as " campaign settings " or " world " . D & D settings are based in various fantasy genres and feature different levels and types of magic and technology . Popular commercially published campaign settings for Dungeons & Dragons include Greyhawk , Dragonlance , Forgotten Realms , <unk> , Spelljammer , Ravenloft , Dark Sun , Planescape , Birthright , and Eberron . Alternatively , DMs may develop their own fictional worlds to use as campaign settings . 
 = = = Miniature figures = = = 
 The wargames from which Dungeons & Dragons evolved used miniature figures to represent combatants . D & D initially continued the use of miniatures in a fashion similar to its direct precursors . The original D & D set of 1974 required the use of the Chainmail miniatures game for combat resolution . By the publication of the 1977 game editions , combat was mostly resolved verbally . Thus miniatures were no longer required for game play , although some players continued to use them as a visual reference . 
 In the 1970s , numerous companies began to sell miniature figures specifically for Dungeons & Dragons and similar games . Licensed miniature manufacturers who produced official figures include Grenadier Miniatures ( 1980 – 1983 ) , Citadel Miniatures ( 1984 – 1986 ) , Ral Partha , and TSR itself . Most of these miniatures used the 25 mm scale . 
 Periodically , Dungeons & Dragons has returned to its wargaming roots with supplementary rules systems for miniatures @-@ based wargaming . Supplements such as <unk> ( 1985 & 1989 ) and a new edition of Chainmail ( 2001 ) provided rule systems to handle battles between armies by using miniatures . 
 = = Game history = = 
 = = = Edition history = = = 
 Dungeons & Dragons has gone through several revisions . Parallel versions and inconsistent naming practices can make it difficult to distinguish between the different editions . 
 = = = = Original game = = = = 
 The original Dungeons & Dragons , now referred to as OD & D , was a small box set of three booklets published in 1974 . It was amateurish in production and assumed the player was familiar with wargaming . Nevertheless , it grew rapidly in popularity , first among wargamers and then expanding to a more general audience of college and high school students . Roughly 1 @,@ 000 copies of the game were sold in the first year followed by 3 @,@ 000 in 1975 , and much more in the following years . This first set went through many printings and was supplemented with several official additions , such as the original Greyhawk and Blackmoor supplements ( both 1975 ) , as well as magazine articles in TSR 's official publications and many fanzines . 
 = = = = Two @-@ pronged strategy = = = = 
 In 1977 , TSR created the first element of a two @-@ pronged strategy that would divide the D & D game for nearly two decades . A Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set boxed edition was introduced that cleaned up the presentation of the essential rules , made the system understandable to the general public , and was sold in a package that could be stocked in toy stores . Also in 1977 , the first part of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) was published , which brought together the various published rules , options and corrections , then expanded them into a definitive , unified game for hobbyist gamers . TSR marketed them as an introductory game for new players and a more complex game for experienced ones ; the Basic Set directed players who exhausted the possibilities of that game to switch to the advanced rules . 
 As a result of this parallel development , the basic game included many rules and concepts which contradicted comparable ones in AD & D. John Eric Holmes , the editor of the basic game , preferred a lighter tone with more room for personal improvisation . AD & D , on the other hand , was designed to create a tighter , more structured game system than the loose framework of the original game . Between 1977 and 1979 , three hardcover rulebooks , commonly referred to as the " core rulebooks " , were released : the Player 's Handbook ( <unk> ) , the Dungeon Master 's Guide ( DMG ) , and the Monster Manual ( MM ) . Several supplementary books were published throughout the 1980s , notably Unearthed Arcana ( 1985 ) that included a large number of new rules . Confusing matters further , the original D & D boxed set remained in publication until 1979 , since it remained a healthy seller for TSR . 
 = = = = Revised editions = = = = 
 In the 1980s , the rules for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons and " basic " Dungeons & Dragons remained separate , each developing along different paths . 
 In 1981 , the basic version of Dungeons & Dragons was revised by Tom <unk> to make it even more novice @-@ friendly . It was promoted as a continuation of the original D & D tone , whereas AD & D was promoted as advancement of the mechanics . An accompanying Expert Set , originally written by David " Zeb " Cook , allowed players to continue using the simpler ruleset beyond the early levels of play . In 1983 , revisions of those sets by Frank Mentzer were released , revising the presentation of the rules to a more tutorial format . These were followed by Companion ( 1983 ) , Master ( 1985 ) , and Immortals ( 1986 ) sets . Each set covered game play for more powerful characters than the previous . The first four sets were later compiled as a single hardcover book , the Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia ( 1991 ) , along with a new introductory boxed set . 
 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd Edition was published in 1989 , again as three core rulebooks ; the primary designer was David " Zeb " Cook . The Monster Manual was replaced by the Monstrous Compendium , a loose @-@ leaf binder that was subsequently replaced by the hardcover Monstrous Manual in 1993 . In 1995 , the core rulebooks were slightly revised , although still referred to by TSR as the 2nd Edition , and a series of Player 's Option manuals were released as optional rulebooks . 
 The release of AD & D2 deliberately excluded some aspects of the game that had attracted negative publicity . References to demons and devils , sexually suggestive artwork , and playable , evil @-@ aligned character types – such as assassins and half @-@ orcs – were removed . The edition moved away from a theme of 1960s and 1970s " sword and sorcery " fantasy fiction to a mixture of medieval history and mythology . The rules underwent minor changes , including the addition of non @-@ weapon proficiencies – skill @-@ like abilities that originally appeared in 1st Edition supplements . The game 's magic spells were divided into schools and spheres . A major difference was the promotion of various game settings beyond that of traditional fantasy . This included blending fantasy with other genres , such as horror ( Ravenloft ) , science fiction ( Spelljammer ) , and apocalyptic ( Dark Sun ) , as well as alternative historical and non @-@ European mythological settings . 
 = = = = Wizards of the Coast = = = = 
 In 1997 , a near @-@ bankrupt TSR was purchased by Wizards of the Coast . Following three years of development , Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition was released in 2000 . The new release folded the Basic and Advanced lines back into a single unified game . It was the largest revision of the D & D rules to date , and served as the basis for a multi @-@ genre role @-@ playing system designed around 20 @-@ sided dice , called the d20 System . The 3rd Edition rules were designed to be internally consistent and less restrictive than previous editions of the game , allowing players more flexibility to create the characters they wanted to play . Skills and feats were introduced into the core rules to encourage further customization of characters . The new rules standardized the mechanics of action resolution and combat . In 2003 , Dungeons & Dragons <unk> was released as a revision of the 3rd Edition rules . This release incorporated hundreds of rule changes , mostly minor , and expanded the core rulebooks . 
 In early 2005 , Wizards of the Coast 's R & D team started to develop Dungeons & Dragons 4th Edition , prompted mainly by the feedback obtained from the D & D playing community and a desire to make the game faster , more intuitive , and with a better play experience than under the 3rd Edition . The new game was developed through a number of design phases spanning from May 2005 until its release . Dungeons & Dragons 4th Edition was announced at Gen Con in August 2007 , and the initial three core books were released June 6 , 2008 . 4th Edition streamlined the game into a simplified form and introduced numerous rules changes . Many character abilities were restructured into " Powers " . These altered the spell @-@ using classes by adding abilities that could be used at will , per encounter , or per day . Likewise , non @-@ magic @-@ using classes were provided with parallel sets of options . Software tools , including player character and monster building programs , became a major part of the game . 
 On January 9 , 2012 , Wizards of the Coast announced that it was working on a 5th edition of the game . The company planned to take suggestions from players and let them playtest the rules . Public playtesting began on May 24 , 2012 . At Gen Con 2012 in August , Mike Mearls , lead developer for 5th Edition , said that Wizards of the Coast had received feedback from more than 75 @,@ 000 playtesters , but that the entire development process would take two years , adding , " I can 't emphasize this enough ... we 're very serious about taking the time we need to get this right . " The release of the 5th Edition , coinciding with D & D 's 40th anniversary , occurred in the second half of 2014 . 
 = = = Acclaim and influence = = = 
 The game had more than three million players around the world by 1981 , and copies of the rules were selling at a rate of about 750 @,@ 000 per year by 1984 . Beginning with a French language edition in 1982 , Dungeons & Dragons has been translated into many languages beyond the original English . By 2004 , consumers had spent more than US $ 1 billion on Dungeons & Dragons products and the game had been played by more than 20 million people . As many as six million people played the game in 2007 . 
 The various editions of Dungeons & Dragons have won many Origins Awards , including All Time Best Roleplaying Rules of 1977 , Best Roleplaying Rules of 1989 , and Best Roleplaying Game of 2000 for the three flagship editions of the game . Both Dungeons & Dragons and Advanced Dungeons & Dragons are Origins Hall of Fame Games inductees as they were deemed sufficiently distinct to merit separate inclusion on different occasions . The independent Games magazine placed Dungeons & Dragons on their Games 100 list from 1980 through 1983 , then entered the game into the magazine 's Hall of Fame in 1984 . 
 Dungeons & Dragons was the first modern role @-@ playing game and it established many of the conventions that have dominated the genre . Particularly notable are the use of dice as a game mechanic , character record sheets , use of numerical attributes and gamemaster @-@ centered group dynamics . Within months of Dungeons & Dragons 's release , new role @-@ playing game writers and publishers began releasing their own role @-@ playing games , with most of these being in the fantasy genre . Some of the earliest other role @-@ playing games inspired by D & D include Tunnels & Trolls ( 1975 ) , Empire of the Petal Throne ( 1975 ) , and Chivalry & Sorcery ( 1976 ) . 
 The role @-@ playing movement initiated by D & D would lead to release of the science fiction game Traveller ( 1977 ) , the fantasy game <unk> ( 1978 ) , and subsequent game systems such as Chaosium 's Call of Cthulhu ( 1981 ) , Champions ( 1982 ) , GURPS ( 1986 ) , and Vampire : The Masquerade ( 1991 ) . Dungeons & Dragons and the games it influenced fed back into the genre 's origin – miniatures wargames – with combat strategy games like Warhammer Fantasy Battles . D & D also had a large impact on modern video games . 
 Director Jon Favreau credits Dungeons & Dragons with giving him " ... a really strong background in imagination , storytelling , understanding how to create tone and a sense of balance . " 
 = = = Licensing = = = 
 Early in the game 's history , TSR took no action against small publishers ' production of D & D compatible material , and even licensed Judges Guild to produce D & D materials for several years , such as City State of the Invincible Overlord . This attitude changed in the mid @-@ 1980s when TSR took legal action to try to prevent others from publishing compatible material . This angered many fans and led to resentment by the other gaming companies . Although TSR took legal action against several publishers in an attempt to restrict third @-@ party usage , it never brought any court cases to completion , instead settling out of court in every instance . TSR itself ran afoul of intellectual property law in several cases . 
 With the launch of Dungeons & Dragons 's 3rd Edition , Wizards of the Coast made the d20 System available under the Open Game License ( OGL ) and d20 System trademark license . Under these licenses , authors were free to use the d20 System when writing games and game supplements . The OGL and d20 Trademark License made possible new games , some based on licensed products like Star Wars , and new versions of older games , such as Call of Cthulhu . 
 With the release of the fourth edition , Wizards of the Coast has introduced its Game System License , which represents a significant restriction compared to the very open policies embodied by the OGL . In part as a response to this , some publishers ( such as Paizo Publishing with its Pathfinder Roleplaying Game ) who previously produced materials in support of the D & D product line , have decided to continue supporting the 3rd Edition rules , thereby competing directly with Wizards of the Coast . Others , such as <unk> & Company , are returning to the practice of publishing unlicensed supplements and arguing that copyright law does not allow Wizards of the Coast to restrict third @-@ party usage . 
 During the 2000s , there has been a trend towards reviving and recreating older editions of D & D , known as the Old School Revival . Game systems based on earlier editions of D & D. Castles & Crusades ( 2004 ) , by Troll Lord Games , is a reimagining of early editions by streamlining rules from OGL . This in turn inspired the creation of " retro @-@ clones " , games which more closely recreate the original rule sets , using material placed under the OGL along with non @-@ copyrightable mechanical aspects of the older rules to create a new presentation of the games . 
 = = = Controversy and notoriety = = = 
 At various times in its history , Dungeons & Dragons has received negative publicity , in particular from some Christian groups , for alleged promotion of such practices as devil worship , witchcraft , suicide , and murder , and for the presence of naked breasts in drawings of female humanoids in the original AD & D manuals ( mainly monsters such as harpies , succubi , etc . ) . These controversies led TSR to remove many potentially controversial references and artwork when releasing the 2nd Edition of AD & D. Many of these references , including the use of the names " devils " and " demons " , were reintroduced in the 3rd edition . The moral panic over the game led to problems for fans of D & D who faced social ostracism , unfair treatment , and false association with the occult and Satanism , regardless of an individual fan 's actual religious affiliation and beliefs . 
 Dungeons & Dragons has been the subject of rumors regarding players having difficulty separating fantasy from reality , even leading to psychotic episodes . The most notable of these was the saga of James Dallas Egbert III , the facts of which were fictionalized in the novel Mazes and Monsters and later made into a TV movie . The game was blamed for some of the actions of Chris Pritchard , who was convicted in 1990 of murdering his stepfather . Research by various psychologists , the first being that of Armando Simon , has concluded that no harmful effects are related to the playing of D & D. 
 The game 's commercial success was a factor that led to lawsuits regarding distribution of royalties between original creators Gygax and Arneson . Gygax later became embroiled in a political struggle for control of TSR which culminated in a court battle and Gygax 's decision to sell his ownership interest in the company in 1985 . 
 = = Related products = = 
 D & D 's commercial success has led to many other related products , including Dragon Magazine , Dungeon Magazine , an animated television series , a film series , an official role @-@ playing soundtrack , novels , and computer games such as the MMORPG Dungeons & Dragons Online . Hobby and toy stores sell dice , miniatures , adventures , and other game aids related to D & D and its game offspring . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 D & D grew in popularity through the late 1970s and 1980s . Numerous games , films , and cultural references based on D & D or D & D @-@ like fantasies , characters or adventures have been ubiquitous since the end of the 1970s . D & D players are ( sometimes pejoratively ) portrayed as the epitome of <unk> , and have become the basis of much geek and gamer humor and satire . Famous D & D players include Pulitzer Prize winning author Junot Díaz , professional basketball player Tim Duncan , comedian Stephen Colbert , and actors Vin Diesel and Robin Williams . D & D and its fans have been the subject of spoof films , including Fear of Girls and The Gamers : <unk> Rising . 
 = Ninja Gaiden ( 2004 video game ) = 
 Ninja Gaiden is an action @-@ adventure hack and slash video game developed by Team Ninja for the Xbox video game console . It went through five years of development before its release by Tecmo in 2004 , and had a number of expansion packs and two remakes , Ninja Gaiden Black and Ninja Gaiden Sigma . The game follows the fictional story of Ryu Hayabusa , a master ninja , in his quest to recover a stolen sword and avenge the slaughter of his clan . 
 Tecmo specifically targeted Ninja Gaiden at a western audience , and despite difficulties in obtaining content ratings due to the game 's graphic depictions of violence , it was generally well received , and 362 @,@ 441 copies were sold in North America in the first month after its release . Nevertheless , the game had to be censored for release in some regions , and Japanese sales were poor , with only 60 @,@ 000 in the four months following its release . Making use of the Xbox 's internet connectivity , Ninja Gaiden was the focus of a series of online contests across North America , Europe and Japan . Record @-@ breaking numbers of players took part , competing for places in the live final , which was held during the Tokyo Game Show ( TGS ) 2004 . 
 Team Ninja continued to update the game after its release : two Hurricane Packs were made available as free downloadable content that added extra content , gameplay challenges , and game engine improvements . These were incorporated into a reworked version , released in 2005 and entitled Ninja Gaiden Black , that was regarded by the game 's creator Tomonobu Itagaki and many players as the definitive version . In 2007 , Ninja Gaiden was graphically enhanced on the PlayStation 3 , with extra content , in the form of Ninja Gaiden Sigma . This version was later released on the PlayStation Vita as Ninja Gaiden Sigma Plus . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ninja Gaiden develops its narrative thread through the actions of its player @-@ controlled protagonist , Ryu Hayabusa . Viewed from a third person over @-@ the @-@ shoulder perspective , in typical action @-@ adventure fashion Ryu starts the game with basic , low @-@ level abilities and weapons that can be upgraded as he progresses , by discovering or buying items . In keeping with his ninja persona , his character can interact with the game environment to perform acrobatic feats , such as running along and jumping off walls , swinging from pole to pole , or running across water . The game world is made up of several distinct regions , most of which are connected via the city of Tairon , which functions as a hub . Access to these regions are obtained by fighting enemies , finding keys , or solving puzzles , inspired by the mechanics of the The Legend of Zelda video games . Dragon busts scattered throughout the regions provide the means to save player progress , permitting gameplay to be resumed at a later time . 
 Ryu 's movements are directed using the console gamepad . The game 's control system , which comprises the left thumbstick , two attack buttons , and a block button , was described as fluid and responsive , and Ninja Gaiden was regarded as having one of the deeper combat engines among Xbox games at the time , comparing well to the PlayStation 2 action @-@ adventures God of War and Devil May Cry . Eric Williams , the designer of the God of War combat engine , explained that Ninja Gaiden prohibits players from stopping or changing attacks in mid @-@ stroke . In contrast , God of War allows players to do so , and Devil May Cry grants this freedom to certain attacks . Williams said that , compared to those two games , the combat system in Ninja Gaiden was harder to master ; however , it lets players fight their computer controlled foes on equal terms . 
 Ninja Gaiden features a large selection of weapons for Ryu to wield , each with advantages and disadvantages that affect the way the player approaches combat . These include one @-@ handed swords , such as the Dragon Sword and <unk> , which grant quick attacks , and a move called the " Flying Swallow " , which allows Ryu to leap and slash through enemies . In addition these light weapons allow Ryu to smash foes into the ground and perform his signature Izuna Drop — a spinning piledriver . Heavy weapons , such as the <unk> and the <unk> <unk> , are slow but cause more damage to opponents . With flails and staves , the player can string together long sequences of attacks . To engage distant foes Ryu can throw shuriken and shoot arrows . In addition to using standard melee techniques , Ryu can employ essences — colored globes of energy that are released on the death of enemies and absorbed into Ryu 's body when he comes into proximity with them . Essences have an important role in general gameplay , acting to heal Ryu , restore his magic , or increase his cash . However , in combat the player can cause Ryu to deliberately draw in essences , which can then be used to unleash powerful attacks known as Ultimate Techniques that allow Ryu to damage enemies without taking damage himself . These techniques deal heavy damage and make Ryu immune to injury for a short time . 
 Ninja Gaiden also provides Ryu with magical spells in the form of ninpo spells . When activated by the player , these make Ryu cast fireballs , ice storms , or bolts of lightning . Functioning in a similar manner to the bombs or grenades of shooter action games , these spells allow Ryu to inflict heavy damage on enemies while potentially avoiding damage himself . But , dissatisfied with their programmed visual effects , the game 's director Tomonobu Itagaki wanted to deter players from using ninpo . He therefore tweaked the game to award bonus points when players cleared stages without employing magic . For Ryu 's defense , the player has two options . First , Ryu can stand still and attempt to block attacks . However , certain enemies can break his guard — either through particularly strong attacks or by grappling him . The second option is to make Ryu dodge , by rolling away from the attack in a maneuver called " reverse wind " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Inspired by the 1990s Ninja Gaiden series for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) , the 2004 version was originally set in a re @-@ imagined game world based on another Team Ninja creation , the Dead or Alive ( DOA ) series of fighting games . However , interviews with Tomonobu Itagaki indicate that the Xbox games are prequels to the NES series and that both possibly share a single continuity . 
 Ninja Gaiden is set in the game world of the Dead or Alive series . Located mainly in Japan and the fictional Vigoor Empire , the game draws on Heian period structures for its Japanese locales — a ninja fortress and village set in the mountains . In contrast the Vigoor Empire , with its capital city of Tairon , is a blend of architectural types from around the world . European @-@ style buildings display Arabic lettering , and the monastery in Tairon exhibits Gothic influences with a vaulted hall , pointed arches , and large stained glass windows . A hidden underground level features statues with the heads of cats , walls covered with carvings , hieroglyphics , Aztec pyramid and a labyrinth . This mix of styles was the result of Itagaki 's deliberate refusal to constrain the game 's creative process . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Ryu Hayabusa , the " super ninja " , is the protagonist of Ninja Gaiden , and the only player @-@ controllable character in the game . Itagaki believed that creating extra player characters might distract his team from focusing on Ryu 's development . Ryu has a long history with Tecmo ; he was the star of the 1990s Ninja Gaiden series , and has been part of the DOA roster since 1996 . His roles in these games played a part in his popularity among fans and the video game industry . Ninja Gaiden provides a backstory to Ryu 's appearance and character as seen in the Dead or Alive series , being set two years before the first DOA game . 
 Rachel is the leading female character , and tragic heroine of the game . She and her twin sister , Alma , are afflicted with a blood curse that turns humans into fiends . Believing that there is no cure for their condition , Rachel seeks to kill Alma to redeem her sister 's soul . The relationship between the sisters and the Greater Fiend Doku , who cursed them , serves as a plot device to drive the game forward , with Rachel occasionally needing to be rescued by Ryu . Although not a player @-@ controlled character in Ninja Gaiden , in a few sections of the Ninja Gaiden Sigma remake she is controllable . Two other characters assist the player in the game . Ayane , a young female ninja and one of the DOA regular cast members , acts as a guide throughout Ninja Gaiden by supplying advice and objectives to the player . Muramasa , a <unk> , has shops scattered throughout the game world where players can purchase useful items and upgrades for Ryu 's weapons . Muramasa also gives quests and relates back @-@ stories and other crucial information ; for example , he tells Ryu how he can obtain the item required to upgrade his Dragon Sword to its full potential . Players have the option to customize the appearance of player characters , with selectable costumes for Ryu and hairstyles for Rachel . 
 Most of the enemies are fiends — humans changed into monsters by their blood curse . Three Greater Fiends lead their lesser brethren against Ryu , playing major roles in the game 's plot : Alma , Rachel 's sister , whose story forms a significant part of the game ; Doku , Ryu 's main antagonist , whose raid on Hayabusa village and theft of the Dark Dragon Blade comprise the main plot thread ; and <unk> , lord of the fiend underworld who is responsible for the final set of challenges Ryu faces in the realm of the fiends before encountering the Vigoor Emperor . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Ninja Gaiden 's story spans 16 chapters , each beginning and ending with a cutscene . At the start of the game , the player takes control of Ryu as he infiltrates the Shadow clan fortress . Ryu is there to visit his uncle , the clan leader Murai . During their chat , Ayane delivers news of a raid on the Hayabusa village . Fighting his way back to his village , Ryu encounters Doku , who has killed the Hayabusa shrine maiden Kureha and has taken the Dark Dragon Blade . Ryu is cut down by Doku with the stolen Blade , but he is brought back to life as a " soldier of revenge " by a falcon , the spiritual animal of the Hayabusa clan . 
 Seeking vengeance for Kureha 's death , Ryu learns from Murai that the raiders were from Vigoor , so he stows away on an airship bound for the empire . Fighting his way through the streets of its capital city , Tairon , Ryu faces several bosses including the three Greater Fiends . He defeats Alma in a battle that wrecks the city , but leaves her to Rachel 's mercy . Conversely , Rachel cannot bring herself to kill her sister , and instead is taken by Doku , who prepares to sacrifice her in a ritual to enhance Alma 's power . With Alma 's help Ryu rescues Rachel and destroys Doku 's spirit , but with his dying breath Doku casts the blood curse on Ryu . The only way for Ryu to lift the curse is to kill the emperor , so he storms the palace , defeating <unk> who bars his way to the emperor 's personal realm . Two successive boss fights must be completed to destroy the Emperor and reclaim the Dark Dragon Blade — once this is accomplished his realm starts to destruct . Ryu must then be maneuvered up a series of ledges to escape , but in the process he loses his grip on the Dark Dragon Blade . 
 The fallen Blade lands at the feet of a figure , the Dark Disciple , who has been shadowing Ryu throughout the game . Taking the Blade , the Disciple reveals himself to be the clan leader Murai . He admits that the raid on Hayabusa village was part of his plan to restore the Blade 's evil power , using souls harvested by Ryu . Drawing on the Blade , Murai transforms himself , setting the stage for the final boss fight . Ryu defeats Murai and shatters the Blade with the True Dragon Sword . Victorious , Ryu turns himself into a falcon and flies to the Hayabusa village . In the game 's final scene he places the Dragon Eye , used to enhance his sword , on Kureha 's tombstone and disappears into the night . The story of Ninja Gaiden is continued in the sequels Ninja Gaiden : Dragon Sword , Ninja Gaiden II and Ninja Gaiden 3 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1999 , Team Ninja started work on the " Next @-@ Generation Ninja Gaiden Project " . The first stage of development was to create the game on the Sega NAOMI arcade system board . They then planned to move the project to the Dreamcast console for further development and release , but this was abandoned when Sega announced the end of Dreamcast product line in 2001 . At this point , Tecmo decided to release Ninja Gaiden as a launch title for the Sony PlayStation 2 in the United States . Itagaki , however , had other plans ; the Team Ninja Leader was impressed with the software development kits for the Xbox and pushed for his team to develop for the Microsoft console . The company kept silent on this change in direction , and surprised both the games industry and fans when they announced at E3 2002 that Ninja Gaiden would be released exclusively on the Xbox gaming console . Most fans who voted on Tecmo 's poll wanted the game on the Nintendo GameCube . 
 Ninja Gaiden was Team Ninja 's first action title . Its initial concept had nothing in common with the original Ninja Gaiden series that was released for the NES . However , for retail reasons Tecmo wanted to retain a link with the previous games , which had many adherents in the West , so Itagaki was asked to rethink his ideas to target the foreign market . Analysing the earlier games , he concluded that their violence appealed to players , and included gory content , such as beheadings , in the Xbox game to retain that spirit . He also aimed to make his new game hard but alluring ; it would challenge players on their reflexes rather than on their memories of layouts and timings . His team made a point of designing smoothly @-@ flowing gameplay with high @-@ quality animations that reacted quickly to the player 's input . Itagaki paid homage to the earlier Ninja Gaiden series by including updated versions of foes and special attacks . Team Ninja based their 3D computer models , from the pistols of the henchman upwards , on real world material . Character models were taken from studies of human anatomy , and the team hired martial artists in order to digitally capture their movement . Rather than import the motion captures directly into the game , however , the animators used them as templates to give a sense of realism to the game characters ' exaggerated movements . Itagaki found it more interesting to design nonhuman creatures than human enemies . 
 = = Release = = 
 In 2004 , Tecmo released a demo disc of Ninja Gaiden in Japan , bundled with the February 26 issue of Famitsu Xbox magazine . The demo let players try the first chapter of the game on two difficulty settings with a few fully upgraded weapons and <unk> . On March 2 , 2004 , a year later than originally planned , Tecmo released Ninja Gaiden in the United States . 
 = = = Regional censorship = = = 
 As released , Ninja Gaiden contained bloody acts of violence , decapitations and grotesque monsters . The North American games rating body , the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) , rated it as a " Mature " game , which prohibits sale to anyone under the age of 17 . The depiction of beheadings , though , attracts stricter ratings in other parts of the world . In Germany , the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle ( USK ) deemed these excessive , and refused to rate the game at all . Since this had the potential to place Ninja Gaiden in Germany 's " List of Media Harmful to Young People " , which would have meant that shops could neither advertise the game nor sell it unless by request to customers of 18 years or older , Tecmo censored the European PAL version to obtain a USK rating . A year later , Tecmo managed to obtain a USK 18 + rating for the uncensored release of Ninja Gaiden Black . 
 Japan 's Computer Entertainment Rating Organization ( CERO ) rated Ninja Gaiden and Black , on their release , as 18 + games . At the time , CERO ratings acted as guidelines for consumers . However , on March 1 , 2006 , the Japanese rating system changed . A scale from A to D was introduced , with an additional Z rating for games with large amounts of gore and sexual content . The Z rating is legally enforced , it being illegal to sell such games to anyone under the age of 18 . As a result , Tecmo removed the human beheadings in Sigma to obtain a D rating for the East Asian market . However , CERO reclassified the two previous games as D , despite them also depicting human decapitations . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Team Ninja kept working on the Ninja Gaiden project after its release , with the aim of pushing the action genre and their first such title as far as they could . To this end , they released downloadable expansions , known as Hurricane Packs , free of charge . Itagaki said that since the packs were born out of his team 's interest , they did not care to charge players for their efforts . The two packs were available over Xbox Live in the third quarter of 2004 . 
 Hurricane Pack 1 was a revamped version of Story Mode ; Team Ninja tweaked the encounters and artificial intelligence ( AI ) of Ryu 's foes to increase the difficulty of the game . The pack introduced additional foes such as humanoid cats , giants wearing dinosaur skulls , and cyborgs , and Team Ninja made a key change to the camera system by which the on @-@ screen action is displayed ; players could now control the camera and change its viewing angle . Another feature of the pack was to enhance the combat engine ; the new " Intercept " skill let players counter any enemy attack with the proper timing . 
 Hurricane Pack 2 kept the enhancements of the first , but took place in an alternative world comprising only two regions , where players have to fight through several encounters to rescue Rachel from two new bosses ( <unk> and <unk> ) . This expansion introduced fiends who wield giant swords and cast fireballs . 
 Team Ninja later compiled both expansion packs , and added new features , to create Ninja Gaiden Black . This game , which Itagaki viewed as the final version of Ninja Gaiden , went on sale on September 20 , 2005 . A few years later , Team Ninja upgraded the graphics of the game and ported it to the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) . This version was released as Ninja Gaiden Sigma on June 14 , 2007 . Black became an Xbox Original game on February 11 , 2008 . 
 = = = Online competition = = = 
 The Master Ninja Tournaments were a series of three online contests held by Microsoft and Tecmo in 2004 . They took place over Xbox Live , and were open to participants in Europe , Japan , and North America . Winner selection was based on the scores achieved through playing Ninja Gaiden or its Hurricane Packs . Players had 14 to 24 days to complete the required games and submit their scores to an online scoreboard . 
 The first two tournaments formed regional qualification stages for a live Ninja Gaiden Master Tournament World Championship , held on September 25 at the TGS 2004 . Competition for places was intense , with both tournaments breaking records for online participation in Xbox Live events . Six of the highest scoring players from Europe and North America won <unk> bearing Itagaki 's signature , and five regional winners were selected to proceed to the final . Here , the finalists simultaneously played a custom game drawn from Hurricane Pack 2 while commentators called out the action . They had 15 minutes to complete the game and post the highest score ; the winner emerged only in the last 20 seconds , when Yasunori Otsuka cleared the game and outscored his rivals . At the award ceremony , the finalists received their prize plaques from Itagaki . 
 The tournaments were not without controversy . Players complained about Microsoft 's tardiness in posting the official rules for the first playoff , and it was believed that the top posted score was not achievable by fair means . Officials , however , stated that the score was possible , and allowed the results to stand . In the second playoff , Microsoft initially named the runner up as the North American finalist , after disqualifying the winner for no publicly stated reason , but eventually had to send the second runner up to Tokyo when the first was unable to produce a passport in time . 
 Master Ninja Tournament 3 started on September 27 and lasted 26 days . Rankings were decided by scores obtained while playing Hurricane Pack 2 , and the prizes were Tecmo apparel and Team Ninja games . This marked the end of official tournaments for Ninja Gaiden , although Microsoft have retained the ranking boards for players to upload their scores . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Tecmo has built up a line of merchandise around the Ninja Gaiden name . Its online shop carries apparel and accessories such as caps , wristbands , T @-@ shirts , key holders , and mugs . Most of the merchandise is based on that associated with the various Ninja Gaiden game launches or given as prizes in the Master Ninja Tournaments . Tecmo also published the original soundtrack of the game under their record label Wake Up on March 20 , 2004 . Kotobukiya , a figurine maker , includes 1 / 6 scale plastic figurines of Ninja Gaiden characters in their range of products . As of 2007 , they have produced figures of Ryu , Ayane , Kureha and Rachel . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Tecmo published two versions of Ninja Gaiden : Ninja Gaiden Black for Xbox and Ninja Gaiden Sigma for PS3 . Essentially the same game as the original , they tell the same story of Ryu and the Dark Dragon Blade , but include additional content and updated game mechanics . Itagaki deemed Black to be the final version of Ninja Gaiden , but with the release of the PS3 , Tecmo ported the game to this platform as Sigma . 
 In addition to the narrative Story Mode , Black and Sigma introduced a gameplay variation called Mission Mode . Focused on action rather than character development , this provides combat @-@ based missions set mainly in small areas , where the player 's goal is to " destroy all enemies " . In both Story and Mission modes , game scoring is based on the player 's speed in clearing encounters , the number of kills achieved , the number of unused ninpo spells remaining at the end , and the amount of cash collected . Players can compare their scores on online ranking boards . 
 = = = Ninja Gaiden Black = = = 
 Tecmo announced at E3 2005 that Team Ninja was working on Ninja Gaiden Black , and later exhibited a working version of the game at the TGS 2005 . Black is a reworked compilation of the original Ninja Gaiden and the two Hurricane Packs . The game features new foes , such as exploding bats and doppelgänger fiends who can imitate Ryu . It contains more costumes than the original , and swaps Ninja Gaiden 's unlockable NES games for an arcade version . 
 One key feature of this version is its two new difficulty settings — the easy Ninja Dog and the very hard Master Ninja . Itagaki added Ninja Dog after receiving complaints of Ninja Gaiden being too hard in its default incarnation , although he believed that , with persistence , any player was capable of completing the game . Hence he ensured that those players selecting Ninja Dog would be subjected to gentle mockery by the game — players on this difficulty setting receive colored ribbons as accessories , and Ayane treats Ryu as an inferior . In compensation , Itagaki made the other difficulty settings harder than in Ninja Gaiden . Another feature of Black is its Mission Mode , which comprises 50 combat missions , one of which is adapted from the custom game designed for the Ninja Gaiden Master Tournament World Championship final . The last five missions are based on those in Hurricane Pack 2 and form a linked series known as " Eternal Legend " . While most of the improvements made in the Hurricane Packs carried forward through this game , including the camera system tweaks and new boss battles , the Intercept maneuver , introduced in Hurricane Pack 1 , was not included in Black , adding to its increased challenge . 
 = = = Ninja Gaiden Sigma = = = 
 In 2006 , Tecmo and Sony announced the development of Ninja Gaiden Sigma for the PS3 . Eidos obtained the European publishing rights for this game . Itagaki had no direct role in Sigma and judged it a flawed game , although he acknowledged that Sigma gave PlayStation owners a taste of Ninja Gaiden . A version for PlayStation Vita , titled Ninja Gaiden Sigma Plus , was released in North America and Europe on February 22 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ninja Gaiden was released to much critical acclaim . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot called it " one of the best most challenging action adventure games ever made " , and IGN 's Erik Brudvig said that it " sets a new standard for third @-@ person action games in terms of length , depth , speed , and gore . " Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) called it " an unmissable instant classic " , and declared that " no Xbox should go without [ Ninja ] Gaiden . " Critics also regarded it to be one of the most difficult games released prior to 2007 . 
 Its enhanced version , Ninja Gaiden Black , also impressed reviewers . GameSpot noted that it had the best visual and audio presentation on the Xbox , and praised its new Mission Mode for " [ distilling ] the game down to its purest essentials . " IGN called its release " a rare and welcome day " , which brought their " excitement levels back to the first time [ they ] played the game . " 
 From a technical point of view , critics regarded Ninja Gaiden and Black as the best of the available Xbox software at the time ; the console hardware had been pushed to its limits without showing significant drops in performance . GameSpot 's Kasavin was impressed with their " first @-@ rate presentation " and said that no other games at that time came close in visuals and audio . According to IGN , the games could " make [ them ] momentarily forget about the next generation of consoles " . Both Ninja Gaiden and Black were top @-@ sellers , which led to them being compatible with the Xbox 360 for all regions on the new platform 's release . Ninja Gaiden attracted criticism for the way on @-@ screen action is framed by the game 's camera . The default camera system centers the action on Ryu and his surroundings , but reviewers were frustrated by occasions when the camera locked on to part of the scenery , thus losing track of Ryu . Tecmo attempted to address this with the introduction of manual camera controls in the Hurricane Packs , and most critics judged that either the camera frame was usually acceptable , or that Ninja Gaiden was a good enough game that its flaws could be overlooked . 
 Consumers purchased 1 @.@ 5 million copies of Ninja Gaiden and Black to August 2007 , with the bulk of these sales going to North America and Europe . According to the NPD Group , in its first month Ninja Gaiden sold 362 @,@ 441 copies in the United States . These sales figures reflect Tecmo 's decision to target the non @-@ Japanese market . Japanese gamers were not particularly excited — according to Itagaki , only 60 @,@ 000 copies of Ninja Gaiden were sold in Japan in the four months following its release . The critical and commercial successes of Ninja Gaiden have led CNET and GameSpot Asia to induct the game into their halls of fame . 
 The Ninja Gaiden games gained a reputation throughout the gaming community for their difficulty and attention to detail . Although they appealed to gamers who , like Pro @-@ G 's Struan Robertson , wanted a " bloody hard , but also bloody good " challenge , it was feared that casual gamers would find the learning curve daunting . IGN warned that gamers with lesser skills might not " get as much out of this game as others due to [ its ] incredible difficulty " , and Edge commented that " Tecmo ’ s refusal to extend any kind of handhold to less dedicated players is simply a failure of design , not a badge of hardcore honour " and " it ’ s impossible to believe they couldn ’ t have found a way to increase the accessibility of the game without undermining the gloriously intractable nature of the challenges it contains . " EGM found the challenge to be " rewarding " as it " motivates you to actually get better at the game . " Clive Thompson focused on Ninja Gaiden in his Slate article examining the motivation for playing difficult games . He contends that extreme levels of challenge can be initially very frustrating and may cause a game to be abandoned in disgust . However , where a game also rewards a player 's perseverance by teaching the skills required to overcome its challenges , that player will have the motivation to finish the game . Ninja Gaiden , in his opinion , strikes the correct balance between challenge and reward ; completion brings " a sort of exhausted exhilaration , like finally reaching the end of War and Peace . " In 2012 , CraveOnline included it on their list of five " badass ninja games " , calling it " the pinnacle of action gaming at the time , holding onto that crown for an entire year until God of War released in 2005 " and " a true video game classic , and maybe the best ninja game of all time . " That same year , G4tv ranked it as the 83rd top video game of all time , also calling it " the best ninja game ever made and one of the all around hardest . " 
 = Milutin Bojić = 
 Milutin Bojić ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 18 May [ O.S. 7 May ] 1892 – 8 November [ O.S. 25 October ] 1917 ) was a Serbian poet , theatre critic , playwright , and soldier . 
 A native of Belgrade , he began writing poetry at an early age and published a number of literary reviews under a pseudonym while he was still a teenager . He rose to prominence during the Balkan Wars , writing about his experiences in territories newly retaken from the Ottoman Empire . The outbreak of World War I interrupted Bojić 's studies at the University of Belgrade and forced him to postpone marrying his girlfriend , Radmila Todorović . The couple were separated in the chaos of war , and Bojić left Belgrade with his family and relocated to Niš , where he worked as a military censor and wrote articles for a local newspaper to pay his family 's bills . In October 1915 , the Serbian Army was overwhelmed by a combined Austro @-@ Hungarian , Bulgarian and German invasion and forced to retreat to neutral Greece via Albania . Bojić and his younger brother joined the exodus , marching for several weeks through Kosovo , Montenegro and northern Albania , where they were finally reunited with Bojić 's fiancée . Bojić was not allowed to accompany his brother and fiancée on a ship destined for Italy because he was of fighting age , and had to continue marching to Greece without them . 
 In early 1916 , Bojić reached the Greek island of Corfu , where he was recruited to work for Serbian military intelligence . That summer , he was transferred to Thessaloniki , where he continued working for the military . In August , he was granted leave and sailed to France , where he reunited with his fiancée and his brother . Bojić returned to Greece several weeks later , and was diagnosed with tuberculosis in September the following year . Owing to the political connections of his patrons , he managed to find care at an exclusive military hospital in Thessaloniki , but by late October his condition worsened . He died in early November at the age of 25 . He was initially buried at the Allied military cemetery at <unk> , but in 1922 , his siblings had his remains relocated to Belgrade , where they were reburied beside those of his parents . 
 Bojić 's popularity grew exponentially following his death . Many of his poems received widespread critical acclaim for their portrayal of the Serbian Army 's retreat during the winter of 1915 – 16 and its stay on Corfu , where thousands of soldiers succumbed to disease and exhaustion and were buried at sea . Bojić 's work remained popular in Yugoslavia for much of the 20th century , cementing his reputation as one of the greatest Serbian poets of the Romantic period . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Milutin Bojić was born in Belgrade on 18 May [ O.S. 7 May ] 1892 , the eldest child of Jovan and Sofia Bojić ( née <unk> ) . His father 's family was originally from Herzegovina . Following the First Serbian Uprising , Bojić 's great @-@ grandfather fled his ancestral homeland and settled in the Austro @-@ Hungarian city of Semlin ( modern Zemun ) to escape Ottoman persecution . Bojić 's father and grandfather were born in Semlin , and were good @-@ standing members of the town 's fledgling Serb community . In 1875 , Bojić 's father was conscripted into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army . Shortly afterwards , he entered into an argument with a high @-@ ranking Hungarian officer , insulted him , then fled to the Serbian capital to escape punishment . He attended trade school in Belgrade and became a successful shoemaker . 
 Bojić 's matrilineal line traces its origins to the town of Tetovo , in what is now northern Macedonia . His mother 's family had fled the town in 1690 as part of the Great Serb Migration and settled in <unk> ( modern Zrenjanin ) . Bojić 's maternal grandfather , Jovan , had lived in the border town of Pančevo since he was a child , married and started a family there . Much like Bojić 's father , he was a successful shoemaker , and in 1890 he offered to marry his only daughter to him . After initial disagreement over the price of the dowry , <unk> gave the marriage his blessing and Bojić 's parents were soon married . 
 At the time of Bojić 's birth , his parents were living in a small flat at No. 4 Sremska Street , situated just above his father 's shop in Belgrade 's Stari Grad . Over the next decade , they had four more children – <unk> ( b . 1894 ) , Danica ( b . 1896 ) , Radivoje ( b . 1900 ) and Dragoljub ( b . 1905 ) . All of their children survived to adulthood . When Bojić was a child , he and his family were frequently visited by his mother 's cousin Jovan <unk> , the brother of humourist Stevan <unk> . Jovan is said to have greatly influenced the young Bojić , having introduced him to Serbian folk tales and medieval legends at an early age . 
 = = = Education and first publications = = = 
 Bojić began attending the Terazije Elementary School in 1898 , and finished with excellent grades . He likely began writing poetry between the ages of eight and ten , and this caught the attention of some of his teachers . Jovan <unk> , who taught Serbian in Bojić 's school , wrote : " One of my pupils has been writing poetry since his first year of elementary school . His father , a shoemaker on Sremska Street , is very proud of his son 's work . He keeps his poems locked away in a safe as great treasures , convinced that they are of immense value and proof of his son 's brilliant future . " 
 In 1902 , the <unk> moved into a small house on <unk> Street . That autumn , Bojić enrolled into Belgrade 's Secondary School No. 2 , which taught children from the ages of ten to eighteen . Over the next several years , Bojić distinguished himself as an excellent student . In 1907 , he was recognized as the best student in his school , and was exempt from final examinations . By this time , Bojić 's poems started appearing in his school 's periodical . He also began writing literary reviews for Jovan <unk> and Milan <unk> 's Daily News ( Dnevni list ) , and became the paper 's youngest contributor . All of Bojić 's contributions there were written under a pseudonym because he feared he would not be taken seriously if his true age was uncovered . Bojić also authored articles in the newspapers Artwork ( Delo ) , Wreath ( <unk> ) and The Serbian Literary Gazette ( Srpski <unk> <unk> ) . In 1908 , during the Austro @-@ Hungarian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bojić penned his first stage play , titled " The Blind Despot " ( <unk> despot ) . It was meant to be the first play of a trilogy titled " The Despot 's Crown " ( <unk> <unk> ) . Bojić shared the play with his friend Radoslav <unk> , who then showed it to <unk> <unk> , the director of the National Theatre in Belgrade . 
 By the end of his secondary school studies , Bojić was elected chairman of his school 's literary club . Upon turning eighteen , in May 1910 , he was deemed unfit to serve in the Serbian Army and excused from mandatory service . After graduation , in the autumn of 1910 , he enrolled in the University of Belgrade 's Faculty of Philosophy , where he studied the works of Immanuel Kant , as well as German , Italian and South Slavic literature with varying rates of success . Shortly after entering the university , Bojić began contributing theatrical reviews to Pijemont , an ultra @-@ nationalist daily strongly opposed to the Prime Minister of Serbia , Nikola Pašić , and his People 's Radical Party ( Serbian : Narodna radikalna stranka ; NRS ) . Pijemont was also the quasi @-@ official paper of the secret organization Unification or Death ( better known as the Black Hand ) , which played an important role in Serbian political life between 1903 and 1914 . 
 Milutin K. Dragutinović was one of Bojić 's greatest influences during his teenage years . Dragutinović was one of Bojić 's former secondary school teachers , as well as a literary critic and member of the National Theatre 's artistic committee . He advised Bojić to continue writing poetry and dramatic verse . In 1911 , Bojić shared the first draft of a stage play titled " Chains " ( <unk> ) with Dragutinović , who encouraged him to submit it to a competition held by the Literary Committee of the National Theatre in Belgrade . Bojić 's play was one of forty @-@ two works that were submitted . A number of prominent writers took part in the competition , including Ivo Vojnović , Branislav Nušić , Aleksa Šantić , and Svetozar Ćorović . " Chains " was rejected as being too " naïve " and " full of youthful exaggerations " , and the prize went to another contestant . In May , Bojić 's father died suddenly of a heart attack , aged 56 . 
 = = = Rise to prominence and coverage of the Balkan Wars = = = 
 Despite his busy schedule , during his university years Bojić spent many of his nights in cafés and bars , mingling with other artists in Skadarlija , Belgrade 's Bohemian quarter . He was extremely popular among the writers and artists of his generation . 
 During this time , many of Belgrade 's merchant elite became art patrons . Bojić 's patrons were Ljuba Jovanović @-@ <unk> and his wife <unk> , who used their power and influence to publicize his works . During the Balkan Wars , Bojić accompanied the Serbian Army as a war reporter and wrote several travelogues about his experiences in Kosovo and Macedonia . The expulsion of the Turks , who had occupied much of the Balkans for 500 years , seemed to fill Bojić with optimism about the future . Helena <unk> , a Czech volunteer nurse with the 17th Reserve Hospital of the Serbian Army 's 7th Regiment , recalled : " His spirit was in constant opposition to everything ; at the same time he was an enthusiast . He was bursting with desires , and he drank the sap of life through his senses . " Historian Mihailo Đorđević writes : 
 [ Bojić ] was an impulsive young man . From rare photographs and the testimony of his contemporaries emerges [ ... ] a figure of medium stature , with slightly drooped shoulders , thick brown hair , and a pale oval face . His eyebrows were dark , and one of them was almost always raised , giving his face an expression of intense irony . His eyes burned with constant passion , and his lips were full and sensuous . There was also something young and vulnerable in his smile . He smiled often , and his conversation was reputed to be brilliant . 
 As the wars raged , Bojić wrote a historical drama titled " The King 's Autumn " ( <unk> <unk> ) , which received considerable praise from <unk> . The drama premiered at the National Theatre in October 1913 . Another one of Bojić 's works , " Ms. Olga " ( <unk> Olga ) premiered soon after . In early 1914 , publishing magnate <unk> <unk> printed Bojić 's first poetry collection , consisting of 48 works . 
 = = = Outbreak of World War I and retreat to Corfu = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Bojić was in his final year at the University of Belgrade and had gotten engaged to his girlfriend , Radmila Todorović . The war put a stop to his education , and Bojić decided to postpone the marriage until peace was restored . He remained employed at Pijemont until 1915 , when he left Belgrade with his family , never to return . While Todorović remained in the city , the <unk> moved to the town of <unk> in the Serbian interior . Shortly after , they moved to Niš as it was further from the frontlines . There , Bojić worked as a military censor . He wrote articles for the Niš Gazette ( <unk> <unk> ) to pay his family 's bills . In early February 1915 , Bojić 's mother died of cancer , leaving him to take care of his younger siblings . 
 Bojić devoted most of his creative energy to the completion of an epic poem titled Cain , which was published just before the combined Austro @-@ Hungarian , Bulgarian and German invasion of Serbia in October 1915 . A deeply patriotic work , Cain compares Bulgaria 's impending attack on Serbia to the Biblical story of Cain jealously murdering his brother Abel . Upon capturing Niš , the Bulgarians burned every copy of the poem , and the only one that survived was the one that Bojić carried with him out of the city . Upon leaving Niš , Bojić and his brother Radivoje joined the Serbian Army in its retreat to the Adriatic coast . Their sisters and infant brother went to live with a cousin in occupied Kraljevo . The Bojić brothers ' journey took them through <unk> , Mitrovica , Pristina , Prizren , Đakovica , Dečani and Peć , from where they continued to Andrijevica and Podgorica . The two intended to join retreating Montenegrin Army columns and head on to Scutari , where they hoped that Allied ships would evacuate them and other Serbian troops to Italy . 
 The Serbs quickly realized that they had no hope of being evacuated at Scutari due to the Austro @-@ Hungarian naval presence off the northern Albanian coast , and the Serbian and Montenegrin military leaderships elected to retreat further into the Albanian interior rather than surrender . The Serbs and Montenegrins marched south , first to Durrës and then to Vlorë . From there , they intended to meet up with a French expeditionary force that was to evacuate them to the Greek island of Corfu . Thousands of soldiers either died of hunger or succumbed to the cold . Many were ambushed by hostile Albanian tribesmen and killed while traversing the countryside . While marching through the wilderness , Bojić began writing a poetry anthology titled " Songs of Pride and Suffering " ( <unk> <unk> i <unk> ) , which would comprise some of his best known works . He also started working on a new drama in verse titled " The Marriage of Uroš " ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Stojan Živadinović , a friend who accompanied Bojić on the difficult journey , recalled : 
 He was dressed in a strange way . A šajkača was pulled to the front of his head and almost completely covered his forehead . His eyebrows were hardly visible . Under its weight , the ears seemed to have collapsed . He wore a kind of long , black coat , covered in mud and held in place by a string . He used another piece of string for a belt , and from it hung a pot for boiling water , a tea strainer , a canteen , and other useful things . He walked slightly bent forward , followed everywhere by the noise of the things clashing at his waist . 
 The occupation of Serbia by the Central Powers pained Bojić far more than the everyday struggles of the exodus itself . He is said to have slept very little , telling Živadinović : " You don 't realize what you are missing by sleeping . In circumstances like these , the entire soul must be kept constantly awake . Whole centuries have never painted such a vast fresco . Never has death been so greedy , nor heroes so indifferent to it . " In December 1915 , Bojić reached <unk> with the others and reunited with his fiancée . Živadinović recalled : " I shall never forget the day that we saw the sea . Only then did Bojić begin to speak about the future . He was making plans for a vast novel in verse , for comedies , dramas , tragedies , all intended to bring the great events of our history back to life . " Upon reaching the coast , Bojić was told that he could not board the ship to Italy because he was of fighting age . His fiancée was allowed to board and his fifteen @-@ year @-@ old brother was judged to be too young for military service and granted passage as well . Unable to go with them , Bojić and his companions continued down the length of the Albanian coast until they reached Corfu , where the Allies had sent ships to transport the remnants of the Serbian Army to the Greek mainland . 
 Upon reaching Corfu , thousands of Serb troops began showing symptoms of typhus and had to be quarantined on the island of <unk> , where 11 @,@ 000 died over the span of two months . Seven thousand of these had to be buried at sea because there was not enough space for their remains to be interred on land ; corpses were simply piled onto barges and tossed overboard . Bojić was appalled by the suffering . " Our church bells toll dead instead of hours , " he wrote . Witnessing the disposal of bodies inspired Bojić to write the poem " Ode to a Blue Sea Tomb " ( Plava <unk> ) , which Đorđević describes as " Bojić 's best ... a masterpiece of Serbian patriotic poetry . " Shortly after arriving at Corfu , Bojić was recruited to work for Serbian military intelligence . In mid @-@ 1916 , he was transferred to Thessaloniki . 
 = = = Last years and death = = = 
 Upon reaching Thessaloniki , Bojić spent much of his spare time reading the works of French authors and writing poetry . In August 1916 , he received a month 's leave and sailed for France , where his fiancée and brother had gone to escape from the war , shortly after landing in Italy . Bojić spent the month with his fiancée in Nice . Upon returning to Greece , Bojić resumed his army service , and continued writing poetry . " Songs of Pride and Suffering " was first published in Thessaloniki in mid @-@ 1917 . Nearly every copy of the anthology was destroyed in the Great Fire of Thessaloniki , in August 1917 . The only copy that survived was one sent by Bojić to his fiancée in France and this became the basis for the post @-@ war edition . 
 In September 1917 , Bojić was diagnosed with tuberculosis . Owing to the influence of his old patron , Ljuba Jovanović @-@ <unk> , he was admitted to a military hospital in central Thessaloniki which tended exclusively to Serbian Army officers , where Jovanović 's wife often visited him . Bojić continued writing poetry , and as his condition deteriorated , his poems began to take a melancholy tone . Nevertheless , he remained optimistic that he would recover from his illness and see his family again . One month before his death , he sent his fiancée and brother a telegram assuring them that he was " ... only slightly ill " and promised they would be reunited . Bojić died of tuberculosis on 8 November [ O.S. 25 October ] 1917 . Even a few hours before his death , he appeared convinced of his survival . According to a fellow patient , Bojić " ... died choking in half @-@ sleep from a fit of coughing that destroyed the tissues of his lungs . " He was buried at the <unk> military cemetery in Thessaloniki . His family was shocked by the news of his death , particularly his brother and fiancée , who believed him to be on the road to recovery . In 1922 , Bojić 's remains were exhumed and transferred to Belgrade 's New Cemetery , where they were reburied beside those of his parents . 
 All of Bojić 's siblings survived the war ; his brother Radivoje became a diplomat and worked in the Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs until the Axis invasion of the country in April 1941 , when he left Yugoslavia with his family and emigrated to the West . Bojić 's youngest brother , Dragoljub , spent the rest of his life in Belgrade and became a high school geography teacher . His sister <unk> married and lived in Belgrade until her death in 1942 . His youngest sister , Danica , died single in 1952 . Bojić 's fiancée Radmila remained loyal to him and never married after his death ; she returned to Serbia after the war and died in Belgrade in 1971 . 
 = = Influences , themes and legacy = = 
 While at the University of Belgrade , Bojić studied The Bible in his free time and read the works of Victor Hugo , Friedrich Nietzsche , Charles Baudelaire , Leo Tolstoy , Anton Chekhov and Sigmund Freud , among others . Đorđević notes that Bojić 's early poems reflect the degree to which he was influenced by the " exalted sensuality " of Baudelaire 's works . He contends that Baudelaire 's influence on Bojić 's early work is " rather unfortunate " , as by striving to imitate Baudelaire 's style , Bojić failed to achieve originality and instead merely used Baudelaire as a " crutch in the absence of spontaneous emotion " . 
 As he matured , Bojić was influenced by the works of Irish writer Oscar Wilde , particularly the play Salome , which was being performed at the National Theatre in Belgrade during Bojić 's university years . The play influenced Bojić to such an extent that he later composed a poem of the same name . According to Đorđević , Bojić was " thrilled by the beauty of Wilde 's descriptions " , and reading his work inspired Bojić to use Biblical rhythm and accentuation . Đorđević notes that the archaic phrase " thou art " only appears in Bojić 's poems after he began reading Wilde . Wilde 's influence can also be observed in Bojić 's lyric plays , especially " The King 's Autumn " . Bojić was also inspired by French playwright Edmond Rostand , whose play L 'Aiglon was Bojić 's " dramatic ideal incarnate " . Rostand 's influence is most clearly felt in " The Marriage of Uroš " , where Bojić paid homage to Rostand by writing the entire drama in verse , a style that was considered obsolete at the time . Serbian history and medieval legends had the greatest influence on Bojić 's plays ; Đorđević notes that " all Bojić 's dramas , published or not , are inspired by Serbian medieval motifs " . 
 The Balkan Wars inspired Bojić to write his first patriotic poetry , where he attempted to emulate Hugo 's rhetorical verse . By 1914 , much of Bojić 's poetry revolved around patriotic themes , and by 1917 this theme had overtaken all others . In his last months , the only non @-@ patriotic poems that Bojić wrote were about the love he felt towards his fiancée . The historian John K. Cox opines that Bojić 's " personal suffering ... [ embodied ] Serbian history at the crossroads of greatness and disaster . " 
 Cox considers Bojić the most famous of the many Serbian artists and writers who perished during World War I. Đorđević contends that Bojić achieved more during his short career than a number of other writers and poets who led far longer lives . He writes that Bojić 's influence on Serbian literature would have been even greater had he survived the war , and praises him as " one of the great poets of the 20th century " . 
 In May 2014 , the inaugural Milutin Bojić Prize was awarded to a student from Čačak by the Milutin Bojić Library , a Belgrade @-@ based learning institution dedicated exclusively to studies on Bojić 's life and work . The Library is funded by the Serbian Ministry of Culture , and operates an extensive online database known as the Milutin Bojić Virtual Library . In August 2014 , researchers discovered the original manuscript of " Ode to a Blue Sea Tomb " in the Library 's archives . The yellowed slip of paper was immediately given to experts at the National Library of Serbia , who went about restoring it so as to prevent further decay . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = The Target ( The Office ) = 
 " The Target " is the eighth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 184th episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC on November 29 , 2012 . It features guest star Chris Gethard as Trevor . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) goes to Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) for help when she learns that her husband is having an affair . Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) and Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) take advantage of Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) when he needs a favor , and Pete ( Jake Lacy ) distracts Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) as she begins painting her mural . 
