 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 The second season begins with Rachel waiting at the gate for Ross to declare her love for him . However , she discovers that he is dating Julie ( Lauren Tom ) , someone he knew from graduate school . Rachel 's attempts to tell Ross she likes him mirror his failed attempts in the first season , although the characters eventually begin a relationship . Joey gets cast in a part in a fictional version of the soap opera Days of Our Lives , but his character is killed off after conflicts with the show 's writers , claiming that he writes many of his own lines . Chandler gets back with Janice , his ex @-@ girlfriend from season one . Monica begins dating Richard ( Tom Selleck ) , a recently divorced family friend and 21 years her senior . In the season finale , they end their relationship when they realize that unlike Monica , Richard does not want children . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 Season three takes on a significantly greater serialized format . Rachel begins working at Bloomingdale 's , an upscale department store chain , and Ross becomes jealous of her colleague , Mark . Rachel decides to take a break ; and Ross , hurt and drunk , sleeps with someone else , causing Rachel to break up with him . In the meantime , Chandler has a hard time dealing with their breakup because it reminds him of his parents ' divorce . After believing she has no family except her twin sister Ursula ( Lisa Kudrow ) , Phoebe becomes acquainted with her half @-@ brother ( Giovanni Ribisi ) and birth mother ( Teri Garr ) . Joey develops a relationship with his acting partner Kate ( Dina Meyer ) , and Monica begins a relationship with millionaire Pete Becker ( Jon Favreau ) which ends because of disagreements between the two . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In the fourth season premiere , Ross and Rachel briefly reconcile after Ross pretends to read a long letter that Rachel wrote for him , but continues to insist that the two were on a break so they break up again . Joey dates Kathy ( Paget Brewster ) , a girl that Chandler has a crush on . Kathy and Chandler later kiss , which causes drama between Chandler and Joey . Joey forgives Chandler only after he spends a day in a box as punishment . Phoebe becomes a surrogate mother for her brother and his wife Alice ( Debra Jo Rupp ) . Monica and Rachel are forced to switch apartments with Joey and Chandler after losing a bet during a quiz game , but manage to switch back by bribing them with Knicks season tickets and a one @-@ minute kiss ( off @-@ screen ) between the girls . Ross begins dating an English woman named Emily ( Helen Baxendale ) , and the season finale features their wedding in London . Chandler and Monica sleep together , and Rachel decides to attend Ross and Emily 's wedding . While saying his vows , Ross uses the wrong name at the altar ( Rachel 's ) , to the shock of his bride and the guests . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 Season five features Monica and Chandler trying to keep their new relationship a secret from their friends . Phoebe gives birth to triplets in the show 's 100th episode . She gives birth to a boy , Frank Jr . Jr . , and two girls : Leslie and Chandler . ( They had originally thought that there were two boys and one girl , but decided to keep the name Chandler , despite the baby turning out a girl . ) Emily states that the only condition in which she would remain married to Ross is if he stops all communication with Rachel . Ross agrees , but during a last dinner with all six main characters together , Emily phones Ross and , upon discovering Rachel is there , realizes she does not trust him , which ends the marriage . Phoebe begins a relationship with a police officer , Gary ( Michael Rapaport ) , after finding his badge and using it as her own . Monica and Chandler go public with their relationship , to the surprise and happiness of their friends . They decide to get married on a trip to Las Vegas , but change their plans after witnessing Ross and Rachel drunkenly stumble out of the wedding chapel . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 In the sixth season premiere , Ross and Rachel 's marriage is established to be a drunken mistake . Ross and Rachel try to get an annulment because he doesn 't want to have three divorces . However , he realized he couldn 't do so and tried to keep their wedding a secret from Rachel . Nonetheless , they divorce several episodes later . Monica and Chandler move in together , causing Rachel to move in with Phoebe . Joey lands a role on a cable television series called Mac and <unk> , where he stars alongside a robot . Ross gets a job lecturing at New York University and starts dating one of his students , Elizabeth ( Alexandra Holden ) . The relationship ends because of their maturity differences . Phoebe and Rachel 's apartment catches fire , and Rachel moves in with Joey , while Phoebe moves in with Chandler and Monica . Chandler proposes to Monica , who says yes even though her ex @-@ boyfriend Richard confesses his love for her . 
 = = = Season 7 = = = 
 The seventh season mainly follows the various antics by Monica and Chandler , who begin to plan their wedding and run into financial problems which are quickly fixed by Chandler ’ s secret funds . Joey 's television series Mac and <unk> is cancelled , but he is offered his job back on Days of Our Lives . Phoebe 's apartment is fixed , but is rebuilt with only one large bedroom instead of the original two , so Rachel decides to stay with Joey . The season ends during Monica and Chandler ’ s wedding where Phoebe and Rachel find a positive pregnancy test in the bathroom . 
 = = = Season 8 = = = 
 In the eighth season , it is revealed that the positive pregnancy test found at Monica 's wedding belongs to Rachel . Phoebe at first tricks Rachel and tells her that the pregnancy test is negative , in order to achieve Rachel 's real emotions on the realization of being pregnant . Rachel projects feelings of sadness when she thinks she 's not pregnant , so Phoebe tells her the truth . The three of them rejoice in the bathroom . The season revolves around Rachel 's pregnancy ; Ross is revealed to be the father after an investigation involving a red sweater . Rachel and Ross decide to have the baby but do not resume their romantic relationship . Joey develops romantic feelings for Rachel , but she does not reciprocate them . Rachel gives birth to baby Emma in the season finale . At the hospital , Ross 's mother offers him an engagement ring because she wants him to marry Rachel . Ross does not intend to ask Rachel to marry him , but he takes the ring anyway and puts it in his jacket pocket . Meanwhile , in the post @-@ delivery room , Joey looks for some tissue for an upset Rachel , picks up Ross 's jacket , and the ring falls to the floor . He kneels to pick it up and turns to Rachel , still on his knees and still holding the ring . Rachel accepts what she thinks is his proposal of marriage . 
 = = = Season 9 = = = 
 Season nine begins with Ross and Rachel living together as roommates with their daughter Emma . Monica and Chandler try to conceive a baby of their own but find out that they are unable to , due to health restrictions . Phoebe begins dating Mike Hannigan ( Paul Rudd ) , and chooses to be with him over her ex @-@ boyfriend David ( Hank Azaria ) . Rachel and Emma move in with Joey in the middle of the season , and Rachel develops romantic feelings for him , while the rest of the " friends " try hard to get Ross and Rachel back together . The group travels to Barbados in the finale to hear Ross give a keynote speech at a paleontology conference . Joey and his girlfriend Charlie ( Aisha Tyler ) break up , and she begins a relationship with Ross . Joey and Rachel 's feelings for each other return , and the finale ends with them kissing . 
 = = = Season 10 = = = 
 The tenth season closes several long @-@ running storylines . Charlie breaks up with Ross to get back together with her ex @-@ boyfriend . Joey and Rachel try to contend with Ross ' feelings about them being together and decide it would be best to remain friends . Phoebe and Mike get married mid @-@ season outside the Central Perk coffee house . Monica and Chandler apply to adopt a child and are chosen by Erica ( Anna Faris ) . In the series finale , Erica gives birth to twins , to the surprise of Monica and Chandler — a boy , Jack ( after Monica 's father ) , and a girl , Erica ( named after the birth mother ) . Monica and Chandler prepare to move to the suburbs , and Joey becomes upset with the changes in his life . Rachel gets fired from her job and accepts a new offer in Paris , but Ross , realizing he loves her , chases after her . Rachel realizes she loves him , too , and cancels her flight to Paris , agreeing to stay with him . The series ends with all the friends plus Monica and Chandler 's new babies leaving the apartment , heading to Central Perk for a final cup of coffee . The finale dialogue used in this series is by Chandler , making a joke for the last time . The camera 's last view is of all of the character 's keys to the apartment on the counter table , finishing with a shot of the apartment door . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Thursday at 8 : 30 – 9 : 00 pm on NBC : September 22 , 1994 – February 23 , 1995 
 Thursday at 9 : 30 – 10 : 00 pm on NBC : February 23 – May 18 , 1995 
 Thursday at 8 : 00 – 8 : 30 pm on NBC : September 21 , 1995 – May 6 , 2004 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 David Crane and Marta Kauffman began developing three new television pilots that would premiere in 1994 after their sitcom Family Album was cancelled by CBS in 1993 . Kauffman and Crane decided to pitch the series about " six people in their 20s making their way in Manhattan " to NBC , since they thought it would fit best there . Crane and Kauffman presented the idea to their production partner Kevin Bright , who had served as executive producer on their HBO series Dream On . The idea for the series was conceived when Crane and Kauffman began thinking about the time when they had finished college and started living by themselves in New York ; Kauffman believed they were looking at a time when the future was " more of a question mark . " They found the concept to be interesting , as they believed " everybody knows that feeling " , and because it was also how they felt about their own lives at the time . The team titled the series Insomnia Cafe , and pitched the idea as a seven @-@ page treatment to NBC in December 1993 . 
 At the same time , Warren Littlefield , the then @-@ president of NBC Entertainment , was seeking a comedy involving young people living together and sharing expenses . Littlefield wanted the group to share memorable periods of their lives with friends , who had become " new , surrogate family members . " However , Littlefield found difficulty in bringing the concept to life , and found the scripts developed by NBC to be terrible . When Kauffman , Crane and Bright pitched Insomnia Cafe , Littlefield was impressed that they knew who their characters were . NBC bought the idea as a put pilot , meaning they risked financial penalties if the pilot was not filmed . Kauffman and Crane began writing a pilot script for a show now titled Friends Like Us , which took three days to write . Littlefield wanted the series to represent Generation X and explore a new kind of tribal bonding , but the trio did not share his vision . Crane argued that it was not a series for one generation , and wanted to produce a series that everyone would enjoy watching . NBC liked the pilot script and ordered the series under another title , Six of One , mainly due to the similar title it shared with the ABC sitcom These Friends of Mine . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Once it became apparent that the series was a favored project at NBC , Littlefield reported that he was getting calls from every agent in town , wanting their client to be a part of the series . Auditions for the lead roles took place in New York and Los Angeles . The casting director shortlisted 1 @,@ 000 actors who had applied for each role down to 75 . Those who received a callback read again in front of Crane , Kauffman and Bright . At the end of March , the number of potential actors had been reduced to three or four for each part , and were asked to read for Les Moonves , then @-@ president of Warner Bros. Television . 
 Having worked with David Schwimmer in the past , the series creators wrote the character of Ross with him in mind , and he was the first actor cast . Cox wanted to play the role of Monica , but the producers had her in mind to play Rachel because of her " cheery , upbeat energy " , which was not how they envisioned Monica ; after Cox 's audition , though , Kauffman agreed with Cox , and she got the role . When Matt LeBlanc auditioned for Joey , he put a " different spin " on the character . The writers did not originally intend for Joey to be dim , but found it to be a major source of comedy . LeBlanc also gave the character heart , which the writers did not realize Joey had . Although Crane and Kauffman did not want LeBlanc for the role at the time , they were told by the network to cast him . Jennifer Aniston , Matthew Perry and Lisa Kudrow were cast based on their auditions . 
 More changes occurred to the series ' storylines during the casting process . The writers found that they had to adjust the characters they had written to suit the actors , and the discovery process of the characters occurred throughout the first season . Kauffman acknowledged that Joey 's character became " this whole new being " , and that " it wasn 't until we did the first Thanksgiving episode that we realized how much fun Monica 's neuroses are . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In the weeks after NBC 's pick up of Friends , Crane , Kauffman and Bright reviewed sent @-@ in scripts that writers had originally prepared for other series , mainly unproduced Seinfeld episodes . Kauffman and Crane hired a team of seven young writers because " When you 're 40 , you can 't do it anymore . The networks and studios are looking for young people coming in out of college . " The creators felt that using six equal characters , rather than emphasizing one or two , would allow for " myriad storylines and give the show legs . " The majority of the storyline ideas came from the writers , although the actors added ideas . The writers originally planned a big love story between Joey and Monica , as they intended them to be the most sexual of the characters in the series pitch . The idea of a romantic interest between Ross and Rachel emerged during the period when Kauffman and Crane wrote the pilot script . 
 During production of the pilot , NBC requested that the script be changed to feature one dominant storyline and several minor ones , but the writers refused , wanting to keep three storylines of equal weight . NBC thought the cast was too young and pushed for an older character who could give the young adults advice . Crane and Kauffman were forced to comply and wrote a draft of an early episode that featured " Pat the Cop . " Crane found the storyline to be terrible , and Kauffman joked , " You know the kids book , Pat the Bunny ? We had Pat the Cop . " NBC eventually relented and dropped the idea . 
 Each summer ( June , July , and August in the US ) , the producers would outline the storylines for the subsequent season . Before an episode went into production , Kauffman and Crane would revise the script written by another writer , mainly if something concerning either the series or a character felt foreign . Unlike other storylines , the idea for a relationship between Joey and Rachel was decided on halfway through the eighth season . The creators did not want Ross and Rachel to get back together so soon , and while looking for a romantic impediment , a writer suggested Joey 's romantic interest in Rachel . The storyline was incorporated into the season ; however , when the actors feared that the storyline would make their characters unlikable , the storyline was wrapped up , until it again resurfaced in the season 's finale . For the ninth season , the writers were unsure about the amount of storyline to give to Rachel 's baby , as they wanted the show neither to revolve around a baby nor pretend there to be none . Crane said that it took them a while to accept the idea of a tenth season , which they decided to do because they had enough stories left to tell to justify the season . Kauffman and Crane would not have signed on for an eleventh season , even if all the cast members had wanted to continue . 
 The episode title format — " The One ... " — was created when the producers realized that the episode titles would not be featured in the opening credits , and therefore would be unknown to most of the audience . Episode titles officially begin with " The One ... " except the title of the pilot episode and the series finale " The Last One . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The first season was shot on Stage 5 at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , California . NBC executives had worried that the coffee house setting was too hip and asked for the series to be set in a diner , but eventually consented to the coffee house concept . The opening title sequence was filmed in a fountain at the Warner Bros. Ranch at 4 : 00 am , while it was particularly cold for a Burbank morning . At the beginning of the second season , production moved to the larger Stage 24 , which was renamed " The Friends Stage " after the series finale . Filming for the series began during the summer ( June , July , and August in the US ) of 1994 in front of a live audience , who were given a summary of the series to familiarize themselves with the six main characters ; a hired comedian entertained the studio audience between takes . Each 22 @-@ minute episode took six hours to film — twice the length of most sitcom tapings — mainly due to the several retakes and rewrites of the script . 
 Although the producers always wanted to find the right stories to take advantage of being on location , Friends was never shot in New York . Bright felt that filming outside the studio made episodes less funny , even when shooting on the lot outside , and that the live audience was an integral part of the series . When the series was criticized for incorrectly depicting New York , with the financially struggling group of friends being able to afford huge apartments , Bright noted that the set had to be big enough for the cameras , lighting , and " for the audience to be able to see what 's going on " ; the apartments also needed to provide a place for the actors to execute the funny scripts . The fourth season finale was shot on location in London because the producers were aware of the series ' popularity in the UK . The scenes were shot in a studio with three audiences each made up of 500 people . These were the show 's largest audiences throughout its run . The fifth season finale , set in Las Vegas , was filmed at Warner Bros. Studios , although Bright met people who thought it was filmed on location . 
 = = Series finale = = 
 The series ' creators completed the first draft of the hour @-@ long finale in January 2004 , four months before its original airing . Crane , Kauffman and Bright watched the finales of other sitcoms to prepare the episode 's outline , paying attention to what worked and what did not . They liked the ones that stayed true to the series , citing the finale of The Mary Tyler Moore Show as the gold standard . Crane , Kauffman , and Bright had difficulty writing the finale , and spent several days thinking about the final scene without being able to write a word . They did not want to do " something high concept , or take the show out of the show . " The most critical parts of the finale were shot without an audience , and with a minimum number of crew members . The main cast enjoyed the finale and were confident that the fans would react similarly : 
 It 's exactly what I had hoped . We all end up with a sense of a new beginning and the audience has a sense that it 's a new chapter in the lives of all these characters . 
 NBC heavily promoted the series finale , which was preceded by weeks of media hype . Local NBC affiliates organized viewing parties around the U.S. , including an event at Universal CityWalk featuring a special broadcast of the finale on an outdoor Astrovision screen . The finale was the subject of two episodes of Dateline NBC , a weekly television newsmagazine , one of which ran for two hours . A one @-@ hour retrospective of clips from previous episodes was shown before to the airing of the episode . Following the finale , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno was filmed on the set of the Friends ' Central Perk coffee house , which featured the series ' cast as guests . The advertising rates for the finale averaged $ 2 million for 30 seconds of commercial time , breaking the record held by the Seinfeld finale at $ 1 @.@ 7 million . 
 In the U.S. , 52 @.@ 5 million viewers watched the finale on May 6 , 2004 , making it the most watched entertainment telecast since the Seinfeld finale in 1998 . Although it was not the series ' most watched episode , the finale was the fourth most watched series finale in television history , only behind the finales of M * A * S * H , Cheers and Seinfeld , which were respectively watched by 105 , 80 @.@ 4 and 76 @.@ 2 million viewers . The retrospective episode was watched by fewer than 36 million viewers , and the finale was the second most watched television broadcast of the year , only behind the Super Bowl . Following the finales of Friends and Frasier , media critics speculated about the fate of the sitcom genre . Expressed opinions varied between a signaling of the end of the sitcom genre , a small decline in the large history of the genre , and a general reduction of scripted television in favor of reality shows . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Early reviews of the series were mixed and it holds a Metacritic score of 59 out of 100 , based on 20 sampled reviews , indicating " mixed to average reviews . " Tom Feran of The Plain Dealer wrote that the series traded " vaguely and less successfully on the hanging @-@ out style of Seinfeld " , while Ann Hodges of the Houston Chronicle called it " the new Seinfeld wannabe , but it will never be as funny as Seinfeld . " In the Los Angeles Daily News , Ray Richmond named the series as " one of the brighter comedies of the new season " , and The Los Angeles Times called it " flat @-@ out the best comedy series of the new season . " 
 Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Ginny Holbert found Joey and Rachel 's characteristics to be underdeveloped , while Richmond commended the cast as a " likeable , youth ensemble " with " good chemistry . " Robert Bianco of USA Today was complimentary of Schwimmer , calling him " terrific . " He also praised the female leads , but was concerned that Perry 's role as Chandler was " undefined " and that LeBlanc was " relying too much on the same brain @-@ dead stud routine that was already tired the last two times he tried it . " The authors of Friends Like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends thought that the cast was " trying just a little too hard " , in particular Perry and Schwimmer . 
 As the series progressed , reviews became more positive , and Friends became one of the most popular sitcoms of its time . It is now often ranked among the all @-@ time best TV shows . Critics commended the series as having consistently sharp writing and chemistry between the main actors . Noel Holston of Newsday , who had dismissed the pilot as a " so @-@ so Seinfeld wannabe " in 1994 , repudiated his earlier review after rewatching the episode , and felt like writing an apology to the writers . Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com thought that the series " hit its stride " in the second season . Havrilesky found the character @-@ specific jokes and situations " could reliably make you laugh out loud a few times each episode " , and the quality of writing allowed the stories to be " original and innovative . " Bill Carter of The New York Times called the eighth season a " truly stunning comeback . " Carter found that by " generating new hot storylines and high @-@ decibel laughs " , the series made its way " back into the hearts of its fans . " However , Liane Bonin of Entertainment Weekly felt that the direction of the ninth season was a " disappointing buzzkill " , criticizing it for the non @-@ stop celebrity guest spots and going into jump the shark territory . Although disappointed with the season , Bonin noted that " the writing [ was ] still sharp . " Havrilesky thought that the tenth season was " alarmingly awful , far worse than you would ever imagine a show that was once so good could be . " Friends was featured on Time 's list of " The 100 Best TV Shows of All @-@ Time " , saying , " the well @-@ hidden secret of this show was that it called itself Friends , and was really about family . " 
 Reviews of the series finale were mixed . USA Today 's Robert Bianco described the finale as entertaining and satisfying , and praised it for deftly mixing emotion and humor while highlighting each of the stars . Sarah Rodman of the Boston Herald praised Aniston and Schwimmer for their acting , but felt that their characters ' reunion was " a bit too neat , even if it was what most of the show 's legions of fans wanted . " Roger Catlin of the Hartford Courant felt that newcomers to the series would be " surprised at how laughless the affair could be , and how nearly every strained gag depends on the sheer stupidity of its characters . " Ken Parish Perkins , writing for Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram , pointed out that the finale was " more touching than comical , more satisfying in terms of closure than knee @-@ slappingly funny . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 To maintain the series ' ensemble format , the main cast members decided to enter themselves in the same acting categories for awards . Beginning with the series ' eighth season , the actors decided to submit themselves in the lead actor balloting , rather than in the supporting actor fields . The series was nominated for 62 Primetime Emmy Awards , winning six . Aniston and Kudrow are the only main cast members to win an Emmy , while Cox is the only actor not to be nominated . The series won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2002 , receiving nominations in 1995 , 1996 , 1999 , 2000 , and 2003 . The series also won an American Comedy Award , one GLAAD Media Award , one Golden Globe Award , three Logie Awards , six People 's Choice Awards , one Satellite Award , and one Screen Actors Guild Award . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The table below shows the ratings of Friends in the United States , where it consistently ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings . " Rank " refers to how well Friends rated compared to other television series that aired during primetime hours of the corresponding television season . It is shown in relation to the total number of series airing on the then @-@ six major English @-@ language networks in a given season . " Viewers " refers to the average number of viewers for all original episodes , broadcast during the television season in the series ' regular timeslot . The " season premiere " is the date that the first episode of the season aired , and the " season finale " is the date that the final episode of the season aired . So far , Friends has been the last sitcom to reach the No. 1 spot on television , as its successors were CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , American Idol , NBC Sunday Night Football and NCIS . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Although the producers thought of Friends as " only a TV show " , numerous psychologists investigated the cultural impact of Friends during the series ' run . Aniston 's hairstyle was nicknamed " The Rachel " , and copied around the world . Joey 's catchphrase , " How you doin ' ? " , became a popular part of Western English slang , often used as a pick @-@ up line or when greeting friends . The series also influenced the English language , according to a study by the University of Toronto that found that the characters used the emphasized word " so " to modify adjectives more often than any other intensifier . Although the preference had already made its way into the American vernacular , usage on the series may have accelerated the change . Perry 's habit of ending a sentence unfinished for sarcasm also influenced viewers ' speech . Following the September 11 attacks , ratings increased 17 % over the previous season . 
 Friends is parodied in the twelfth season Murder , She Wrote episode " Murder Among Friends . " In the episode , amateur sleuth Jessica Fletcher ( Angela Lansbury ) investigates the murder of a writer for Buds , a fictional television series about the daily lives of a group of city friends . The episode was devised after CBS moved Murder , She Wrote from its regular Sunday night timeslot to a Thursday night timeslot directly opposite Friends on NBC ; Angela Lansbury was quoted by Bruce Lansbury , her brother and Murder , She Wrote 's supervising producer , as having " a bit of an attitude " about the move to Thursday , but he saw the plot as " a friendly setup , no mean @-@ spiritedness . " Jerry Ludwig , the writer of the episode , researched the " flavor " of Buds by watching episodes of Friends . 
 The Central Perk coffee house , one of the principal settings of the series , has inspired various imitations worldwide . In 2006 , Iranian businessman Mojtaba <unk> started a Central Perk franchise , registering the name in 32 countries . The decor of the coffee houses is inspired by Friends , featuring replica couches , counters , neon signage and bricks . The coffee houses also contain paintings of the various characters from the series , and televisions playing Friends episodes . James Michael Tyler , who plays the Central Perk manager in the series , Gunther , attended the grand opening of the Dubai cafe , where he worked as a waiter . Central Perk was rebuilt as part of a museum exhibit at Warner Bros. Studios , and was shown on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in October 2008 . Jennifer Aniston revisited the set for the first time since the series finale in 2004 . From September 24 to October 7 , 2009 , a Central Perk replica was based at <unk> Street , Soho , London . The coffee house sold real coffee to customers and featured a display of Friends memorabilia and props , such as the Geller Cup from the season three episode " The One with the Football . " In Beijing , business owner Du Xin opened a coffee shop named Central Perk in March 2010 . There are two Friends themed cafes in Pakistan as well . One in Lahore known as " Friends Cafe " and the other in Peshawar called " Central Perk " . Both of those cafes have an iconic couch , a guitar and foosball table , quotes from the show on the walls and even episode reruns on a projector . They 're also planning to have their own Gunther at the bar . 
 Friends has also developed an alternative family lifestyle by representing young people that live unconventional domestic lives . It presents the idea that " all you need is good friends " and can construct families through choice . The audience is able to identify with the program through the troubles seen on weekly episodes . It portrays a new way of living life and developing relationships which are not normally seen in conventional society . According to a pop @-@ culture expert at the University at Buffalo , Friends is " one of those rare shows that marked a change in American culture . " The images of youth and the roles they portray are better defined and represent a lifestyle that centres around creating and sustaining relationships between friends running their own lives and seeking help from each other . 
 The Guardian 's TV and radio blog stated that Friends has impacted the creation of other television shows such as How I Met Your Mother . The similarities between the two consist of both sitcoms taking place in Manhattan , a group of white adults who are funny and have similar character traits . 
 Readers of TV Guide voted the cast of Friends their Best Comedy cast of all time , ranking at 29 % of the votes , beating Seinfeld , which registered 18 % . A poll undertaken by 60 Minutes and Vanity Fair named Friends the third greatest sitcom of all time . In 2014 , the series was ranked by Mundo <unk> the Best TV Series of All Time . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 After the produced pilot lived up to NBC 's hopes , the series premiered with the name Friends on September 22 , 1994 , in the coveted Thursday 8 : 30 p.m. timeslot . The pilot aired between Mad About You and Seinfeld , and was watched by almost 22 million American viewers . The series was a huge success throughout its run , and was a staple of NBC 's Thursday night line @-@ up , dubbed by the network as Must See TV . When Crane told reporters in 2001 that the ninth season was a possibility , critics believed that he was posturing , and that at least two of the cast members would not sign on for another season . When it was confirmed that Friends would return for a ninth season , the news was mainly about the amount of money — $ 7 million per episode — that it took to bring the series back for another season . 
 After year @-@ long expectations that the ninth season would be the series ' last , NBC signed a deal in late December 2002 to bring the series back for a final tenth season . The series ' creative team did not want to extend negotiations into the next year , and wanted to start writing the rest of the ninth season episodes and a potential series finale . NBC agreed to pay $ 10 million to Warner Bros. for the production of each tenth season episode , the highest price in television history for a 30 @-@ minute series . Although NBC was unable to bring in enough advertising revenue from commercials to cover the costs , the series was integral to the Thursday night schedule , which brought high ratings and profits to the other television series . The cast demanded that the tenth season be reduced from the usual 24 episodes to 18 episodes to allow them to work on outside projects . 
 In fall 2001 , Warner Bros. Domestic Cable made a deal with sister network TBS ( both are owned by Time Warner ) to air the series in rerun syndication . Warner Bros. Domestic Cable announced that it had sold additional cable rights to Friends to Nick at Nite which began airing in the fall of 2011 ( unlike the TBS and broadcast syndication airings , Nick at Nite broadcasts of the series , which began airing as part of a seven @-@ night launch marathon on September 5 , 2011 , replace the end credit tag scenes with marginalized credits featuring promotions for the series and other Nick at Nite programs ) . Warner Bros. was expected to make $ 200 million in license fees and advertising from the deal . Nick at Nite paid $ 500 @,@ 000 per episode to air the episodes after 6 p.m. ET for six years through fall 2017 . TBS also renewed its contract for the same six @-@ year period as Nick at Nite but paid $ 275 @,@ 000 per episode because airings were restricted to before 6 p.m. ET except for the first year . In syndication until 2005 , Friends had earned $ 4 million per episode in cash license fees for a total of $ 944 million . 
 Beginning on March 5 , 2012 , high definition versions of all 236 Friends episodes were made available to local broadcast stations , starting with the pilot episode . For the remastered episodes , Warner Bros. restored previously cropped images on the left and right sides of the screen , using the original 35 mm film source , to use the entire 16 : 9 widescreen frame . These masters had been airing in New Zealand on TV2 since January 2011 . Netflix added all ten seasons of Friends in high definition to their streaming service in the United States on January 1 , 2015 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Friends has aired on different channels in the UK , including Channel 4 , Sky1 , E4 , and Comedy Central UK . On September 4 , 2011 , Friends officially ended on E4 after the channel re @-@ ran the series since 2004 . Comedy Central took over the rights to air the program from October 2011 . In the Republic of Ireland each season of the show made its European debut on RTÉ2 . After 2004 RTÉ2 began to repeat the series from the start before moving over to TV3 and its digital channel 3e in 2010 . As of February 2015 , repeats of the show have returned to RTÉ2 while also broadcasting on Comedy Central Ireland . 
 Friends has aired in Australia on the Seven Network ( season 1 only ) , Nine Network ( season 2 – 10 ) , Network Ten ( 2007 – 09 , repeats ) , on GEM ( a sub @-@ channel of the Nine Network ) , and on pay TV channel TV Hits formerly aired on Arena , 111 Hits . The show is broadcast on TV2 in New Zealand . 
 In Canada , the series was broadcast on Global . In later years , it was syndicated on several of its cable sibling networks , including Slice , <unk> , and <unk> , its previous incarnation . In India the show is broadcast by Comedy Central India on various times . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 All ten seasons have been released on DVD individually and as a box set . Each Region 1 season release contains special features and footage originally cut from the series , although Region 2 releases are as originally aired . For the first season , each episode is updated with color correction and sound enhancement . A wide range of Friends merchandise has been produced by various companies . In September 1995 , WEA Records released the first album of music from Friends , the Friends Original TV Soundtrack , containing music featured in previous and future episodes . The soundtrack debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 46 , and sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in November 1995 . In 1999 , a second soundtrack album entitled Friends Again was released . Other merchandise include a Friends version of the DVD game " Scene It ? " , and a quiz video game for PlayStation 2 and PC entitled Friends : The One with All the Trivia . On September 28 , 2009 , a box set was released in the UK celebrating the series ' 15th anniversary . The box set contained extended episodes , an episode guide , and original special features . 
 Warner Home Video released a complete series collection on Blu @-@ ray on November 13 , 2012 . The collection does not feature the extra deleted scenes and jokes that were included on prior DVD releases . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 = = = Joey = = = 
 After the series finale in 2004 , LeBlanc signed on for the spin @-@ off series , Joey , following Joey 's move to Los Angeles to pursue his acting career . Kauffman and Crane were not interested in the spin @-@ off , although Bright agreed to executive produce the series with Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg @-@ Meehan . NBC heavily promoted Joey and gave it Friends ' Thursday 8 : 00 pm timeslot . The pilot was watched by 18 @.@ 60 million American viewers , but ratings continually decreased throughout the series ' two seasons , averaging 10 @.@ 20 million viewers in the first season and 7 @.@ 10 million in the second . The final broadcast episode on March 7 , 2006 was watched by 7 @.@ 09 million viewers ; NBC cancelled the series on May 15 , 2006 after two seasons . Bright blamed the collaboration between NBC executives , the studio and other producers for quickly ruining the series : 
 On Friends , Joey was a womanizer , but we enjoyed his exploits . He was a solid friend , a guy you knew you could count on . Joey was deconstructed to be a guy who couldn 't get a job , couldn 't ask a girl out . He became a pathetic , mopey character . I felt he was moving in the wrong direction , but I was not heard . 
 = = = Film rumors = = = 
 Following the series finale , rumors began to emerge of a Friends film , although all were proven untrue . Rumors of a film reemerged after the release of the Sex and the City film in 2008 , which proved to be a success at the box office . The Daily Telegraph reported in July 2008 that the main cast members had agreed to star in the project , and that filming was going to start within the next 18 months . When asked about the film , Kudrow said that she was unaware of the talks , but expressed interest in the idea . The director of publicity for Warner Bros. , Jayne Trotman , said there was " no truth in the story " , and Perry 's spokeswoman added that " nothing is happening in this regard , so the rumor is false . " Kudrow and Cox told the Associated Press in January 2010 that they had never been approached by Crane and Kauffman to make a film version of the series . 
 Co @-@ creator Marta Kauffman denied new rumors of a reunion in 2013 . She said there would never be a Friends movie as the characters had all grown up : " Friends was about that time in your life when your friends are your family and once you have a family , there 's no need anymore . " When LeBlanc visited a British polo match where royalty were present , he reported that " all they ( Prince William and Harry ) wanted to know was ' When is the Friends reunion ? ' That 's all they wanted to know about . " ( He continued , " I told them to [ censored ] off . " ) 
 In December 2013 , following rumors suggesting that Aniston and Cox were discussing plans for a 2014 reunion , a poster titled ' The One After The 10 Year Break ' went viral on the internet , claiming to be an advertisement for a reunion show . The poster was met with excitement at first , and then anger after a tweet by Lisa Kudrow implied that the rumor was untrue . It was later confirmed on January 16 , 2014 , that the poster was made by a fan , who later apologized for misleading fans of the show . 
 = Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite = 
 Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite is the debut album by American R & B recording artist Maxwell , released on April 2 , 1996 , by Columbia Records . He worked on the album between 1994 and 1995 at Electric Lady Studios , RPM , Sorcerer , and Chung King Studios in New York City , and CRC Studios in Chicago . The record 's music features a mellow , groove @-@ based sound with elements of funk , jazz , smooth soul , and quiet storm . A concept album , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was composed as a song cycle that focuses on an adult romance , based in part on Maxwell 's personal experiences . 
 Although Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was not an immediate commercial success , it was helped by the release of its second single " Ascension ( Don 't Ever Wonder ) " . Eventually becoming a million @-@ seller , the album was also a success with critics , who praised it as a departure from the mainstream , hip hop @-@ oriented R & B of the time , while earning Maxwell several accolades and comparisons to soul singers of the past , particularly Marvin Gaye and Prince . 
 The success of Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite elevated Maxwell 's reputation to that of a sex symbol and a notable performer in the music industry . He was credited with shaping the " neo soul " movement of musicians that rose to prominence during the late 1990s . Along with D 'Angelo 's Brown Sugar ( 1995 ) and Erykah Badu 's Baduizm ( 1997 ) , the album provided commercial exposure to neo soul and has since been cited by several critics as Maxwell 's greatest work . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After receiving a low @-@ cost Casio keyboard from a friend , Brooklyn , New York @-@ native Maxwell began composing material at age 17 . Raised in the borough 's East New York @-@ section , Maxwell 's previous musical experience included his beginnings as a singer in the congregation of his Baptist church , which had become an integral part of his life after the death of his father in a plane crash . Already a fan of what he described as " <unk> curl soul " , which was the trademark of early 1980s R & B acts such as Patrice Rushen , S.O.S. Band and Rose Royce , Maxwell began to teach himself to play a variety of instruments . According to him , the R & B of the early 1980s contained " the perfect combination of computerized instrumentation with a live feel " , and that the genre 's dynamics later became lost due to the influence of hip hop on R & B. Despite facing ridicule from classmates for being shy and awkward , he progressed and continued to develop his musical abilities . 
 At 19 , Maxwell began performing throughout the New York club circuit while supporting himself by waiting tables during the day . He was able to gain access to a 24 track recording studio and started to record songs for a demo tape , which he circulated among his friends . The demo engendered interest , and his official debut concert performance at Manhattan nightclub Nell 's drew a crowd . During the next two years , Maxwell wrote and recorded over three hundred songs and played frequently at small venues throughout New York City . Maxwell 's performances continued to draw interest and increase the buzz about him , and he was called " the next Prince " by a writer from Vibe magazine who attended one of his shows . After earning a considerable reputation , Maxwell signed a recording contract with Columbia Records in 1994 . He adopted his middle name as a moniker out of respect for his family 's privacy . 
 Maxwell recorded his debut album between 1994 and 1995 at Electric Lady Studios , RPM Studios , Sorcerer Studios and Chung King Studios in New York City , and at CRC Studios in Chicago , Illinois . Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was produced primarily by Peter Mokran , who was credited as P.M. , and Maxwell , who was credited as " <unk> " , a play on the word muse . Columbia executives reluctantly gave Maxwell creative freedom in his contract and were hesitant to allow him produce the album alone . They assigned Chicago @-@ based , English producer and multi @-@ instrumentalist Stuart Matthewman to the project , but he only produced the first few tracks . Matthewman had previously worked with English R & B and jazz group Sade . During the recording sessions , Maxwell worked extensively with collaborators , including Matthewman , soul singer @-@ songwriter Leon Ware , and funk guitarist Melvin " Wah @-@ Wah Watson " Ragin . Prior to working with Maxwell , Ware and Ragin were collaborators of soul musician Marvin Gaye ; Ware had produced and composed most of Gaye 's tenth album I Want You ( 1976 ) . 
 Production assistance and instrumentation from such veteran session musicians contributed significantly to Urban Hang Suite 's vintage overtones and classic R & B influences . Matthewman and Maxwell played several instruments during recording for the album , including guitar , drums , saxophone , bass , and keyboards . They also composed three of the album 's eleven tracks together . After the recording sessions ended in March 1995 , Urban Hang Suite was mixed by P.M. ( Peter Mokran ) and audio engineer Mike <unk> , after which it was mastered by Tom Coyne at Sterling Sound in New York City . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Although one of his earliest influences was early 1980s urban R & B , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was inspired by the sounds and themes of classic soul artists such as Marvin Gaye , Curtis Mayfield , Barry White , Stevie Wonder and Prince . According to Prince biographer Alex Hahn , Maxwell adopts the singer 's sound and style , particularly from songs such as " Do Me , Baby " ( 1982 ) and " Pink Cashmere " ( 1993 ) , while The New York Times 's Amy Linden said that he " melds a soft @-@ spoken singing style with the fluid , spacious grooves often associated with the cocktail funk of Sade " . Critics have also noted Maxwell 's falsetto singing voice , and the music 's atmospheric , funky instrumentation , featuring mellow horns , wah wah guitar , Rhodes piano and deep , articulate bass lines . The tempo of the songs slowly diminishes through the course of the album 's songs . One critic attributes the tempo decrease to Stuart Matthewman 's production . The album contains elements of funk , jazz , contemporary R & B and quiet storm , and it is mostly composed of sexual balladry and slow jams . 
 A concept album , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite features song cycle that focuses on an adult romance from first encounter to its dramatic conclusion . Over the course of the album , Maxwell details a single passionate encounter . Throughout , it examines the concept with lyrical themes of love , sex and spirituality , as well as issues such as commitment , marriage and monogamy . Maxwell has described the themes and his thoughts on romance as " idealistic " on Urban Hang Suite . Rolling Stone editor David Fricke compared the album 's concept to that of Marvin Gaye 's 1978 record Here , My Dear , which dealt with his divorce , saying that Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite had been reworked as a treatise on monogamy . The album has been noted for the sincerity of Maxwell 's lyrics , which depict a man 's weakness and vulnerability to a woman 's love . In an interview with music journalist Mark Coleman , Maxwell cited his respect for African @-@ American women as the inspiration for the respectful nature of his lyrics towards women . Maxwell told Interview 's Dimitri <unk> that his main muse for Urban Hang Suite was women , and further elaborated on his inspiration , stating : 
 Maxwell also cited his grandmother and other West Indian women he knows as the inspiration behind his romantic notions . Music journalists inferred that the album was inspired by or based on an unsuccessful affair in Maxwell 's life . Maxwell said in an interview , " I 'm so innately romantic and always have been , and I went through this particular romantic experience and based my album on that " . The album 's liner notes have a dedication from Maxwell to his " <unk> " , stating " I could never have done this without you " . 
 The album opens with an instrumental track , " The Urban Theme " , which begins with the sound of a stylus dropping on a vinyl record . The track 's prominent funk sound is reminiscent of the music of the Brand New Heavies . " Welcome " features the album 's prominent sexual vibe , and contains a quiet storm sound and saxophone . The two opening tracks both contain prominent funk influence . Roni Sarig wrote that their " early ' 80s full @-@ band R & B and jazz pop grooves are reminiscent of Maze 's brightest days and Steely Dan 's coolest nights . " The funk @-@ influenced " Sumthin ' Sumthin ' " , which was co @-@ written by Leon Ware , contains a strong , rhythmically tight groove created by the implementation of the " pocket " bass technique . Co @-@ written by songwriter <unk> <unk> , " Ascension ( Don 't Ever Wonder ) " opens with a funky groove and bass line , and features a forceful rhythm and rough funk sound . The song contains strong gospel overtones with references to God in the lyrics . The song has been covered by gospel artists such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> Pace . 
 Cited by Blender magazine as one of the " Greatest Make @-@ Out Songs of All Time " , " ... Til the Cops Come Knockin ' " contains sexually explicit lyrics and a slower tempo than its preceding tracks . It also contains the sound of distant sirens and " grinding porn @-@ movie " guitar licks . The songs " Whenever Wherever Whatever " and " Lonely 's the Only Company ( I & II ) " are ballads that contain themes of vulnerability to love . " <unk> ( The Proposal Jam ) " completes the album 's concept of monogamy with lyrics depicting a marriage proposal from Maxwell . Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite closes with the instrumental track " The Suite Theme " . While the length of the track is listed as 13 : 47 minutes , the song ends after 6 : 00 minutes , followed by a period of silence , before resuming with a hidden track , which consists of 1 : 41 minutes of an instrumental version of " ... Til the Cops Come Knockin ' " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was completed , the finished recordings were presented to Columbia Records in mid 1995 . It was shelved for nearly a year , because of issues with Columbia 's management , the label 's extensive reorganization , and record executives ' doubts regarding the album 's commercial potential . The marketplace dominance of hip hop soul in 1995 was in contrast with Maxwell 's monogamous themes and older soul influences , which Columbia worried would be interpreted as old @-@ fashioned . The label 's executives also feared that his romantic concept and image would not appeal to listeners . Maxwell made matters worse by refusing to allow his picture to be placed on the album 's front cover ; instead he preferred to have the track listing and other information he felt was more important about the album in place of his photo . Regarding the cover , Maxwell later said " I wanted people to have the facts : the title , the selections and the fact that you had to basically buy it . I wanted people to come to the music and not base any opinion on the image " . Columbia reached a compromise with Maxwell and used a promotional shot of him as the back cover . The album 's front cover art also features a picture of a pair of golden women 's shoes on the floor of a hotel room , with the bar coding prominently displayed . In the period before its release , Maxwell wrote and demoed songs for a subsequent studio album , and embarked on an African American college tour with Groove Theory and the Fugees . 
 Released on April 2 , 1996 , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was slow to obtain commercial interest . On April 20 , it made its chart debut at number 38 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums in the United States . The gold @-@ certified single " Ascension ( Don 't Ever Wonder ) " , which had shipped 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US by October , was considered by music journalists to be a significant factor in consumers ' increased interest in the album . On September 17 , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . By 1997 , the album had shipped one million copies , earning platinum status from the RIAA . It spent seventy @-@ eight weeks on the Billboard 200 albums chart , while becoming a Top 30 chart hit in the United Kingdom . In 2002 , it was certified double platinum , and by 2008 , it stood as Maxwell 's best @-@ selling album , having sold 1 @,@ 790 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite received positive reviews from critics . It was called a " masterpiece " by several reviewers who viewed it as a departure from the mainstream , hip hop @-@ oriented R & B of the time . Maxwell was also compared to soul singers of the 1960s and 1970s . Writing for Vibe , OJ Lima said the record was a " refreshing detour from hump @-@ <unk> ' ' 90s R & B " , while Dimitri Ehrlich from Entertainment Weekly wrote that Maxwell " smooths hip @-@ hop 's and soul 's edges , proving that black dance music doesn 't automatically mean ghetto culture . " Jim Farber of the New York Daily News called it " one of the few modern sex albums to offer a sense of succor " , and Urban Latino hailed it as " one of the most soulful releases of the year " , writing that Maxwell exhibited " the soul of Curtis Mayfield , the poetics of Beni More and the stage presence of Michael Jackson , pre @-@ Thriller " . In American Visions , Michael George wrote , " In an age where young , black artists are criticized ( often rightly so ) for misogynistic lyrics , Maxwell 's focus on commitment is refreshing . But more important , he can flat @-@ out sing . " In The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Arion Berger later said , " [ Maxwell 's ] laid @-@ back romanticism has heat at its core and a powerful groove that grounds the music : By varying the push of the beat but retaining the central mellow vibe , Maxwell creates a sound as felicitous on headphones as it is in the bedroom . " Peter Shapiro was more critical , panning Maxwell 's lyrics and calling the album an " overly mannered pastiche of early 70s soul ... all style and no substance " . In The Village Voice , Robert Christgau rated the album a " dud " , indicating " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought " . 
 At the end of 1996 , Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite named one of the year 's 10 best albums in lists published by Rolling Stone , Time , and USA Today . It was named the 20th best album of 1996 in the Pazz and Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published by The Village Voice . For the record , Maxwell was nominated for the 1997 Grammy Award for Best R & B Album , received three NAACP Image Award nominations , and wins in the categories of Best Male R & B / Soul Album and Best Male R & B / Soul Single ( for " Ascension " ) , as well as Best R & B / Soul or Rap New Artist , for the 1997 Soul Train Awards . That year , Rolling Stone voted him Best R & B Artist . The album 's success also earned Maxwell his own MTV Unplugged special , which was a popular measure of mainstream success for recording artists in the 1990s . Nick Coleman from The Independent later cited Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite as the " sexiest record of 1996 " , while Q magazine called it " one of the very best R & B records of the ' 90s . " Stylus Magazine ranked it at number six on their list of the Top Ten Albums from 1996 . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Along with musicians D 'Angelo and Erykah Badu , Maxwell was credited with helping to shape the " neo soul " movement that rose to prominence during the late 1990s . Along with D 'Angelo 's Brown Sugar ( 1995 ) and Badu 's Baduizm ( 1997 ) , Urban Hang Suite has been recognized by writers for beginning neo soul 's popularity and helping the genre obtain commercial visibility . However , in contrast to D 'Angelo , Maxwell was more conventional in his approach on his debut album . The term " neo soul " was penned in the late 1990s by record executive Kedar Massenburg , who managed both D 'Angelo and Erykah Badu . According to Shapiro , the term itself refers to a musical style that obtains its influence from more classical styles , and bohemian musicians seeking a soul revival , while setting themselves apart from the more contemporary sounds of their mainstream R & B counterparts . In commenting on the " new soul revival " in music , Maxwell told Entertainment Weekly in 1997 that " everything out there musically was inspired or influenced by something from the past . It 's not about creating some super @-@ fresh new thing . If it doesn 't lend itself to your history , how is it going to extend to your future ? " According to <unk> Fields , Maxwell received an overwhelmingly positive reaction to his debut album from music listeners due to their weariness of contemporary black music 's predictability . 
 Maxwell 's role in writing and producing the album exhibited a level of artistic control by an R & B artist that was uncommon in the recording industry at the time . On Maxwell 's emergence with Urban Hang Suite , writer Carol Brennan cited him , along with the Fugees , D 'Angelo and Tony Rich , as neo soul musicians that " exhibited the identifying characteristics of this new breed of R & B artists : lyrics that give voice to intense personal expression , creative control over the music , and a unexpectedly successful debut . " In his book A Change Is Gonna Come : Music , Race & the Soul of America ( 2006 ) , Craig Hansen Werner lists Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite as important in neo soul , including it along with R. Kelly 's R. ( 1998 ) , D 'Angelo 's Voodoo ( 2000 ) , the Young Disciples ' Road to Freedom ( 1991 ) , Aaliyah 's self @-@ titled final release ( 2001 ) , Faith Evans ' Keep the Faith ( 1998 ) and " anything by Seal " as among " the starter kit " for the genre . In Songs in the Key of Black Life : A Rhythm and Blues Nation ( 2003 ) , writer Mark Anthony Neal cited the album as one of the most popular of neo soul recordings , along with Musiq Soulchild 's <unk> ( 2000 ) and India.Arie 's Acoustic Soul ( 2001 ) , that helped to redefine the boundaries and contours of black pop and R & B. 
 The unexpected commercial and critical success of Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite helped establish Maxwell as a serious performer in the music industry . He was described by critics as " part of a new generation of smooth soul crooners " , and he obtained a reputation among fans as a sex symbol , which according to one journalist , was due to his " wild " afro and " extravagant cheekbones " . His concert performances in promotion of the album attracted many female fans . One sold @-@ out concert at New York City 's Radio City Music Hall was praised by Rolling Stone , who compared him to R & B singers such as Gaye , Prince , Frankie Beverly , and Luther Vandross . The magazine highlighted Maxwell 's showmanship , " down @-@ to @-@ earth " attitude and body movements including dropping down to his knees , swiveling his hips in a " slow grind " , and crawling across the stage while singing . Essence writer Jeannine Amber compared his stage presence to Teddy Pendergrass . According to some journalists , Maxwell 's appeal to female fans was due to the respectful and sincere nature of his lyrics regarding women . In Contemporary Musician ( 1998 ) , Mary Alice Adams examined the personal impact of his debut album on listeners : 
 Maxwell 's following studio albums were received less enthusiastically by critics , who were more critical of his songwriting on his next two studio albums , <unk> ( 1998 ) and Now ( 2001 ) . Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite has since been cited by several critics as his best album , including Stephen Cook from AllMusic , who said it was " destined to become a classic contemporary R & B disc " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Maxwell 's Urban Hang Suite adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Bahrain = 
 Bahrain ( / <unk> / ; Arabic : البحرين al @-@ <unk> ) , officially the Kingdom of Bahrain ( Arabic : <unk> البحرين Mamlakat al @-@ <unk> ) , is an island country situated near the western shores of the Persian Gulf in the Middle East . It is an archipelago with Bahrain Island , the largest land mass , at 55 km ( 34 mi ) long by 18 km ( 11 mi ) wide . Saudi Arabia lies to the west and is connected to Bahrain by the King Fahd Causeway while Iran lies 200 km ( 124 mi ) to the north across the Persian Gulf . The peninsula of Qatar is to the southeast across the Gulf of Bahrain . The population in 2010 stood at 1 @,@ 234 @,@ 571 , including 666 @,@ 172 non @-@ nationals . 
 Bahrain is the site of the ancient Dilmun civilisation . It has been famed since antiquity for its pearl fisheries , which were considered the best in the world into the 19th century . Bahrain was one of the earliest areas to convert to Islam ( AD 628 ) . Following a period of Arab rule , Bahrain was occupied by the Portuguese in 1521 , who in turn were expelled in 1602 by Shah Abbas I of the Safavid dynasty under the Persian Empire . In 1783 , the Bani Utbah clan captured Bahrain from Nasr Al @-@ Madhkur and it has since been ruled by the Al Khalifa royal family , with Ahmed al Fateh as Bahrain 's first <unk> . In the late 1800s , following successive treaties with the British , Bahrain became a protectorate of the United Kingdom . In 1971 , Bahrain declared independence . Formerly a state , Bahrain was declared a Kingdom in 2002 . In 2011 , the country experienced protests inspired by the regional Arab Spring . 
 Bahrain had the first post @-@ oil economy in the Persian Gulf . Since the late 20th century , Bahrain has invested in the banking and tourism sectors . The country 's capital , Manama , is home to many large financial structures . Bahrain has a high Human Development Index and was recognised by the World Bank as a high income economy . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In Arabic , Bahrayn is the dual form of <unk> ( " sea " ) , so al @-@ Bahrayn means " the two seas " , although which two seas were originally intended remains in dispute . The term appears five times in the Quran , but does not refer to the modern island — originally known to the Arabs as Awal — but rather to all of Eastern Arabia ( most notably al @-@ <unk> and al @-@ Hasa ) . 
 Today , Bahrain 's " two seas " are instead generally taken to be the bay east and west of the island , the seas north and south of the island , or the salt and fresh water present above and below the ground . In addition to wells , there are areas of the sea north of Bahrain where fresh water bubbles up in the middle of the salt water as noted by visitors since antiquity . An alternate theory with regard to Bahrain 's toponymy is offered by the al @-@ Ahsa region , which suggests that the two seas were the Great Green Ocean ( the Persian Gulf ) and a peaceful lake on the Arabian mainland . Another supposition by al @-@ <unk> suggests that the more formal name Bahri ( lit . " belonging to the sea " ) would have been misunderstood and so was opted against . 
 Until the late Middle Ages , " Bahrain " referred to the region of Eastern Arabia that included Southern Iraq , Kuwait , Al @-@ Hasa , Qatif and Bahrain . The region stretched from Basra in Iraq to the Strait of Hormuz in Oman . This was <unk> al @-@ Bahrayn 's " Bahrayn Province " . The exact date at which the term " Bahrain " began to refer solely to the Awal archipelago is unknown . The entire coastal strip of Eastern Arabia was known as " Bahrain " for a millennium . The island and kingdom were also commonly spelled <unk> into the 1950s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 Bahrain was home to the Dilmun civilization , an important Bronze Age trade centre linking Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley . Bahrain was later ruled by the Assyrians and Babylonians . 
 From the 6th to 3rd century BC , Bahrain was part of the Persian Empire ruled by the <unk> dynasty . By about 250 BC , Parthia brought the Persian Gulf under its control and extended its influence as far as Oman . The Parthians established garrisons along the southern coast of the Persian Gulf to control trade routes . 
 During the classical era , Bahrain was referred to by the ancient Greeks as Tylos , the centre of pearl trading , when the Greek admiral Nearchus serving under Alexander the Great landed on Bahrain . Nearchus is believed to have been the first of Alexander 's commanders to visit the island , and he found a verdant land that was part of a wide trading network ; he recorded : “ That on the island of Tylos , situated in the Persian Gulf , are large plantations of cotton trees , from which are manufactured clothes called <unk> , of strongly differing degrees of value , some being costly , others less expensive . The use of these is not confined to India , but extends to Arabia . ” The Greek historian , Theophrastus , states that much of Bahrain was covered by these cotton trees and that Bahrain was famous for exporting walking canes engraved with emblems that were customarily carried in Babylon . 
 Alexander had planned to settle Greek colonists on Bahrain , and although it is not clear that this happened on the scale he envisaged , Bahrain became very much part of the Hellenised world : the language of the upper classes was Greek ( although Aramaic was in everyday use ) , while Zeus was worshipped in the form of the Arabian sun @-@ god Shams . Bahrain even became the site of Greek athletic contests . 
 The Greek historian Strabo believed the Phoenicians originate from Bahrain . Herodotus also believed that the homeland of the Phoenicians was Bahrain . This theory was accepted by the 19th @-@ century German classicist Arnold Heeren who said that : " In the Greek geographers , for instance , we read of two islands , named Tyrus or Tylos , and Arad , Bahrain , which boasted that they were the mother country of the Phoenicians , and exhibited relics of Phoenician temples . " The people of Tyre in particular have long maintained Persian Gulf origins , and the similarity in the words " Tylos " and " Tyre " has been commented upon . However , there is little evidence of any human settlement at all on Bahrain during the time when such migration had supposedly taken place . 
 The name Tylos is thought to be a Hellenisation of the Semitic , <unk> ( from Dilmun ) . The term Tylos was commonly used for the islands until Ptolemy ’ s Geographia when the inhabitants are referred to as ' <unk> ' . Some place names on Bahrain go back to the Tylos era ; for instance the name of Arad , a residential suburb of Muharraq , is believed to originate from " <unk> " , the ancient Greek name for Muharraq . 
 In the 3rd century , Ardashir I , the first ruler of the Sassanid dynasty , marched on Oman and Bahrain , where he defeated <unk> the ruler of Bahrain . At this time , Bahrain was known as <unk> ( which in Middle @-@ Persian / Pahlavi means " ewe @-@ fish " ) . 
 Bahrain was also the site of worship of a shark deity called Awal . Worshipers built a large statue to Awal in Muharraq , although it has now been lost . For many centuries after Tylos , Bahrain was known as Awal . By the 5th century , Bahrain became the centre for Nestorian Christianity , with the village <unk> as the seat of bishops . In 410 , according to the Oriental Syriac Church synodal records , a bishop named <unk> was excommunicated from the church in Bahrain . As a sect , the Nestorians were often persecuted as heretics by the Byzantine Empire , but Bahrain was outside the Empire 's control offering some safety . The names of several Muharraq villages today reflect Bahrain 's Christian legacy , with Al Dair meaning “ the monastery ” . 
 Bahrain 's pre @-@ Islamic population consisted of Christian Arabs ( mostly Abd al @-@ Qays ) , Persians ( Zoroastrians ) , Jews and Aramaic @-@ speaking agriculturalists . According to Robert Bertram Serjeant , the Baharna may be the Arabized " descendants of converts from the original population of Christians ( Aramaeans ) , Jews and Persians inhabiting the island and cultivated coastal provinces of Eastern Arabia at the time of the Muslim conquest " . The sedentary people of pre @-@ Islamic Bahrain were Aramaic speakers and to some degree Persian speakers , while Syriac functioned as a liturgical language . 
 = = = Time of Muhammad = = = 
 Muhammad 's first interaction with the people of Bahrain was the Al <unk> Invasion . Muhammad ordered a surprise attack on the Banu Salim tribe for allegedly plotting to attack Medina . He had gotten news that some tribes were assembling an army on Bahrain and preparing to attack the mainland . But the tribesmen retreated when they learned Muhammad was leading an army to do battle with them . 
 Traditional Islamic accounts state that Al @-@ ʿAlāʾ Al @-@ <unk> was sent as an envoy during the Expedition of Zaid ibn <unk> ( <unk> ) to the Bahrain region by the prophet Muhammad in AD 628 and that <unk> ibn @-@ Sawa al @-@ Tamimi , the local ruler , responded to his mission and converted the entire area . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In AD 899 , the Qarmatians , a millenarian Ismaili Muslim sect seized Bahrain , seeking to create a utopian society based on reason and redistribution of property among initiates . Thereafter , the Qarmatians demanded tribute from the caliph in Baghdad , and in AD 930 sacked Mecca and Medina , bringing the sacred Black Stone back to their base in Ahsa , in medieval Bahrain , for ransom . According to historian Al @-@ <unk> , the stone was returned 22 years later in 951 under mysterious circumstances . Wrapped in a sack , it was thrown into the Great Mosque of Kufa in Iraq , accompanied by a note saying " By command we took it , and by command we have brought it back . " The theft and removal of the Black Stone caused it to break into seven pieces . 
 Following their AD 976 defeat by the Abbasids , the <unk> were overthrown by the Arab <unk> dynasty of al @-@ Hasa , who took over the entire Bahrain region in 1076 . The <unk> controlled Bahrain until 1235 , when the archipelago was briefly occupied by the Persian ruler of Fars . In 1253 , the Bedouin <unk> brought down the <unk> dynasty , thereby gaining control over eastern Arabia , including the islands of Bahrain . In 1330 , the archipelago became a tributary state of the rulers of Hormuz , though locally the islands were controlled by the Shi 'ite <unk> dynasty of Qatif . In the mid @-@ 15th century , the archipelago came under the rule of the <unk> , a Bedouin dynasty also based in Al @-@ Ahsa that ruled most of eastern Arabia . 
 = = = Early @-@ modern era = = = 
 In 1521 , the Portuguese allied with Hormuz and seized Bahrain from the <unk> ruler <unk> ibn Zamil , who was killed during the takeover . Portuguese rule lasted for around 80 years , during which time they depended mainly on Sunni Persian governors . The Portuguese were expelled from the islands in 1602 by Abbas I of the Safavid dynasty of Persia , which gave impetus to Shia Islam . For the next two centuries , Persian rulers retained control of the archipelago , interrupted by the 1717 and 1738 invasions of the <unk> of Oman . During most of this period , they resorted to governing Bahrain indirectly , either through the city of Bushehr or through immigrant Sunni Arab clans . The latter were tribes returning to the Arabian side of the Persian Gulf from Persian territories in the north who were known as Huwala ( literally : those that have changed or moved ) . In 1753 , the Huwala clan of Nasr Al @-@ Madhkur invaded Bahrain on behalf of the Iranian Zand leader Karim Khan Zand and restored direct Iranian rule . 
 In 1783 , Al @-@ Madhkur lost the islands of Bahrain following his defeat by the Bani Utbah tribe at the 1782 Battle of Zubarah . Bahrain was not new territory to the Bani Utbah ; they had been a presence there since the 17th century . During that time , they started purchasing date palm gardens in Bahrain ; a document shows that 81 years before arrival of the Al @-@ Khalifa , one of the <unk> of the Al Bin Ali tribe ( an offshoot of the Bani Utbah ) had bought a palm garden from Mariam bint Ahmed Al <unk> in Sitra island . 
 The Al Bin Ali were the dominant group controlling the town of Zubarah on the Qatar peninsula , originally the center of power of the Bani Utbah . After the Bani Utbah gained control of Bahrain , the Al Bin Ali had a practically independent status there as a self @-@ governing tribe . They used a flag with four red and three white stripes , called the Al @-@ Sulami flag in Bahrain , Qatar , Kuwait , and the Eastern province of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia . Later , different Arab family clans and tribes from Qatar moved to Bahrain to settle after the fall of Nasr Al @-@ Madhkur of Bushehr . These families included the Al Khalifa , Al @-@ Ma <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ Mannai , Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ <unk> , Al @-@ Sadah , Al @-@ <unk> and other families and tribes . 
 The Al Khalifa family moved from Qatar to Bahrain in 1799 . Originally , their ancestors were expelled from Umm Qasr in central Arabia by the Ottomans due to their predatory habits of preying on caravans in Basra and trading ships in Shatt al @-@ Arab waterway until Turks expelled them to Kuwait in 1716 where they remained until 1766 . 
 Around the 1760s , the Al <unk> and Al Khalifa clans , both belonging to the <unk> federation , migrated to Zubarah in modern @-@ day Qatar , leaving Al Sabah as the sole proprietors of Kuwait . 
 = = = 19th century and later = = = 
 In the early 19th century , Bahrain was invaded by both the Omanis and the Al <unk> . In 1802 it was governed by a twelve @-@ year @-@ old child , when the Omani ruler Sayyid Sultan installed his son , Salim , as Governor in the Arad Fort . In 1816 , the British political resident in the Gulf , William Bruce , received a letter from the Sheikh of Bahrain who was concerned about a rumour that Britain would support an attack on the island by the Imam of Muscat . He sailed to Bahrain to reassure the Sheikh that this was not the case and drew up an informal agreement assuring the Sheikh that Britain would remain a neutral party . 
 In 1820 , the Al Khalifa tribe were recognised by Great Britain as the rulers ( " Al @-@ Hakim " in Arabic ) of Bahrain after signing a treaty relationship . However , ten years later they were forced to pay yearly tributes to Egypt despite seeking Persian and British protection . 
 In 1860 , the Al Khalifas used the same tactic when the British tried to overpower Bahrain . Writing letters to the Persians and Ottomans , Al Khalifas agreed to place Bahrain under the latter 's protection in March due to offering better conditions . Eventually the Government of British India overpowered Bahrain when the Persians refused to protect it . Colonel Pelly signed a new treaty with Al Khalifas placing Bahrain under British rule and protection . 
 Following the Qatari – Bahraini War in 1868 , British representatives signed another agreement with the Al Khalifas . It specified that the ruler could not dispose of any of his territory except to the United Kingdom and could not enter into relationships with any foreign government without British consent . In return the British promised to protect Bahrain from all aggression by sea and to lend support in case of land attack . More importantly the British promised to support the rule of the Al Khalifa in Bahrain , securing its unstable position as rulers of the country . Other agreements in 1880 and 1892 sealed the protectorate status of Bahrain to the British . 
 Unrest amongst the people of Bahrain began when Britain officially established complete dominance over the territory in 1892 . The first revolt and widespread uprising took place in March 1895 against Sheikh Issa bin Ali , then ruler of Bahrain . Sheikh Issa was the first of the Al Khalifa to rule without Persian relations . Sir Arnold Wilson , Britain 's representative in the Persian Gulf and author of The Persian Gulf , arrived in Bahrain from Muscat at this time . The uprising developed further with some protesters killed by British forces . 
 Before the development of petroleum , the island was largely devoted to pearl fisheries and , as late as the 19th century , was considered to be the finest in the world . In 1903 , German explorer , Hermann <unk> , visited Bahrain and took many photographs of historical sites , including the old <unk> es @-@ Sheikh , photos now stored at the Ethnological Museum of Berlin . Prior to the First World War , there were about 400 vessels hunting pearls and an annual export of more than £ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1911 , a group of Bahraini merchants demanded restrictions on the British influence in the country . The group 's leaders were subsequently arrested and exiled to India . In 1923 , the British introduced administrative reforms and replaced Sheikh Issa bin Ali with his son . Some clerical opponents and families such as al <unk> left or were exiled to Saudi Arabia and Iran . Three years later the British placed the country under the de facto rule of Charles Belgrave who operated as an adviser to the ruler until 1957 . Belgrave brought a number of reforms such as establishment of the country 's first modern school in 1919 , the Persian Gulf 's first girls school in 1928 and the abolition of slavery in 1937 . At the same time , the pearl diving industry developed at a rapid pace . 
 In 1927 , <unk> <unk> , then Shah of Iran , demanded sovereignty over Bahrain in a letter to the League of Nations , a move that prompted Belgrave to undertake harsh measures including encouraging conflicts between Shia and Sunni Muslims in order to bring down the uprisings and limit the Iranian influence . Belgrave even went further by suggesting to rename the Persian Gulf to the " Arabian Gulf " ; however , the proposal was refused by the British government . Britain 's interest in Bahrain 's development was motivated by concerns over Saudi and Iranian ambitions in the region . 
 The Bahrain Petroleum Company ( <unk> ) , a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of California ( <unk> ) , discovered oil in 1931 and production began the following year . This was to bring rapid modernisation to Bahrain . Relations with the United Kingdom became closer , as evidenced by the British Royal Navy moving its entire Middle Eastern command from Bushehr in Iran to Bahrain in 1935 . 
 In the early 1930s Bahrain Airport was developed . Imperial Airways flew there , including the Handley Page <unk> aircraft . Later in the same decade the Bahrain Maritime Airport was established , for flying @-@ boats and seaplanes . 
 Bahrain participated in the Second World War on the Allied side , joining on 10 September 1939 . On 19 October 1940 , four Italian SM.82s bombers bombed Bahrain alongside Dhahran oilfields in Saudi Arabia , targeting Allied @-@ operated oil refineries . Although minimal damage was caused in both locations , the attack forced the Allies to upgrade Bahrain 's defences , an action which further stretched Allied military resources . 
 After World War II , increasing anti @-@ British sentiment spread throughout the Arab World and led to riots in Bahrain . The riots focused on the Jewish community . In 1948 , following rising hostilities and looting , most members of Bahrain 's Jewish community abandoned their properties and evacuated to Bombay , later settling in Israel ( Pardes Hanna @-@ <unk> ) and the United Kingdom . As of 2008 , 37 Jews remained in the country . In the 1950s , the National Union Committee , formed by reformists following sectarian clashes , demanded an elected popular assembly , removal of Belgrave and carried out a number of protests and general strikes . In 1965 a month @-@ long uprising broke out after hundreds of workers at the Bahrain Petroleum Company were laid off . 
 = = = Independence = = = 
 On 15 August 1971 , Bahrain declared independence and signed a new treaty of friendship with the United Kingdom . Bahrain joined the United Nations and the Arab League later in the year . The oil boom of the 1970s benefited Bahrain greatly , although the subsequent downturn hurt the economy . The country had already begun diversification of its economy and benefited further from the Lebanese Civil War in the 1970s and 1980s , when Bahrain replaced Beirut as the Middle East 's financial hub after Lebanon 's large banking sector was driven out of the country by the war . 
 Following the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran , in 1981 Bahraini Shī 'a fundamentalists orchestrated a failed coup attempt under the auspices of a front organisation , the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain . The coup would have installed a Shī 'a cleric exiled in Iran , <unk> l @-@ <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> , as supreme leader heading a theocratic government . In December 1994 , a group of youths threw stones at female runners during an international marathon for running bare @-@ legged . The resulting clash with police soon grew into civil unrest . 
 A popular uprising occurred between 1994 and 2000 in which leftists , liberals and Islamists joined forces . The event resulted in approximately forty deaths and ended after Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa became the Emir of Bahrain in 1999 . He instituted elections for parliament , gave women the right to vote , and released all political prisoners . A referendum on 14 – 15 February 2001 massively supported the National Action Charter . As part of the adoption of the National Action Charter on 14 February 2002 , Bahrain changed its formal name from the State ( dawla ) of Bahrain to the Kingdom of Bahrain . 
 The country participated in military action against the Taliban in October 2001 by deploying a frigate in the Arabian Sea for rescue and humanitarian operations . As a result , in November of that year , US president George W. Bush 's administration designated Bahrain as a " major non @-@ NATO ally " . Bahrain opposed the invasion of Iraq and had offered Saddam Hussein asylum in the days prior to the invasion . Relations improved with neighbouring Qatar after the border dispute over the Hawar Islands was resolved by the International Court of Justice in The Hague in 2001 . Following the political liberalisation of the country , Bahrain negotiated a free trade agreement with the United States in 2004 . 
 = = = Bahraini uprising = = = 
 Inspired by the regional Arab Spring , Bahrain 's Shia majority started large protests against its Sunni rulers in early 2011 . The government initially allowed protests following a pre @-@ dawn raid on protesters camped in Pearl Roundabout . A month later it requested security assistance from Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries and declared a three @-@ month state of emergency . The government then launched a crackdown on the opposition that included conducting thousands of arrests and systematic torture . Almost daily clashes between protesters and security forces led to dozens of deaths . Protests , sometimes staged by opposition parties , are ongoing . More than 80 civilians and 13 policemen have been killed as of March 2014 . The lack of coverage by Arab media in the Persian Gulf , as compared to other Arab Spring uprisings , has sparked several controversies . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Bahrain is a generally flat and arid archipelago in the Persian Gulf , east of Saudi Arabia . It consists of a low desert plain rising gently to a low central escarpment with the highest point the 134 m ( 440 ft ) Mountain of Smoke ( Jabal ad Dukhan ) . Bahrain had a total area of 665 km2 ( 257 sq mi ) but due to land reclamation , the area increased to 765 km2 ( 295 sq mi ) , which is slightly larger than Hamburg or the Isle of Man . 
 Often described as an archipelago of 33 islands , extensive land reclamation projects have changed this ; by August 2008 the number of islands and island groups had increased to 84 . Bahrain does not share a land boundary with another country but does have a 161 km ( 100 mi ) coastline . The country also claims a further 22 km ( 12 nmi ) of territorial sea and a 44 km ( 24 nmi ) contiguous zone . Bahrain 's largest islands are Bahrain Island , the Hawar Islands , Muharraq Island , Umm an <unk> , and Sitra . Bahrain has mild winters and very hot , humid summers . The country 's natural resources include large quantities of oil and natural gas as well as fish in the offshore waters . Arable land constitutes only 2 @.@ 82 % of the total area . 
 Though 92 % of Bahrain is desert with periodic droughts and dust storms , the main natural hazards for Bahrainis . Environmental issues facing Bahrain include desertification resulting from the degradation of limited arable land , coastal degradation ( damage to coastlines , coral reefs , and sea vegetation ) resulting from oil spills and other discharges from large tankers , oil refineries , distribution stations , and illegal land reclamation at places such as <unk> Bay . The agricultural and domestic sectors ' over @-@ utilisation of the Dammam Aquifer , the principal aquifer in Bahrain , has led to its salinisation by adjacent brackish and saline water bodies . A <unk> study identified the locations of the sources of aquifer salinisation and delineated their areas of influence . The investigation indicates that the aquifer water quality is significantly modified as groundwater flows from the northwestern parts of Bahrain , where the aquifer receives its water by lateral <unk> from eastern Saudi Arabia , to the southern and southeastern parts . Four types of salinisation of the aquifer are identified : brackish @-@ water up @-@ flow from the underlying brackish @-@ water zones in north @-@ central , western , and eastern regions ; seawater intrusion in the eastern region ; intrusion of sabkha water in the southwestern region ; and irrigation return flow in a local area in the western region . Four alternatives for the management of groundwater quality that are available to the water authorities in Bahrain are discussed and their priority areas are proposed , based on the type and extent of each salinisation source , in addition to groundwater use in that area . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Zagros Mountains across the Persian Gulf in Iran cause low level winds to be directed toward Bahrain . Dust storms from Iraq and Saudi Arabia transported by northwesterly winds , locally called <unk> wind , cause reduced visibility in the months of June and July . 
 Summers are very hot . The seas around Bahrain are very shallow , heating up quickly in the summer to produce high humidity , especially at night . Summer temperatures may reach up to 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) under the right conditions . Rainfall in Bahrain is minimal and irregular . Rainfalls mostly occur in winter , with a recorded maximum of 71 @.@ 8 mm ( 2 @.@ 83 in ) . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 More than 330 species of birds were recorded in the Bahrain archipelago , 26 species of which breed in the country . Millions of migratory birds pass through the Persian Gulf region in the winter and autumn months . One globally endangered species , <unk> undulata , is a regular migrant in the autumn . The many islands and shallow seas of Bahrain are globally important for the breeding of the Socotra cormorant ; up to 100 @,@ 000 pairs of these birds were recorded over the Hawar islands . 
 Only 18 species of mammals are found in Bahrain , animals such as gazelles , desert rabbits and hedgehogs are common in the wild but the Arabian oryx was hunted to extinction on the island . 25 species of amphibians and reptiles were recorded as well as 21 species of butterflies and 307 species of flora . The marine biotopes are diverse and include extensive sea grass beds and mudflats , patchy coral reefs as well as offshore islands . Sea grass beds are important foraging grounds for some threatened species such as dugongs and the green turtle . In 2003 , Bahrain banned the capture of sea cows , marine turtles and dolphins within its territorial waters . 
 The Hawar Islands Protected Area provides valuable feeding and breeding grounds for a variety of migratory seabirds , it is an internationally recognised site for bird migration . The breeding colony of Socotra cormorant on Hawar Islands is the largest in the world , and the dugongs foraging around the archipelago form the second largest dugong aggregation after Australia . 
 Bahrain has five designated protected areas , four of which are marine environments . They are : 
 Hawar Islands 
 <unk> Island , off the coast of Bahrain . 
 Arad bay , in Muharraq . 
 <unk> Bay 
 Al <unk> Wildlife Park , which is a zoo and a breeding centre for endangered animals , is the only protected area on land and also the only protected area which is managed on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Bahrain under the Al @-@ Khalifa regime is a constitutional monarchy headed by the King , Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa . King Hamad enjoys wide executive authorities which include appointing the Prime Minister and his ministers , commanding the army , chairing the Higher Judicial Council , appointing the parliament 's upper half and dissolving its elected lower half . The head of government is the unelected Prime Minister , Shaikh <unk> bin Salman Al Khalifa , the uncle of the current king who has served in this position since 1971 , making him the longest serving prime minister in the world . In 2010 , about half of the government was composed of the Al Khalifa family . 
 Bahrain has a bicameral National Assembly ( al @-@ Jam <unk> al @-@ Watani ) consisting of the Shura Council ( Majlis Al @-@ Shura ) with 40 seats and the Council of Representatives ( Majlis Al @-@ <unk> ) with 40 seats . The 40 members of the Shura are appointed by the king . In the Council of Representatives , 40 members are elected by absolute majority vote in single @-@ member constituencies to serve 4 @-@ year terms . The appointed council " exercises a de facto veto " over the elected , because draft acts must be approved so they may pass into law . After approval , the king may ratify and issue the act or return it within six months to the National Assembly where it may only pass into law if approved by two thirds of both councils . 
 In 1973 , the country held its first parliamentary elections ; however , two years later , the late emir dissolved the parliament and suspended the constitution after parliament rejected the State Security Law . The period between 2002 and 2010 saw three parliamentary elections . The first , held in 2002 was boycotted by the opposition , Al Wefaq , which won a majority in the second in 2006 and third in 2010 . The 2011 by @-@ election was held to replace 18 members of Al Wefaq who resigned in protest against government crackdown . 
 The opening up of politics saw big gains for both <unk> and <unk> Islamists in elections , which gave them a parliamentary platform to pursue their policies . It gave a new prominence to clerics within the political system , with the most senior Shia religious leader , Sheikh Isa Qassim , playing a vital role . This was especially evident when in 2005 the government called off the Shia branch of the " Family law " after over 100 @,@ 000 Shia took to the streets . Islamists opposed the law because " neither elected MPs nor the government has the authority to change the law because these institutions could misinterpret the word of God " . The law was supported by women activists who said they were " suffering in silence " . They managed to organise a rally attended by 500 participants . Ghada <unk> , a leading woman activist said the government was using the law as a " bargaining tool with opposition Islamic groups " . 
 Analysts of democratisation in the Middle East cite the Islamists ' references to respect human rights in their justification for these programmes as evidence that these groups can serve as a progressive force in the region . Some Islamist parties have been particularly critical of the government 's readiness to sign international treaties such as the United Nations ' International Convention on Civil and Political Rights . At a parliamentary session in June 2006 to discuss ratification of the Convention , Sheikh Adel <unk> , the former leader of <unk> party , Asalah , explained the party 's objections : " The convention has been tailored by our enemies , God kill them all , to serve their needs and protect their interests rather than ours . This why we have eyes from the American Embassy watching us during our sessions , to ensure things are swinging their way " . 
 = = = Human rights = = = 
 The period between 1975 and 1999 known as the " State Security Law Era " , saw wide range of human rights violations including arbitrary arrests , detention without trial , torture and forced exile . After the Emir Hamad Al Khalifa ( now king ) succeeded his father Isa Al Khalifa in 1999 , he introduced wide reforms and human rights improved significantly . These moves were described by Amnesty International as representing a " historic period of human rights " . 
 Human rights conditions started to decline by 2007 when torture began to be employed again . In 2011 , Human Rights Watch described the country 's human rights situation as " dismal " . Due to this , Bahrain lost some of the high International rankings it had gained before . 
 In 2011 , Bahrain was criticised for its crackdown on the Arab spring uprising . In September , a government appointed commission confirmed reports of grave human rights violations including systematic torture . The government promised to introduce reforms and avoid repeating the " painful events " . However , reports by human rights organisations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch issued in April 2012 said the same violations were still happening . 
 The documentary TV film Bahrain : Shouting in the Dark which was produced by the Qatari channel Al Jazeera , talks about the Bahraini protests during 2011 . This TV film showed all the violations that have been taken against the rights of Bahraini citizens during the uprising . It also caused some problems between the Bahraini and the Qatari governments . Relations between Bahrain and Qatar improved following a meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council in November 2014 in which it was announced Bahrain diplomats would return to Qatar . 
 Amnesty International 's 2015 / 6 report on the country points to continued suppression of dissent , restricted freedom of expression , unjust imprisonment , and frequent torture and other ill @-@ treatment of its citizens . 
 = = = Women 's rights = = = 
 Women 's political rights in Bahrain saw an important step forward when women were granted the right to vote and stand in national elections for the first time in the 2002 election . However , no women were elected to office in that year 's polls . In response to the failure of women candidates , six were appointed to the Shura Council , which also includes representatives of the Kingdom 's indigenous Jewish and Christian communities . Dr. Nada <unk> became the country 's first female cabinet minister on her appointment as Minister of Health in 2004 . The quasi @-@ governmental women 's group , the Supreme Council for Women , trained female candidates to take part in the 2006 general election . When Bahrain was elected to head the United Nations General Assembly in 2006 it appointed lawyer and women 's rights activist Haya bint Rashid Al Khalifa President of the United Nations General Assembly , only the third woman in history to head the world body . Female activist Ghada <unk> said " The government used women 's rights as a decorative tool on the international level . " She referred to the reforms as " artificial and marginal " and accused the government of " hinder [ ing ] non @-@ governmental women societies " . 
 In 2006 , <unk> Al Gaood became the first female MP after winning by default . The number rose to four after the 2011 by @-@ elections . In 2008 , <unk> <unk> was appointed ambassador to the United States making her the first Jewish ambassador of any Arab country . In 2011 , Alice <unk> , a Christian woman was appointed ambassador to the UK . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Bahraini journalists risk prosecution for offences which include " undermining " the government and religion . Self @-@ censorship is widespread . Journalists were targeted by officials during anti @-@ government protests in 2011 . Three editors from opposition daily Al @-@ Wasat ( Bahraini newspaper ) were sacked and later fined for publishing " false " news . Several foreign correspondents were expelled . 
 Most domestic broadcasters are state @-@ run . An independent commission , set up to look into the unrest , found that state media coverage was at times inflammatory . It said opposition groups suffered from lack of access to mainstream media , and recommended that the government " consider relaxing censorship " . Bahrain will host the Saudi @-@ financed <unk> News Channel , expected to launch in December 2012 . It will be based at a planned " Media City " . An opposition satellite station , Lualua TV , operates from London but has found its signals blocked . 
 By June 2012 , Bahrain had 961 @,@ 000 internet users . The platform " provides a welcome free space for journalists , although one that is increasingly monitored " , according to Reporters Without Borders . Rigorous filtering targets political , human rights , religious material and content deemed obscene . Bloggers and other netizens were among those detained during protests in 2011 . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The kingdom has a small but well equipped military called the Bahrain Defence Force ( BDF ) , numbering around 13 @,@ 000 personnel . The supreme commander of the Bahraini military is King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa and the deputy supreme commander is the Crown Prince , Salman bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa . 
 The BDF is primarily equipped with United States equipment , such as the F16 Fighting Falcon , F5 Freedom Fighter , <unk> Blackhawk , M60A3 tanks , and the ex @-@ USS Jack Williams , an Oliver Hazard Perry class frigate renamed the <unk> Sabha . 
 The Government of Bahrain has close relations with the United States , having signed a cooperative agreement with the United States Military and has provided the United States a base in Juffair since the early 1990s , although a US naval presence existed since 1948 . This is the home of the headquarters for Commander , United States Naval Forces Central Command ( <unk> ) / United States Fifth Fleet ( <unk> ) , and around 6 @,@ 000 United States military personnel . 
 Bahrain participates in Saudi Arabian @-@ led intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh , who was deposed in the 2011 Arab Spring uprising . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Bahrain established bilateral relations with 190 countries worldwide . As of 2012 , Bahrain maintains a network of 25 embassies , 3 consulates and 4 permanent missions to the Arab League , United Nations and European Union respectively . Bahrain also hosts 36 embassies . Bahrain plays a modest , moderating role in regional politics and adheres to the views of the Arab League on Middle East peace and Palestinian rights by supporting the two state solution . Bahrain is also one of the founding members of the Gulf Cooperation Council . Relations with Iran tend to be tense as a result of a failed coup in 1981 which Bahrain blames Iran for and occasional claims of Iranian sovereignty over Bahrain by ultra @-@ conservative elements in the Iranian public . 
 Saudi Arabian troops were sent into Bahrain to crush a pro @-@ democracy protests in 2011 . 
 = = = Governorates = = = 
 The first municipality in Bahrain was the 8 @-@ member Manama municipality which was established in July 1919 . Members of the municipality were elected annually ; the municipality was said to have been the first municipality to be established in the Arab world . The municipality was in charge of cleaning roads and renting buildings to tenants and shops . By 1929 , it undertook road expansions as well as opening markets and slaughterhouses . In 1958 , the municipality started water purification projects . In 1960 , Bahrain comprised four municipalities including Manama , <unk> , Al Muharraq , and Riffa . Over the next 30 years , the 4 municipalities were divided into 12 municipalities as settlements such as Hamad Town and Isa Town grew . These municipalities were administered from Manama under a central municipal council whose members are appointed by the king . 
 The first municipal elections to be held in Bahrain after independence in 1971 , was in 2002 . The most recent was in 2010 . The municipalities are listed below : 
 After 3 July 2002 , Bahrain was split into five administrative governorates , each of which has its own governor . These governorates are : 
 The Central Governorate was abolished in September 2014 , its territory divided between the Northern Governorate , Southern Governorate , and Capital Governorate . 
 The United States designated Bahrain a major non @-@ NATO ally in 2001 . As of October 2014 , Bahrain is ruled by an " authoritarian regime " and is rated as " Not Free " by the U.S.-based non @-@ governmental Freedom House . 
 = = Economy = = 
 According to a January 2006 report by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia , Bahrain has the fastest growing economy in the Arab world . Bahrain also has the freest economy in the Middle East and is twelfth freest overall in the world based on the 2011 Index of Economic Freedom published by the Heritage Foundation / Wall Street Journal . 
 In 2008 , Bahrain was named the world 's fastest growing financial center by the City of London 's Global Financial Centres Index . Bahrain 's banking and financial services sector , particularly Islamic banking , have benefited from the regional boom driven by demand for oil . Petroleum production and processing is Bahrain 's most exported product , accounting for 60 % of export receipts , 70 % of government revenues , and 11 % of GDP . Aluminium production is the second most exported product , followed by finance and construction materials . 
 Economic conditions have fluctuated with the changing price of oil since 1985 , for example during and following the Persian Gulf crisis of 1990 – 91 . With its highly developed communication and transport facilities , Bahrain is home to a number of multinational firms and construction proceeds on several major industrial projects . A large share of exports consist of petroleum products made from imported crude oil , which accounted for 51 % of the country 's imports in 2007 . Bahrain depends heavily on food imports to feed its growing population ; it relies heavily on meat imports from Australia and also imports 75 % of its total fruit consumption needs . Since only 2 @.@ 9 % of the country 's land is arable , agriculture contributes to 0 @.@ 5 % of Bahrain 's GDP . In 2004 , Bahrain signed the US @-@ Bahrain Free Trade Agreement , which will reduce certain trade barriers between the two nations . Due to the combination of the global financial crisis and the recent unrest , the growth rate decreased to 2 @.@ 2 % which is the lowest growth rate since 1994 . 
 Unemployment , especially among the young , and the depletion of both oil and underground water resources are major long @-@ term economic problems . In 2008 , the jobless figure was at 4 % , with women over represented at 85 % of the total . In 2007 Bahrain became the first Arab country to institute unemployment benefits as part of a series of labour reforms instigated under Minister of Labour , Dr. Majeed Al Alawi . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 As a tourist destination , Bahrain received over eight million visitors in 2008 though the exact number varies yearly . Most of these are from the surrounding Arab states although an increasing number hail from outside the region due to growing awareness of the kingdom 's heritage and its higher profile as a result of the Bahrain International F1 Circuit . 
 The kingdom combines modern Arab culture and the archaeological legacy of five thousand years of civilisation . The island is home to forts including Qalat Al Bahrain which has been listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site . The Bahrain National Museum has artefacts from the country 's history dating back to the island 's first human inhabitants some 9000 years ago and the Beit Al Quran ( Arabic : بيت <unk> , meaning : the House of Qur 'an ) is a museum that holds Islamic artefacts of the Qur 'an . Some of the popular historical tourist attractions in the kingdom are the Al Khamis Mosque , which is the one of the oldest mosques in the region , the Arad fort in Muharraq , Barbar temple , which is an ancient temple from the <unk> period of Bahrain , as well as the A 'ali Burial Mounds and the Saar temple . The Tree of Life , a 400 @-@ year @-@ old tree that grows in the Sakhir desert with no nearby water , is also a popular tourist attraction . 
 Bird watching ( primarily in the Hawar Islands ) , scuba diving and horse riding are popular tourist activities in Bahrain . Many tourists from nearby Saudi Arabia and across the region visit Manama primarily for the shopping malls in the capital Manama , such as the Bahrain City Centre and Seef Mall in the Seef district of Manama . The Manama Souq and Gold Souq in the old district of Manama are also popular with tourists . 
 Since 2005 , Bahrain annually hosts a festival in March , titled Spring of Culture , which features internationally renowned musicians and artists performing in concerts . Manama was named the Arab Capital of Culture for 2012 and Capital of Arab Tourism for 2013 by the Arab League . The 2012 festival featured concerts starring Andrea Bocelli , Julio Iglesias and other musicians . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Bahrain has one main international airport , the Bahrain International Airport ( BIA ) which is located on the island of Muharraq , in the north @-@ east . The airport handled more than 100 @,@ 000 flights and more than 8 million passengers in 2010 . Bahrain 's national carrier , Gulf Air operates and bases itself in the BIA . 
 Bahrain has a well @-@ developed road network , particularly in Manama . The discovery of oil in the early 1930s accelerated the creation of multiple roads and highways in Bahrain , connecting several isolated villages , such as Budaiya , to Manama . 
 To the east , a bridge connected Manama to Muharraq since 1929 , a new causeway was built in 1941 which replaced the old wooden bridge . Currently there are three modern bridges connecting the two locations . Transits between the two islands peaked after the construction of the Bahrain International Airport in 1932 . Ring roads and highways were later built to connect Manama to the villages of the Northern Governorate and towards towns in central and southern Bahrain . 
 The four main islands and all the towns and villages are linked by well @-@ constructed roads . There were 3 @,@ 164 km ( 1 @,@ 966 mi ) of roadways in 2002 , of which 2 @,@ 433 km ( 1 @,@ 512 mi ) were paved . A causeway stretching over 2 @.@ 8 km ( 2 mi ) , connect Manama with Muharraq Island , and another bridge joins Sitra to the main island . The King Fahd Causeway , measuring 24 km ( 15 mi ) , links Bahrain with the Saudi Arabian mainland via the island of Umm an @-@ <unk> . It was completed in December 1986 , and financed by Saudi Arabia . In 2008 , there were 17 @,@ 743 @,@ 495 passengers transiting through the causeway . 
 Bahrain 's port of Mina Salman is the main seaport of the country and consists of 15 berths . In 2001 , Bahrain had a merchant fleet of eight ships of 1 @,@ 000 GRT or over , totaling 270 @,@ 784 GRT . Private vehicles and taxis are the primary means of transportation in the city . 
 = = = Telecommunications = = = 
 The telecommunications sector in Bahrain officially started in 1981 with the establishment of Bahrain 's first telecommunications company , <unk> and until 2004 , it monopolised the sector . In 1981 , there were more than 45 @,@ 000 telephones in use in the country . By 1999 , <unk> had more than 100 @,@ 000 mobile contracts . In 2002 , under pressure from international bodies , Bahrain implemented its telecommunications law which included the establishment of an independent Telecommunications Regulatory Authority ( TRA ) . In 2004 , Zain ( a rebranded version of MTC Vodafone ) started operations in Bahrain and in 2010 <unk> ( owned by STC Group ) became the third company to provide mobile services . 
 Bahrain has been connected to the internet since 1995 with the country 's domain suffix is ' <unk> ' . The country 's connectivity score ( a statistic which measures both Internet access and fixed and mobile telephone lines ) is 210 @.@ 4 percent per person , while the regional average in Arab States of the Persian Gulf is 135 @.@ 37 percent . The number of Bahraini internet users has risen from 40 @,@ 000 in 2000 to 250 @,@ 000 in 2008 , or from 5 @.@ 95 to 33 percent of the population . As of August 2013 , the TRA has licensed 22 Internet Service Providers . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In 2010 , Bahrain 's population grew to 1 @.@ 2 million , of which 568 @,@ 399 were Bahraini and 666 @,@ 172 were non @-@ nationals . It had risen from 1 @.@ 05 million ( 517 @,@ 368 non @-@ nationals ) in 2007 , the year when Bahrain 's population crossed the one million mark . Though a majority of the population is Middle Eastern , a sizeable number of people from South Asia live in the country . In 2008 , approximately 290 @,@ 000 Indian nationals lived in Bahrain , making them the single largest expatriate community in the country . Bahrain is the fourth most densely populated sovereign state in the world with a population density of 1 @,@ 646 people per km2 in 2010 . The only sovereign states with larger population densities are city states . Much of this population is concentrated in the north of the country with the Southern Governorate being the least densely populated part . The north of the country is so urbanised that it is considered by some to be one large metropolitan area . 
 = = = Ethnic groups = = = 
 Bahraini people are ethnically diverse . Shia Bahrainis are divided into two main ethnic groups : Baharna and Ajam . Most Shia Bahrainis are ethnic Baharna . The Ajam are ethnic Persian Shias . Shia Persians form large communities in Manama and Muharraq . A tiny minority of Shia Bahrainis are ethnic <unk> from Al @-@ Hasa . 
 Sunni Bahrainis are mainly divided into two main ethnic groups : Arabs ( al Arab ) and Huwala . Sunni Arabs are the most influential ethnic group in Bahrain , they hold most government positions and the Bahraini monarchy are Sunni Arabs . Sunni Arabs have traditionally lived in areas such as <unk> , Muharraq , Riffa and Hawar islands . The Huwala are descendants of Sunni Iranians ; some of them are Sunni Persians , while others Sunni Arabs . There are also Sunnis of Baloch origin . Most Bahrainis of African origin come from east Africa and have traditionally lived in Muharraq Island and Riffa . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The state religion of Bahrain is Islam and most Bahraini citizens are Muslim . There are no official figures for the proportion of Shia and Sunni among the Muslims of Bahrain , but approximately 65 – 75 % percent of Bahraini Muslims are Shia . 
 There is a native Christian community in Bahrain . Non @-@ Muslim Bahraini residents numbered 367 @,@ 683 per the 2010 census , most of whom are Christians . Expatriate Christians make up the majority of Christians in Bahrain , while native Christian Bahrainis ( who hold Bahraini citizenship ) make up a smaller community . <unk> <unk> , a former Bahraini ambassador to the United Kingdom is a native Christian . Bahrain also has a native Jewish community numbering thirty @-@ seven Bahraini citizens . Various sources cite Bahrain 's native Jewish community as being from 36 to 50 people . 
 Due to an influx of immigrants and guest workers from southern Asian countries , such as India , the Philippines and Sri Lanka , the overall percentage of Muslims in the country has declined in recent years . According to the 2001 census , 81 @.@ 2 % of Bahrain 's population was Muslim , 10 % were Christian , and 9 @.@ 8 % practised Hinduism or other religions . The 2010 census records that the Muslim proportion had fallen to 70 @.@ 2 % ( the 2010 census did not differentiate between the non @-@ Muslim religions ) . Bahrain government officials rejected reports from Bahraini opposition that the administration was trying to alter the country 's demographics by naturalizing Sunni Syrians . Baha 'is constitute approximately 1 % of Bahrain 's total population . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 Arabic is the official language of Bahrain , though English is widely used . Bahrani Arabic is the most widely spoken dialect of the Arabic language , though it differs widely from standard Arabic , like all Arabic dialects . Arabic plays an important role in political life , as , according to article 57 ( c ) of Bahrain 's constitution , an MP must be fluent in Arabic to stand for parliament . Among the Bahraini and non @-@ Bahraini population , many people speak Persian , the official language of Iran , or Urdu , the official language of Pakistan . Nepali is also widely spoken in the Nepalese workers and Gurkha Soldiers community . Malayalam , Tamil and Hindi are spoken among significant Indian communities . All commercial institutions and road signs are bilingual , displaying both English and Arabic . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Education is compulsory for children between the ages of 6 and 14 . Education is free for Bahraini citizens in public schools , with the Bahraini Ministry of Education providing free textbooks . Coeducation is not used in public schools , with boys and girls segregated into separate schools . 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , Qur 'anic schools ( <unk> ) were the only form of education in Bahrain . They were traditional schools aimed at teaching children and youth the reading of the Qur 'an . After World War I , Bahrain became open to western influences , and a demand for modern educational institutions appeared . 1919 marked the beginning of modern public school system in Bahrain when the Al @-@ <unk> Al @-@ <unk> School for boys opened in Muharraq . In 1926 , the Education Committee opened the second public school for boys in Manama , and in 1928 the first public school for girls was opened in Muharraq . As of 2011 , there are a total of 126 @,@ 981 students studying in public schools . 
 In 2004 , King Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa introduced the " King Hamad Schools of Future " project that uses Information Communication Technology to support K – 12 education in Bahrain . The project 's objective is to connect all schools within the kingdom with the Internet . In addition to British intermediate schools , the island is served by the Bahrain School ( BS ) . The BS is a United States Department of Defense school that provides a K @-@ 12 curriculum including International Baccalaureate offerings . There are also private schools that offer either the IB Diploma Programme or United Kingdom 's A @-@ Levels . 
 Bahrain also encourages institutions of higher learning , drawing on expatriate talent and the increasing pool of Bahrain nationals returning from abroad with advanced degrees . The University of Bahrain was established for standard undergraduate and graduate study , and the King Abdulaziz University College of Health Sciences , operating under the direction of the Ministry of Health , trains physicians , nurses , pharmacists , and paramedics . The 2001 National Action Charter paved the way for the formation of private universities such as the <unk> University in Manama and University College of Bahrain in Saar . The Royal University for Women ( <unk> ) , established in 2005 , was the first private , purpose @-@ built , international University in Bahrain dedicated solely to educating women . The University of London External has appointed MCG ( Management Consultancy Group ) as the regional representative office in Bahrain for distance learning programmes . MCG is one of the oldest private institutes in the country . Institutes have also opened which educate South Asian students , such as the Pakistan Urdu School , Bahrain and the Indian School , Bahrain . A few prominent institutions are DePaul University , Bentley University , the Ernst & Young Training Institute , NYIT and the Birla Institute of Technology International Centre . In 2004 , the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland ( RCSI ) set up a constituent medical university in the country . In addition to the Arabian Gulf University , AMA International University and the College of Health Sciences , these are the only medical schools in Bahrain . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Bahrain has a universal health care system , dating back to 1960 . Government @-@ provided health care is free to Bahraini citizens and heavily subsidised for non @-@ Bahrainis . Healthcare expenditure accounted for 4 @.@ 5 % of Bahrain 's GDP , according to the World Health Organisation . Bahraini physicians and nurses form a majority of the country 's workforce in the health sector , unlike neighbouring Gulf states . The first hospital in Bahrain was the American Mission Hospital , which opened in 1893 as a dispensary . The first public hospital , and also tertiary hospital , to open in Bahrain was the Salmaniya Medical Complex , in the Salmaniya district of Manama , in 1957 . Private hospitals are also present throughout the country , such as the International Hospital of Bahrain . 
 The life expectancy in Bahrain is 73 for males and 76 for females . Compared to many countries in the region , the prevalence of AIDS and HIV is relatively low . Malaria and tuberculosis ( TB ) do not constitute major problems in Bahrain as neither disease is indigenous to the country . As a result , cases of malaria and TB have declined in recent decades with cases of contractions amongst Bahraini nationals becoming rare . The Ministry of Health sponsors regular vaccination campaigns against TB and other diseases such as hepatitis B. 
 Bahrain is currently suffering from an obesity epidemic as 28 @.@ 9 % of all males and 38 @.@ 2 % of all females are classified as obese . Bahrain also has one of the highest prevalence of diabetes in the world ( 5th place ) , with more than 15 % of the Bahraini population suffering from the disease , and accounting for 5 % of deaths in the country . Cardiovascular diseases account for 32 % of all deaths in Bahrain , being the number one cause of death in the country ( the second being cancer ) . Sickle cell anaemia and thalassaemia are prevalent in the country , with a study concluding that 18 % of Bahrainis are carriers of sickle cell anaemia while 24 % are carriers of thalassaemia . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Islam is the main religion , and Bahrainis are known for their tolerance towards the practice of other faiths . <unk> between Bahrainis and <unk> are not uncommon , there are many Filipino @-@ Bahrainis like that of Filipino <unk> actress Mona Marbella Al @-@ Alawi 
 Rules regarding female attire are generally relaxed compared to regional neighbours ; the traditional attire of women usually include the hijab or the <unk> . Although the traditional male attire is the <unk> which also includes traditional headdresses such as the keffiyeh , <unk> and <unk> , Western clothing is common in the country . 
 Although Bahrain legalized homosexuality in 1976 , many homosexuals have since been arrested . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 The modern art movement in the country officially emerged in the 1950s , culminating in the establishment of an art society . Expressionism and surrealism , as well as calligraphic art are the popular forms of art in the country . Abstract expressionism has gained popularity in recent decades . Pottery @-@ making and textile weaving are also popular products that were widely made in Bahraini villages . Arabic calligraphy grew in popularity as the Bahraini government was an active patron in Islamic art , culminating in the establishment of an Islamic museum , Beit Al Quran . The Bahrain national museum houses a permanent contemporary art exhibition . The architecture of Bahrain is similar to that of its neighbours in the Persian Gulf . The wind tower , which generates natural ventilation in a house , is a common sight on old buildings , particularly in the old districts of Manama and Muharraq . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Literature retains a strong tradition in the country ; most traditional writers and poets write in the classical Arabic style . In recent years , the number of younger poets influenced by western literature are rising , most writing in free verse and often including political or personal content . Ali Al <unk> , a decorated longtime poet , was described in 2011 by Al <unk> as the literary icon of Bahrain . 
 In literature , Bahrain was the site of the ancient land of Dilmun mentioned in the Epic of Gilgamesh . Legend also states that it was the location of the Garden of Eden . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music style in Bahrain is similar to that of its neighbours . The <unk> style of music , which is folk music , is popular in the country . The <unk> style of music , which involves a complex form of urban music , performed by an Oud ( plucked lute ) , a violin and <unk> ( a drum ) , is also popular in Bahrain . Ali Bahar was one of the most famous singers in Bahrain . He performed his music with his Band Al @-@ <unk> ( The Brothers ) . Bahrain was also the site of the first recording studio amongst the Persian Gulf states . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Association football is the most popular sport in Bahrain . Bahrain 's national football team has competed multiple times at the Asian Cup , Arab Nations Cup and played in the FIFA World Cup qualifiers , though it has never qualified for the World Cup . Bahrain has its own top @-@ tier domestic professional football league , the Bahraini Premier League . Basketball , Rugby and horse racing are also widely popular in the country . 
 Bahrain has a Formula One race @-@ track , which hosted the inaugural Gulf Air Bahrain Grand Prix on 4 April 2004 , the first in an Arab country . This was followed by the Bahrain Grand Prix in 2005 . Bahrain hosted the opening Grand Prix of the 2006 season on 12 March of that year . Both the above races were won by Fernando Alonso of Renault . The race has since been hosted annually , except for 2011 when it was cancelled due to ongoing anti @-@ government protests . The 2012 race occurred despite concerns of the safety of the teams and the ongoing protests in the country . The decision to hold the race despite ongoing protests and violence has been described as " controversial " by Al Jazeera English , CNN , AFP and Sky News . The Independent named it " one of the most controversial in the history of the sport " . 
 In 2006 , Bahrain also hosted its inaugural Australian V8 Supercar event dubbed the " Desert 400 " . The V8s returned every November to the Sakhir circuit until 2010 , in which it was the second event of the series . The series has not returned since . The Bahrain International Circuit also features a full @-@ length dragstrip where the Bahrain Drag Racing Club has organised invitational events featuring some of Europe 's top drag racing teams to try to raise the profile of the sport in the Middle East . 
 = = = Holidays = = = 
 On 1 September 2006 , Bahrain changed its weekend from being Thursdays and Fridays to Fridays and Saturdays , in order to have a day of the weekend shared with the rest of the world . Notable holidays in the country are listed below : 
 = Walkabout ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Walkabout " is the seventeenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on March 28 , 1997 . The episode was written by Chip Johannessen and Tim Tankosic , and directed by Cliff Bole . " Walkabout " featured guest appearances by Željko Ivanek and Gregory Itzin . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , finds himself suffering from amnesia after taking part in a nightmarish drug trial . Fearing that someone may have died as a result , Black attempts to track down the doctor responsible . 
 " Walkabout " was the only episode of the series to feature contributions from either Bole or Tankosic . The episode , which opens with a quotation from Cicero , was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 1 million households in its initial broadcast , and earned mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a medical clinic , a nurse escapes to the shops from a room , locking it just before someone inside can rape her . Inside the room , a group of people are screaming , panicking and self @-@ mutilating ; one man — Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) — begins pounding on a reinforced glass window until his fists bleed . 
 Millennium Group investigator Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) visits Catherine Black ( Megan Gallagher ) to tell her that Frank , her husband and a fellow Group member , disappeared on his way to Yakima , Washington . Watts combs Black 's computer history for information , finding emails back and forth between Black — using the pseudonym " David Marx " — and a doctor called Daniel Miller . Catherine reveals that the pseudonym Black has been using is one he had also used to check into hotels during a previous mental breakdown . 
 Black is discovered at a bus depot by a police , his hands injured and bandaged . His pseudonym is found on a hospital bracelet ; and he has no recollection of events save for the suspicion that someone died during the gap in his memory . Watts helps Black trace Dr. Miller ( Željko Ivanek ) to a hotel , where he informs them that Black was seeking a cure for his " gift " ; a seemingly @-@ psychic ability to understand others ' psyches . Miller had been helping Black join a clinical trial for a drug called Proloft which would treat temporal lobe abnormalities ; however , Black refutes that he would be interested in such a thing . Visiting a clinic , Black 's ability reveals to him that he has been there before , during the nightmarish drug trial he cannot remember . From there , he is able to use the Millennium Group to persuade the drug company to release records which allow him to trace other participants . He finds that one participant died after gouging his own eyes out ; the body of the supervising nurse is later found in a dumpster . 
 Research on the drug given to the trial participants reveals it to be a chiral chemical , with two enantiomer forms ; one is the harmless and beneficial Proloft , the other is the dangerous hallucinogen which Black and the others ingested . Dr Miller tells Black that he had been working on drugs to cure his own visions , which he believes are similar to Black 's . One night , years earlier , Miller 's left him after he ran into the road amidst oncoming traffic , almost killing himself in a hallucinatory state . After Black leaves , Hans Ingram ( Gregory Itzin ) , the doctor responsible for the trial , breaks into Miller 's room . 
 Later , Miller is killed in a traffic accident after once again running onto a busy highway ; Black finds a photograph of Ingram on his body . Watts and the police investigate Ingram 's home , finding the <unk> body of the dead trial participant and sachets of something called " Smooth Time " , which they ascertain to be the nightmarish enantiomer of Proloft . Watts and the Millennium Group receive news that workers at a city office building are rioting and panicking . Black realizes that Ingram had been distributing " Smooth Time " under the guise of a sweetener in order to drug a large number of people . Tracking Ingram to the office building 's surveillance room , Black learns that the doctor believes that the country 's dependence on antidepressants has created a nation of " zombies " , and he is attempting to " wake them up " with violent hallucinogens . The doctor is arrested and taken into custody . 
 At home with his family , Black 's motives for visiting the drug trials return to him — he is concerned about his young daughter Jordan , believing that she has inherited his abilities . He is now dissuaded from using pharmaceuticals to suppress this , opting instead to guide her to understand her gift . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Walkabout " is the third Millennium episode penned by Chip Johannessen , after " Blood Relatives " and " Force Majeure " . Johannessen would go on to write an additional ten episodes across all three seasons , including the series ' final episode " Goodbye to All That " . After Millennium 's cancellation , Johannessen would also contribute an episode to its sister show The X @-@ Files , 1999 's " Orison " . 
 Co @-@ writer Tim Tankosic 's contribution to this episode was his only involvement in Millennium . The episode also marked the only contribution to the series by director Cliff Bole . Bole also contributed episodes to The X @-@ Files and Millennium creator Chris Carter 's series Harsh Realm . Guest star Željko Ivanek had also previously appeared in " Roland " , an episode of The X @-@ Files . 
 Lance Henriksen was concerned that it would be out of character for Frank Black to recklessly take untested drugs , and suggested adding a line of dialogue — " I don 't even take aspirin " — to the script to help clue the audience in to the fact that his involvement in the clinical trial was an attempt to aid his daughter . The episode begins with a quotation translated from classical Roman orator Marcus Tullius Cicero 's treatise De <unk> <unk> et <unk> — " I remember the very things I do not wish to ; I cannot forget the things I wish to forget " . The phrase is found at the beginning of Book II of the work . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Walkabout " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on March 28 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 3 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 3 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented 6 @.@ 1 million households , and left the episode the sixty @-@ seventh most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five , comparing it to " Demons " , an episode of The X @-@ Files which was broadcast during the same season . Shearman and Pearson found " Walkabout " the better episode of the two , but felt that it became " a curiously passionate affair " after the first act — from the cold open until Black is found by the police . Shearman also noted that Željko Ivanek 's guest performance " lacked subtlety " , though praised Henriksen for a " bravura performance . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Walkabout " 4 out of 5 , describing it as " a fine outing " . Gibron felt that the episode " forces us to confront uneasy questions " , likening the narrative to " a giant puzzle with the pieces tossed at us from all angles " . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , rated " Walkabout " an A − . Handlen noted that he was pleasantly surprised that the episode did not play on clichéd amnesia tropes as he had expected , and felt that involving Black so heavily in the cold open was a good method of changing the series ' usual formula . 
 = 1907 Tour de France = 
 The 1907 Tour de France was the 5th running of the annual Tour de France , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . From 8 July to 4 August , the 93 cyclists cycled 4488 km ( 2 @,@ 788 mi ) in fourteen stages around France . The winner , Lucien Petit @-@ Breton , completed the race at an average speed of 28 @.@ 47 km / h ( 17 @.@ 69 mi / h ) . For the first time , climbs in the Western Alps were included in the Tour de France . The race was dominated at the start by Émile Georget , who won five of the first eight stages . In the ninth stage , he borrowed a bicycle from a befriended rider after his own broke . This was against the rules ; initially he received only a small penalty and his main competitors left the race out of protest . Georget 's penalty was then increased and Lucien Petit @-@ Breton became the new leader . Petit @-@ Breton won two of the remaining stages and the overall victory of the Tour . 
 = = Changes from the 1906 Tour de France = = 
 The 1907 Tour de France incorporated 14 stages , which was one more than in 1906 . For the first time , roads in Switzerland were included . The mountain stages in 1906 had been so successful , according to the organiser Henri Desgrange , that the western Alps were included in the race for the first time . The 1907 race was also the first time that a car with bicycle repairmen drove behind the riders , to give assistance in solving mechanical problems on bicycles . 
 As in 1906 , the race was decided by a points system . At the end of every stage , the winner was given one point , the next cyclist two points , and so on . After the eighth stage , when there were only 49 cyclists left in the race , the points given in the first eight stages were redistributed among the remaining cyclists , according to their positions in those stages . 
 = = Participants = = 
 René Pottier , the winner of the 1906 Tour de France , did not defend his title because he had committed suicide in early 1907 . Although the riders officially rode the Tour as individuals , some shared the same sponsor and cooperated as if they rode in teams . At the start of the race , it was expected that the riders sponsored by Alcyon and the riders sponsored by Peugeot would compete for the overall victory . Alcyon started with three main contenders : Louis Trousselier , Marcel Cadolle and Léon Georget ; Peugeot counted on Emile Georget . 
 As in the previous years , there were two classes of cyclists , the coureurs de vitesse and the coureurs sur machines poinçonnées . Of the 93 cyclists starting the race , 82 were in the <unk> category , which meant that they had to finish the race on the same bicycle as they left , and if it was broken they had to fix it without assistance . The coureurs de vitesse could get help from the car with bicycle repairmen when they had to fix a bicycle , and when a bicycle was beyond repair , they could change it to a new one . 
 Not all cyclists were competing for the victory ; some only joined as tourists . The most notable of them was Henri Pépin . Pépin had hired two riders , Jean <unk> and Henri <unk> , to ride with him . They treated the race as a pleasure ride , stopping for lunch when they chose and spending the night in the best hotels they could find . <unk> and <unk> became the first cyclists in the history of the Tour de France to ride not for their own placings but for another rider 's interest . During the race , they found another Tour de France competitor , Jean @-@ Marie <unk> , lying in a ditch . They helped him get up and fed him ; from then on <unk> also helped Pépin . 
 = = Race details = = 
 Early in the race , Trousselier , François Faber and Emile Georget were the main contenders . Trousselier , winner of the 1905 Tour de France and eager to win again , won the first stage . In the second stage , the Tour passed the French @-@ German border to finish in Metz , which was then part of Germany . The German authorities allowed the cyclists to finish there , but did not allow the French flag to be flown or the cars of race officials to enter the city . At the end of the stage , Emile Georget seemingly beat Trousselier with a very small margin . After inquiry , Desgrange , the Tour 's organiser , decided to put both cyclists in first place , to keep both sponsors satisfied . 
 In the third stage , the Tour returned to France ; at the border , the riders were stopped by two French customs officers and the delay took so long that the stage had to be restarted . During the stage in the Alps , Émile Georget was better than his competitors ; he won the stage and became leader of the general classification . Georget won five of the first eight stages , and had a commanding lead . In the seventh stage , Marcel Cadolle , at that time in second place , fell and his handlebar penetrated his knee , after which he had to give up . 
 During the ninth stage , when Georget was leading the race , he broke the frame of his bicycle at a checkpoint . According to the rules , Georget should have fixed his bicycle alone ; he knew this would take him more than five hours , so he switched bicycles with Pierre @-@ Gonzague <unk> . This was against the rules , so Georget was given a fine of 500 francs . After this stage , won by Petit @-@ Breton , the general classification was as follows : 
 Unsatisfied with the fine given to Georget , Trousselier and the other riders sponsored by Alcyon left the Tour in protest . 
 After the tenth stage , the organisers gave Georget an additional penalty for the bicycle change in the ninth stage . They changed the classification of the ninth stage , moving Georget from 4th on the stage to last ( 48th place ) . This effectively cost him 44 points in the general classification and moved him from first to third place . The new classification , after the tenth stage , was 
 Lucien Petit @-@ Breton became the new leader of the race . Although he had already finished in fifth place and fourth place in previous years , he was still relatively unknown , and had started in the coureurs sur machines poinçonnées category . Petit @-@ Breton finished in the top three in the next stages , so no other cyclist was able to challenge him for the overall victory . At the end of the race , he had increased his lead to a margin of 19 points ahead of <unk> and 27 points ahead of Georget . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 In the first and final stages , the cyclists were allowed to have pacers . 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 Although 110 riders were on the starting list , 17 did not show up , so the race started with 93 cyclists . At the end of the Tour de France , 33 cyclists remained . The cyclists officially were not grouped in teams ; some cyclists had the same sponsor , even though they were not allowed to work together . 
 The total prize money was 25000 French francs , of which 4000 francs were given to Petit @-@ Breton for winning the Tour . In total , he received more than 7000 francs . 
 = = = Other classifications = = = 
 Lucien Petit @-@ Breton was also the winner of the " machines poinçonnées " category . 
 The organising newspaper l 'Auto named Emile Georget the meilleur grimpeur . This unofficial title is the precursor to the modern @-@ day mountains classification . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Petit @-@ Breton also started the 1908 Tour de France . He won five stages and the general classification , and became the first cyclist to win the Tour de France two times . 
 = River Tone = 
 The River Tone is a river in the English county of Somerset . The river is about 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) long . Its source is at Beverton Pond near Huish <unk> in the Brendon Hills , and is dammed at Clatworthy Reservoir . The reservoir outfall continues through Taunton and Curry and Hay Moors , which are designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest . Finally , it flows into the River Parrett at Burrowbridge . 
 An act of Parliament granted in 1699 authorised work that made the river navigable as far as Taunton . The act specified that profits should be used to benefit the poor of Taunton , but the Proprietors succeeded in avoiding their obligation until 1843 , when they used the proceeds from the sale of the navigation to fund a wing of the Taunton and Somerset Hospital , and to aid the Taunton Market Trust . 
 The Bridgwater and Taunton Canal opened in 1827 , which provided an easier route than the river , and protracted legal battles followed over ownership of the river and water rights for the canal . These were not finally resolved until 1832 , when the Canal Company formally took over the river navigation . The ability to navigate the river gradually deteriorated , not helped by the abandonment of the River Parrett as a navigation in 1878 . Following flooding in Taunton in 1960 , much of the river between there and its mouth was straightened , and the navigation locks were removed . That at Ham was blown up by the Territorial Army . Navigation rights were repealed in 1967 . 
 = = Course = = 
 The river is about 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) long . Its source is at Beverton Pond . Over its first 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) it follows a south @-@ easterly course and drops around 490 feet ( 150 m ) before discharging into Clatworthy Reservoir , which also impounds the waters of 5 other streams . 
 The river continues as the outflow from the main dam of the reservoir , passing to the west of the village of Clatworthy before following a southerly course which passes to the east of Huish <unk> . The river enters a steeply wooded section at <unk> bridge . The <unk> road from <unk> crosses from the east to the west side of the valley at <unk> bridge . By the time it reaches <unk> bridge and turns south @-@ east , it has lost another 410 ft ( 120 m ) and is just 330 ft ( 100 m ) above sea level . At <unk> , the river turns to the north @-@ east and then the north . Here the course of the derelict Grand Western Canal crossed the Tone on an aqueduct which now carries a footpath . 
 The river passes over weirs at Greenham , Tone and Nynehead , after which it is crossed by the aqueduct of the Grand Western Canal and the railway , both on their own routes to Taunton . A disused bridge , constructed in 1817 , spans the river at Nynehead . The river turns to the north @-@ east near Bradford on Tone , with its two listed bridges , including the Bradford Bridge which was originally built by the 15th century , and then to the east near Upcott bridge , where there were two mills . At <unk> its course is crossed by Silk Mills Road . There is a scheme to make the river navigable from here to the town centre as a way of encouraging transport with less environmental impact . 
 The French weir in Taunton is the head of navigation as boats can not be taken upstream of this point . As it makes its way through the town centre to Firepool weir and the junction with the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal , it passes under the North Bridge , which was constructed in 1895 , and Priory Bridge Road . Next comes the A358 Obridge viaduct , the A38 Bathpool Bridge and the M5 motorway bridge . Firepool weir was reconstructed in 1967 as part of the plans to straighten the river through the town centre and down to Bathpool in order to provide better flood defences . These works swept away the remains of the original navigation . There is a disused five @-@ arched railway bridge built in 1863 at Creech St Michael . Nearby is the aqueduct that carried the Chard Canal over the river from 1842 until 1866 . The Brewhouse Theatre & Arts Centre , is close to the riverside . Ham weir stands as a reminder of the location of the lock there . After Knapp bridge , the sluice at Newbridge marks the upper tidal limit of the river . Curry and Hay Moors , an area of low @-@ lying fenland close to the river , are a Site of Special Scientific Interest . A railway bridge carries the Taunton to Castle Cary railway line over the river , after which is the Curry Moor pumping station . Two more road bridges at Athelney and Stanmoor cross the river before it joins the River Parrett at Burrowbridge , where the junction is overshadowed by Burrow Mump . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The catchment area of the river is approximately 414 square kilometres ( 160 sq mi ) and the average daily flow for the entire catchment is estimated to be 4 @.@ 76 cubic metres per second ( 168 cu ft / s ) . Water from tributaries such as <unk> Brook , Halse Water , Haywards Water , Three Bridges Stream , <unk> Stream and Broughton Brook feed the river but are supplemented by controlled releases from Clatworthy and <unk> Reservoirs during dry periods . The tributaries flowing into the Tone from the south bring water from the Blackdown Hills . 
 The rivers source is in the Brendon Hills which fall within the Exmoor National Park . The hills are quite heavily cultivated unlike their neighbouring upland areas of Exmoor and the Quantock Hills . The Brendon Hills are largely formed from the Morte Slates , a thick faulted and folded sequence of Devonian age sedimentary rocks . It then flows through an alluvial floodplain underlain by sub @-@ alluvial gravels , underlain by rocks of the Mercia Mudstone Group . The floodplain is between 5 metres ( 16 ft ) and 50 metres ( 160 ft ) above the ordnance datum ( mean sea level ) . The surrounding land is dominated by wet meadow and wooded areas including willow trees . 
 Water quality in the river can be affected by dredging work . 
 = = Hydrology and water quality = = 
 The Environment Agency is responsible for monitoring water quality on the river and its tributaries , which have been divided into seventeen separate water bodies . In 2013 , seven water bodies were assessed as having good quality and ten as being moderate . The reasons for not achieving good status included pollution from waste water , pollution from agriculture and physical modifications . The physical modifications include dredging work on the lower reaches , near the junction with the Parrett to increase the channel flow to reduce flooding . The use and storage of the dredged material in bank restoration may also have an impact . In 1998 improvements were sought to treatment works and surface water outfalls to improve water quality . A vegetable washing plant on the <unk> stream at Wellington was also identified as a source of pollution . The waters of the Upper Tone have been classified as having good ecological status , whereas the section from Wellington to Taunton and <unk> of Taunton are rated as moderate . 
 There are three monitoring stations on the river tracking the water levels . At Greenham the normal level of the river in average weather conditions is between 0 @.@ 15 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and 0 @.@ 50 metres ( 1 ft 8 in ) with the highest recorded being 2 @.@ 2 metres ( 7 ft 3 in ) on 7 December 2000 . At Bishops Hull the normal range is 0 @.@ 09 metres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) to 0 @.@ 54 metres ( 1 ft 9 in ) and the high 2 @.@ 59 metres ( 8 ft 6 in ) on 30 October 2000 . At Taunton market the normal range is 0 @.@ 88 metres ( 2 ft 11 in ) to 0 @.@ 93 metres ( 3 ft 1 in ) with a high of 2 @.@ 77 metres ( 9 ft 1 in ) on 24 December 2013 . 
 The flow in two tributaries and two points on the river is also monitored , primarily to act as an early flood warning system for Taunton . On <unk> the mean flow is 1 @.@ 128 cubic metres per second ( 39 @.@ 8 cu ft / s ) while at Milverton on the <unk> Brook it is 0 @.@ 53 cubic metres per second ( 19 cu ft / s ) and at Greenham on the river itself it is 1 @.@ 025 cubic metres per second ( 36 @.@ 2 cu ft / s ) . At Clatworthy Reservoir near the source the flow rate is 0 @.@ 322 cubic metres per second ( 11 @.@ 4 cu ft / s ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The river has a long history of improvements to facilitate navigation from Bridgwater to Taunton , and has also been used to power mills along its length . These two objectives are often antagonistic , and this has been the case on the River Tone . 
 The earliest known record of improvements to the river is recorded in a document of 1325 from the Dean and Chapter of Wells Cathedral , where it was proposed to widen the river between Ham Mill and a new mill which was to be built at Knapp . The Dean and Chapter owned the river as far as Athelney weir , which was presumably a fish weir , as the river was an important source of fish for the local population . Records from 1494 record the intent to build a new mill at North Curry , which was operational in 1504 , and caused flooding in 1505 , resulting in the Bishop of Winchester having to complain to the Dean and Chapter of Wells . There is also mention of boats using the river at this time , as their use was restricted by the construction of the new mill at Ham . 
 = = = River improvements = = = 
 Navigation on the first 7 miles ( 11 km ) from Burrowbridge to Ham Mill was much easier than on the final stretch to Taunton , and in 1638 , John Mallett , the Sheriff of Somerset and member of parliament for Bath , obtained a Commission under the Great Seal from King Charles II . This granted him and his heirs sole navigation rights from Bridgwater to Ham Mills , and allowed him to improve the river at his own expense . He saw this as a philanthropic action , as it reduced the price of coal to the poor people of Taunton , as well as improving the transport infrastructure . 
 With the death of Mallett and later his son , work on the maintenance of the river ceased , and its condition declined . By 1697 , trade was threatened , and a group of 34 merchants and traders petitioned parliament for powers to take over the navigation . An Act of Parliament dated 24 March 1699 created the Conservators of the River Tone , giving them powers " for making and keeping the River Tone navigable from Bridgewater to Taunton , in the county of Somerset " , which included the purchase of the navigation rights from Bridgwater to Ham Mills from the Mallett estate , for which a price of £ 330 was agreed . 
 The Conservators applied for a second act of parliament in 1707 , as they needed a further £ 3 @,@ 800 to finance projects including the building of a half @-@ lock and the removal of a shoal just below Knapp Bridge . Boats carrying 15 tons of cargo could reach Taunton by 1717 . The navigation included a lock and two or more half @-@ locks , consisting of a pair of gates to hold back the water , and an agreement to build a towpath between Ham Mills and Taunton was reached in 1724 . 
 The number of locks on the navigation varied over the years , and by 1804 there were four full or pound locks , situated at Ham , Creech St Michael , Bathpool and Obridge . In addition , there were at least four half locks . Curry Moor gates were the lowest on the river , which were followed by a second half lock 100 yards ( 91 m ) further upstream , just below Newbridge . A third gate was located 450 yards ( 410 m ) below Ham lock , and the fourth one was just below the lock at Bathpool . 
 = = = Profits = = = 
 The 1699 act of parliament had stipulated that the Conservators could receive dividends of six per cent on the money they had invested into the undertaking , until the capital was repaid , and that after that the tolls were to be reduced , while profits were to be used for " the benefit and advantage of the poor of Taunton " , particularly by the building of hospitals . Local landowners complained about rights of access across their land and increased flooding in a petition of 1707 , however in 1708 another act was passed to allow the completion of the navigation to Taunton . 
 Because the receipts were initially insufficient to cover the six per cent dividend on the £ 5 @,@ 697 that the Conservators had invested , they added the difference to the capital , so that the debt steadily increased . This state of affairs was challenged in 1735 , when it was decreed that the original capital had been repaid , and the poor should now benefit , but the decision was overturned in 1738 on appeal . 
 Profits for the undertaking showed a steady rise , due in part to the low maintenance costs of the river . Income from tolls rose from £ 321 in 1712 to £ 1 @,@ 137 by 1802 . By this time , traffic consisted of about 11 @,@ 500 tons of coal carried from Bridgwater upstream out of a total tonnage of 14 @,@ 000 tons . Dividends for 1797 were 11 @.@ 5 % , but the capital debt had risen to £ 85 @,@ 466 by 1800 , when the auditors refused to examine the accounts , because the likelihood of the poor ever benefitting from the navigation was receding . After much negotiation , the capital debt was reduced to £ 13 @,@ 000 . An act of parliament dated 14 July 1804 enshrined this position , and ensured that interest was limited to six percent , with profits being used to reduce the debt . By 1828 , the amount owing had reduced to £ 4 @,@ 426 . 
 = = = Canal Company Takeover = = = 
 The building of the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal , which opened in 1827 , directly affected the River Tone Navigation , as it provided a more direct route between Taunton and Bridgwater . The Conservators attempted to limit the supply of water from the river to the canal , while the canal company breached the river bank near Firepool lock , in order to ensure that boats could reach Taunton Bridge wharf from the canal . In order to compete with the canal , they chose to reduce the tolls , although they were unsure of the legality of this action while they had outstanding debts . The canal company challenged their right to reduce the tolls in court , but the action was defeated , and the tolls remained at the lower level . 
 On 28 August 1827 , the canal company announced that they were taking over the River Tone Navigation , under the terms of their acts of parliament of 1811 and 1824 . This they did in November , when William Goodland , the river superintendent , was evicted from his cottage , the tolls were raised again , and maintenance ceased . This action was ruled to be illegal by the Court of King 's Bench , as the canal company had not complied with the time limits enshrined in the act , but the canal company held on to the river despite the order to give it back to the conservators . Both sides took their case to the High Court , which ruled that the Conservators should have the river in February 1830 . A further series of legal actions followed , after which the canal company attempted to obtain a new act of parliament to obtain the Tone by compulsory purchase . The Conservators then decided to negotiate , and an act of parliament passed in July 1832 authorised the takeover . 
 Under the terms of the act , the canal company inherited the debts of the Conservators , and paid them an additional £ 2 @,@ 000 . They were required to rebuild part of the North Town Bridge in Taunton , and to return the Tone Navigation to good order . The Conservators were empowered to carry out an annual inspection , and to re @-@ possess the river if the canal was not properly maintained . The £ 2 @,@ 000 was held by the Conservators until 1838 , when they applied for an order to dispose of it , but it was not until 1843 that the order was granted . £ 1 @,@ 000 was used to build a new wing for the Taunton and Somerset Hospital , and £ 1 @,@ 000 was invested in the Taunton Market Trust , in line with the intentions of the 1699 act . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Traffic on the river in 1823 was 39 @,@ 516 tons , which generated tolls of £ 2 @,@ 194 . After the construction of the canal , traffic steadily declined , until income was insufficient to cover maintenance by the early 1860s . The canal company used a similar accounting practice to manage the Tone debt , inflating it at six per cent each year , to ensure that they could demonstrate that the river was unprofitable . 
 Navigation was further affected by the passing of the Somersetshire Drainage Act on 1 July 1878 , which resulted in the River Parrett being taken over by the Drainage Commissioners , and abandoned as a navigation . Limited traffic continued to use the lower reaches of the Tone , with the last barge using the Burrowbridge to Ham Mills section in 1929 . In 1967 the Somerset River Authority applied to the Ministry of Agriculture for permission to remove the navigation rights , and the original acts of parliament were repealed under section 41 of the Land Drainage Act ( 1930 ) . This allowed the river through Taunton to be straightened , and a weir to be constructed at Firepool , to improve the flood defences for Taunton . Above the weir , the river is still navigable as far as French Weir . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Ham Mills was a site of milling activity from mediaeval times until about 1914 . The mill was situated on an island in the middle of the river , with a weir and bypass channel to the north and the lock channel to the south . The Conservators were required to light the area after a boatman fell into the river and drowned while attempting to use the lock after dark in March 1826 . The coroner who instructed that the lighting should be installed noted that " boats were passing at all hours of the night . " Water levels in the river fell as more water was extracted further upstream , and by the 1890s the waterwheels were assisted by a steam @-@ driven turbine which the miller installed . Milling ceased in 1914 , when the boiler which supplied the steam was removed by the War Department , so that it could be fitted into a minesweeper . A surviving mill house which dates from the early 19th century has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade II listed building . 
 There had been a mill at Bathpool for several centuries , which had been rebuilt or adapted as required . In March 1812 , the structure was burnt down by a fire , caused , according to the Taunton Courier , by " the excessive friction excited in the stones used in the process of shelling clover seeds " . Stocks of flour , grain and flax valued at £ 2 @,@ 500 were destroyed . The mill was rebuilt and later owned by Captain George Beadon . The mill was purchased by Thomas <unk> in 1889 on the death of Beadon , but another fire damaged much of it two years later . <unk> rebuilt it with safety in mind , and as at Ham , installed a steam @-@ driven turbine as water levels were often inadequate to power the wheels . Two more turbines followed , and the water wheels were removed . Steam from the turbines was also used to heat bread ovens , which were amongst the first in the country to be heated in this way . In September 1915 , another fire gutted the building , which was not rebuilt , and the ruins were demolished in the 1920s . 
 There were originally mills at Firepool and Obridge as well . Because of the difficulties of navigating past the mill pools , the Conservators of the River Tone decided to buy the mill at Firepool in December 1793 with a view to demolishing it " for the benefit of the navigation " , and they obtained it for just £ 32 . In 1797 , they decided to follow the same course with Obridge Mill . The mill at Creech St Michael was the subject of a court action at the King 's Bench . In October 1830 , while replacing the mill stones , the millers had opened the flood gates for 16 days , and built a dam across the river , thus preventing navigation . The case was heard in 1831 , and the judgement was that both parties were obligated to use the water in a way that did not cause injury to the other party . 
 = = Flood defences = = 
 The first Curry Moor pumping station was built in 1864 , to house a steam engine and pump . A cottage for the operator was built next to it at the same time . This installation lasted until 1955 , when a new pumphouse was constructed to house two diesel pumps . The steam engine was retained for historical reasons , and is located in part of the new building . The diesel pumps were supplemented by an electric pump in 1983 , and a programme of refurbishment was carried out in 2008 , which included the construction of a new outfall into the river . 
 In 1951 , very heavy rainfall resulted in large portions of the Tone valley below Taunton flooding . Analysis of what had happened indicated that the channel was of insufficient size to carry the volume of water , which fell on the hills to the west and then flowed down the river . The easy solution of widening the channel was not available , as there were houses built along the south @-@ eastern bank for around 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) above the junction with the River Parrett . The flooding revealed that although these properties were not normally affected by floods , there was significant seepage through the banks . There was no likelihood of sufficient money being available to buy all the houses to demolish them , and so a program of constructing concrete cores in the centre of the banks began in 1956 and continued until 1964 . 
 Rainfall in October 1960 was even heavier , when 9 @.@ 72 inches ( 247 mm ) fell on the Somerset Levels , representing 249 % of the normal levels . Again the valley flooded , and large areas of Taunton were under water to a depth of 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) . Plans for a flood relief channel centred at first on the Bridgwater to Taunton Canal , which follows a slightly higher course to the west , and does not run through peat , but the estimated cost of £ 1 @.@ 7 million was prohibitive , and so a scheme to upgrade the river costing around one third of that was implemented . This involved straightening of the river where it meandered , widening the bridge openings , and the demolition of navigation locks and weirs . 
 A new sluice was constructed at Newbridge , incorporating tidal gates , which effectively prevent tides from passing further up the river . The removal of the navigation works at Ham proved particularly difficult , and acted as a training exercise for the Territorial Royal Engineers . Men from the 205 ( Wessex ) Field Squadron RE ( TA ) used 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) of explosives to blow up the half @-@ lock and a mud @-@ filled barge which could not be moved . The river banks were raised to give more protection to the villages of Creech St Michael , Ham and <unk> , but the channel was still only capable of discharging 2 @,@ 500 cubic feet per second ( 71 m3 / s ) , whereas the channels through Taunton were designed to handle 4 @,@ 500 cu ft / s ( 130 m3 / s ) , and were unlikely to overflow until discharges reached 6 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ( 170 m3 / s ) . Curry Moor is therefore used as a <unk> , and excess water floods over it , to be pumped out at a later date by the Curry Moor pumping station , situated on the banks of the river below the railway bridge . The programme began in 1965 and was completed in 1967 . 
 During the winter flooding of 2013 – 14 on the Somerset Levels , the River Tone overflowed at new year , during the rain and storms from Storm Dirk , with many residents asking for the Environment Agency to resume river dredging . On 24 January 2014 , in light of the continued flooded extent of the Somerset Moors and forecast new rainfall as part of the winter storms of 2013 – 14 in the United Kingdom , both Somerset County Council and Sedgemoor District Council declared a major incident , as defined under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 . As a result of the extensive flooding dredging work was carried out . In addition plans were developed for a flood storage area or " <unk> " with a capacity of 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 64 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) , on the Tone at Taunton . Studies of the potential impact on the <unk> were carried out . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Clatworthy Reservoir is an important wildlife habitat managed by Wessex Water , and offers facilities for fishing and walking . The river and its tributaries support populations of European water vole ( Arvicola amphibius ) . There may also be populations of white @-@ clawed crayfish ( <unk> pallipes ) and northern crested newts ( Triturus cristatus ) . The fish species in the river include : chub , carp , grayling , roach , tench , rudd , perch and pike . 
 Curry and Hay Moors is a 472 @.@ 8 hectares ( 1 @,@ 168 acres ) biological Site of Special Scientific Interest adjacent to the Tone . They form part of the complex of grazing marshes known as the Somerset Levels and Moors . The low @-@ lying site is situated adjacent to the River Tone which annually <unk> , flooding the fields in winter . Soils are predominantly alluvial clays overlying Altcar series <unk> . The flora and fauna of the ditches and rhynes is of national importance . Over 70 aquatic and bankside vascular plants have been recorded including <unk> ( <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , flowering rush ( Butomus <unk> ) , wood club @-@ rush ( Scirpus sylvaticus ) and lesser water @-@ plantain ( <unk> <unk> ) . Over 100 species of aquatic invertebrates inhabit the ditches including one nationally rare soldier fly , ( Odontomyia ornata ) and 13 nationally scarce species including the water beetles <unk> uliginosus , <unk> transversalis and <unk> nanus . In winter the flooded fields provide food for large numbers of waterfowl with several thousand lapwing ( Vanellus vanellus ) , hundreds of snipe ( Gallinago gallinago ) and smaller numbers of golden plover ( <unk> <unk> ) and dunlin ( Calidris alpina ) regularly present . Over two hundred Bewick 's swans ( Cygnus bewickii ) have been recorded , making the site an internationally important wintering ground for this species . Raptor species such as short @-@ eared owl ( Asio flammeus ) , merlin ( Falco columbarius ) and peregrine ( Falco peregrinus ) regularly hunt over the site in winter . Vertebrate species present include grass snake ( Natrix natrix ) and common frog Rana temporaria . Otters ( Lutra lutra ) are regularly recorded on the site . 
 Southlake Moor is another biological Site of Special Scientific Interest , this one covering 196 @.@ 1 hectares ( 485 acres ) near the junction of the Tone and Parrett at Burrow Mump and Burrowbridge . Southlake Moor is unusual in that , when conditions in the River Parrett are suitable , it may be deliberately flooded in winter by means of a sluice in the river floodbank . Some 96 species of aquatic and bankside vascular plant species have been recorded from Southlake Moor , of particular interest is the greater water @-@ parsnip ( Sium latifolium ) . When the moor is flooded , large numbers of wildfowl may be present ; with up to 22 @,@ 000 wigeon ( Anas penelope ) , 250 Bewick 's swan ( Cygnus bewickii ) and good numbers of pochard ( Aythya ferina ) , teal ( Anas crecca ) and tufted duck ( Aythya fuligula ) . Regular signs of the otter ( Lutra lutra ) are to be seen on the muddy banks of the River Parrett . The ditches on the east side of the site contain a population of the palmate newt ( Triturus helveticus ) . 
 = No. 90 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing that operated during the early years of the Malayan Emergency . Its purpose was to serve as an umbrella organisation for the RAAF units deployed in the conflict , No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron , flying Avro Lincolns , and No. 38 ( Transport ) Squadron , flying Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas . The wing was established in July 1950 and headquartered at Changi , on the east coast of Singapore . No. 1 Squadron operated from Tengah , in Singapore 's west . No. 38 Squadron was based at Changi and , from April 1951 to February 1952 , at Kuala Lumpur in central Malaya . The Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as precision strikes , to harass communist insurgents . The Dakotas were tasked with airlifting cargo , VIPs , troops and casualties , as well as courier flights and supply drops . Following No. 38 Squadron 's departure in December 1952 , No. 90 Wing was disbanded , leaving No. 1 Squadron to carry on as the sole RAAF unit in the Malayan air campaign until its withdrawal to Australia in July 1958 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and formation = = = 
 In April 1950 , the British government requested Australia 's assistance to combat communist insurgents during the Malayan Emergency . In response , the Australian Defence Committee determined that it was possible to commit a squadron of eight Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakota transports and a flight of four to six Avro Lincoln heavy bombers . The Federal government formally announced the decision to send the Dakotas soon afterwards ; in late June , it confirmed the allocation of six Lincolns . No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron , operating the Lincolns , would be detached from the control of No. 82 Wing at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , and be based at Tengah airfield in the west of Singapore . No. 38 ( Transport ) Squadron , operating Dakotas , would be detached from No. 86 Wing at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and be based at Changi , in Singapore 's east . The transport commitment was rendered possible by the recent return of ten Australian Dakota crews from service during the Berlin Airlift . 
 It was agreed that RAAF operations during the Emergency would be directed by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) through Air Headquarters Malaya ( later No. 224 Group RAF ) . The British also wanted the Australian squadrons attached to an RAF wing . However , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal George Jones , was mindful of repeating the experience of World War II , when RAAF units and personnel based in Britain had been absorbed by the RAF , rather than operating as a national group led by high @-@ ranking Australian officers . He therefore decided that Nos. 1 and 38 Squadrons should be formed into a " composite " organisation ( one made up of disparate elements such as bomber , fighter , or reconnaissance units ) and administered by an overarching RAAF headquarters , and put this requirement to the British Air Ministry . The Air Ministry agreed , and No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing was duly established at Richmond on 10 July 1950 , under the command of Group Captain Paddy Heffernan . 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron 's Dakotas began arriving at Changi on 19 June 1950 , and No. 1 Squadron 's Lincolns at Tengah on 16 July . No. 90 Wing staff departed Richmond by air and established the headquarters at Changi on 22 July . The Dakotas had flown their first mission the previous day ; the Lincolns undertook their initial operations on 26 July . Nos. 1 and 38 Squadrons were responsible for their own routine maintenance ; aircraft rotated back to Australia for major work . The RAF provided base support facilities , including messing and accommodation . 
 The Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as strikes against pinpoint targets . They operated singly and in formations , sometimes in concert with RAF bombers . Not having to contend with anti @-@ aircraft fire , the Lincolns flew mainly by day . After completing a bomb run , they would make another pass over the target to strafe with machine guns and 20 mm cannon . The Lincolns were considered well suited to the campaign , owing to their range and ability to fly at low speeds to search for targets , as well as their firepower and heavy bomb load . No. 1 Squadron also flew night missions — the only Commonwealth air force unit authorised to do so — of up to six hours duration , dropping one bomb every half hour or so . To reduce the risk of collateral damage , all air strikes had to be approved by the Joint Operation Centre , located at Kuala Lumpur in central Malaya and staffed by military , police and civilian personnel . Although the original purpose of the bombing campaign was to kill as many insurgents as possible , the impracticality of achieving this in operations over dense jungle resulted in a shift towards harassing and demoralising the communists , driving them out of their bases and into areas held by Commonwealth ground troops . 
 The Dakotas were tasked with airlifting cargo , VIPs , troops and casualties , as well as courier flights , supply drops to friendly forces and aerial despatch of propaganda leaflets . On other missions they acted as pathfinders for No. 1 Squadron , dropping smoke canisters on suspected communist hideouts that the Lincolns following above and behind would attempt to bomb . <unk> and supplying troops was a key part of the strategy to defeat the insurgency , by ensuring that security forces could maintain a semi @-@ permanent presence in the jungle . No. 38 Squadron 's operations ranged throughout Malaya and into Borneo , the Philippines , Japan and Korea . Transport requirements in the Korean War led to a reduction in No. 90 Wing 's strength when four of the Dakotas were transferred to Iwakuni , Japan , headquarters of No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing , in November 1950 . The same month , Group Captain Frank Headlam was appointed to take over command of No. 90 Wing from Heffernan . Headlam co @-@ piloted a Dakota on a supply drop on 20 December ; he was slightly injured and the aircraft badly damaged following a crash @-@ landing at Kampong Aur in Pahang as a result of engine failure . 
 No. 1 Squadron 's complement was increased from six to eight aircraft after the British Air Ministry requested in February 1951 that Australia augment its bomber force to partly offset the imminent withdrawal of the RAF 's Lincolns to Bomber Command in Europe . In April , No. 38 Squadron 's four Dakotas relocated to Kuala Lumpur , where they undertook supply drops in cooperation with No. 41 Squadron RNZAF . One of No. 1 Squadron 's Lincolns was written off after overshooting the runway at Tengah on 30 November . Wing Commander ( later Group Captain ) Redmond Green was appointed the new commanding officer of No. 90 Wing the following month , replacing Headlam . On 4 April 1952 , Green participated in a Lincoln sortie in place of an injured pilot . The first aircraft he took off in had to turn back owing to engine failure . The second completed the mission but was found to have lost brake power as it was returning to Tengah , and there was a danger of the aircraft overrunning the landing strip and sustaining heavy damage ; the crew was able to slow the Lincoln on the runway by trailing a parachute from the rear turret upon touching down . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron relocated from Kuala Lumpur to its former base at Changi in February 1952 . As the year progressed , RAAF transport priorities altered owing to the increasing demands of the Korean War , and the Malayan commitment was no longer considered sustainable . Having airlifted more than 17 @,@ 000 passengers and almost 1 @,@ 900 tonnes of cargo , dropped some 750 tonnes of supplies and evacuated over 300 injured troops , No. 38 Squadron departed for Australia on 8 December and rejoined No. 86 Wing at Richmond three days later . Following this withdrawal , No. 90 Wing was disbanded at Changi , and No. 1 Squadron became the only Australian flying unit in Malaya . It continued the bombing campaign against the communists until it was withdrawn to Australia in July 1958 , having flown almost 4 @,@ 000 sorties in its eight years of operation and dropped over 14 @,@ 000 tonnes of bombs — 85 per cent of the total delivered by Commonwealth forces during the Emergency . No. 1 Squadron was relieved by No. 2 Squadron , operating English Electric Canberra jet bombers out of Butterworth in north @-@ west Malaya . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 No. 90 Wing was commanded by the following officers : 
 = Rose Tyler = 
 Rose Tyler is a fictional character portrayed by Billie Piper in the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , and was created by series producer Russell T Davies . With the revival of Doctor Who in 2005 , Rose was introduced as a new travelling companion of series protagonist , the Doctor , in his ninth and tenth incarnations . The companion character , intended to act as an audience surrogate , was key in the first series to introduce new viewers to the mythos of Doctor Who , which had not aired regularly since 1989 . Piper received top billing alongside Christopher Eccleston and David Tennant for the duration of her time as a regular cast member . A regular for all of series one ( 2005 ) and series two ( 2006 ) , Piper later returned for three episodes of the programme 's fourth series ( 2008 ) and appeared in feature @-@ length specials in both 2010 and 2013 . 
 In the series ' narrative , Rose is introduced in the eponymous series one premiere as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old working class shop assistant from London , alongside her own supporting cast in the form of her mother Jackie Tyler ( Camille Coduri ) and her boyfriend Mickey Smith ( Noel Clarke ) . Over the course of the first series Rose 's human actions and responses contrast with the Doctor 's alien perspectives . Rose grows increasingly trusting of the Doctor and comes to realise she has fallen in love with him . He comes to value and depend on her and sacrifices his Ninth incarnation for her . Rose forms a similar bond with the new Doctor , but the two appear to be forever separated in the series two finale , although Rose 's temporary return in the fourth series gives her relationship with the Doctor a resolution . 
 In promoting the series , both Piper and Eccleston stressed Rose 's heroic characteristics whilst Davies highlighted her down to earth qualities and quintessential Britishness . Critical reaction noted that the character was more developed , independent and equal to the Doctor than previous companions had been , whilst the character 's overall role in the narrative of the first two series was praised . However , reaction to the character 's 2008 return was more mixed . Piper won numerous awards for her portrayal of Rose — including two National Television Awards — and since her initial role in the series has ranked highly in numerous ' best companion ' polls . After leaving as a series regular , Piper experienced success in other high @-@ profile roles as an actress which has been partly attributed to her performances in Doctor Who . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Rose is introduced in the eponymous premiere episode of the 2005 series . There , she is saved from an Auton attack by the mysterious alien Time Lord known as the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) , and assists him in preventing an invasion of Earth . Subsequently , the Doctor invites Rose to be his travelling companion , taking her to the end of the world and giving her a " <unk> " so she can remain in contact with her mother Jackie ( Camille Coduri ) , and boyfriend Mickey ( Noel Clarke ) . In their travels through time and space , Rose learns the importance of not tampering with history , when she attempts to save the life of her father Pete Tyler ( Shaun Dingwall ) , who had died when she was a baby . Throughout these journeys , she and the Doctor are haunted by two mysterious recurring words : ' Bad Wolf ' . Rose , the Doctor , and new companion Captain Jack ( John Barrowman ) come to understand the meaning of this phrase when they encounter an unstoppable army of evil alien Daleks on the space station Satellite 5 . To return to the Doctor after he sends her home to Earth in series finale " The Parting of the Ways " , Rose tears open the console of the Doctor 's time machine , the TARDIS , and becomes suffused with the power of the time vortex . Returning , she uses her power over the infinity of time and space to spread the words " Bad Wolf " over its entirety , then saving the universe from the Dalek invasion . Rose resurrects Jack , who died from Dalek fire , and destroys the Dalek fleet before the Doctor drains the energy out of her — by kissing her — to save her life from its harmful effects . Rose is horrified as the Doctor appears to die and regenerates into a new man ( David Tennant ) , who proceeds to take the TARDIS and a terrified Rose to Earth , abandoning Jack on Satellite 5 . 
 The new Doctor and Rose arrive on Earth on Christmas Day , where he passes out from the strain of regeneration in the midst of a Sycorax invasion in the 2005 Christmas special " The Christmas Invasion " . Having woken up and saved Earth , the Doctor enjoys Christmas dinner with Rose before the two once again depart to parts unknown . Over the second series ( 2006 ) , Rose and the Doctor grow increasingly close to one another . After defeating a werewolf , they are knighted by Queen Victoria ( Pauline Collins ) , who banishes them as threats to the Empire whilst setting up the Torchwood Institute , which aims to track the Doctor and other aliens . Their relationship proves a source of tension once Mickey joins the pair in their travels , at the suggestion of the Doctor 's former companion Sarah Jane Smith ( Elisabeth Sladen ) . Whilst stranded in a parallel universe , Rose meets a rich , entrepreneur version of her father who never died . Mickey decides to stay behind on this world to battle the Cybermen — emotionless cyborgs which seek to convert humans to their ranks — as he no longer wants to feel like a spare part . Alone with the Doctor again , Rose faces the mythical Beast ( Gabriel Woolf ) , who prophesies that Rose will soon die in battle . This day comes when , in the present day , the Torchwood Institute 's director Yvonne Hartman ( Tracy @-@ Ann Oberman ) accidentally allows the Cybermen army and Dalek Cult of Skaro into Rose 's reality , where they begin a war . In sealing the Cybermen and Daleks back into the " void " through which they came , Rose is transported to the parallel universe by Pete , to save her from also being pulled into the void . Rose becomes trapped in the parallel universe with Jackie and the alternate universe Pete as the walls between universes seal ; she is later declared dead in her own universe . Months later , the Doctor is able to transmit Rose a goodbye message . She reveals she now works for that universe 's Torchwood , and confesses her love for him . Before he can reply , their connection is lost . 
 In spin @-@ off series Torchwood ( 2006 – 2011 ) , the audience learns that Rose 's act of resurrecting Jack cursed him with being unable to die . Her absence and the Doctor 's pained estrangement from her proves a point of contention for the Doctor 's series 3 companion Martha ( Freema Agyeman ) ; when Martha protects the Doctor , living as a human without his memories , it is still Rose that he dreams of . When the Doctor is reunited with Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) in the show 's fourth series ( 2008 ) , Rose mysteriously begins to appear in the Doctor 's life — first seen only by Donna , and later in silent video messages which the Doctor fails to notice . When a " Time Beetle " creates an alternate universe in which Donna never meets the Doctor and the Doctor dies , Rose travels from her parallel world to this world , working alongside the organisation UNIT to send Donna back in time , and make Donna 's younger self turn left at a junction and not right . Rose tells Donna to say two words to The Doctor ; ' Bad Wolf ' . The Doctor concludes this is a sign that the Universe , and reality itself is under threat . Later , in the midst of Davros ' ( Julian Bleach ) plot to obliterate existence , Rose unites with the Doctor and his companions Donna , Martha , Jack and Sarah Jane to make a stand against him and his army of Daleks . In the midst of the battle , a part @-@ human Doctor is created and destroys the Daleks . The Doctor returns Rose to the parallel universe along with Jackie , and his part @-@ human counterpart . Rose challenges the Doctor to say the words he did not say to her during their previous farewell . The Doctor does not answer , but his part @-@ human counterpart whispers in her ear and Rose kisses him . The Doctor retreats , leaving Rose behind with his part @-@ human counterpart . In the closing scenes of the The End of Time ( 2010 ) , just prior to his regeneration , the Doctor travels to Rose 's housing estate in the first minutes of 2005 . He speaks to her from the shadows , asking her what year it is . She tells him it 's January 1st 2005 . The Doctor promises her that she will have a really great year . 
 Piper returned for the show 's 50th anniversary episode " The Day of the Doctor " ( 2013 ) as the interface of a sentient weapon of mass destruction known as " the Moment " . The War Doctor ( John Hurt ) intends to end the raging Time War by using the Moment to destroy both the Daleks and the Time Lords . Using Rose 's image , chosen for her future significance to the Doctor , the Moment attempts to persuade him to seek an alternative course of action by showing him how the decision will affect his future . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Rose is featured in the first twelve Doctor Who New Series Adventures novels , which expand on her characterisation . The first three of these novels — The Clockwise Man , The Monsters Inside and Winner Takes All — were published in May 2005 and feature solely the Ninth Doctor and Rose . The Monsters Inside depicts Rose 's first visit to an alien planet , her travels previously having been confined to earth and orbiting space stations . Rose mentions this visit to the planet Justicia in the first series television episode " Boom Town " which aired 4 June 2005 . The second batch of Ninth Doctor novels — comprising The Deviant Strain , Only Human and The Stealers of Dreams — were released in September 2005 and expand on the Doctor and Rose 's travels with Jack Harkness . The novel Only Human mentions that Rose was engaged to a previous love interest before becoming involved with Mickey . The events of " Boom Town " are addressed in The Stealers of Dreams in which Jackie complains that Rose did not alert her to her recent visit to modern day Cardiff . The first three novels to feature Rose and the Tenth Doctor — The Stone Rose , The Feast of the Drowned and The Resurrection Casket — were released in April 2006 to coincide with the broadcast of the second television series . The Feast of the Drowned explores the context of Rose 's shifting relationship with Jackie and Mickey in light of her frequent absences from earth . Her relationship with a school friend , Keisha , is also explored ; Rose is irritated to find out she and Mickey have become involved in her absence . The last three New Series Adventures novels to feature Rose — The Nightmare of Black Island , The Art of Destruction and The Price of Paradise — were published in September 2006 . In addition to the regular range of novels , Rose is featured in the first Doctor Who Quick Reads Initiative novella , I am a Dalek in which she and the Doctor must deal with a human @-@ Dalek hybrid . 
 The Doctor Who Annual 2006 , published in August 2005 , gives further biographical information on Rose in an article written by the programme 's chief writer and executive producer Russell T Davies , including the middle name " Marion " , and information about her mother , school life and ex @-@ boyfriends . The character also appears in short stories featured in the Doctor Who annuals for 2006 and 2007 , in addition to an issue of the series ' sanctioned companion magazine , Doctor Who Magazine . She has additionally been featured in comic book sequences which feature in the annuals , Doctor Who Magazine , and children 's magazines Doctor Who Adventures and Doctor Who – Battles in Time . In one Doctor Who Magazine comic strip , " The Green @-@ Eyed Monster " , Rose is possessed by a creature that feeds on jealousy . In order to arouse enough jealousy to defeat this creature the Tenth Doctor feigns a romance with Rose 's mother and sets up Mickey with a group of actors who pose as beautiful amazonian girlfriends . The character also appears in a panel of Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight 's second story , " No Future for You " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Lead writer and executive producer Russell T Davies chose the name Rose because he considered it a " good luck charm " after he used it for Lesley Sharp 's character in Bob & Rose . His desire to make the show " essentially British " was another justification : he considered Rose to be " the most British name in the world " and feminine enough to subvert a recent trend of female companions having " boyish " names , such as Peri , Benny , Charley , and Ace . Davies also frequently uses the surname " Tyler " in his work — previous characters he created with the surname include Ruth Tyler in Revelations ( 1994 ) , Vince Tyler in Queer as Folk ( 1999 ) , and Johnny Tyler in The Second Coming ( 2003 ) — due to his affection for how the surname is spelled and pronounced . The casting of Piper as Rose was announced on by the BBC on 24 May 2004 . Head of Drama for BBC Wales Julie Gardner commented that the former pop star " fits the bill perfectly " as a " unique , dynamic partner for Christopher Eccleston " . Whilst some fans — including a representative of the Doctor Who Appreciation Society — were enthusiastic about the announcement , others felt it was " publicity stunt " casting and questioned Piper 's acting credentials . One of the factors that influenced Piper 's acceptance of the role was that she was able to relate the character of Rose to her own experiences as a teenager . 
 The British media had regularly released conflicting reports about how long Piper would be staying with the programme . In March 2006 , she claimed that she would continue on Doctor Who into its third series in 2007 . The BBC announced on 15 June 2006 that Piper was to depart in the final episode of the second series , " Doomsday " . Piper 's decision to leave had been taken a year previously but remained a secret until news of her departure became public . Following " Doomsday " , Piper as Rose was greenlit to be the star of the spin @-@ off series Rose Tyler : Earth Defence , set in her parallel universe and to air as a bank holiday special , but Davies deemed the concept " a spin @-@ off too far " after Torchwood and The Sarah Jane Adventures . Piper 's eventual return during series four was planned during filming of the second series ; in January 2006 , she made a pact promising to return to film several more episodes . Davies and Piper cited her commitment to other projects — specifically , her roles as Belle de Jour in Secret Diary of a Call Girl , the lead character in the BBC adaptations of Philip Pullman 's Sally Lockhart quartet , and Fanny Price in the ITV adaptation of Mansfield Park — as explanations behind her departure appearing permanent . Davies ' successor as executive producer , Steven Moffat praised the creation and casting of the character in advance of the series ' 50th anniversary in 2013 . He stated that the character of Rose helped secure the return of the show by allowing " an audience who would not naturally have watched Doctor Who " to become invested in the show . Moffat suggested that during the first two years of the revival Doctor Who " was Billie Piper ’ s show " and that this has given her an " iconic status " above other Doctor Who companions . 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Rose is used by Davies as an introduction to the shows mythos and fantasy elements . He later underlined similarities between Rose and Gwen Cooper — the leading lady he created for Torchwood — describing both as " the ordinary person who stumbles into something extraordinary and finds herself their equal . " Like her successor Martha , Rose is from London ; Brett Mills from the University of East Anglia makes the assumption that this is because characters from the capital of the country are " relatable to all British people " because they are seen as " neutral " . Rose is introduced alongside a supporting cast in the form of her boyfriend Mickey and mother Jackie which James Chapman cites as " evidence of Davies ' attempt to create a social context for the companion " . Davies states that the inclusion of these two characters was part of his desire to " make her real " and to " give her a life " . He later stated that in giving Rose a mother , a boyfriend and a " sad story with her father " the character has " her own mythology , to match the Doctor . " Lindy A. <unk> observes that Rose , like the other companions in Davies ' era of Doctor Who , is " drawn from a cosmopolitan vision " in her case because of her class background . <unk> contends that whilst working @-@ class companions had featured previously in the show " none were unskilled workers nor chronically under- or unemployed like Rose , Jackie and Donna " . Looking back at the two characters , Davies felt Jackie to be someone who is " holding Rose back " right from the first episode due to her suggestions her daughter be content with menial employment . Piper states that this causes Rose to resent her mum somewhat , although she loves her . 
 Kay McFadden of The Seattle Times felt Rose to resemble " the Bridget Jones type of Englishwoman , albeit a few pegs down the socioeconomic scale " waiting to be awakened " not by some Mark Darcy ... but by adventure incarnate . " Piper stated that at the start of the series Rose is " looking for something to happen " and that once the Doctor arrives she becomes " ruthless " in her decision to " completely drop her life as she knows it . " At a media preview of the series she characterised Rose as being " positive , ambitious and full of conviction and confidence . " She felt additionally that Rose is " a good character to relate to or aspire to . " In a 2013 retrospective on her time on Doctor Who Piper stated Rose 's feminine characteristics contributed to her being a balanced representation of a female character . She felt that Rose as a character could be both " strong @-@ willed and vulnerable " and ventured that her emotional response made her more interesting than " a female character endlessly striving towards perfection " . Eccleston , who played the Ninth Doctor described the character as a " heroine " who " teaches [ the Doctor ] huge emotional lessons " . In an episode of Doctor Who Confidential he expanded on this , describing her as " the Doctor 's equal in every way " except for the fact she lacks his scientific knowledge . He felt that the relationship between the two characters was " love at first sight " although in a more mysterious fashion than a conventional love affair . Davies summarised the relationship between the two characters as " soul mates " who " understand and complement each other " . 
 Lynette Porter , in her book <unk> Heroes , Charming Villains and Modern Monsters : Science Fiction in Shades of Gray on 21st Century Television observed that Rose 's role " humanizes the Doctor and makes him less alien , not only to other characters , but to the audience " . In the first series finale , Rose takes on deadly energies to save the Doctor and planet Earth . Script editor Helen Raynor felt the episode gave Rose a chance to “ again be the Doctor ’ s equal ” and “ to finally match him with a gesture that is so noble , and strong , and heroic , and clever ” . Davies describes Rose in the context of this scene , and the whole of the first series , as being “ braver than brave and more loyal than anyone else in the universe ” . The Doctor repays her loyalty by sacrificing his ninth incarnation in turn to save her ; Davies states unequivocally that " he gives his life for her " . Elements of Rose 's characterisation in the first series were originally different . Paul Abbott was scheduled to write an episode which would have revealed that Rose 's entire life had been manipulated by the Doctor in order to mould her into an ideal companion . Davies wrote the episode " Boom Town " to replace it when Abbott realised he was too busy to work on the script . 
 = = = With the Tenth Doctor = = = 
 In an interview with SFX producer Phil Collinson stated that after the Doctor regenerates the " initial dynamic changes because [ Rose ] has to learn to trust him again " . Piper added that as the Doctor is incapacitated Rose consequently feels " unloved " , " isolated " and " like she 's lost her best friend " . In the Doctor 's absence Rose relies on her observations of him and tries to mimic his actions . Collinson felt it was important to resolve any mistrust between the pair by the end of the Christmas Special , as the public had responded well to Rose and the Doctor 's friendship previously . Davies had scripted dialogue in " The Christmas Invasion " explaining the newly regenerated Doctor 's estuary English accent by stating he had imprinted on Rose and adopted her way of speaking . However , due to time constraints this sequence was not filmed . Discussing how Rose had developed by the second series , Piper described her as having " come on in leaps and bounds " and stated she is now " a lot more proactive . " She felt that there is a " different kind of energy " between Rose and the Tenth Doctor , whilst Tennant remarked that the audience would get to see the Doctor @-@ companion relationship " developing and becoming something that it maybe hasn 't before . " Piper stated that with the Tenth Doctor , Rose is " more tetchy and more possessive " over him as " she feels like she 's lost him once and doesn 't want to lose him again " . She cited Rose 's " catfight " with former companion Sarah Jane Smith in " School Reunion " as evidence of this . Discussing the possibility of Rose and the Tenth Doctor becoming more romantically involved Piper stated " You want it to happen , but at the same time you don 't want it to happen " . Tennant likened the dynamic between the pair to that of Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) in The X @-@ Files . Both Tennant and Piper agreed that the expectation of the relationship is more exciting than having it realised . To add to the tragedy of their separation , Davies scripted the series two story arc so that Rose and the Doctor would be indirectly responsible for their separation . " It 's deliberate when that happens [ the Doctor and Rose 's arrogance ] " , said Davies , " and they do pay the price . In " Tooth and Claw " , they set up the very thing — Torchwood — that separates them in the end . It 's sort of their own fault . " Though Davies left the Doctor 's response to Rose 's declaration of love in " Doomsday " unstated , Gardner felt strongly that the character reciprocated her feelings . On the commentary for the episode she stated that she would " confirm to the world " that he was going to " say it back . " 
 Davies created the expectation of Rose 's return in the fourth series by mentioning her in dialogue and featuring Piper in cameo appearances in " Partners in Crime " , " The Poison Sky " , and " Midnight " . Speaking on how Rose 's character had changed between her appearances , Davies described the fourth series Rose as " tougher , more independent , and [ she ] might , at times , seem a little harder " . Piper stated she rewatched her earlier episodes to remember how the character spoke and acted as she felt she had " been playing posh birds " since she left the programme and by contrast " Rose is a bit of a chav " . Rose is re @-@ united with the Doctor near the climax of " The Stolen Earth " . Director Graeme Harper insisted that the scene appear " mystical " because the characters ' reunion was " the most magical moment " in the entire episode and Ernie <unk> , the Director of Photography for the show , compared the scene 's feeling to the 1980s science @-@ fiction film Blade Runner . Davies characterised the reunion between Rose and the Doctor as " the biggest romance [ the viewer ] has ever seen " and joked that seminal films such as Gone with the Wind should have ended with a Dalek shooting the male lead . He had difficulty splitting up the characters for a second time for the necessity of the plot . He felt that " Rose has to be stupid to fall in love with Doctor # 2 " because " she 's doing what the plot demands , not what she 'd demand " . At one stage he considered giving an explanation that Rose 's dimension hopping and the Dalek 's meddling with reality had contaminated her with " <unk> " and that she would die if she stayed in her original universe . In the final episode it is enough for her to stay that the human Doctor needs her and is able to reciprocate her love . Porter felt that the climax of " Journey 's End " indicated that " Rose 's role as a sidekick has been completed " as she has a second Doctor to humanise , one who she can be equals with . 
 = = = Reprisals = = = 
 Piper 's 2010 appearance in The End of Time , Tennant 's final story as a series regular , was leaked by the press in May 2009 when Piper was seen photographed on location with Coduri and Tennant . Though Davies had intended the serial to end with the Tenth Doctor visiting his former companions , he struggled with how to include Rose . An initial idea was for Rose to appear with her part @-@ human Doctor in the parallel universe , where both would sense the original Tenth Doctor regenerating . However , Davies felt this would raise too many questions about their lives in the parallel universe . Davies ' successor as executive producer , Steven Moffat , felt that Davies ended Rose 's story in the perfect way by choosing to take it back to the beginning of her acquaintance with the Doctor . Piper 's return for Doctor Who 's 50th anniversary episode was confirmed in March 2013 . Moffat wished to include Piper in the episode because he felt that she symbolised the rebirth of Doctor Who . As he did not feel comfortable adding to Davies ' story arc , he chose instead to re @-@ introduce her Bad Wolf persona . During the episode Piper 's character has dialogue solely with John Hurt 's War Doctor , and is unseen by the other characters , including the Tenth Doctor . Reviewers noted similarities between the characterisation of Bad Wolf Rose and that of a plot device used by Charles Dickens in his 1843 novella A Christmas Carol . Ted B. Kissell , a journalist for The Atlantic likened the War Doctor to Ebenezer Scrooge and dubbed Rose the " Ghost of Doctors Yet to Come " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After a preview of the first series , The Guardian 's Owen Gibson described Rose as " newly empowered " and a " go @-@ getting teen in the Buffy the Vampire Slayer mould . " Ahead of the series premiere on Australian Network ABC the Sydney Morning Herald 's Robin Oliver described Rose 's role in the series as being " more the Doctor 's equal than previous companions " and that this was " no mean achievement against Eccleston 's acting skills . " Seventh Doctor actor Sylvester McCoy opined that Piper was " wonderful in the role " and the relationship between her and the Doctor was " quite extraordinary " . Porter suggests in her analysis of Rose that the romance between her and the Doctor widened the demographic appeal of the series . She claims that the love story " simmers enough below the surface that adults , especially women who find time @-@ lords sexy , watched the series for Rose 's interplay with the Doctor " . In their book Who is the Doctor ? , Graeme Burk and Robert Smith described the climactic kiss between the Ninth Doctor and Rose in " The Parting of the Ways " as being something " we all secretly wanted , even though it ultimately killed him " . Peter Davison , who portrayed the Fifth Doctor , also felt that allowing the Doctor and his companion to have sexual tension ultimately allowed for more rounded characterization . He believed that Rose was the first example of the production team creating a well written companion . 
 Burk and Smith found the pairing of the Doctor and Rose to be unlikeable in the episode " Tooth and Claw " because they were " acting like smug idiots " . However they noted that " fortunately there are consequences : the season arc gets kicked off as a direct result of the Doctor and Rose being so irritating " . Harry Venning of The Stage commented that the eventual parting scene between Rose and the Doctor in " Doomsday " was " beautifully written and movingly played , " with " not a dry eye in the universe " . Burk and Smith singled out Piper 's performance in the episode for special praise stating she " is astonishing at capturing the reality of someone whose world suddenly , finally collapses . " Remarking on Piper 's departure , Dek Hogan of Digital Spy stated that " Billie Piper ’ s energy has undoubtedly been one of the reasons that this revival has been so successful and the difficult third series will be so much more so without her . " Stephen Brook of The Guardian commented that " the departure of the much @-@ loved Rose ... was brilliantly handled and completely unexpected . " 
 Stephen James Walker , a writer of reference works on Doctor Who , gave an unfavourable review to Rose 's return in " Turn Left " in his " unauthorised guide to Doctor Who 's fourth series , " Monsters Within . He thought that Billie Piper was " distinctly below par " , citing her gaunt and malnourished appearance , new hairstyle , and slight lisp as reasons why her acting was not her finest . He criticised her role in the episode , stating it had been " far less well worked out " than Donna 's . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy also noted a change in Piper 's enunciation ; he compared her accent to " [ having ] her mouth numbed with local anaesthetic " . In Rawson @-@ Jones ' review of the series <unk> he notes that whilst having the Doctor and Rose ' cop off ' would be divisive with the shows audience , " Davies wisely managed to please both parties " by pairing her off with a human Doctor instead . However , IGN 's Travis Fickett reacted unfavourably towards Rose 's return and her pairing with the part human Doctor . He thought that it undermined her " perfect send off " in " Doomsday " as she was on the sidelines for much of " Journey 's End " , and her ending up with the part human , part Time Lord Doctor " feels like an insult to the character " . Io9 's Charlie Jane Anders also reacted unfavorably to Rose returning and wrote " it was pretty clear that she was only there so she could get her pet faux @-@ Doctor at the end . " Reviewers generally reacted positively to Piper 's 2013 appearance in 50th anniversary episode " The Day of the Doctor " . Ben Lawrence of The Daily Telegraph called her performance as the " Bad Wolf " Rose " transfixing " . Neela Debnath of The Independent praised the chemistry between Hurt and Piper and compared Piper 's performance to Suranne Jones ' portrayal of the TARDIS in " The Doctor 's Wife " describing it as " slightly eccentric " , " oddball " and " off @-@ the @-@ wall " . Daniel Martin of the Guardian praised Steven Moffat 's decision not to extend Rose Tyler 's story or re @-@ unite her with the Tenth Doctor . He called Piper " a true and unending legend of Doctor Who " and stated that " her wise rendition of the Bad Wolf avatar made a passable stab at the stealing of the show " . 
 Geoff Boucher of the Los Angeles Times named Rose the ninth best sidekick of all time , referring to her as " the saucy and smart character who was key to the success of the Russell T Davies relaunch of Doctor Who in 2005 " . She was named the best Doctor Who companion by Digital Spy in 2011 , who opined that she worked best alongside the Ninth Doctor . In 2006 she was voted best companion by readers of Doctor Who Magazine . In an online poll in late 2010 conducted by the Radio Times , with over 3 @,@ 000 participants , Rose was again voted the most popular companion . She retained this position in a 2013 poll conducted ahead of Doctor Who 's 50th anniversary , which had over 21 @,@ 000 respondents , with 25 @.@ 09 % of the vote . In a 2012 poll conducted by BBC America with over 200 @,@ 000 participants , Rose was voted " The Greatest Woman of Doctor Who . " Both The Daily Telegraph 's Gavin Fuller and Daniel Martin of The Guardian rated her as the second @-@ best female companion behind Sarah Jane Smith . In 2012 Will Salmon of SFX magazine listed Rose 's original exit as the greatest companion departure in the history of Doctor Who as he felt it " impossible not to be moved by the sudden severance of their relationship " . In 2014 Radio Times organized the most massive online ( over 2 million respondents ) poll which featured every companion since 1963 , beating the main <unk> Jack Harkness and River Song , Rose was crowned " Companion Champion " . 
 At the 2005 National Television Awards , Billie Piper won the " Most Popular Actress " award for her role as Rose . In the BBC Online " Best of Drama " poll in 2005 Piper won the Best Actress category with 59 @.@ 76 % of the vote . She was also voted the Most Desirable Star with 26 @.@ 47 % . In January 2006 she was awarded the Breakthrough Award for Rising British Talent at The South Bank Show Awards . Piper again won the Most Popular Actress category at the 2006 National Television Awards for her work on the second series of Doctor Who . In September 2006 , Piper was named Best Actress at the TV Quick and TV Choice Awards . Radio Times 's Tom Cole discussed the importance of Doctor Who in boosting Piper 's career in an article on how former Doctor Who actors can now expect more than " a life of signing autographs at provincial sci @-@ fi conventions . " He notes that Piper 's portrayal of Rose " firmly cemented her credentials as an actress " and cited the variety of roles she had taken on since leaving the show as proof that " as far as post @-@ Who careers go , they don 't get much healthier than Billie 's . " 
 = Illinois Freedom Bell = 
 The Illinois Freedom Bell is located in Mount Morris , Illinois , United States , and is the official freedom bell of the U.S. state of Illinois . The bell was created for a church in Lake Geneva , Wisconsin as a replica of the Liberty Bell in 1862 . In 1910 , while it was being moved across the frozen Geneva Lake following a fire at the church , the ice cracked and the bell sank to the bottom of the lake . It was salvaged in 1960 and the village of Mount Morris acquired it in 1966 . The Illinois Freedom Bell is rung during the annual Let Freedom Ring festival , and it can be found beneath a gazebo on the village square . The bell has been credited with starting an Independence Day bell @-@ ringing tradition across the United States . The bell was designated the official Illinois Freedom Bell in 1971 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The Illinois Freedom Bell is located in Mount Morris , Illinois , and was cast as a replica of the Liberty Bell in 1862 . Following its casting , the bell was transported to Lake Geneva , Wisconsin , where it was kept in the belfry of a church along the north shore of Geneva Lake . In 1910 , the church was destroyed by a fire ; the bell fell during the fire but was undamaged ; following the fire , the bell was put into storage . The church members then decided to reconstruct the church on the south side of the lake . During the winter , as a group of men attempted to drag the bell across the frozen lake , the weight of the bell cracked the ice and it sank to the bottom . 
 The bell remained submerged for over 40 years before a wealthy resident of Lake Geneva decided to surface the bell in 1960 . The resident located the bell , and surfaced it with great difficulty , intent on making the future Illinois Freedom Bell the focal point of his new home . After the bell was salvaged he decided it did not suit his purposes . A young farmer from <unk> purchased the bell , and it was again kept in storage . 
 In 1966 , an article was published about the bell 's submersion and resurfacing at Geneva Lake . The article interested the people of Mount Morris , Illinois , and they sent 12 members of their Fourth of July Committee to investigate the bell in <unk> . The people of Mount Morris decided to purchase the bell ; a committee was formed and obtained a loan from the Mount Morris VFW . The group also collected donations from local residents to purchase the bell for US $ 500 . By July 4 , 1966 , the Illinois Freedom Bell hung from the gazebo in its current location , and the two writers who first suggested bell ringing as an annual Independence Day ceremony , Eric Hatch and Eric Sloane were on hand for its dedication . 
 Five years later , in 1971 , the bell was designated the Official Freedom Bell of the State of Illinois by Illinois Governor Richard B. Ogilvie . A plaque was added to the tower on July 4 , 1972 with an inscription from Governor Ogilvie that reads : 
 = = = Festival = = = 
 On February 17 , 1963 , an issue of This Week contained an article , " Make Freedom Really Ring " , written by two Connecticut writers , Eric Hatch and Eric Sloane . In the article , they suggested that every July 4 , all bells in the country ring for four minutes , and radio stations broadcast the ringing for two minutes . Readers across the country took the advice of the magazine 's editor , and contacted local officials in support of a nationwide bell @-@ ringing observance . Concurrently , a resolution was proposed in Congress by Connecticut Senator Abraham Ribicoff that called for the ringing of bells nationwide at 2 p.m every July 4 . Eastern Daylight Time . The bill passed both the Senate and House of Representatives later that year . 
 Meanwhile , the village of Mount Morris had already decided to hold their own bell @-@ ringing during the village 's annual Independence Day festival , the " Let Freedom Ring " . Subsequently , on April 30 , 1963 , Illinois native and rising Republican political star Ronald Reagan visited Mount Morris to dedicate the first Mount Morris freedom bell , which now hangs at the Veterans ' Memorial Fountain . The first freedom bell was a small 16 inch ( 40 @.@ 6 cm ) bell . Later , as U.S. President in 1984 , Reagan was presented with a replica of the official Illinois Freedom Bell in the Oval Office by U.S. Representative Lynn Morley Martin . The first national bell @-@ ringing took place on July 4 , 1963 ; Mount Morris also participated in that ringing . Even though many states sponsored bell @-@ <unk> , Hatch and Sloane both credited Mount Morris with making their suggestion a reality . 
 The Illinois Freedom Bell is annually rung in unison , at 1 pm CDT ( 18 : 00 UTC ) on the Independence Day , July 4 , with other bells across the United States . Thousands of people gather in the village to hear the bell each year on Independence Day . In Mount Morris , the annual event is known as the Let Freedom Ring festival . The Mount Morris festival and bell ringing has been attended by several notable individuals . In 1973 , future Illinois Governor and member of the 9 / 11 Commission , James Thompson attended the festival and bell ringing . A year later , in 1974 , Richard Blake , a noted Abraham Lincoln impersonator , appeared at the festival to speak as Lincoln . 
 Several times the Let Freedom Ring festival has been broadcast nationally . During the 1964 festival , Governor Otto Kerner was the speaker at the bell @-@ ringing observance , and his address was transmitted via telephone to the Illinois pavilion at the 1964 New York World 's Fair . The 1965 bell @-@ ringing was broadcast over the public address system at Wrigley Field in Chicago . Over the years , the committee for the festival requested that the bell @-@ ringing be part of the Illinois Sesquicentennial , the U.S. Bicentennial , and the Statue of Liberty Centennial celebrations , all of which were allowed . The " Let Freedom Ring " celebration hosts a " Freedom Run " , arts and crafts , a parade , a fireworks display , and the highlighted ringing of the Illinois Freedom Bell . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Illinois Freedom Bell is silver in color and cast from bronze metal . It is four feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) tall and four feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) wide with a weight of 1 @,@ 500 pounds ( 680 kg ) . The bell is housed in a 15 @-@ foot wooden " tower , " which stands in a prominent position on the town square . 
 = Umar al @-@ Aqta = 
 ʿUmar ibn <unk> ibn <unk> or ʿAmr ibn <unk> ibn <unk> , surnamed al @-@ <unk> , " the one @-@ handed " ( <unk> , <unk> , in Greek ) , and found as Amer or Ambros ( Greek : <unk> or <unk> ) in Byzantine sources , was the semi @-@ independent Arab emir of Malatya ( Melitene ) from the 830s until his death in the Battle of Lalakaon on September 3 , 863 . During this time , he was one of the greatest enemies of the Byzantine Empire on its eastern frontier , and became a prominent figure in later Arabic and Turkish epic literature . 
 = = Biography = = 
 ʿUmar belonged to the Banu Sulaym tribe , which was established in the western Jazira at the time of the Muslim conquests and played an important role in the affairs of Malatya and the Jaziran frontier zone ( thughur ) with the Byzantine Empire as well as the Caucasian frontier with the Khazars . His father , <unk> or <unk> , is little known , except that he was also emir of Malatya , and that ca . 810 he surrendered to the Byzantines the fortress of <unk> to obtain the release of his son , who was held captive . 
 ʿUmar himself probably became emir of Malatya in the 830s , and first appears in 838 , in the Amorium campaign of the Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( r . 833 – 842 ) . The campaign was waged in retaliation for a large @-@ scale raid in the previous year by the Byzantine emperor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) against the Arab border emirates , including Malatya , whose territory was laid waste and depopulated . During the Amorium campaign , ʿUmar took part with his men in the great Arab victory over Theophilos himself at the Battle of Dazimon in July 838 . In the 840s , he provided refuge to the surviving members of the Paulicians , who were fleeing persecution in Byzantium , and allocated them the area around the fortresses of Tephrike , Amara and <unk> . The Paulician leader Karbeas turned this into a separate Paulician principality , allied with ‘ Umar and launching frequent expeditions against Byzantium , either in conjunction with ʿUmar or independently . In 844 , ʿUmar 's forces participated in a major raid that inflicted a heavy defeat upon an army led by the Byzantine chief minister , Theoktistos , at the Battle of Mauropotamos . In the late 840s , he was also engaged in warfare against a neighbouring Armenian lord named Skleros , whom he finally vanquished after a protracted and bloody conflict . 
 In the 850s , ʿUmar is recorded as having defeated an expedition led by the Byzantine emperor Michael III ( r . 842 – 867 ) against Samosata , and to have carried out a number of successful raids into Byzantium . One of them swept through the themes of <unk> and Opsikion and reached up to the great Byzantine army base of Malagina in Bithynia . He was unable , however , to stop a retaliatory expedition launched in 856 by Petronas against Melitene and Tephrike , which raided all the way to Amida , taking many prisoners before returning home . 
 In 860 , along with Karbeas , ʿUmar launched a major raid into Anatolia which reached the Black Sea port of Sinope , returning with over 12 @,@ 000 head of captured livestock . Three years later , he was part of a major Abbasid force that invaded Anatolia through the Cilician Gates . After splitting off from the main force and repulsing a Byzantine army under Emperor Michael III at <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( " Bishop 's Meadow " ) in Cappadocia , ʿUmar with his men headed north to sack the port city of Amisos . On his return , however , he was encircled by the Byzantines and killed at the Battle of Lalakaon on September 3 , 863 . Only a splinter of his army escaped under his son , but was then defeated and captured by the commander of the Charsianon district . According to al @-@ Tabari , when the news of ʿUmar 's death , along with that of another celebrated leader , Ali ibn Yahya al @-@ Armani , arrived in Iraq , they provoked riots among the populace of Baghdad , Samarra , and other cities , angry at the Abbasid government 's perceived incompetence . 
 Indeed , ʿUmar 's death marked the end of Malatya as a military threat to Byzantium , although the city itself would remain in Muslim hands for 70 more years . ʿUmar himself was succeeded by his son , Abu Abdallah , and grandson , Abu Hafs , who was forced to surrender the city to the Byzantine general John Kourkouas in 934 . 
 = = Cultural legacy = = 
 Like many other protagonists of the Arab – Byzantine Wars , ʿUmar figures in both Arab and Byzantine legend . In the Arab epic romance " Tale of Delhemma and al @-@ Battal " ( Sīrat <unk> al @-@ Himma wa @-@ l @-@ Baṭṭāl ) , he is a major figure , although his role has been diminished and he is often cast as almost a villain , due to the tale 's bias in favour of the Banu Sulaym 's rivals , the Banu Kilab , who furnish most of the heroic characters . Traditions about ʿUmar seem also to have influenced the story cycle around ‘ Umar ibn al @-@ Numan and his sons which became included in the One Thousand and One Nights , while ʿUmar himself features in later Turkish epic literature centred around the heroic figure of Battal Ghazi ( inspired by the real @-@ life Umayyad general Abdallah al @-@ Battal ) , who is also one of the main heroes of the Delhemma . 
 In Byzantine literature , ʿUmar is regarded as the probable prototype for the emir <unk> , the grandfather of the eponymous hero in the epic poem Digenes Akritas , while the Greek scholar G. <unk> suggested him as the origin of the eponymous hero of the Song of Armouris . The German scholar Hans @-@ Georg Beck finds this identification unlikely , but points out to the reference to a " short @-@ armed " Arab leader in the same tale , which may reflect a folk tradition based on ʿUmar . Finally , the 10th @-@ century scholar al @-@ Mas 'udi reports ( The Meadows of Gold , VIII , 74 – 75 ) that ʿUmar was among the " illustrious Muslims " whose portraits were displayed in Byzantine churches in recognition of their valour . 
 = Liber Eliensis = 
 The Liber Eliensis ( sometimes Historia Eliensis or Book of Ely ) is a 12th @-@ century English chronicle and history , written in Latin . Composed in three books , it was written at Ely Abbey on the island of Ely in the <unk> of eastern Cambridgeshire . Ely Abbey became the cathedral of a newly formed bishopric in 1109 . Traditionally the author of the anonymous work has been given as Richard or Thomas , two monks at Ely , one of whom , Richard , has been identified with an official of the monastery , but some historians hold that neither Richard nor Thomas was the author . 
 The Liber covers the period from the founding of the abbey in 673 until the middle of the 12th century , building on earlier historical works . It incorporates documents and stories of saints ' lives . The work typifies a type of local history produced during the latter part of the 12th century . Similar books were written at other English monasteries . The longest of the contemporary local histories , the Liber chronicles the devastation that the Anarchy caused during the reign of King Stephen . It also documents the career of Nigel , the Bishop of Ely from 1133 to 1169 , and his disputes with King Stephen . Other themes include the miracles worked by the monastery 's patron saint , Æthelthryth , and gifts of land to Ely . 
 Two complete manuscripts survive , complemented by partial manuscripts . The Latin text was published in 1962 , and an English translation followed in 2005 . Extracts had appeared in print earlier . 
 The Liber Eliensis provides an important history of the region and period it covers , and particularly for the abbey and bishopric of Ely . 
 = = Background and authorship = = 
 The Liber Eliensis was written at Ely Abbey , which became Ely Cathedral upon conversion into a bishopric in 1109 . The historian Elisabeth van Houts believes that it was written in two stages : first under Bishop Hervey le Breton , in office from 1109 to 1133 ; and continued under Bishop Geoffrey Ridel , who served from 1173 to 1189 . For van Houts , the first stage was the translation of an Old English work into Latin , commissioned by Bishop Hervey . The rest of the work , van Houts argues , was composed in the 1170s . However , E. O. Blake , who edited the first Latin printing of the work , concludes that the Liber was probably composed in three parts , based on its contents ; the first book of the Liber was begun after 1131 , when one of the sources used in the Liber was completed . The second has a preface apologising for the delay in its completion , and could not have been started before 1154 , as it records events from that year . The third and final book was completed between 1169 , when Bishop Nigel died and whose death is mentioned in the book , and 1174 , when a new bishop was appointed . As there is no mention of Nigel 's replacement , Blake states that this suggests that book three was finished before the new bishop took office . 
 Traditionally the work was ascribed to either Thomas or Richard , two monks of Ely mentioned in the text . The historian Antonia Gransden is inclined to believe that the work is by Richard , who is usually identified with the Richard who was recorded as sub @-@ prior and prior of Ely , holding the latter office from 1177 until some time between 1189 and 1194 . Blake thinks that Richard was the author , but he considers the evidence to be inconclusive . Janet Fairweather , a classicist and a recent translator of the Liber , suggests that it may have been written by someone other than the traditional candidates . Whoever the author , the Liber specifically states that it was written at the bidding of some members of the monastic community at Ely . 
 The Liber is one of a number of monastic histories written during the middle and later 12th century , when a number of monasteries in northern and southern England produced works devoted to recording the histories of their religious houses and local areas . In the south , these included the Historia Ecclesie <unk> of Abingdon Abbey , the Chronicon Abbatiae Rameseiensis of Ramsey Abbey , the Chronicon Angliae <unk> of Peterborough Abbey , a history of the see of Bath and Wells , and the Chronicon <unk> de Bello of Battle Abbey . The northern histories record the foundation stories of the various Cistercian houses in the north , along with other information relating to those houses . Those from the south , including the Liber Eliensis , mainly concern themselves with the various controversies involving their respective religious houses . The northern histories are less concerned with controversy , and overall are more prone to hagiography . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The work is traditionally divided into three books . Along with the history in Book I the first section also contains a prologue and a preface . It discusses the founding of the Abbey of Ely and the background of the foundress , Æthelthryth . The first book also deals with the history of the abbey and its abbesses until the Danish invasions of the 9th century . A description of the destruction of the abbey by the Danes and of King Edgar 's ( reigned 959 – 975 ) rule concludes the book . The second book , Book II , begins with the restoration of the abbey during Edgar 's reign , under Bishop Æthelwold . Accounts of the subsequent abbots until the last , Richard , are included in Book II , as well as numerous charters and other documents . The final book , Book III , contains information on the conversion of the abbey to a bishopric , and on the first few bishops ; it concludes with a description of the martyrdom of Thomas Becket . Interspersed with the historical narrative are a number of documents and charters relating to the bishops . 
 The work also depicts the devastation that the Anarchy caused during King Stephen 's reign . The chronicler states that failure of the harvest and pillaging caused a famine . The work describes the area around the abbey for 20 – 30 miles ( 32 – 48 kilometres ) as being filled with unburied corpses , and that the price of a bushel of grain rose to 200 pence . The long descriptions of Nigel of Ely 's disputes with King Stephen lead to a discussion of the Battle of Lincoln and other matters not directly related to Ely . The Liber gives a detailed account of Nigel 's career , although in general the chronicle 's author favours Stephen over his own bishop . The ascension of King Henry II to the English throne is considered to be an excellent event , and the Liber praises the new king . 
 An important part of the work was devoted to the miracles and glorification of Ely 's patroness , Saint Æthelthryth . The very beginning of the work incorporates an earlier Vita , or Life , of Æthelthryth , which resembles the Vitae of other saints written by Goscelin in the 11th century ; Goscelin is known to have visited Ely . The work may have helped to increase the number of pilgrims visiting Ely , as well as enabling the monks to better explain the history of earlier donations to the abbey . Many of the gifts to the abbey church are described , such as the altar cloth donated by Queen Emma ( died 1052 ) , wife of both King Æthelred II ( died 1016 ) and King Cnut ( died 1035 ) , with a short history of the circumstances of the gift . The miracle stories frequently say that those who wished cures or miracles similar to those in the Liber would need to come to the monastery , where they could make a donation . The historian Jennifer Paxton argues that increasing pilgrimage to the monastery was one of the main goals of the compilers of the Liber . 
 Another concern of the chronicle was the acquisition of land by the abbey . The work incorporates three pre @-@ existing inventories of the abbey 's possessions , and records each gift to the abbey , giving the grantor and occasionally details of the grantor 's life . This detailed record of the various rights and possessions of the abbey was useful if those possessions needed to be defended against outside or inside conflicts . The Liber was used by the monks to defend their claims to be the real heirs of the abbey 's rights and property rather than the bishops , after the conversion of the abbey into a bishopric . The chronicle also records the division of property between the monks and the newly appointed bishop . According to the chronicler , the division took place during the episcopate of the first bishop , Hervey le Breton , and was characterised as barely adequate for the needs of the monks . Later the chronicle records documents from the bishops that defined the separation between the monks and the episcopate . The chronicle also records the conflict between the abbey and various Bishops of Lincoln , which had continued until the abbey became a bishopric in 1109 . 
 A third theme of the work is the stress on the importance and number of distinguished burials that took place at Ely . They would have increased the desire of others to be buried there , which would have benefited the community by the donations that would have flowed from those wishing to secure their burial . The Liber stresses the burials of Æthelstan , a Bishop of Elmham , that of Ælfwine , another Bishop of Elmham , and Wulfstan II , an Archbishop of York . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The Liber was familiar to the 13th @-@ century chronicler Matthew Paris , who used it along with the Chronicon Abbatiae Rameseiensis of Ramsey Abbey in his own historical works . Another 13th @-@ century English writer , Roger of Wendover , was also aware of the Liber . 
 Some of the information contained in the Liber is important to historians . It is in the Liber that the first statement that Æthelwold translated the Benedictine Rule into Old English is made . The Liber is the longest of the local histories produced in England during the 12th century , and it contains a description of the royal chancery , which might be the earliest evidence for the existence of that office in the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom . The Liber describes how King Edgar ( died 975 ) granted the abbey the office of chancellor ( head of the chancery ) , but the authenticity of the passage is unclear . The existence of a formal chancery office in Anglo @-@ Saxon England before the Norman Conquest is a matter of some debate amongst historians . 
 The historian Dorothy Whitelock says of the work that it is " unique among post @-@ Conquest monastic histories " . It was written to help buttress the claims of Ely to a judicial liberty , or the exercise of all the royal rights within a hundred . To do this , the Liber collected together earlier sources used to help the abbey evade episcopal control , prior to the abbey becoming a bishopric . These documents may have been forged or had their contents doctored to help the abbey 's cause . Because of the tendentious nature of the collection , the work is used by historians with great caution . Despite the untrustworthy nature of the Liber and the documents preserved therein , it remains a valuable source for the history of the time period it covers , as well as the internal history of the abbey and bishopric . The historian Antonia Gransden characterises the Liber as " valuable for general history " , but qualifies by saying that " the whole lacks unity and has errors and confusing repetitions " . 
 = = Manuscripts = = 
 The work survives in two complete manuscripts ( MS ) , that of Trinity College , Cambridge MS <unk> , usually known as the E manuscript ; and one in the possession of Ely Cathedral Chapter , usually known as the F manuscript . The E manuscript dates from the late 12th century , and shows three different scribal hands . The F manuscript dates to the early 13th century , with four scribal hands . The E manuscript was given to Trinity College as part of the Gale Collection by Roger Gale in 1738 . The F manuscript has remained at Ely since its creation , and is the only manuscript at Ely still remaining from the medieval monastic library . 
 As well as the two complete manuscripts , a number of other manuscripts contain parts of the whole work . British Library MS Cotton Titus <unk> , usually known as the G manuscript , has part of Book II , and dates from the late 12th or early 13th century . British Library MS Cotton Domitian <unk> , known as the B manuscript , dates from the late 13th or early 14th century and includes some other material along with Book I and the same parts of Book II as in manuscript G. Another Cottonian manuscript , British Library MS Cotton Vespasian <unk> , has parts of Book III , and dates to between 1257 and 1286 . This manuscript is usually known as the A manuscript . 
 The relationship between the various extant manuscripts is complex , and a definitive scheme of how the various manuscripts relate to each other cannot be made . Blake , in his edition of the Liber , suggests that Book I once existed as a stand @-@ alone work , which influenced the B manuscript . A separate Book II , with parts of Book III , was then written and combined with the stand @-@ alone Book I , into either manuscript E or an earlier version of that manuscript . Book II was then revised , combined with parts of G , Book I , and parts of E to make manuscript F. 
 Related manuscripts include Bodleian Library Oxford MS Laud 647 , known as the O manuscript . This is based on the Liber , but reorganised into a listing of the acts of the various abbots and bishops and dates from the 14th century . Blake , in his edition of the Liber , calls that and related works the Chronicon Abbatum et <unk> <unk> . Another related work is contained in Trinity College , Cambridge MS <unk> , which contains the Libellus of Æthelwold and an Ely cartulary . Two other related works containing just cartularies are British Library Cotton MS Tiberius A vi and Cambridge University Library Ely Diocesan Register Liber M. 
 = = Publication = = 
 Liber Eliensis has been published by the Royal Historical Society in its Camden Third Series , edited by E. O. Blake . The edition contains the Latin text along with some Old English texts , but no translation . Janet Fairweather has produced a recent English translation of the Latin , published in 2005 by the Boydell Press . 
 Formerly , only sections of the Liber had appeared in print , without translations . Parts of the Liber were edited by D. J. Stewart and published by the Anglia Christiana Society in 1848 . Other extracts were published in various works , including parts of Book I that were included in Volume 2 of Jean <unk> 's nine @-@ volume Acta Sanctorum , printed between 1688 and 1701 . Another set of extracts , mainly consisting of parts of Book II , was compiled by Roger Gale 's father Thomas Gale , as part of his <unk> Britannicae Scriptores XV , published at Oxford in 1691 . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 Blake , E. O. , ed . ( 1962 ) . Liber Eliensis . Camden Third Series . London : Royal Historical Society . OCLC <unk> . 
 Fairweather , Janet ( trans . ) , ed . ( 2005 ) . Liber Eliensis . Woodbridge , UK : Boydell Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 015 @-@ 3 . 
 = Fanny Bullock Workman = 
 Fanny Bullock Workman ( January 8 , 1859 – January 22 , 1925 ) was an American geographer , cartographer , explorer , travel writer , and mountaineer , notably in the Himalayas . She was one of the first female professional mountaineers ; she not only explored but also wrote about her adventures . She set several women 's altitude records , published eight travel books with her husband , and championed women 's rights and women 's suffrage . 
 Born to a wealthy family , Workman was educated in the finest schools available to women and traveled in Europe . Her marriage to William Hunter Workman cemented these advantages , and , after being introduced to climbing in New Hampshire , Fanny Workman traveled the world with him . They were able to capitalize on their wealth and connections to voyage around Europe , North Africa , and Asia . The couple had two children , but Fanny Workman was not a motherly type ; they left their children in schools and with nurses , and Workman saw herself as a New Woman who could equal any man . The Workmans began their travels with bicycle tours of Switzerland , France , Italy , Spain , Algeria and India . They cycled thousands of miles , sleeping wherever they could find shelter . They wrote books about each trip and Fanny frequently commented on the state of the lives of women that she saw . Their early bicycle tour narratives were better received than their mountaineering books . 
 At the end of their cycling trip through India , the couple escaped to the Western Himalaya and the Karakoram for the summer months , where they were introduced to high @-@ altitude climbing . They returned to this then @-@ unexplored region eight times over the next 14 years . Despite not having modern climbing equipment , the Workmans explored several glaciers and reached the summit of several mountains , eventually reaching 23 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) on Pinnacle Peak , a women 's altitude record at the time . They organized multiyear expeditions but struggled to remain on good terms with the local labor force . Coming from a position of American privilege and wealth , they failed to understand the position of the native workers and had difficulty finding and negotiating for reliable porters . 
 After their trips to the Himalaya , the Workmans gave lectures about their travels . They were invited to learned societies ; Fanny Workman became the first American woman to lecture at the Sorbonne and the second to speak at the Royal Geographical Society . She received many medals of honor from European climbing and geographical societies and was recognized as one of the foremost climbers of her day . She demonstrated that a woman could climb in high altitudes just as well as a man and helped break down the gender barrier in mountaineering . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Workman was born January 8 , 1859 , in Worcester , Massachusetts , to a wealthy and elite family descended from the Pilgrims ; she was the youngest of three children . Her mother was Elvira Hazard , and her father was Alexander H. Bullock , businessman and Republican Massachusetts governor . Fanny was educated by governesses before attending Miss Graham 's Finishing School in New York City , after which she spent time in Paris and then Dresden . Thomas Pauly writes in his short biography of Workman that " early on Fanny chafed at the constraints of her privilege " . A small number of her stories from this time survive , describing her interest in adventure . In one , " A Vacation Episode " , she describes a beautiful and aristocratic English girl who is contemptuous of society . She runs away to Grindelwald , becoming an excellent alpinist and marrying an American . The story encapsulates much of Fanny 's own life : wanderlust , a love of the mountains , and a commitment to women 's rights . In 1886 , she published a short story , set during the First Indian War , in New York Magazine about " the capture and rescue of a white girl " ; a reviewer of the story stated that it was " told in a very pleasant and infatuating style " . 
 In 1879 , Fanny returned to the United States and on June 16 , 1882 married William Hunter Workman , a man 12 years her senior . He was also from a wealthy and educated family , having attended Yale and having received his medical training at Harvard . In 1884 they had a daughter , Rachel . 
 William introduced Fanny to climbing after their marriage , and together they spent many summers in the White Mountains in New Hampshire ; here she summited Mount Washington ( 6 @,@ 293 feet or 1 @,@ 918 metres ) several times . Climbing in the Northeastern United States allowed Fanny to develop her abilities together with other women . Unlike European clubs , American climbing clubs in the White Mountains allowed women to be members and encouraged women to climb . They promoted a new vision of the American woman , one who was both domestic and athletic , and Workman took to this image with enthusiasm . By 1886 , women sometimes outnumbered men on hiking expeditions in New England . In her paper on the gender dynamics of climbing in the region , Jenny Ernie @-@ Steighner states that this formative experience shaped Workman 's commitment to women 's rights , pointing out that " no other well @-@ known international mountaineers of the time , male or female , spoke as openly and fervently about women 's rights " . However , both of the Workmans disliked the provincial nature of life in Worcester , where they resided , and yearned to live in Europe . After both Fanny 's and William 's fathers died , leaving them enormous estates , the couple embarked on their first major European trip , a tour of Scandinavia and Germany . 
 = = Move to Europe and cycling tours = = 
 In 1889 the Workman family relocated to Germany citing William 's health , although Pauly speculates that this may have been merely a pretext , for he recovered surprisingly quickly . The couple 's second child , Siegfried , was born shortly after they arrived in Dresden . Although Fanny and William now had two children , Fanny refused to conform to the socially accepted role of a wife and mother , and instead became an author and adventurer . She lived a vigorous life that diverged from idealized femininity in the 1800s . As a feminist , Fanny considered herself an example of the idea that women could equal and excel over men in the arduous life , and embodied the New Woman ethos of the day . Moreover , as Miller points out in her book about women explorers , since the ideal family of the time was a large one and information about birth control was not easily available , William 's medical knowledge must have been invaluable . The Workmans left their children with nurses while they took long trips . In 1893 , Siegfried died from a combination of influenza and pneumonia . After his death , according to Pauly , Workman , through her bicycle tours , " aggressively pursued an alternative identity , one that liberated her from the conventional responsibilities of wife and mother and allowed for her interests and ambitions " . They missed their daughter 's wedding to Sir Alexander MacRobert in 1911 while exploring in the Karakoram . 
 Together , the Workmans explored the world and co @-@ wrote eight travel books , which describe the people , art , and architecture of the areas in which they journeyed . The Workmans were aware of their contribution to the genre of travel writing as they commented on other writers in their own works . Their mountaineering narratives said little about the culture of those remote and sparsely inhabited regions ; they included both lyrical descriptions of the sunset , for example , for their popular audience and detailed explanations of geographical features , such as glaciers , for their scientific readership . Fanny and William added scientific elements to their writings to appeal to authoritative organizations such as the Royal Geographical Society ; Fanny also believed the science would make her more legitimate in the eyes of the climbing community , but it cost her readers . In general , their bicycling tour narratives were better received than those about their mountaineering exploits . Fanny wrote the majority of these travel books herself , and in them she commented extensively on the plight of women wherever she traveled . 
 Stephanie Tingley writes , in her encyclopedia entry on Workman 's travel writing , that there is an implied feminist criticism of the hardships women experienced and the inferior status of the women in the societies she encountered . As a strong @-@ willed , outspoken supporter of women 's rights , Workman used their travels to demonstrate her own abilities and to highlight the inequities other women lived under . However , their travel books are written in the first @-@ person plural or third @-@ person singular , so it is difficult to decisively attribute views or voices to either William or Fanny . The Workmans ' works are colonialist in that they describe the people they meet and observe as " exotic or unusual , at worst as primitive or even subhuman " . However , at times they make it clear that the people they encounter see them in a similar light , demonstrating that they were sometimes aware of their own biases . 
 Between 1888 and 1893 , the Workmans took bicycling tours of Switzerland , France , and Italy . In 1891 , Fanny became one of the first women to climb Mont Blanc . She also was one of the first women to climb the Jungfrau and the Matterhorn ; her guide was Peter <unk> , who had made the first ascent with Edward Whymper . In 1893 , the couple decided to explore areas beyond Europe and headed for Algeria , Indochina , and India . These longer trips were Fanny 's idea . The couple 's first extended tour was a 2 @,@ 800 @-@ mile ( 4 @,@ 500 km ) bicycle trip across Spain in 1895 ; each of them carried 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) of luggage and they averaged 45 miles ( 72 km ) a day , sometimes riding up to 80 miles ( 130 km ) . Afterwards , they co @-@ wrote Sketches <unk> in Modern Iberia about their trip . In it , they described Spain as " rustic , quaint , and charming " , a common travel writing motif that did not make their book fresh or original . In Algerian Memories Fanny focused on the beauty and romance of the countryside , avoiding any commentary on the appalling urban conditions . However , she did highlight the abuse and neglect of women in Algerian society . 
 = = India = = 
 The Workmans ' trip to India , Burma , Ceylon , and Java lasted two and a half years , beginning in November 1897 , and covered 14 @,@ 000 miles ( 23 @,@ 000 km ) . At the time , Fanny was 38 and William 50 . They bicycled about 4 @,@ 000 miles ( 6 @,@ 400 km ) from the southernmost tip of India to the Himalaya in the north . In order to ensure that they had access to supplies , they rode along major thoroughfares near railways , and were sometimes forced to sleep in railway waiting rooms if no other accommodation was available . They carried minimal supplies , including tea , sugar , biscuits , cheese , tinned meats , water , pillows , a blanket for each of them , writing materials , and medical and repair kits . They dispensed with their bicycles at the northern end of their trip and hiked over passes between 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) and 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) . The trip was grueling . They often had little food or water , dealt with swarms of mosquitoes , fixed as many as 40 bicycle tire punctures per day , and slept in rat @-@ infested quarters . Fanny Workman 's book , written after the trip , highlighted the ancient architecture that they had seen rather than the contemporary local cultures . Mrs Workmans mentions in " My Asiatic Wanderings " about India " I have wheeled through much enchanting scenery , in the palm and banyan grooves of Orissa , Over the green and scarlet slopes of the Terai ... But I have never cycled 1200 miles in a country so continuously beautiful . " The Workmans possessed an unusual amount of historical knowledge about India for Westerners of the time and had read the <unk> , Mahabharata , and Ramayana before their trip . They were eager to learn about the culture that had produced these epics and spent more time learning about ancient history than interacting with living people . 
 = = = Labor issues = = = 
 During the summer of 1898 , the couple decided to escape the heat and explore the western Himalaya and Karakoram . After that , they intended to explore the area around Kanchenjunga in Sikkim , and then finally travel to the mountains bordering Bhutan on the east . Bureaucratic difficulties and weather problems abounded and impeded their plans . The most serious problems concerned labor . They hired 45 porters , outfitted them for basic mountain travel , and bought provisions , but costs skyrocketed as news of wealthy Americans circulated in the villages . They could not leave until October 3 and by then cold weather was approaching . The Workmans complain in their writings about the porters they hired , who were difficult to work with and refused to trek more than five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) per day . Three days into their journey the Workmans reached snow and the porters rebelled ; they refused to work in such cold conditions and forced the entire party to return to Darjeeling . 
 The Workmans struggled with labor problems continually , needing local porters to carry gear for them because they could not carry a sufficient amount for themselves for a multi @-@ month expedition . They had to transport <unk> tents , eider sleeping bags , camera equipment , scientific instruments , and a large supply of food . The porters were skeptical of the entire venture . The locals rarely climbed mountains and were not used to taking orders from a woman , which made Fanny 's position difficult . The Workmans tried to solve these problems with condescension and high @-@ handedness . Kenneth Mason maintains in his history of Himalayan mountaineering , written in 1955 , that " The Workmans were , on their journeys , the victims of their own faults . They were too impatient and rarely tried to understand the mentality of the porters and so did not get the best out of them . " Labor problems beset all of their expeditions because , as Miller puts it , " Almost alone of Victorian travellers , the Workmans had absolutely no sympathy or even common @-@ sense understanding of the local people , into whose poor and remote villages they burst with trains of followers demanding service and supplies . " In her chapter on Workman , Miller argues that the couple , being American , did not have the same sense of caste or class that British explorers had : " the Workmans , like most of their countrymen , plunged in their enterprises headlong , expecting their enormous energy to overcome all obstacles . They were justifiably criticized by the British for their callous , incompetent behavior toward the Indians . " 
 = = Mountaineering in the Himalayas = = 
 After travelling to the Himalaya the first time , the Workmans became entranced with climbing and mountaineering . Over a span of 14 years , they traveled eight times to the area , which at the time was almost completely unexplored and unmapped . Their trips were made without the benefit of modern lightweight equipment , freeze @-@ dried foods , sunblock , or radios . On each expedition , they explored , surveyed , and photographed , ultimately reporting on their findings and creating maps . The couple shared and alternated responsibilities ; one year Fanny would organize the logistics of their journey and William would work on the scientific projects and the next year they would reverse roles . 
 After their first trip to the Himalaya and subsequent labor problems , the Workmans hired Matthias Zurbriggen , the best and most experienced mountain climbing guide of the time . Thus , in 1899 , with 50 local porters and Zurbriggen , the Workmans began to explore the Biafo Glacier in the Karakoram , but dangerous crevasses and poor weather forced them instead to shift to the <unk> La Glacier and the unclimbed peaks around it . They reached <unk> , an 18 @,@ 600 @-@ foot ( 5 @,@ 700 m ) summit that she named after her son , giving Fanny an altitude record for women at the time . They next camped at 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) and climbed a higher peak of 19 @,@ 450 feet ( 5 @,@ 930 m ) , naming it Mount Bullock Workman . Admiring the view of a far @-@ off mountain , they commented on the grand view : they were looking at K2 , the second @-@ highest mountain in the world . Fanny Workman may have been the first woman recorded to have seen it . Finally , they climbed <unk> Gunge ( 20 @,@ 997 feet or 6 @,@ 400 metres ) , giving Fanny her third successive altitude record . It was very challenging : they had to hire new porters , establish a new base camp , and remain overnight at around 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) . In the morning , they climbed a wall that measured 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) , and were buffeted by winds . During the summit push , Fanny 's fingers were so numb that she could no longer hold her ice ax and one of the porters abandoned them . Pauly writes , " propelled to the summit by adrenalin and desperation , the foursome lingered only long enough for their instruments to assess that the temperature was ten degrees Fahrenheit [ − 12 ° C ] and their elevation was 21 @,@ 000 feet . " Fanny was a " slow , relentless , and intrepid " climber ; " bearlike , she solidly planted one foot and then groped for another secure grip with the other " . Climbing at the beginning of the 20th century , she did not have specialized equipment like <unk> or carabiners . She was able to climb to such heights , Pauly argues , because of " her dauntless persistence and her immunity to altitude sickness " . 
 As soon as she was able , Fanny Workman published accounts of her feats , such as an article in the Scottish Geographical Magazine . Writing about this trip at length in In the Ice World of the Himalayas , Fanny made efforts to include scientific information and experiments , touting her own modified barometer as superior , but scholarly critics were unimpressed and pointed out her lack of scientific knowledge . Popular reviewers , on the other hand , enjoyed the book , with one concluding , " We have no hesitation in saying that Dr. and Mrs. Workman have written one of the most remarkable books of travel of recent years . " 
 In 1902 , the Workmans returned to the Himalaya and became the first Westerners to explore the <unk> <unk> Glacier , starting in <unk> . They hired 80 porters and took four tons of supplies , but their explorations were limited by near @-@ constant snow and a 60 @-@ hour storm . In 1903 , they trekked to the Hoh Lumba Glacier with guide Cyprien Savoye . They also attempted to climb the nearby mountain they called Pyramid Peak ( later renamed Spantik , as part of the Spantik @-@ <unk> Mountains ) . They camped the first night at 16 @,@ 200 feet ( 4 @,@ 900 m ) and the second at 18 @,@ 600 feet ( 5 @,@ 700 m ) . An ailing porter forced them to camp the third night at 19 @,@ 355 feet ( 5 @,@ 899 m ) rather than 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) and they eventually left him behind . They ascended a 22 @,@ 567 @-@ foot ( 6 @,@ 878 m ) peak , giving Fanny a new altitude record . William and a porter climbed toward the needle @-@ like spire that was the expedition 's goal . However , he abandoned the summit attempt a few hundred feet from the top because he realized they could not have descended to a safe altitude before altitude sickness set in . 
 After returning from their travels , the Workmans lectured all over Europe . Fanny lectured in English , German , or French , as the occasion required . At one talk in Lyon , France , 1000 people crowded into the auditorium and 700 were turned away . In 1905 Fanny became the second woman to address the Royal Geographical Society . ( Isabella Bird Bishop had been the first in May 1897 . ) Her talk was mentioned in The Times . 
 The Workmans returned to Kashmir in 1906 , and were the first Westerners to explore the Nun Kun massif . For this trip , the couple hired six Italian porters from the Alps , 200 local porters , and Savoye returned as guide . As Isserman , Weaver and Molenaar explain in their history of Himalayan mountaineering , the Workmans despised the local porters but were forced to recruit them ; " their otherwise invaluable books read like one long , anguished harangue against the lazy , lying , thieving , mutinous cheats on whom they unhappily depended for local support " . They planned a sequence of four camps from 17 @,@ 657 feet ( 5 @,@ 382 m ) to 21 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) . Despite labor problems , the Workmans spent the night higher than any previous mountaineers — 20 @,@ 278 feet ( 6 @,@ 181 m ) on top of Z1 on Nun Kun — at what they called " Camp America " . William wrote of Fanny : 
 She concentrated her attention on the end in view , often disregarding the difficulties and even the dangers that might lie in the way of accomplishment . She went forward with a determination to succeed and a courage that won success where a less determined effort would have failed . She believed in taking advantage of every opportunity . She was no quitter , and was never the first to suggest turning back in the face of discouraging circumstances . 
 The map the Workmans made during this trip was of low quality . According to Mason , the couple did not have a good sense of topographical direction , which meant that their measurements were inaccurate and unusable by the Survey of India . 
 = = = Pinnacle Peak and altitude record = = = 
 From 20 @,@ 278 feet ( 6 @,@ 181 m ) , at the age of 47 in 1906 , Workman climbed up to Pinnacle Peak ( 22 @,@ 735 feet or 6 @,@ 930 metres ) ( which she believed to be 23 @,@ 263 feet or 7 @,@ 091 metres ) , a subsidiary peak in the Nun Kun massif of the western Himalaya . It was her greatest mountaineering achievement . As Isserman , Weaver and Molenaar point out , the fact that she " climbed the mountain at all , without benefit of modern equipment and encumbered by her voluminous skirts , speaks to both her ability and resolve " . She set an altitude record for women that would stand until Hetti <unk> 's 1934 ascent of Sia <unk> C ( 23 @,@ 861 feet or 7 @,@ 273 metres ) . Believing that they had both climbed above the 23 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) mark , Fanny and William now considered themselves the leading experts on climbing at altitude . 
 Workman vigorously defended her Pinnacle Peak altitude record against all other claimants , especially Annie Smith Peck . In 1908 , Peck claimed a new record with her climb of Peru 's <unk> , which she believed to be 23 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) . However , she was misinformed as to the peak 's height and exaggerated distances she could not measure . Workman was so competitive that she paid a team of French surveyors from the Service Géographique de l 'Armée US $ 13 @,@ 000 to measure the elevation of the mountain , which was actually 22 @,@ 205 feet ( 6 @,@ 768 m ) , confirming her record . Pauly explains , " Ironically , her determination to prove herself the equal of any man at lofty elevations culminated with a withering attack on an American woman who tried to surpass her " . Determined to be the best woman , Workman was also a meticulous record @-@ keeper so that she could prove her accomplishments . Pauly concludes , " If Fanny Workman ever receives the recognition she deserves for her feminist determination to excel at this then @-@ male sport , she will surely be remembered as much for her insistence upon accurate record @-@ keeping as for the elevations she achieved . " 
 = = = Hispar and Siachen Glaciers = = = 
 In 1908 , the Workmans returned to the Karakoram and explored the 38 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 61 km ) Hispar Glacier in the <unk> Nagar region ; they went from Gilgit to <unk> over the Hispar pass ( 17 @,@ 500 feet or 5 @,@ 300 metres ) and onto the 37 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 60 km ) Biafo Glacier to <unk> . Their total traverse of the glaciers was another record , and Fanny became the first woman to travel across any Himalayan glacier of this size . They were the first to explore its many side glaciers and the maps created by their Italian porters helped map the region for the first time . They recorded the physiological effects of high altitude , studied glaciers and ice pinnacles , and took meteorological measurements , including altitude data recorded with both aneroid barometers and boiling point thermometers . 
 The Workmans ' exploration of the Rose Glacier and the 45 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 72 km ) Siachen Glacier in Baltistan around <unk> in 1911 and 1912 was the most important achievement of their careers because it was the widest and longest subpolar glacier in the world and at the time , the least explored and accessible glacier as well . For two months , the Workmans explored the 45 @-@ mile glacier , climbed several mountains , and mapped the area . They spent the entire time over 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , the high point being Indira Col which they summitted and named . On this expedition , one of their Italian guides fell into a crevasse and died ; Fanny was lucky to escape . The others were badly shaken but decided to carry on . Fanny led them across the Sia La pass ( 18 @,@ 700 feet or 5 @,@ 700 metres ) near the head of the Siachen Glacier and through a previously unexplored region to the <unk> Glacier . This exploration and the resulting book were among her greatest accomplishments . As she wrote in her book about the trip , Two Summers in the Ice @-@ Wilds of Eastern Karakoram , she organized and led this expedition : " Dr. Hunter Workman accompanied me , this time , in charge with me of commissariat and as photographer and <unk> , but I was the responsible leader of this expedition , and on my efforts , in a large measure , must depend the success or failure of it " . At one 21 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) plateau , Fanny unfurled a " Votes for Women " newspaper and her husband snapped an iconic picture . They took trained Alpine guides and surveyors including Grant Peterkin and Surjan Singh , whose contributions ensured that , unlike numerous other maps the Workmans helped create , their map of the Siachen Glacier remained unchallenged for many years . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After their 1908 – 12 trip , the couple stopped exploring and turned to writing and lecturing , primarily because of the onset of World War I in 1914 . Fanny Workman became the first American woman to lecture at the Sorbonne in Paris . She was also one of the first women to be admitted as a member of the Royal Geographical Society , a distinction she earned because her publications included scientific reflections on glaciation and other phenomena . She also earned medals of honor from 10 European geographical societies and was eventually elected a member of the American Alpine Club , Royal Asiatic Society , Club Alpino Italiano , Deutscher und Österreichischer <unk> , and Club <unk> français . She was very proud of these achievements , listing them on the title pages of her books . 
 Fanny Workman fell ill in 1917 and died after a long illness in 1925 in Cannes , France . Her ashes were buried in Massachusetts , and are now reinterred along with her husband 's , under a monument in Worcester Massachusetts ' Rural Cemetery that reads " Pioneer Himalayan Explorers " . In her will , she left $ 125 @,@ 000 to four colleges , Radcliffe , Wellesley , Smith , and Bryn Mawr ; the bequests were demonstrative of her long @-@ lasting interest in the advancement of women 's rights , and her belief that women were the equals of men . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Women in climbing = = = 
 Along with Annie Smith Peck , Workman was recognized during the early 20th century as one of the most famous female climbers in the world . Their rivalry demonstrated that women could climb the most remote and difficult terrain on the planet , and achieve the same accomplishments as male mountaineers . It was not until Peck and Workman 's feats that women had been involved in mountaineering , though they had climbed regularly in the Alps since the 1850s . In the Himalaya , in particular , mountaineering had been dominated by wealthy Englishmen . No other women , however , climbed in the Himalaya until well after World War I , by which time improvements in equipment and organization had reduced the risk and the difficulty of the expeditions . 
 Workman , herself an ardent feminist and a supporter of women 's suffrage , wanted her readers to understand how her contributions and achievements reflected all women 's potential . In her writings , Workman described herself as " questioning or violating the norms of Victorian female propriety " . She demonstrated that women were strong enough to thrive outside the home by showing how easy it was for her to endure strenuous physical activities like bicycling long distances in hot , humid places or mountaineering in cold temperatures and high altitudes . Workman challenged a masculine realm ; her obituary in the Alpine Journal alluded to the challenges she faced , saying that she " felt that she suffered from ' sex antagonism ' " . The author of the piece added : " it is possible that some unconscious feeling let us say of the novelty of a woman 's intrusion into the domain of exploration so long reserved to man , may in some quarters have existed ... there tended to arise ... an atmosphere shall we say of aloofness ? " However , in her study of Victorian mountaineering , Ann Colley suggests that gender discrimination was more overt at lower elevations and in regular life than at higher elevations , such as in the Himalaya . Colley states , " Away from such petty opinion emanating from society pressures , up high , above the snow line or in distant regions , women climbers could more fully experience equality and power ... If they chose , they could be just as sportsmanlike or competitive as the men . " In her entry about Workman in the Dictionary of Literary Biography , Tingley sums Workman up as " an aggressive , determined , and uncompromising turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century American woman traveler " and " one of the first women to work as a professional mountaineer and surveyor and to write about the expeditions she and her husband took to the most remote reaches of the Himalaya . She was an outspoken advocate of woman 's suffrage and made it clear that she considered herself to be a role model for other women travelers and mountaineers . " 
 As a result of the money Workman left in her will , Wellesley College offers a $ 16 @,@ 000 fellowship named after Fanny Workman for graduate study in any discipline to a Wellesley graduate each year . Bryn Mawr established a Fanny Bullock Workman Traveling Fellowship , which is awarded to Ph.D candidates in Archaeology or Art History when funds permit . 
 = = = Exploration of the Himalaya = = = 
 The many books and articles produced by the Workmans are " still useful " according to Mason , especially for their photographs and illustrations , but their maps are " deceptive and not always reliable " . One assessment states that although the Workmans excelled at describing meteorological conditions , glaciology , and how high altitudes affected human health and fitness , they were poor <unk> . The Workmans were some of the first mountaineers to grasp that the Himalaya were the place for the ultimate climbing challenge and their explorations helped evolve mountaineering from strenuous recreation into a serious , regulated competitive sport . According to Isserman , Weaver and Molenaar , " that the Workmans were intrepid explorers and climbers none could possibly doubt , but they were also aggressive self @-@ promoters who in their eagerness for recognition and honors sometimes exaggerated the originality and significance of what they had done . " In their final assessment , Isserman , Weaver and Molenaar say " they had logged more miles and climbed more peaks than anyone to date ; they had produced five sumptuously illustrated and widely read expedition volumes ; and by simple virtue of her sex Fanny of course had set an invaluable Himalayan precedent . But the Workmans were not great mountaineers . At their best they were vigorous and competent patrons who followed capably in the hard @-@ won steps of their Italian guides . " However , in his chapter on Workman , Pauly writes that " the few recent accounts of Fanny Workman have tended to slight or belittle her achievements , but contemporaries , unaware of the far greater accomplishments to come , held the Workmans in high regard . " They were the first Americans to explore the Himalaya in depth and break the British monopoly over Himalayan mountaineering . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Algerian memories : a bicycle tour over the Atlas to the Sahara . London : T.F. Unwin . 1895 @.@ p . 216 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 Sketches <unk> in modern Iberia . London : Unwin . 1897 @.@ p . 280 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 In the ice world of <unk> , among the peaks and passes of Ladakh , <unk> , <unk> , and Baltistan . New York : Cassell & Company , Limited . 1900 @.@ p . 204 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 Ice @-@ Bound Heights of the <unk> : An Account of Two seasons of Pioneer Exploration and High Climbing in the Baltistan Himalaya . London : A. Constable & Co . 1908 @.@ p . 444 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 Peaks and Glaciers of Nun Kun : A Record of Pioneer @-@ Exploration and Mountaineering in the Punjab Himalaya . London : Constable and Company Ltd . 1909 @.@ p . 411 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 The Call of the Snowy Hispar : A Narrative of Exploration and Mountaineering on the Northern Frontier of India . New York : Scribner . 1911 @.@ p . 520 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 Two Summers in the Ice @-@ Wilds of Eastern Karakoram : The Exploration of Nineteen Hundred Square Miles of Mountain and Glacier . New York : E. P. Dutton & Company . 1916 @.@ p . 578 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 " Among the Great Himalayan Glaciers . " National Geographic 13 ( Nov. 1920 ) : 405 – 406 . 
 " First Ascents of the Hoh Lumba and the <unk> Glaciers in the Northwest Himalayas . " Independent 55 ( December 31 , 1903 ) : <unk> – 12 . 
 Through Town and Jungle : Fourteen Thousand Miles A @-@ Wheel Among the Temples and People of the Indian Plain . London : Unwin , 1904 . 
 " Miss Peck and Mrs. Workman . " Scientific American 102 ( Feb 12 and April 16 , 1910 ) ; 143 , 319 . 
 " Recent First Ascents in the Himalaya . " Independent 68 ( June 2 , 1910 ) : 1202 – 10 . 
 " Conquering the Great Rose . " Harper 129 ( June 1914 ) : 44 – 45 . 
 " Exploring the Rose . " Independent 85 ( January 10 , 1916 ) : 54 – 56 . 
 " Four Miles High . " Independent 86 ( June 5 , 1916 ) : 377 – 378 . 
 = = = Cited sources = = = 
 Colley , Ann C. ( 2010 ) . Victorians in the Mountains : Sinking the Sublime . Farnham : Ashgate . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4094 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Ellis , Reuben ( 2001 ) . Vertical Margins : Mountaineering and the Landscapes of <unk> . Madison : University of Wisconsin Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 299 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Ernie @-@ Steighner , Jenny ( 2009 ) . " Delightful Escapes : U.S. Female Mountaineers Travel Abroad , 1890 – 1915 " . Thinking Gender Papers ( Los Angeles : UCLA Center for the Study of Women ) . Retrieved 22 October 2013 . 
 Isserman , Maurice ; Weaver , Stewart ; Molenaar , Dee ( 2008 ) . Fallen Giants : A History of Himalayan Mountaineering from the Age of Empire to the Age of Extremes . New Haven : Yale University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Jordan , Jennifer ( 2009 ) . Savage Summit : The Life and Death of the First Women of K2 . New York : HarperCollins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Kraig , Beth ( 1999 ) . " Fanny Bullock Workman " . In Garraty , John A. ; Carnes , Mark C. American National Biography 23 . New York and Oxford : Oxford University Press. pp. 877 – 879 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Mason , Kenneth ( 1955 ) . Abode of Snow : A History of Himalayan Exploration and Mountaineering . New York : E.P. Dutton & Co . , Inc . 
 Middleton , Dorothy ( 1965 ) . Victorian Lady Travellers . New York : E.P. Dutton & Co . , Inc . 
 Miller , <unk> ( 1976 ) . On Top of the World : Five Women Explorers in Tibet . Frome : Padding Press Ltd . ISBN 0 @-@ 8467 @-@ 0138 @-@ 3 . 
 Pauly , Thomas H. ( 2012 ) . Game Faces : Five Early American Champions and the Sports They Changed . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Michael ( 1992 – 1993 ) . " The Workmans : Travellers Extraordinary " ( PDF ) . Alpine Journal 97 : 231 – 237 . Retrieved 15 October 2013 . 
 Tingley , Stephanie A. ( 1998 ) . " Fanny Bullock Workman " . In Ross , Donald ; <unk> , James J. Dictionary of Literary Biography : American Travel Writers , 1850 – 1915 189 . Detroit : <unk> pp. 360 – 365 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1844 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Marion ( 1989 ) . Women into the Unknown : A Sourcebook on Women Explorers and Travelers . New York : Greenwood Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = Murasaki Shikibu Diary Emaki = 
 The Murasaki Shikibu Diary Emaki ( <unk> , Murasaki Shikibu nikki emaki ) is a mid @-@ 13th century emaki , a Japanese picture scroll , inspired by the private diary ( nikki ) of Murasaki Shikibu , lady @-@ in @-@ waiting at the 10th / 11th centuries Heian court and author of The Tale of Genji . This emaki belongs to the classical style of Japanese painting known as yamato @-@ e and revives the iconography of the Heian period . 
 Today there remain four paper scrolls of the emaki in varying condition and stored in different collections : Hachisuka , Matsudaira , Hinohara scrolls ( Tokyo ) , and Fujita scroll ( Fujita Art Museum , Osaka ) . Of the extant scrolls , the first relates the celebrations on occasion of the birth of prince <unk> ( Atsuhira , later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō ) in 1008 and the last those of the birth of Prince Atsunaga ( later Emperor Go @-@ Suzaku ) in 1009 . This difference in time indicates that the original emaki most likely consisted of more scrolls than exist today . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Diary of Lady Murasaki ( <unk> , Murasaki Shikibu Nikki ) records the daily life of the Heian era lady @-@ in @-@ waiting and writer , Lady Murasaki Shikibu , author of The Tale of Genji . Most likely written between 1008 and 1010 , the largest portion consists of descriptive passages of the birth of Empress Shōshi 's ( Akiko ) children ( future Emperors Go @-@ Ichijō and Go @-@ Suzaku ) and related festivities , with smaller vignettes describing life at the Imperial court and relations between other ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting and court writers such as Izumi Shikibu , <unk> Emon and Sei Shōnagon . It also gives a lively account of the regency of the powerful Fujiwara no Michinaga . Like the romantic novel Genji Monogatari , the diary deals with emotions and human relationships , particularly with Murasaki Shikibu 's constraints at the court of Akiko , loneliness and futility after her husband 's death ( in 1001 ) . The author is critical of her contemporaries , the men for their discourteous ways ( including Fujiwara no Michinaga ) and the women for their inexperience and lack of education and will . The diary is considered a masterpiece of Nikki <unk> . 
 Emaki , which are long paper scrolls telling a story through texts and paintings , came to Japan through exchange with the Chinese Empire around the 6th century and spread widely among the Heian aristocracy . The subsequent Kamakura period was marked by internal strife and civil wars that fostered the rise of the warrior class . If the warriors of the bakufu preferred " quick @-@ moving narrative scrolls " such as war tales or legends , the production of emaki at the Heian court subsisted . Pictures illustrating The Tale of Genji continued to be popular into the early Kamakura period and revived interest in the author , Murasaki Shikibu . Towards the end of the 13th century , a renewed interest in the refined culture of the Heian period led some artists to return to painting styles of the Imperial Court ; many emaki were produced during this period . 
 The Murasaki Shikibu Diary Emaki belongs to this golden age of the emaki and according to Penelope Mason " may be regarded as one of the finest extant examples of prose @-@ poetry narrative illustration from the Kamakura period " . It was created about 200 years after the diary was written , in the mid @-@ 13th century . It transcribes the solitude and the observations of palace life from the diary but adds to the text a certain nostalgia for the glorious past of the Heian court which is typical for the 13th century , giving an overall feeling of " lost golden age " , according to Mason , even during happy events such as parties . The explanatory notes ( or captions ) , i.e. the non @-@ painting part , show little textual deviations from the diary . 
 An emaki of Murasaki Shikibu 's diary is mentioned in the Meigetsuki ( " Record of the clean moon " ) , the diary of the poet and scholar Fujiwara no Teika . According to this document , in 1233 several aristocrats close to cloistered Emperor Go @-@ Horikawa planned to create a new emaki of The Tale of Genji ( after the 12th century Genji Monogatari Emaki , the best known of these works ) , accompanied by another of Murasaki 's diary . However , there is no conclusive evidence that the extant scrolls correspond to those mentioned by Fujiwara no Teika , even though the consistency of manufacturing dates suggests that this is the case . The paintings of the emaki have been attributed to the painter Fujiwara <unk> and the captions to the excellent calligrapher <unk> ( <unk> , 1169 – 1206 ) , despite definitive evidence . 
 = = Style and composition = = 
 Two elements are found in the illustrations of the emaki : people indoors engaging in activities typical of the aristocracy of the period , such as writing letters , playing instruments , exchanging poems or talking to each other ; and the gardens outside their buildings . For this reason , Mason calls the people in the emaki " house bound " . The leftward direction of scroll reading is reflected in the composition of paintings and pictures which may build to a climax from right to left ; or a main event presented on the right may be followed by its after @-@ effects to the left . Stylistically the emaki follows the principles of the onna @-@ e genre of yamato @-@ e and is in this respect similar to the Tale of Genji Scrolls ( 1120 – 1140 ) but differs from them in many other aspects . Typical for onna @-@ e , the paintings depict life at the palace with a sense of nostalgia , timeless and very retained , but purely decorative elements such as landscapes and contemplative scenes are added . Illustrations are relatively short compared to emaki of war or folktales , which according to Mason , " heightens the symbolic quality of non @-@ figural motifs " . 
 The painting technique of tsukuri @-@ e ( lit . " built painting " ) , used mainly in emaki of the court in the twelfth century , is also used here . It is done in three stages : a first sketch of the scene is made with Indian ink ( probably by a master of the workshop ) , then the color is applied on the entire surface of the paper in a specific order , from large areas in the background to fine details . Finally , the contours are enhanced or revived in ink to emphasize the depth . However , a visible change in style may again be noted , because the pigments are here less opaque than usual , and the more subtle shades are highlighted by fine outlines in ink ; and in addition , the decorative aspect emerges strongly through extensive use of gold dust , and sometimes of silver . According to Mason , the technique seems to be less careful than in the past , as can be seen in elements of the architectural interior ( sliding doors , screens ... ) which lack detail or in the silver powder which is used much less often in general compared to gold . 
 The cultural changes after the Heian period resulted in a more realistic depiction of figures including movements and gestures . Abandoning the Heian period <unk> <unk> style ( lit . " slit eyes , hooked nose " ) , figures were painted individual features and facial expressions that conveyed emotions and moods . More generally , M. Murase notes that the expression of feelings subtly changed compared to the scrolls of the 12th century ; here the rooms ( or the inner space , because it depends on the fusuma ) in the palace are larger and less intimate or private , and nobles come and go naturally and determined . Unlike earlier scrolls such as the Genji Emaki , in which architecture and landscape were used as metaphors for people 's emotions , interpersonal or societal pressures , in these scrolls the people 's feelings are painted directly on the faces or shown through gestures , in addition to being expressed by the placement of characters within the scene . Architectural elements such as pillars , beams or platforms continued to be used to convey moods . Landscapes stand on their own as they are detached from the characters ' emotions and gain a new function as a place to escape from the constraints of court life . 
 Like most emaki , the composition is based on the <unk> <unk> ( lit . " roof off " ) technique , which consists of a perspective of looking down from above into the inner spaces resulting in a plunging view . Furthermore , diagonals are used to mark depth . Compared to earlier scrolls , in these scrolls , the interior spaces are depicted from a more normal perspective such as through rolled up bamboo blinds ( misu ) or spaces in the walls where sliding panels ( fusuma ) had been removed . The pace that is intentionally slow in tsukuri @-@ e , here seems slightly faster with illustrations depicting a single occurrence in time and temporally related events positioned close to each other in the emaki . 
 This new decorative approach to paintings of the court ( onna @-@ e ) inspired by the themes of literature is evident in several other works of the Kamakura period , such as uta monogatari ( e.g. The Tales of Ise Emaki ) , tsukuri monogatari ( e.g. Sumiyoshi Monogatari Emaki ) and romances ( e.g. Lord Takafusa 's Love Songs ( <unk> , Takafusa Kyō <unk> kotoba emaki ) ) . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The illustrations provide insight into life and festivities at the Heian Palace ; which sometimes consisted of something as simple as games on the lake although those might have been perceived differently at the time of manufacture . Like other picture scrolls on court life such as the Genji Monogatari Emaki or the Pillow Book Emaki ( Makura no Sōshi Emaki ) they provide valuable information on the architectural shinden @-@ <unk> style ( particularly on interiors ) which is characterized by a mixture of Tang and traditional Japanese influences . 
 = = Extant scrolls = = 
 It is thought that the emaki originally consisted of 10 – 12 scrolls . The ancestral heritage of the emaki before the Edo period is not known and an investigation conducted during the Meiji period , found that only four scrolls had survived , each 21 @.@ 0 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) high and about 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 4 m ( 15 – 18 ft ) long . The owners and state of preservation of all four scrolls has since changed . The extant parts correspond to about 15 percent of the original diary and are not in sequence . They consist of 24 scenes of varying widths distributed among three scrolls , six single sheets and two hanging scrolls in six different locations : Fujita Art Museum , Gotoh Museum , Tokyo National Museum and three private collections . Each scroll begins with a text section and generally alternates scene descriptions with illustrations , ending with a painting . In two instances a long text section is split in two parts and the Hachisuka scroll has an accumulation of three illustrations unseparated by text , and an accumulation of two unseparated independent text sections . 
 = = = Hachisuka scroll = = = 
 Chronologically the oldest scenes of the emaki , combined with some of the later anecdotes in the diary , are contained in the Hachisuka scroll . Named after its former owner , the Hachisuka clan , rulers of the Tokushima Domain in Awa Province , this scroll is privately owned . It consists of eight illustrations and seven text sections on 16 paper sheets . The long third text section is split in two parts and followed by three illustrations . The seventh text section immediately follows the sixth without a painting between the two . The full scroll is 537 @.@ 5 cm ( 211 @.@ 6 in ) long and has been designated as Important Cultural Property . Scenes 1 – 5 correspond to a continuous part of the diary and are the oldest diary entries represented by any of the four extant emaki scrolls . Scenes 6 and 7 correspond to later diary entries and appear in the diary after several of the scenes described in the other three extant scrolls . 
 = = = = Third day of birth celebration of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō = = = = 
 The Hachisuka scroll starts with a description of a banquet given by the queen 's majordomo and managed by the governor of Ōmi Province on Kankō 5 , 9th month , 13th day ( October 14 , 1008 ) , the third night of the birth of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō . On that occasion , the mother , Empress Shōshi received presents such as baby clothes and furniture . The illustration associated with this scene shows court nobles on the balconies outside of the principal building in which the queen is located . 
 = = = = Fifth day of birth celebration of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō = = = = 
 The second to fifth scenes of the Hachisuka scroll are set in the evening of Kankō 5 , 9th month , 15th day ( October 16 , 1008 ) . On that day , the prime minister and baby 's grandfather , Fujiwara no Michinaga , celebrates the birth . In the second text scene of the emaki , Murasaki Shikibu describes how everybody including servants , minor officials and high nobility was joyful and happy . Tables with rice balls ( mochi ) were placed in the garden , the full moon shone beautifully and torches made the scene as bright as in daylight . There is one illustration following this scene . 
 The third text is split in two parts , followed by three illustrations . The text contains a detailed description of how the dinner was served to the queen including the names of the maids of honour and their father 's names . The ladies who had not been selected to attend " wept bitterly " . Other people involved in the ceremony included <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> no <unk> and door keepers . According to Murasaki Shikibu so many people were involved that it was hard to get through . 
 The relatively short fourth scene describes that the maids of honour exit from the queen 's room which had been partitioned off by misu entering the torch @-@ lit garden . It also gives more details and an interpretation of the dress of one of those maids , Lady <unk> . 
 The short fifth passage is a continuation of the previous events and relates an exchange of courtesies between court ladies and a monk who had kept night watch telling religious and other stories . Murasaki Shikibu tells him : You cannot see such a lovely thing every day , to which he replies : Indeed ! indeed ! clapping his hands in joy and neglecting his Buddha . The illustration shows an elderly priest near the left border of the painting pushing open a folding screen beyond which three court ladies are seated . Murasaki Shikibu is seated closest to the monk directly behind the screen . 
 = = = = Our lady of the chronicle = = = = 
 This anecdote , the sixth scene of the Hachisuka scroll , occurs at an unspecified date in 1009 . It is part of a description of the lady Saemon no <unk> who , Murasaki Shikibu writes in the diary , hated her . <unk> spread the rumour that Murasaki Shikibu was proud of her Chinese learning ( which in the Heian period was the domain of the male aristocracy ) and gave her the name " Japanese Chronicle Lady " . In the anecdote , Murasaki Shikibu explains she learned Chinese in childhood , that she was taught not to be proud of her learning , keeping it a secret during her life in fear of how others would judge her . The text in the emaki relates how Empress Shōshi requested that Murasaki Shikibu read to her in Chinese and teach her the poetical works of Bai Juyi ( in particular the part known as <unk> ( <unk> ) ) in secrecy . Nevertheless , the Emperor and Prime Minister found out about it and presented to the Empress a number of poetical works . 
 = = = = <unk> dancers = = = = 
 This final scene in the Hachisuka scroll is about a scene from the <unk> , an ancient dance performed by young beautiful girls in the 11th month to celebrate the harvest . The emaki text begins with a description of the appearance and clothing of two of the participating girls and ends with a scene in which the girls throw down their fans as the secretaries of the sixth rank approached them to take away their fans . Murasaki Shikibu considered the dancers graceful but unlike girls . This particular scene is set on Kankō 5 , 11th month , 22nd day ( December 22 , 1008 ) . 
 = = = = Painting only scenes = = = = 
 The Hachisuka scroll contains paintings which are not associated with any text sections of the scroll . The fifth painting of the scroll corresponds to a scene described in the second text section of the Hinohara scroll , where Murasaki Shikibu is looking back to her first time at court . The painting shows Murasaki Shikibu inside a room with closed <unk> ( hinged plank door ) and <unk> ( latticed shutters ) . Next to her is an old @-@ fashioned interior light @-@ fixture consisting of a wooden pole with an oil @-@ filled dish and wick on top of it ( <unk> ) . 
 The final illustration of the Hachisuka scroll has no corresponding text section in the extant emaki fragments . However its content can be matched to a scene from the diary in which Murasaki Shikibu expresses her sorrows as a widow worrying about the future . She relates how she is gazing dreamily at the moon when she is " hopelessly sad " and lonely . Playing the koto ( a kind of horizontal harp ) on a cool evening makes her even more miserable . This section of the diary also contains a short description of her room containing two bookcases , one with books that her husband had placed there and that no one has touched since , the other with " old poems and romances " , likely referring to her own works . This scene is set on an unknown date in Kankō 6 ( 1009 ) . The illustration present in the emaki shows Murasaki Shikibu inside a tatami room playing the koto with a court lady walking outside her room on the balcony ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Fujita scroll = = = 
 Formerly in possession of the Akimoto clan ( <unk> ) , rulers of the <unk> Domain in <unk> Province , the extant Fujita scroll alternates five sections of text and five paintings . Based on this ancestral heritage it is sometimes referred to as former Akimoto scroll . A sixth text only section has been preserved as a 19th @-@ century copy from the original emaki . The extant scroll is 434 @.@ 0 cm ( 170 @.@ 9 in ) long , in possession of the Fujita Art Museum , Osaka and was designated as National Treasure of Japan on June 28 , 1956 . It covers the time from the evening of the 5th day celebration of the birth of the first Imperial Prince , Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō , and ends with the furnishing of Michinaga 's residence for the visit of Emperor Ichijō . 
 = = = = Fifth day of birth celebration of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō = = = = 
 Set shortly after the fifth scene of the Hachisuka scroll , this scene relates events from the evening of Kankō 5 , 9th month , 15th day ( October 16 , 1008 ) , the day Michinaga celebrated the birth of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō . Some people were casting da others composed poems . Murasaki Shikibu then praises Fujiwara no Kintō 's repartee and skills in the composition of poetry ; however on this evening he did not participate in the exchange of poems . The queen gave gift of robes and baby dresses to the highest ranked ladies ; lined kimonos to those of 4th rank ; and hakama to the lesser sixth ranked ladies . 
 = = = = A boating party = = = = 
 The second section is a direct continuation of the previous scene , recounting an outing of young courtiers , dressed in white , going boating on a moonlit night the following day ( Kankō 5 , 9th month , 16th day , or 17 October 1008 in the Gregorian calendar ) . The ladies left behind appeared jealous according to Murasaki Shikibu . 
 Continuing from the previous scene , confusion occurs among the people in the boats as palanquins of ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting of the Emperor 's court appear near the shelter for conveyances . Michinaga welcomes them happily and distributes gifts among them . 
 = = = = Birth celebration organized by the Imperial Court = = = = 
 The Emperor celebrated on Kankō 5 , 9th month , 17th day ( October 18 , 1008 ) , the seventh day of the birth of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō . Presents were exchanged between court nobles and the Emperor . During the evening ceremony , Murasaki Shikibu catches a glance of the queen , remarking that she appeared weary , having lost weight and gaining a pale complexion . Her " hair would be better tied up " writes Murasaki Shikibu ; however she stops the description , realizing the impropriety of her depiction of the " mother of the nation " . 
 = = = = Preparations for the Imperial visit = = = = 
 Set some time between Kankō 5 , 10th month , 13th day and the morning of 16th day ( November 13 to 16 , 1008 ) , this scene begins with a description of planting chrysanthemums at Michinaga 's mansion in preparation for the Emperor 's visit . In the second part of the section , Murasaki Shikibu is musing about her melancholic life because of an " extraordinary sorrow " , wishing to be more adaptable and mindless . Wondering whether she is too sinful , she yearns for a religious life . Seeing waterfowl playing heedlessly in a pond , she writes the following waka : 
 = = = = Day of the Imperial visit ( Tanaka <unk> copy ) = = = = 
 A sixth text section of the Fujita scroll has been preserved in the form of a copy from the original manuscript made by Tanaka <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1875 – 1975 ) , researcher and collector of Japanese fine arts who also assisted in the reproduction of old writings and ancient paintings including the Genji Monogatari Emaki . Starting in 1894 he worked on the reproduction of the Murasaki Shikibu Nikki Emaki . This text fragment does not include any illustration and is in possession of the Tanaka family . 
 The scene , which in the diary directly follows the fifth scene of the Fujita scroll , tells of an exchange of letters between Murasaki Shikibu and the Lady <unk> . Writing her response at the time of a brisk shower in a hurry in order not to keep the messenger waiting as the " sky looked threatening " , Murasaki Shikibu adds the following poem to her letter : 
 After dark she receives the following reply from Lady <unk> : 
 Changing topic , Murasaki Shikibu mentions shortly that at the same day , Michinaga inspected two new boats , one with a dragon 's head the other with a phoenix head at the prow , reminding her of animated living figures . The painting located in the emaki after the fifth text section , at the end of the extant Fujita scroll and originally before the sixth scene , illustrates this inspection of boats . Penelope Mason sees this diverse composition as a nostalgic representation of the 13th century Imperial Court past its golden age , as despite of the " gaiety and splendor the scene is permeated with fleeting nature of joy and pleasure . " 
 = = = Matsudaira or former Morikawa scroll = = = 
 In 1920 Morikawa <unk> ( <unk> , 1887 – 1980 ) from Nagoya discovered a 5 @-@ segment scroll of the Murasaki Shikibu Diary Emaki consisting of <unk> five illustrations and five captions . Formerly in possession of the Matsudaira clan , rulers of the Saijō Domain in Iyo Province , this scroll is referred to as " Matsudaira clan edition " or after its finder as " Former Morikawa edition " ( not to be confused with the Morikawa edition below which refers to the Morikawa family ) . Two years after discovery Morikawa sold the scroll to the Niigata businessman and master of the tea ceremony , Masuda Donō ( <unk> , 1847 － 1938 , who had it cut into parts . One part ( Morikawa edition ) , the fifth segment , is bequeathed to the Morikawa family and today in a private collection . A year later , in 1933 , Donō detached the third segment and reformatted it as a hanging scroll ( now in possession of the Agency for Cultural Affairs ) . The remaining three scenes ( numbers 1 , 2 , 4 ) were framed in 1934 , changed owner once more , eventually ( via the Takanashi family ) ending up in the collection of the Gotoh Museum . They are known collectively as " Gotoh edition " . Today 's Matsudaira scroll is spread over three locations and includes one National Treasure and two Important Cultural Properties . While this scroll has not survived in one piece , a 20th @-@ century reproduction measures in at 453 @.@ 1 cm ( 178 @.@ 4 in ) long . With the exception of the first scene of the Gotoh edition , the Matsudaira clan scroll depicts events on Kankō 5 , 11th month , 1st day ( December 1 , 1008 ) , the day of the ika @-@ no @-@ iwai , the 50th day of birth celebration of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō . 
 = = = = Gotoh edition = = = = 
 The Gotoh edition corresponds to scenes 1 , 2 and 4 of the Matsudaira clan scroll and had been partitioned off from the scroll in 1932 and 1933 by Masuda Donō . It consists of 3 paintings and 3 associated captions each framed individually ( six items in total ) . This set has been designated as National Treasure on June 28 , 1956 and is located at the Gotoh Museum . 
 = = = = = Moonlit night = = = = = 
 The scene dated to Kankō 5 , 10th month , 17th day ( November 17 , 1008 ) , shows two drunk courtiers trying to gain entrance to Murasaki Shikibu quarters after she had enjoyed the garden outside her apartment . In the illustration , Murasaki holds her window shut against the men . First to arrive at the scene is the palace steward Sangi Fujiwara no <unk> ( <unk> ) ( on right ) who opens the upper part of Murasaki 's lattice door and inquires whether anybody is at home . According to Murasaki Shikibu his intention is to be mentioned to Akiko . <unk> is joined by the consort 's steward ( associated with Akiko ) , Sangi Fujiwara no Tadanobu ( <unk> ) who also calls out : " Is anyone here ? " Murasaki replies faintly , avoiding anything that could be regarded as flirting . Together the two courtiers are requesting her to open the lower part of the door . Such behaviour , somebody of higher rank trying to enter the house of somebody of lower rank , was in the Heian period considered disgraceful and only excused by the young age of the two courtiers . 
 In the top right corner , Murasaki 's friend , the maid Saishō no Kimi , is visible . The large garden occupying the left half of the painting and the diagonally positioned building are considered to be a bold scene arrangement . According to Penelope Mason , this is " one of the saddest and most beautiful [ scenes ] in the scroll " , contrasting the beauty of the moonlit garden and pond on the left with the constraints of court life . The lattice window and the stewards separate Murasaki Shikibu from the outside world , keeping her a prisoner in the room . 
 = = = = = 50 day celebration of the birth of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō = = = = = 
 As with all but the first scene of the Matsudaira scroll , this scene is set on the evening of Kankō 5 , 11th month , 1st day ( December 1 , 1008 ) , the day of the Ika @-@ no @-@ iwai of the Imperial Prince Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō . The painting shows a room inside a shinden partitioned off by kichō room dividers featuring the design of decaying trees . Empress Shōshi , with the baby in her arms , is partially visible at the top . Court ladies are serving various types of ritual food . 
 The third scene held by the Gotoh museum was originally the fourth segment of the Matsudaira clan scroll . It is therefore preceded by the segment held by the Agency for Cultural Affairs and followed by the 5th segment of the Matsudaira clan scroll which is in possession of the Morikawa family . Like those segments , this scene is dated to the evening of the Ika @-@ no @-@ iwai celebration of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō . It shows drunk and disordered court nobles amusing themselves with court ladies . This painting is particularly notable for its lifelike depiction of facial expressions and shapes of each figure in the scene . 
 = = = = Former Ōkura family fragment = = = = 
 This item , consisting of one painting and associated caption / text , was originally the third scene of the Matsudaira clan scroll before being reshaped into a hanging scroll by Masuda Donō in 1933 . At some point it was in possession of the Ōkura clan ( <unk> ) , but it is now owned by the Agency for Cultural Affairs and in custody of the Tokyo National Museum . It was designated an Important Cultural Property on March 31 , 1953 . Like its preceding and successive scenes ( scenes 2 and 3 from the Gotoh edition ) , the painting depicts the celebration for the 50th day of the birth of the Imperial Prince Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō in the evening of Kankō 5 , 11th month , 1st day ( December 1 , 1008 ) . The main characters are in full dress in a room decorated with kichō partitioners and the prince 's grandfather , Fujiwara no Michinaga at the bottom is offering rice cake ( mochi ) to the prince in a form of ceremonial ritual . The female servant at the bottom right is presumably the author of the diary Murasaki Shikibu . 
 = = = = Morikawa family fragment = = = = 
 The 5th segment of the five @-@ segment Matsudaira clan scroll was separated in 1932 and mounted as hanging scroll . This fragment is 73 @.@ 7 cm ( 29 @.@ 0 in ) wide . Named after their present owners , it is known as the Morikawa clan edition . It consists of a single scene with a very short illustration showing the inside of a traditional Japanese style room with fusuma sliding doors , tatami and a curtain . Like all but the first segment of this scroll , the scene is set in the evening of Kankō 5 , 11th month , 1st day ( December 1 , 1008 ) on occasion of the 50th day celebration of the birth of Atsuhira @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō . Murasaki Shikibu and Saishō no Kimi had been hiding from the drunken <unk> of that evening , but were discovered by Michinaga , Saishō no Chūjō and others . The painting is dominated by the massive figure of Fujiwara no Michinaga dressed in brocade jacket and trousers and placed in the centre of the room . Murasaki Shikibu and Saishō no Kimi are huddled near the border of the painting with heads bent down as a sign of submission and deference . On discovering the two court ladies in hiding , Michinaga demands a poem from each of them . Murasaki being frightened and helpless in this situation recites the following waka : 
 On the fiftieth day how should one number those that follow ? 
 May the Prince 's life span more than eight thousand years . 
 Despite being drunk , Michinaga answered quickly with another poem : 
 O would I might live the life of a crane — 
 Then might I reckon the years of the Prince 
 Up to one thousand ! 
 which according to Murasaki 's diary " came from his innermost desire " . Based on the topic , this scene resembles the <unk> edition of the Genji emaki where another court noble demands a response from a woman . This part of the scroll was designated Important Cultural Property on July 19 , 1952 . 
 = = = Hinohara or former Hisamatsu scroll = = = 
 Formerly in possession of the Hisamatsu @-@ Matsudaira clan , a branch of the Matsudaira clan and rulers of the Iyo @-@ Matsuyama Domain , this scroll is now privately owned by the Hinohara family ( <unk> ) . Due to this ancestral heritage it is variously referred to as " former Hisamatsu scroll " or " Hinohara scroll " . The scroll is 531 @.@ 6 cm ( 209 @.@ 3 in ) long and consists of <unk> six sections of text and six associated paintings on 13 sheets of paper . The fourth text part is relatively long and has been split in two . The scroll has been designated as an Important Cultural Property of Japan . 
 = = = = Day of the Bird festival = = = = 
 Murasaki Shikibu tells of an anecdote at the festival of the Kamo Shrine held on Kankō 5 , 11th month , 28th day ( December 28 , 1008 ) , the last Day of the Bird ( <unk> , tori no hi ) . On this day , Fujiwara no Norimichi , son of Michinaga , had the role of the Emperor 's substitute . After a night of merriment , a joke is played on the <unk> by making him believe that a present he had received is directly from the Empress ; thus requiring an open return . Murasaki Shikibu goes on to describe how noble and dignified Norimichi looked on that day and how his nurse was overwhelmed by his appearance . In a sacred dance performed at night , the mediocre performance of one dancer who had been " very handsome last year " reminded Murasaki Shikibu " of the fleeting life of us all " . The illustration associated with this scene shows the Imperial Messenger , Fujiwara no Norimichi , his head decorated with wisteria branches on the top of a staircase of a shrine building . The train of his garment is flowing down the staircase and he is watched by three courtiers positioned near the bottom of the stairs . 
 = = = = Thinking of the first time at court = = = = 
 Set on the evening of Kankō 5 , 12th month , 29th day ( January 27 , 1009 ) , in this scene , Murasaki Shikibu returns to the Imperial Court after a visit to her parents ' home . As it is the anniversary of her coming to the court she is looking back at her former life nostalgically . Feeling lonely she goes to sleep murmuring the following waka : 
 My life and the year are closing together . 
 At the sound of the wind dreary is my heart . 
 The painting following this text section shows a man on the stairs of a house and two men on a boat just outside the house . The illustration matching the scene described in the text is now the fifth painting of the Hachisuka scroll . 
 = = = = Incident at night = = = = 
 This scene from an unknown day in the year Kankō 6 ( 1009 ) shows Murasaki asleep at night in a room close to the corridor ; a man is knocking on the door . Afraid to open , she spends the night without making a sound . The next morning her nightly visitor reveals himself as Michinaga through a poem he sent to her . She replies with the lines : 
 A cause of deep regret , indeed , 
 Had the door opened at the knocking of the water @-@ rail ! 
 = = = = 50th day celebration of Atsunaga @-@ shinnō = = = = 
 Scenes four to six describe the 50th day celebration of the birth of Atsunaga @-@ shinnō , the later Emperor Go @-@ Suzaku , on Kankō 7 , 1st month , 15th day ( February 1 , 1010 ) . The lengthy fourth section of text is split into two parts . Murasaki Shikibu briefly mentions her friendly relationship with Lady <unk> and that they join their rooms separating them by kichō partitions only when both are at home . This behaviour made Michinaga believe that they are gossiping about other people . Murasaki Shikibu then describes the day 's festivities : the Queen and her audience , the clothing , names and titles of the participants which included the Emperor , the infant prince and various court ladies . Dazzled in their presence , she escapes to an inner room . As the nurse , Madam <unk> comes away from the Emperor and Queen under the canopy , carrying the prince in her arms , Murasaki Shikibu praises her dignified demeanour , tranquility and earnestness . The painting associated with this scene shows four courtiers on the balcony ( <unk> ) of a Japanese style building outside fabric enclosed rooms , which are not visible . Two of the men are shown walking , the others are kneeling and appear to be talking to a person inside the building or to be handing something to someone inside . Two of the men ( one standing , one walking ) carry trays with cups . 
 In the subsequent scene , the dais at which the main persons are seated , covered by misu , is opened and Murasaki Shikibu notes that the people present at the event and seated around the dais on the balcony were either of high rank or court ladies . Lower rank officials later joined them on the steps below where the royalty is seated to perform music with a lute ( biwa ) , harp ( koto ) and flute ( shō ) . The painting corresponding to this scene shows two ladies on the balcony with rolled up misu . Both are squeezed in the corner of the image and appear to be talking to each other . 
 A short text section follows , which is the final scene of the scroll and the final part of the known diary . The official musicians mentioned in the previous scene are joined by outsiders , one of which " made a mistake in the notes and was hissed " . The Minister of the Right made a great mistake in praising the six @-@ stringed koto . The emaki text ( and diary ) ends abruptly with mention of Michinaga 's gift of flutes in two boxes . The illustration to this scene shows three courtiers seated in a row on the balcony with their backs facing the outside . The left figure is shown with a Japanese harp ( koto ) in front of him , his head is turned toward the other two who appear to be concentrating on something in front of them ( likely instruments ) . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Grilli , Elise ( 1962 ) . <unk> <unk> <unk> [ Japanese painted scrolls ] ( in French ) . Trans . Marcel <unk> . <unk> . 
 Shibuya , Eiichi ( 2011 @-@ 12 @-@ 01 ) . " <unk> Cloud Computing Library " . Murasaki Shikibu Nikki ( in Japanese ) . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 12 @-@ 03 . : Original text , <unk> , Modern Japanese , Annotated version , Reprint , Emaki 
 = Eddie Costa = 
 Edwin James " Eddie " Costa ( August 14 , 1930 – July 28 , 1962 ) was an American jazz pianist , vibraphonist , composer and arranger . In 1957 he was chosen as Down Beat jazz critics ' new star on piano and vibes – the first time that one artist won two categories in the same year . He became known for his percussive , driving piano style that concentrated on the lower octaves of the keyboard . 
