 Costa had an eight @-@ year recording career , during which he appeared on more than 100 albums ; five of these were under his own leadership . As a sideman he appeared in orchestras led by Manny <unk> , Gil Evans , Woody Herman and others ; played in smaller groups led by a diverse range of musicians , including Tal Farlow , Coleman Hawkins , Gunther Schuller , and Phil Woods ; and accompanied vocalists including Tony Bennett and Chris Connor . Costa died , aged 31 , in a car accident in New York City . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eddie Costa was born in Atlas , Pennsylvania , near Mount Carmel , in Northumberland County . He was taught and influenced on piano by his older , musically trained brother , Bill , and a local piano teacher . Eddie took paid jobs as a pianist from the age of 15 . In contrast to his piano training , he was self @-@ taught on vibes . In 1949 Costa played and toured for a few months with violinist Joe Venuti . He then worked for his brother in New York until , in 1951 , Eddie was drafted into the army . During his time in the armed forces , Costa performed in Japan and Korea . Upon release after two years , Costa again worked around the New York area , including for bands led by Kai Winding , Johnny Smith , and Don Elliott . 
 = = Playing and recording career = = 
 = = = 1954 – 1957 = = = 
 In 1954 Costa made his first recordings , with guitarist Sal Salvador , to whom he had been recommended by trombonist Winding . The first of these sessions , in July , featured one of Costa 's compositions , " Round Trip " . The following year , Costa recorded a series of piano duets with John <unk> ; differences in playing style meant that several rehearsals were required to organize which pianist would be responsible for what aspects of the performances . 
 Costa 's first recording as leader was in 1956 , with his trio featuring bassist Vinnie Burke and drummer Nick <unk> . This was released under slightly differing titles by Josie Records and Jubilee Records , and was well received : critic John S. Wilson , for instance , commented on the " roaring , spitting piano solos by Eddie Costa " . Around this time , Costa was nicknamed " The Bear " by Burke for his powerful playing . Also in 1956 , Costa and Burke joined guitarist Tal Farlow , forming a resident trio to play at the Composer , a club on West 58th Street in New York . Farlow 's comment on the absence of a drummer from the trio was that " Eddie 's feeding , comping or whatever you want to call it was so fierce that there was no doubt at all where the time was , so I didn 't miss the drums at all " . The trio stayed together , recording several albums under Farlow 's name , until , in 1958 , the Composer closed . Costa was often in recording studios as a sideman around this time : he appeared on approximately 20 albums in both 1956 and 1957 . These included small group settings with Herbie Mann , Oscar <unk> , and Phil Woods , and accompanying vocalists such as Tony Bennett and Chris Connor . 
 In 1957 Costa was again leader , recording Eddie Costa Quintet with Woods , Art Farmer , Teddy Kotick , and Paul Motian . Their repertoire featured interpretations of " I Didn 't Know What Time It Was " and Dave Brubeck 's recent composition " In Your Own Sweet Way " ; the latter focused on Costa 's vibes and Farmer 's muted trumpet , with Woods switching from his usual alto saxophone to the piano . The Billboard review was positive , calling it " a first rate jazz set " on which " Costa swings as ever on piano " . A trio appearance at the 1957 Newport Jazz Festival also brought Costa greater attention . Some of his playing at the festival – as a trio with Ernie Furtado ( bass ) and Al <unk> ( drums ) , and as a quintet with the addition of Rolf Kühn and Dick Johnson – was released later in 1957 as part of a Verve album . Billboard commented that " Costa [ ... ] will attract many new endorsers with the musicianship displayed " . 
 = = = 1958 – 1962 = = = 
 Costa 's next recording as leader , this time exclusively on vibes , was 1958 's Guys and Dolls Like Vibes , recorded over three sessions in January , with Bill Evans , Wendell Marshall and Motian . This album contained six songs from the show Guys and Dolls , which was familiar to listeners from the musical and film versions that had opened a few years earlier . From 1958 to 1959 Costa was with Woody Herman 's band on and off , including as part of a sextet . Over these two years , Costa continued recording prolifically , including in orchestras led by Herman , Manny <unk> ( one album , A Gallery of Gershwin , included a piano quartet of Costa , the unrelated Johnny Costa , Hank Jones , and Dick Marx ) , Michel Legrand , and Ernie Wilkins . Costa 's final recording as leader was The House of Blue Lights , a piano trio album with Marshall and Motian , in 1959 . Billboard was again positive , highlighting Costa 's " highly inventive and imaginative piano stylings " . After this , although he continued to play in clubs such as the Half Note on Hudson Street , Costa concentrated mainly on studio work , on both piano and vibes , for other leaders . He was much in demand for recording sessions because of the excellence of his sight @-@ reading and playing on both of his instruments . 
 The quantity of studio work created a conflict between Costa 's need and desire to support his family , sometimes achieved through working day and night in studios , and his belief in developing his jazz talents , which would have required playing more in clubs and dealing with the people – agents , club owners , artists and repertoire men , and so on – whose goals seldom matched those of creative musicians . Notable examples of Costa 's studio work from this period are being part of Gigi Gryce 's final recordings as leader , appearances on Gunther Schuller 's Third Stream album Jazz <unk> , a series of small @-@ group recordings with saxophonist Coleman Hawkins , and two tracks of Shelly Manne 's 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 , with Costa featuring on piano for one track and vibes on the other , both with just George Duvivier and Manne . Costa also contributed on vibes to Gryce 's music for Fred Baker 's short dance film On the Sound . A long association with pianist and arranger Ralph Sharon meant that Costa was the vibraphonist in the Sharon orchestra on June 9 , 1962 , when it played with Bennett at Carnegie Hall . Costa 's final recording session was on July 12 , 1962 , as part of a group assembled by saxophonist Al Cohn mainly from the Benny Goodman band that had toured the Soviet Union earlier that year . 
 Late at night on July 28 , 1962 , Costa was killed in a car crash , involving no other vehicles , on New York 's Westside Highway at 72nd Street . He was survived by his wife and four children . This loss to music was summarized years later in the liner notes to one of his recordings : " No pianist with his combination of strength , humor , and drive has developed in the sixties or seventies , and as the years go by it becomes more apparent that we lost a unique creative musician " . In his eight @-@ year recording career , Costa appeared on more than 100 albums . He never recorded a solo album . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Costa 's overall style allowed him to play in a great variety of settings . According to critic Alun Morgan , " his mind was never cluttered up with thoughts of stylistic divisions . He was at home with any jazz group , provided it swung and generated a feeling of happiness " . On piano , his " trademark sound " , remarked Ken Dryden , " was the emphasis of the middle and lower registers while nearly ignoring the top two octaves " . Some of Costa 's more linear , right @-@ hand playing was influenced by his listening to Bud Powell records while in the army . Costa 's playing was more than just one @-@ handed lines : during a period when the typical approach to jazz piano was to concentrate on right @-@ hand solos while adding only basic left @-@ hand support , Costa used both hands in creating his own vigorous sound . His piano playing on the informally recorded album Fuerst Set is typical of his style ; it was later described by critic Whitney Balliett : 
 Each improvisation resembled an excellent drum solo in its rhythmic intensity , pattern of beats , and elements of surprise . Costa liked to use octave chords in the left hand and single @-@ note lines in the right , and he liked to thunder endlessly down in the lower registers of the piano . At such times , he played chords in both hands and with stunning effect . He would let loose a staccato passage and then an impossible two @-@ handed arpeggio , or he would deliver on @-@ the @-@ beat or offbeat chords – <unk> them , making them into sixty @-@ fourth notes , somehow slurring them , and developing great drive and momentum . 
 On vibes , Costa 's style was somewhat different . John S. Wilson commented in 1959 that " In contrast to the stirring forays into the lower register that he is fond of making on piano , Costa 's vibraphone style is light and dancing , closer to the Red <unk> manner than most current <unk> . " After Costa 's death , Alun Morgan also compared his playing on the two instruments : " As a vibraphonist Eddie carried over the pulsating elements of his piano style but also continued to employ a sensitive gradation of touch where necessary " . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Costa was chosen as Down Beat jazz critics ' new star on piano and vibes for 1957 ; this was the first time that one artist had won two categories in the same year . In 1962 he was invited to play at the first International Jazz Festival in Washington , D.C. by the President 's Music Committee of the People to People program . An indication of the esteem in which Costa was held by musicians is the caliber of those who performed at his memorial concert at The Village Gate on October 8 , 1962 : Cohn , Benny Golson , Zoot Sims , Charlie Byrd , Jim Hall , Mundell Lowe , Farmer , Clark Terry and Hawkins were among those who played . The playing of the bands led by the last two was recorded and released as an LP . Hawkins did not usually play at benefit concerts , but his feelings for Costa meant that he did what he could to make the seven @-@ hour event a success . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = As leader = = = 
 = = = As sideman = = = 
 Costa played piano , vibes , or both on the albums listed in the table below . Other recordings , where his presence is disputed or the music is classical , are not listed . 
 Sources : 
 = Jacques Gershkovitch = 
 Jacques Gershkovitch ( 1884 – 1953 ) was a Russian conductor and musician who became the first music director of the Portland Junior Symphony ( now known as the Portland Youth Philharmonic ) , the first youth orchestra in the United States , based in Portland , Oregon . Born to a musical family in Irkutsk , Gershkovitch was sent to Saint Petersburg in his late teens to study at the Imperial Conservatory . In 1913 , he graduated with honors in flute and conducting , and was awarded the Schubert Scholarship for a year of study under German conductor Arthur Nikisch in Berlin . Gershkovitch returned to Irkutsk to enlist during World War I , and by 1916 he had become head of the Imperial Russian Army 's military symphony orchestra . He held this position through the Russian Revolution and thereafter , as concerts were often presented as benefits for orphans and the Red Cross . 
 Gershkovitch married in Irkutsk in 1918 . There , he established a fine arts conservatory and symphony orchestra which continued under the Bolshevik regime . In 1921 , he and his wife crossed the border in China to escape from Russia . Ballerina Anna Pavlova offered Gershkovitch the assistant conductor position with her orchestra , which was touring throughout Asia . Gershkovitch remained in Japan to lead the newly organized Tokyo Symphony Orchestra . However , the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake disrupted the organization and caused Gershkovitch and his wife to emigrate to the United States . The couple arrived in San Francisco in November 1923 and made their way to Portland in 1924 . There , <unk> was approached to lead the Portland Junior Symphony . Known for his discipline and high performance standards , Gershkovitch conducted the orchestra for twenty @-@ nine years , gaining national attention for the ensemble and pioneering the youth orchestra movement until his death in 1953 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Jacques Gershkovitch was born in 1884 to a Jewish family in Irkutsk near Lake Baikal in Siberia , Russia . His father , an amateur violinist " who made up in enthusiasm what he lacked in skill " , and mother had seven children , six of whom became professional conductors or singers . Chamber music was a common activity in the household . 
 Gershkovitch was sent to Saint Petersburg in his late teens to study at the Imperial Conservatory . The 4 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 6 @,@ 400 km ) journey took two weeks via the newly constructed Trans @-@ Siberian Railway , and Gershkovitch arrived with " 17 rubles in his pocket and his flute under his arm " . He auditioned and was awarded a scholarship . There he learned from respected Russian composers such as Alexander Glazunov , Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Nikolai Tcherepnin , and completed coursework in opera and ballet production . To pay his own expenses , and to assist in paying the expenses of two of his siblings who were also studying at the Conservatory , Gershkovitch performed with bands and orchestras . This delayed his undergraduate work , but in 1913 he graduated with the title of " laureate " ( the conservatory 's highest honor ) with honors in flute and conducting , and was awarded the Schubert Scholarship for a year of study under German conductor Arthur Nikisch in Berlin . However , this period was shortened due to World War I , and Gershkovitch returned to Irkutsk to enlist . 
 = = Early career = = 
 In 1916 , Gershkovitch became head of the Imperial Russian Army 's military symphony orchestra , a position he held through the Russian Revolution . Army duties continued after the war as concerts were often given as benefits for orphans and the Red Cross , and it was during this period that Gershkovitch met his future wife Lucia . Then an engineer working on a construction project near Khabarovsk , she had previously been a piano student at the Conservatory during the same period Gershkovitch was there . The two met in 1917 , and in 1918 they married in Irkutsk . In Irkutsk , he organized a fine arts conservatory and symphony orchestra . The institute was successful , and by 1920 enrollment had reached more than 1 @,@ 550 students . Following a successful takeover of the city by the Bolsheviks , Gershkovitch conducted bands for funeral services under the new regime . During a service rehearsal , Gershkovitch removed a man causing numerous interruptions . As a result , Gershkovitch was commanded to visit the Cheka , the presiding chief of which was the victim of the previous day 's incident . However , the chief was a devotee of music and requested that Gershkovitch produce a grand opera . He provided a collection of musical instruments previously confiscated by the Bolsheviks . Gershkovitch 's conservatory , orchestra , and newly established opera continued under the Bolshevik regime . 
 = = Relocation = = 
 When living conditions deteriorated , Gershkovitch traveled to Chita and obtained permission to visit Vladivostok via Manchuria . After crossing the border to China in 1921 , he remained in Harbin , where he met Lucia , who had also escaped from Russia . Together they made their way to Tientsin , where they met and became close friends with composer Aaron Avshalomov . When ballerina Anna Pavlova heard that Gershkovitch had escaped from Russia , she offered him a position as assistant conductor with her orchestra , which was touring throughout Asia . Following three months of touring , Gershkovitch settled in Tokyo to undertake the newly organized Tokyo Symphony Orchestra under the patronage of Baron Okura , a wealthy nobleman and relative of the Mikado . 
 The orchestra 's premiere concert took place at the Imperial Hotel auditorium ; many concerts followed and were well received until the Great Kantō earthquake of 1923 " disorganized all the business and musical interests of the city " . Gershkovitch and his wife , guests at Baron Okura 's home , endured the earthquake for six days before leaving for Kobe . With assistance from Americans , the Norwegian consul , and financial aid from Baron Okura , the couple left for San Francisco , arriving in November 1923 . Following the advice of San Francisco Symphony conductor Alfred Hertz , Gershkovitch and his wife made their way to Portland , Oregon , in 1924 . It was here that Gershkovitch was approached by Mary Dodge and two of her students to lead the Portland Junior Symphony ( PJS ) . He taught flute and conducted the Ellison @-@ White Conservatory 's student orchestra , at the time directed by Jacob Avshalomov , until the PJS duties required his full attention . 
 = = Portland Youth Philharmonic = = 
 Under Gershkovitch 's leadership , the Portland Junior Symphony ( now known as the Portland Youth Philharmonic ) was founded in late 1924 as the first youth orchestra in the United States . The symphony performed for the first time on February 14 , 1925 , at the Lincoln High School Auditorium ( which later became Portland State University 's Lincoln Hall ) , playing Schubert 's Unfinished Symphony . Gershkovitch allegedly introduced the composition and stated " You play , or I keel [ sic ] you " in his heavy accent at the ensemble 's first rehearsal . Concert attendees reportedly surged the stage after the concert to congratulate the musicians , Gershkovitch and Dodge , who was present and called to the stage . One reviewer for the Oregon Sunday Journal wrote the following day that the " audience that almost filled the auditorium to capacity broke into storm upon storm of applause " . According to Ronald Russell , author of A New West to Explore ( 1938 ) , the audience " had experienced a new emotional thrill , and forthwith became strong advocates and supporters of the junior symphony cause " . 
 Gershkovitch , known for his discipline and high performance standards , conducted the orchestra for twenty @-@ nine years , gaining national attention for the ensemble and pioneering the youth orchestra movement . By the 1930s , PJS concerts were broadcast nationally on the CBS Radio Network . In 1956 and 1958 both NBC and CBS transmitted broadcasts of the orchestra 's programs across the United States , and three transcribed programs were broadcast overseas from Voice of America in Washington , D.C. Gershkovitch was also responsible for adding a Preparatory Orchestra ( later renamed the Conservatory Orchestra ) due to increased membership . He tried to incorporate at least one American composition in each concert . Gershkovitch had a distinctive personality and a unique way with words , using expressions such as " More nicely , can 't you more ? " and " Debussy is beauty , French beauty " ( as recollected in one former student 's diary ) . For twenty @-@ five years , David Campbell served as Master of Ceremonies for the Children 's Concerts since Gershkovitch " never gained a command of English sufficient enough for public use " . Gershkovitch 's often @-@ quoted philosophy was that he did " not teach music " , but rather he taught " young people through music " . Though there were times he desired to conduct professional ensembles , Gershkovitch 's primary concern was educating the youth . Apart from music education , he stressed the importance of proper conduct , manners , and " values in life and art " in order to build character . Following Gershkovitch 's death in 1953 , guest conductors led the orchestra for its thirtieth season – one conductor was Jacob Avshalomov , a Columbia University teacher and PJS alumnus who had studied under Gershkovitch while a student at Reed College ( 1939 – 1941 ) . 
 = American bittern = 
 The American bittern ( Botaurus lentiginosus ) is a species of wading bird of the heron family ( Ardeidae ) . It has a Nearctic distribution , breeding in Canada and the northern and central parts of the United States , and wintering in the southern United States , the Caribbean islands and parts of Central America . 
 It is a well @-@ camouflaged , solitary brown bird that unobtrusively inhabits marshes and the coarse vegetation at the edge of lakes and ponds . In the breeding season it is chiefly noticeable by the loud , booming call of the male . The nest is built just above the water , usually among bulrushes and cattails , where the female incubates the clutch of olive @-@ buff eggs for about four weeks . The young leave the nest after two weeks and are fully fledged at six or seven weeks . 
 The American bittern feeds mostly on fish , but also eats other small vertebrates as well as crustaceans and insects . It is fairly common over its wide range but its numbers are thought to be decreasing , especially in the south , due to habitat degradation . However the total population is large , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as being of " Least Concern " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The American bittern is a large , chunky , brown bird , very similar to the Eurasian bittern ( Botaurus stellaris ) , though slightly smaller , and the plumage is speckled rather than being barred . It is 58 – 85 cm ( 23 – 33 in ) in length , with a 92 – 115 cm ( 36 – 45 in ) wingspan and a body mass of 370 – 1 @,@ 072 g ( 0 @.@ 816 – 2 @.@ 363 lb ) . 
 The crown is chestnut @-@ brown with the centers of the feathers being black . The side of the neck has a bluish @-@ black elongated patch which is larger in the male than in the female . The hind neck is olive and the mantle and scapulars are dark chestnut @-@ brown , barred and speckled with black , some feathers being edged with buff . The back , rump and upper tail @-@ coverts are similar in color but more @-@ finely speckled with black and with grey bases to the feathers . The tail feathers are chestnut @-@ brown , with speckled edges , and the primaries and secondaries are blackish @-@ brown with buff or chestnut tips . The cheeks are brown and there is a buff superciliary stripe and a similarly colored <unk> stripe . The chin is creamy @-@ white with a chestnut central stripe , and the feathers of the throat , breast and upper belly are buff and rust @-@ colored , finely outlined with black , giving a striped effect to the underparts . The eye is surrounded by yellowish skin and the iris is pale yellow . The long , robust bill is yellowish @-@ green , the upper mandible being darker than the lower , and the legs and feet are also yellowish @-@ green . Juveniles resemble adults but the sides of their necks are less olive . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The American bittern was first described in 1813 by the English clergyman Thomas <unk> from a vagrant individual he examined in Dorset , England . No subspecies are accepted today , however , fossils found in the <unk> River , Florida , and originally described as a new form of heron ( <unk> <unk> ; McCoy , 1963 ) were later recognized to be a smaller , prehistoric subspecies of the American bittern which lived during the Late Pleistocene ( Olson , 1974 ) and would thus be called B. l. columbianus . Its closest living relative is the <unk> bittern ( Botaurus pinnatus ) from Central and South America . 
 The generic name Botaurus was given by the English naturalist James Francis Stephens , and is derived from Medieval Latin <unk> , " bittern " , itself constructed from the Middle English name for the Eurasian bittern , <unk> . Pliny gave a fanciful derivation from Bos ( ox ) and taurus ( bull ) , because the bittern 's call resembles the bellowing of a bull . The species name lentiginosus is Latin for " freckled " , from <unk> , " freckle " , and refers to the speckled plumage . 
 Many of the folk names are given for its distinctive call ; In his book on the common names of American birds , Ernest Choate lists " bog bumper " and " stake driver " , and other vernacular names include " thunder pumper " and " bog bull " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of this bittern includes much of North America . It breeds in southern Canada as far north as British Columbia , the Great Slave Lake and Hudson Bay , and in much of the United States and possibly central Mexico . It migrates southward in the fall and overwinters in the southern United States , the Caribbean Islands and Mexico , with past records also coming from Panama and Costa Rica . As a long @-@ distance migrant , it is a very rare vagrant in Europe , including Great Britain and Ireland . It is an aquatic bird and frequents bogs , marshes and the thickly @-@ vegetated verges of shallow @-@ water lakes and ponds , both with fresh and brackish or saline water . It sometimes feeds out in the open in wet meadows and pastures . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The American bittern is a solitary bird , and although common in much of its range , usually keeps itself well @-@ hidden and is difficult to observe . It usually hunts by walking stealthily in shallow water and among the vegetation , stalking its prey , but sometimes stands still , in ambush . If it senses that it has been seen , the American bittern remains motionless , with its bill pointed upward , its cryptic coloration causing it to blend into the surrounding foliage . It is mainly nocturnal and is most active at dusk . More often heard than seen , the male bittern has a loud , booming call that resembles a congested pump , and which has been rendered as " <unk> , <unk> , <unk> " . While uttering this sound , the bird 's head is thrown convulsively upward and then forward , and the sound is repeated up to seven times . 
 The exact process by which the bittern makes its distinctive sound is not fully understood . It has been suggested that the bird gradually puffs out its neck by inflating its esophagus with air accompanied by a mild clicking or hiccuping sound . The esophagus is kept inflated by means of flaps beside the tongue . Once this action is completed and the esophagus is fully inflated , the distinctive gulping sound is made in the syrinx . When the sound is finished , the bird deflates its oesophagus . 
 Like other members of the heron family , the American bittern feeds in marshes and shallow ponds , preying mainly on fish , but also consuming amphibians , reptiles , small mammals , crustaceans and insects . It is a territorial bird and has a threat display which involves slowly erecting long , white , previously @-@ concealed , plumes on its shoulders , to form wing @-@ like extensions that nearly meet across its back , resembling a ruff . The bird then stands still in a threatening posture , or stalks the intruder in a crouching position , with its head retracted and a gliding gait . 
 This bird nests solitarily in marshes among coarse vegetation such as bulrushes ( Scirpus ) and cattails , with the female building the nest and the male guarding it . The nest is usually about 15 cm ( 6 in ) above the water surface and consists of a rough platform of dead stalks and rushes , sometimes with a few twigs mixed in , and lined with bits of coarse grass . Up to about six eggs are laid and are incubated by the female for twenty @-@ nine days . The eggs are bluntly ovoid in shape , olive @-@ buff and <unk> , averaging 49 by 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 93 by 1 @.@ 46 in ) in size . The chicks are fed individually , each in turn pulling down the female 's beak , and receiving regurgitated food directly into its beak . They leave the nest at about two weeks and are fully @-@ fledged at six to seven weeks . 
 = = Status = = 
 This bird 's numbers are declining in many parts of its range due to habitat loss . This is particularly noticeable in the southern part where chemical contamination and human development are reducing the area of suitable habitat . However , the bird has an extremely large range and a large total population , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as being of " Least Concern " . The American bittern is protected under the United States Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . It is also protected under the Canadian Migratory Birds Convention Act of 1994 to which both Canada and the United States are signatories . 
 = 1968 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1968 Atlantic hurricane season was one of five Atlantic hurricane seasons during the satellite era not to feature a major hurricane , the others being 1972 , 1986 , 1994 , and 2013 . The season officially began on June 1 and lasted until November 30 , dates which conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . It was a below average season in terms of tropical storms , with a total of eight nameable storms . The first system , Hurricane Abby , developed in the northwestern Caribbean Sea on June 1 . Abby moved northward and struck Cuba , bringing heavy rainfall and flooding to western portions of the island . Making landfall in Florida on June 4 , Abby caused flooding and spawned four tornadoes , but left behind little damage . Overall , the hurricane resulted in six deaths and about $ 450 @,@ 000 ( 1968 USD ) in damage . In late June , Tropical Storm Candy brought minor flooding and spawned several tornadoes across portions of the Southern United States . Overall damage from the cyclone reached approximately $ 2 @.@ 7 million . 
 Despite three named storms in June , cyclone activity slowed throughout the subsequent month , with only one tropical depression . During late August and early September , Tropical Depression Eleven brought flooding to the Jacksonville area of Florida . Hurricane Gladys , the final and also the strongest named storm of the season , developed in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 13 . Peaking as a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , the system resulted in flooding across western Cuba , particularly in Havana , where the storm caused six deaths and about $ 12 million in damage . Rough seas , gusty winds , tornadoes , and heavy rainfall resulted in generally minor impact in Florida , with three fatalities and damage totaling $ 6 @.@ 7 million . Gladys also provided relief for one of North Carolina 's worst droughts . Several other storms left negligible impact on land . Overall , the storms of the season collectively caused approximately $ 21 @.@ 8 million in damage and killed 17 people . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , with Hurricane Abby developing that day . It was a below average season in which eight tropical storms formed , compared to the 1966 – 2009 average of 11 @.@ 3 named storms . Four of these reached hurricane status , slightly below the 1966 – 2009 average of 6 @.@ 2 . None of the hurricanes strengthened into a major hurricane ; only four other seasons since the satellite era began featured no major hurricanes : 1972 , 1986 , 1994 , and 2013 . Further , no hurricanes exceeded Category 1 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ; this would not occur again until 2013 . Despite an active beginning , this season had the fewest hurricane days since 1962 . Four hurricanes and one tropical storm made landfall during the season , causing 17 deaths and about $ 21 @.@ 8 million in damage . The last storm of the season , a tropical depression , dissipated on November 25 , five days before the official end of hurricane season on November 30 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began in June , with three named storms during that month – hurricanes Abby and Brenda and Tropical Storm Candy – tying the record set in 1886 , 1936 , and 1959 . Despite the quick start , activity abruptly slowed , with only a tropical depression in July . The next named storm , Hurricane Dolly , existed from August 10 to August 17 , while Tropical Depression Eleven formed later that month . September was the most active month , with five tropical depressions , two tropical storms , and one subtropical storm , which peaked with an intensity equivalent to a Category 1 . In October , Hurricane Gladys became the strongest tropical cyclone of the season , despite maximum sustained winds of only 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 45 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Abby = = = 
 The interaction of a mid @-@ tropospheric trough and a cold front spawned a tropical depression on June 1 . The initial circulation was not embedded within the convection , but as it moved slowly north @-@ northeastward , it was able to strengthen and become better organized , reaching tropical storm strength on June 2 . It crossed the western tip of Cuba , and upon reaching the southeast Gulf of Mexico , Abby achieved hurricane strength . It weakened to a tropical storm before landfall in Punta Gorda , Florida on June 4 . Abby moved across the state and then reached the western Atlantic . On June 6 , it made another landfall near Jacksonville . Abby weakened to a tropical depression as it moved over Georgia , and over the next six days , it drifted over The Carolinas , finally dissipating on June 13 east of Virginia . 
 As Abby crossed Cuba , moderate rainfall and relatively high winds were reported . In addition , Abby dropped heavy rainfall across the state of Florida , peaking at 14 @.@ 65 in ( 372 mm ) in Hart Lake . However , the rain was almost entirely beneficial , as Florida was suffering from a severe drought . Despite winds gusts up to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , no significant wind damage was reported . Abby spawned several tornadoes in Florida , though losses rarely exceeded $ 5 @,@ 000 . One twister in Monroe , North Carolina , damaged 20 cars , and destroyed three homes and impacted 20 others . Elsewhere , the storm dropped relatively light rainfall and produced a few tornadoes throughout the Southeastern United States . Overall , the storm caused approximately $ 450 @,@ 000 in damage and led to six indirect fatalities . 
 = = = Hurricane Brenda = = = 
 The trough that spawned Abby persisted , with another tropical depression developing over the Straits of Florida on June 17 . Early the following day , the depression crossed the Florida Keys and later made landfall in a rural area of Monroe County . Wind shear levels became increasingly favorable , causing the depression to maintain its intensity while crossing Florida . Because the heaviest shower and thunderstorm activity remained well offshore the state , little impact was reported . Up to 8 @.@ 61 in ( 219 mm ) of precipitation fell at the Homestead Experiment Station . Early on June 20 , the depression emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Flagler Beach . Shortly thereafter , a weak trough in the westerlies forced the storm to curve eastward . Intensification then occurred , with the depression becoming Tropical Storm Brenda early on June 21 . 
 Later on June 21 and into June 22 , the Bermuda high built southwestward as a weak trough passed to the north , resulting in Brenda turning northeastward . With persistent favorable conditions , the storm reached hurricane status at 12 : 00 UTC on June 23 . Early the next day , Brenda attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . Thereafter , a ridge of high pressure blocked moist air from reaching the storm , causing it to weaken . By June 25 , Brenda fell to tropical storm intensity and deteriorated further to a tropical depression on June 26 . Later that day , it was absorbed by a large extratropical cyclone , while located about 360 mi ( 580 km ) west @-@ southwest of Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Candy = = = 
 A tropical disturbance located in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico developed into a tropical depression on June 22 . Gradual strengthening occurred , with the depression being upgraded to Tropical Storm Candy on the following day . On June 23 , the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 996 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Hours later , Candy made landfall near Port Aransas , Texas at the same intensity , before quickly weakening to a tropical depression by early on June 24 . However , it persisted for a few more days , until transitioning into an extratropical cyclone over Michigan on June 26 . 
 Due to rainfall from a previous weather system , the ground was already saturated throughout Texas . As a result , Candy caused flooding , with precipitation exceeding 11 in ( 280 mm ) in some areas . Minor damage to crops , roads , and bridges was reported in the eastern portions of the state . Agricultural losses alone were slightly less than $ 2 million . Storm surge along the coast of Texas caused " cuts " on Padre Island . The storm spawned 24 tornadoes , though only one caused significant impact . Candy and its remnants dropped rainfall in 24 other states , reaching as far north as New Hampshire . Overall , Candy caused $ 2 @.@ 7 million in damage and no fatalities . 
 = = = Hurricane Dolly = = = 
 In late July , a tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa . After tracking west @-@ northwestward and westward , the wave reached the Straits of Florida on August 9 , where it began interacting with an upper @-@ level low . Early on August 10 , the system developed into a tropical depression , while located near Andros Island in the Bahamas . Shortly thereafter , the depression made landfall near Fort Lauderdale , Florida . The depression quickly re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic . Initially , the depression did not strengthen and was nearby absorbed by a cold front . After paralleling part of the East Coast of the United States , the depression moved further out to sea . By early on August 12 , the depression finally strengthened into Tropical Storm Dolly , and further developed into a hurricane later that day . 
 Dolly briefly weakened back to a tropical storm on August 13 amid unfavorable atmospheric conditions , only to <unk> hurricane intensity later that day . On August 14 , Dolly peaked with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . After remaining a minimal hurricane until August 16 , the unfavorable conditions prevailed , causing Dolly to rapidly weaken to a tropical depression . By early on August 17 , Dolly became extratropical while about 300 mi ( 480 km ) north of the Azores . Impact from Hurricane Dolly was minimal , with only rainfall being reported on land . Precipitation peaked at 3 @.@ 89 in ( 99 mm ) at Palm Beach International Airport in West Palm Beach , Florida . Although it was mostly limited to the east coast of Florida , isolated areas of rain were reported in the Panhandle and on the west coast . Elsewhere , rainfall from Dolly was also recorded in North and South Carolina , though it did not exceed or reach 3 in ( 76 mm ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Edna = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 10 . A weak high @-@ level trough and a warm anticyclone to the east @-@ northeast generated low wind shear , allowing a tropical depression to <unk> at 18 : 00 UTC on September 11 , while located about 225 mi ( 360 km ) southeast of Praia , Cape Verde . Although satellite imagery indicated a well @-@ defined tropical depression , it did not organize further until at least September 13 . Two days later , the ship Sal Mela observed wind speeds of 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) . Thus , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Edna on September 15 . Around that time , Edna attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . By September 18 , upper level cold trough began producing unfavorable conditions , with the storm weakening to a tropical depression that day . Edna degenerated into a tropical wave early the following day , while situated about 395 mi ( 635 km ) east of Barbuda . 
 = = = Subtropical Storm One = = = 
 A subtropical depression developed at 12 : 00 UTC on September 14 , while located about 295 mi ( 475 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina and initially moved east @-@ northeastward . Early on September 16 , it briefly curved north @-@ northwestward and strengthened into a subtropical storm , before turning back to the east @-@ northeastward later that day . By September 17 , the storm re @-@ curved to the southeast and decelerated but began to accelerate on September 19 . Strengthened continued , with the storm attaining an intensity equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane early the following day . At 00 : 00 UTC on September 12 , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Accelerating northeastward , a weakening trend soon commenced . The subtropical storm became extratropical by 12 : 00 UTC on September 23 , while located about 320 mi ( 510 km ) northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Frances = = = 
 A tropical depression developed east of the Bahamas at 12 : 00 UTC on September 23 . Convection was enhanced by a mid @-@ tropospheric trough , though further strengthening was initially slow . Initially , the depression headed northward , but curved northeastward on September 25 . A reconnaissance aircraft late on September 26 reported a warm core , sustained winds of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 001 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Therefore , it is estimated that the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Frances around that time . The storm intensified slightly further to winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , before beginning to weaken on September 28 . Later that day , steering flow from an upper low pressure area caused Frances to curve almost due eastward . The storm weakened further to a tropical depression early on September 29 , shortly before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Gladys = = = 
 In early October , a tropical wave interacted with the intertropical convergence zone while located in the southwestern Caribbean Sea , spawning multiple low pressure areas . One of the lows developed into a tropical depression while centered near San Andrés on October 13 . The depression moved north @-@ northwestward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Gladys on October 15 . By the following day , it became a hurricane , shortly before striking Cuba . Gladys later peaked with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , just before making landfall near Homosassa , Florida on October 19 . The hurricane crossed the state and continued northeastward , passing just east of Cape Hatteras on October 20 . The next day , Gladys became extratropical and was absorbed by a cold front over Nova Scotia . 
 In Cuba , Gladys caused flash flooding and heavily damaged the tobacco crop . Damage in the country was estimated at $ 12 million , and there were six deaths . While passing west of the Florida Keys , the hurricane produced strong winds that briefly cut communications to the Dry Tortugas , but damage was minor . Near where Gladys made landfall , winds gusted to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and tides reached 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) above normal . There was heavy beach erosion and flooding along the coast , while the winds knocked down trees and caused power outages . Across the state , damage was estimated at $ 6 @.@ 7 million , and three people were indirectly killed . Heavy rainfall in South Carolina caused minor river flooding . When paralleling just off the coast of North Carolina , Gladys was responsible for breaking the state 's worst drought since 1932 , and proved more beneficial than the minor storm damage there . Later , Gladys killed two people in Atlantic Canada and caused coastal damage in Prince Edward Island . 
 = = = Tropical depressions = = = 
 A total of seven tropical cyclones remained below tropical storm intensity during the 1968 Atlantic hurricane season . The first such system formed in the north @-@ central Gulf of Mexico at 00 : 00 UTC on July 4 . Moving east @-@ northeastward , it dissipated offshore St. George Island , Florida , about 24 hours later . On August 26 , Tropical Depression Eleven developed in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico . Drifting northeastward , the depression was situated offshore Central Florida on August 28 , shortly before it trekked southward and made three landfalls in Florida near Clearwater , Holmes Beach , and Venice . By early on August 29 , the depression began moving northeast to north @-@ northeastward across the state . Late on August 31 , the system emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Atlantic Beach and dissipated shortly thereafter . Due to the depression 's slow movement across Florida , heavy rainfall was observed , including 15 @.@ 46 in ( 393 mm ) of rainfall in Jacksonville . Considerable flooding was reported in Clay and Duval counties . Along the upper Cedar River in the latter , many homes and businesses were flooded . Eleven bridges were inundated with water ranging from a few inches to 4 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) . Peak discharge amounts were higher than during Hurricane Dora in 1964 . However , soil moisture and streamflow conditions during Dora were much more conducive to producing floods than antecedent conditions associated with this depression . Further south in Daytona Beach , a tornado destroyed a motel and several homes . 
 The next tropical depression formed on September 7 , while centered about 820 mi ( 1 @,@ 320 km ) north @-@ northeast of Fortaleza , Ceará . Moving generally west to west @-@ northwestward , the depression approached the Lesser Antilles , but dissipated well east @-@ southeast of the islands on September 10 . Another tropical depression developed on September 17 , while situated about 205 mi ( 330 km ) south of Santiago , Cape Verde . The depression moved northwestward and did not strengthen . By September 21 , it dissipated about 1 @,@ 135 mi ( 1 @,@ 830 km ) west @-@ northwest of the northernmost islands of Cape Verde . The next tropical depression originated on September 23 , while located approximately 670 mi ( 1 @,@ 080 km ) east @-@ northeast of Cayenne , French Guiana . Approaching the Windward Islands , it crossed through Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , before dissipating on September 25 . That day , Tropical Depression Eighteen formed in the northwestern Caribbean Sea . While a tropical cyclone , it struck Cuba and Florida . Generally light rainfall was reported in the state , with up to 7 @.@ 53 in ( 191 mm ) at the Royal Palm Ranger Station in Everglades National Park . Thereafter , the depression tracked northeastward and dissipated on September 29 . The final tropical depression developed on November 24 near Mayaguana . Moving north @-@ northeastward to northeastward , the depression dissipated southwest of Bermuda about 24 hours later . 
 Additionally , another tropical depression was tracked during the season , though it was not included in the Atlantic hurricane best track . Classified as Tropical Depression Fourteen , the system developed from a low pressure area offshore the Southeastern United States on September 8 . It headed generally north @-@ northeastward ahead of a mid @-@ level cyclone that moved south @-@ southeastward into the central Appalachian Mountains . While the storm passed just offshore the Outer Banks of North Carolina , the depression dropped 5 @.@ 8 in ( 150 mm ) of precipitation on Bodie Island . Thereafter , the cyclone began losing tropical characteristics and became extratropical on September 11 while making landfall on Long Island , New York . Winds gusts of 33 and 46 mph ( 53 and 74 km / h ) were observed between Boston and New York City . The remnants of this storm entered Atlantic Canada and was absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone shortly before emerging into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence on September 12 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 1968 . The list is mostly the same as the 1964 season , except for Candy , Dolly , Edna , Frances , Hannah , and Ingrid . A storm was named Candy for the first time in 1968 . No names were retired this season . However , the name Edna was later retroactively retired because of the Hurricane Edna of the 1954 season , and has not been used since . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = You and I ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " You and I " ( stylized as " <unk> and I " ) is a song by American singer Lady Gaga , taken from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) . Written by Gaga , " You and I " samples Queen 's " We Will Rock You " ( 1977 ) and features electric guitar by Queen 's Brian May . The song was debuted by Gaga in June 2010 during her performance at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball . Footage of the performance appeared on the Internet , and positive response encouraged her to incorporate the song into her setlist for The Monster Ball Tour . She subsequently performed the song on Today to a record crowd in July 2010 , and on The Oprah Winfrey Show in May 2011 . The song was released as the fourth single from the album , on August 23 , 2011 by Interscope . 
 " You and I " is a slow tempo song featuring instrumentation from electric guitars and piano , with Gaga and Lange providing background vocals . The song received critical acclaim , with reviewers listing it as one of the highlights from Born This Way . After the release of the parent album , " You and I " charted in Canada , United Kingdom and the United States , due to digital downloads from the parent album . Season ten American Idol contestant Haley Reinhart performed " You and I " in May 2011 prior to its release , earning positive reviews . Her studio recording was released to the iTunes Store as a single , and appeared on the compilation album , American Idol Top 5 Season 10 . " You and I " was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards , which was held on February 12 , 2012 . 
 The accompanying music video for " You and I " was released on August 16 , 2011 and was shot by Gaga 's long @-@ time collaborator Laurieann Gibson in Springfield , Nebraska . The video features Jo Calderone , Gaga 's male alter ego , who is also featured on the single 's cover , and Yüyi , her mermaid alter ego . The main concept behind the video was Gaga 's journey to be with her beloved one ; she is portrayed through an assortment of scenes displaying her in various avatars , including Calderone and Yuyi . After its release , the video was met with positive reception . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " You and I " was written by Lady Gaga and produced by Gaga and Robert John " Mutt " Lange , and was one of the first songs previewed from the album . Gaga said that the song was written in New York , while she was busy playing her old piano . The singer had first played " You and I " at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball in June 2010 . She said that the song was bit of a " rock @-@ and @-@ roll tune " , predicting that it may not be released as a single from Born This Way , but that it will remain " very dear " to her heart . Footage of the performance appeared on the Internet soon after , and positive response encouraged Lady Gaga to perform the song during the first concert of the North American leg of The Monster Ball Tour in Montreal . Gaga told MSNBC 's Meredith Vieira and Ann Curry that " ' You and I ' was written about the most important person that I ever met " , allegedly <unk> Carl , her ex @-@ boyfriend . 
 " You and I " was announced by Gaga on July 22 , 2011 as the fourth single from Born This Way . The single cover for " You and I " was released on August 5 , 2011 , via TwitPic , accompanied with the line : " You will never find what you are looking for in love , if you don 't love yourself . " It features two black @-@ and @-@ white images of Gaga 's male alter ego Jo Calderone , while smoking a cigarette and sporting sideburns . Previously the character of Calderone had made an appearance in June 2011 , when Gaga posed as him for a series of photos in London by photographer Nick Knight and arranged by stylist Nicola Formichetti . One shot features him wearing a blazer and white T @-@ shirt with his head down and smoking a cigarette . The other image is of Jo Calderone in silhouette puffing out a cloud of smoke . A writer for The Daily Telegraph of Australia described the images as giving a moody and scruffy look , and felt that Gaga had become " bored with being an outrageous woman and has decided to switch gender instead . " Rap @-@ Up 's David Jones commented that Gaga 's Calderone character looked similar to musician Bob Dylan on the cover . Although Steve Pond of Reuters did not like the song , he stated about the artwork , " Lady Gaga loves herself even when she 's dressed as a guy . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You and I " has rock music and country music influences , and features British rock band Queen 's guitarist Brian May . It was recorded by Tom Ware and Horace Ward at the Warehouse Productions Studio in Omaha , Nebraska , and <unk> Hill in the United Kingdom , respectively . Along with May , Justin Shirley Smith also played guitars , while Gene Grimaldi did the mastering of the track . Additional recording and programming were done by Olle Romo . Before production credits were announced in April 2011 , Gaga had teased that " someone legendary " would be producing the track . Gaga , a Queen fan ( even taking her stage name from the Queen song " Radio Ga Ga " ) , admitted to " [ falling ] to the floor crying and laughing " when she found out that May agreed to the collaboration . Lange requested that Gaga record a " rough lead vocal " for the track while she was touring . Gaga later recalled : " I had about 30 cigarettes and a couple of glasses of Jameson and just put on a click track and sang my face off , thinking we 'd redo the vocals . " However , Lange was satisfied with Gaga 's recording and it was used as the final recorded vocals for the track . Ware recalled that the song was recorded the night after Gaga 's March 17 , 2011 , concert for The Monster Ball Tour . Gaga welcomed his opinions and encouraged his input , which according to him , helped make the four @-@ hour session the best working experience he has had with a celebrity . " She was flattering toward the studio — and Omaha , too , for that matter . She is a bright young lady with remarkable music instincts who charts her own path , " he added . 
 According to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " You and I " is set in common time with a slow tempo of 60 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A major , and during the song , Gaga 's voice spans from the notes of E3 to C ♯ 5 . The song begins with an A – G – A chord progression , which changes to A – Bm / A – D / A – B ♯ m during the chorus , and back to the former chords afterwards . The opening lyrics — " It 's been a long time since I came around / It 's been a long time , but I 'm back in town / And this time , I 'm not leaving without you " — describe a whiskey @-@ breathed lover for whom she is pining . Gil Kaufman from MTV News described it as the " tune eschewed most of her dance flavor , right down to a rollicking barrel @-@ house piano solo . " Her voice sounded like growling during the main verses , where she sings the lines " He said , ' Sit back down where you belong , in the corner of my bar with your high heels on , Sit back down on the couch where we made love the first time , and you said to me . " Noting the differences between live performances of the song and the studio version , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph observed that the piano parts were replaced mostly by " fizzing synths , a stomping beat sampled from " We Will Rock You " , thundering electric guitars and backing vocals stacked into shimmering choral walls . " Music critic Kitty Empire , while writing for The Guardian , described the song as an " umlaut @-@ toting digital country power ballad " with two Bruce Springsteen references : " born to run " and Nebraska . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " You and I " received critical acclaim from music critics . After hearing the White Tie and Tiara Ball performance , Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt complimented the song for its " torchy , slow @-@ burn cabaret quality " and for lacking " Auto @-@ Tune , fancy production , or performance gimmicks " . McCormick , who noted the differences between Gaga 's live and studio versions of the song , described the studio version as " bigger , bolder and less quirkily emotive , a custom @-@ built radio rock ballad to induce hand claps in packed stadiums . This is not music for the underground : it is cheesy , high @-@ gloss , pop rock for the mainstream middle , a kind of instant Eighties retro classic to seduce middle @-@ aged rockers – possibly the last demographic to remain sceptical about her appeal . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone called the song a confessional power ballad " with a torrid , Sturm und Drang vocal turn " . In his review for The Guardian , Tim Jonze said the song " aims for a ' Hey Jude ' style singalong but – owing to its determination to have someone playing kitchen sink in the background – ends up as bloated as Oasis ' ' All Around the World ' . " Dan Aquilante of The New York Post wrote a less @-@ than @-@ favorable review of Born This Way but complimented " You and I " and the " uniquely earthy quality " that Lange brought to the album . Kitty Empire said the song is Gaga 's " unlikely heartland moment – a bid , perhaps , to locate herself as an all @-@ American balladeer as well as an art @-@ disco avatar with tent pegs under her skin " , referring to the implants featured in the music video for the song " Born This Way " . 
 The Dartmouth 's Kate Sullivan wrote that " You and I " may be Gaga 's most honest song to date . Shirley Halperin from The Hollywood Reporter wondered whether pop radio would play the song , considering Gaga 's popularity . Halperin felt that the track <unk> " a sense of <unk> that listeners don 't always get with Gaga 's RedOne @-@ produced heavily @-@ synthetic sounds . " Conversely , she felt that the addition of live piano and background vocals by Gaga and Lange added " an undeniably lush quality , while the lyrics drives the song home and potentially into hit territory . " Kerri Mason from Billboard felt that the " country ballad " made no contextual sense . Nekesa Mumbi Moody , while reviewing Born This Way for Florida Today , compared the song to " Speechless " , a similar tempo song included on The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . Robert Copsey , a writer for the website Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars calling it a " torchy , retro @-@ classic , all @-@ American power ballad custom @-@ built for the masses – and one we suspect Stefani would be proud to call her own . " Amy Sciarretto of Artistdirect concluded that the song was " a bit bluesier than anything you 'd expect from the dance floor icon . " AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine chose the song as a highlight on Born This Way saying that Gaga shows her vulnerability in it . 
 " You and I " was nominated for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards , which was held on February 12 , 2012 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " You and I " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 36 on the chart dated June 11 , 2011 , after selling 83 @,@ 000 downloads . The song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 96 on the issue dated August 27 , 2011 , while debuting on the Pop Songs chart at number 35 . The next week , the song was the greatest gainer on the digital chart , entering at number 24 by selling 56 @,@ 000 copies , while moving to number 35 on the Hot 100 . It also gained airplay and became the highest debuting song on the Radio Songs chart , entering at number 58 with 22 million audience impressions . Following the performance of the song on the MTV Video Music Awards , " You and I " moved up to number 16 on the Hot 100 , with a 92 % increase in digital sales to 109 @,@ 000 and 50 % increase in airplay to 32 million , according to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems . The following week , it moved to number six on the Hot 100 with a 61 % increase in digital sales to 175 @,@ 000 and a 32 % increase in radio play to 41 million audience impressions , reaching number four and number 23 on the Digital Songs and Radio Songs charts , respectively . " You and I " became Gaga 's eleventh consecutive top ten single on the Hot 100 . In October 2011 it became Gaga 's tenth song to sell 1 million in the U.S. As of April 2015 , " You and I " has sold 2 @,@ 310 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the US becoming Gaga 's tenth two @-@ million seller . In June 2012 " You and I " received a double platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 In Canada , the song entered the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 14 , consequently debuting on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 27 . It entered the charts again at number 45 , and has reached a peak of number 10 . Before the single was officially released , it started selling digital downloads in Australia , and subsequently entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number 56 on August 15 , 2011 . The next week , the song moved up to number 34 , and has reached a peak of number 14 . Following the album 's release on May 23 , 2011 , " You and I " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 89 , due to digital downloads from Born This Way . The song jumped up to number 70 from its previous week 's position of number 187 , on the issue dated September 3 , 2011 , and has reached a peak of number 23 . In Japan , the song had initially entered the digital chart at number 98 , but after the MTV Video Music Awards performance , it entered the Japan Hot 100 at number eight . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The music video for " You and I " was filmed in Springfield , Nebraska in July 2011 and was directed by Lady Gaga 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson . In the video , Gaga walks from New York City to Nebraska to get her boyfriend back . According to Gaga : " I 'm walking with no luggage and no nothing and it 's just me and my ankles are bleeding a little bit and there 's grass stuck in my and I 've got this outfit on and it 's real sort of New York clothing and I 'm sprinting ... And the [ video is about the ] idea that when you 're away from someone you love , it 's torture , " she continued . " I knew I wanted the video to be about me sprinting back and walking hundreds of thousands of miles to get him back . " 
 The music video was announced to be released alongside the 1,000th message posted by Gaga on her Twitter account . Gaga confirmed to MTV News that the video was set to premiere on August 18 , 2011 on MTV . However , two days before the video 's television premiere , parts of the clip leaked on the Internet , prompting Gaga to post three tweets which , together , read " FUCK <unk> DAY " . The messages were immediately followed by her 1,000th Twitter message , " You must love all + every part of me , as must I , for this complex + incomprehensible force to be true , " including a link to the full music video , which was uploaded onto Gaga 's YouTube channel two days earlier than the scheduled premiere . The video features Gaga 's two alter egos : Jo Calderone , Gaga 's male ego , and Yüyi , a mermaid that was hinted to appear in the video in July 2011 . 
 Following the premiere of the video on MTV , Gaga explained some of her inspirations and scenes of the video ; " The video is quite complex in the way that the story is told , and it 's meant to be slightly linear and slightly twisted and confusing , which is the way that love is " , she added . Regarding the sexual intercourse scenes between actor Taylor Kinney and the singer as a mermaid , Gaga explained that metaphorically it emphasized the fact that sometimes relationships did not work . " No matter what you do , there 's this giant boundary between you and someone else . So that 's what it 's about , perceiving in your imagination that there 's something magical inside of you that you can make it work . " After revealing that the wedding dress in the video belonged to her mother , Gaga explained the scenes involving the ice cream truck . According to her , it represented the destruction of her youth , experiences of which she had shared in her earlier interviews . Detailing her decision to include it , Gaga said : 
 That 's how I wanted to open the video , because I think it really sets up the rest of the story . It allows you to imagine you yourself are not just one person ; you 're so many . That person has so many stories and memories to draw from , and they all affect your journey profusely . I 'm battered quite brutally at the beginning of the video , but at the end , I 'm not battered ; I 'm a bit strange . It 's not meant to be an answer video ; it 's meant to be a profuse number of the question . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video begins with Gaga , dressed in black clothing , sunglasses , bloody feet and seemingly bionic features , walking through a field in Nebraska ; having returned on foot after years of absence . Gaga goes to buy ice cream from an ice cream truck , but she suddenly drops it as a toothless man grins at her with a doll in his hand . She begins to then have flashbacks to her time spent in Nebraska as scenes of Gaga having a wedding , being tortured by a man inside a barn and being inside a water tank are shown in quick succession . The song starts playing as the camera slowly zooms towards Gaga , who is standing bent forward as she begins singing . The video continually switches to scenes where Gaga , with little make up , a simple gray @-@ colored hair style and a white dress , plays a piano in the middle of a cornfield , while her male alter ego , Jo Calderone sits on top of the piano , smoking and drinking a beer . As Calderone pulls up his sleeves , present day Gaga is shown still walking through the desert . 
 During the second verse , a mad scientist , portrayed by Kinney seemingly tortures Gaga , who is wearing a yellow dress with glasses made of barbwire , as another version of the singer with teal @-@ colored hair does a dance routine with her backup dancers in a barn . As the chorus begins for the second time , Gaga is portrayed as Yüyi the Mermaid , with gills on her face and neck , as she lies in a tub filled with dirty water . At the end of the chorus , the camera zooms to a brunette Gaga inside a water tank while she sings " You and I " in the desert scene and in the cornfield with Calderone . <unk> scenes again show Gaga having her wedding , Yüyi in her tub , and Gaga seated on a chair with a conveyor belt . During May 's guitar solo , Gaga is seen dancing in the cornfield with other dancers dressed in the same white dress , as Yüyi and the scientist kiss . While singing the chorus for the final time , Gaga kisses Calderone in one sequence and runs across the field in another . As the video reaches its conclusion , the tortured Gaga is seen being slid down as the conveyor belt turns on . The video ends with Yüyi and the scientist together in the bath tub , as a depiction of their dream wedding flash across , before a final shot of the barn as the screen turns black . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Following its premature release on the web , the music video for " You and I " was met with positive reviews . Matthew Perpetua from Rolling Stone felt that the video was an improvement from her previous videos , " Judas " and " The Edge of Glory " , saying , " the best moments of the video put a distinctly Gaga @-@ ish spin on the iconography of Americana and traditional love stories . " Jillian Mapes from Billboard wrote , " torture contraptions , mermaid sex , a wedding , bondage in a barn , an ice cream truck , and to top it all off , ' Children of the Corn ' and religious overtones thrown in for good measure , " and thought of the video as the strangest representation of Nebraska , the video 's setting . Leah Collins from Dose named the video a " great opportunity for the singer to finally find out what it 's like to make out with herself . " Kyle Anderson from Entertainment Weekly made note of the video 's scene in which Gaga plays a piano in a cornfield alongside her male alter ego : " She 's just Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta , playing a piano in the middle of a corn field — with a little making out on the side , of course . " Gil Kaufman from MTV News believed that Gaga was not joking when she talked about the video being about the " torture " of being away from the one you love . " And , man , based on the bruising final product , she wasn 't kidding , " Kaufman concluded . 
 Jocelyn Vena from MTV found influences of Gaga 's past videos , in the various avatars that she plays in the music video . She explained that " when [ Gaga ] stands at a crossroads in a big hat , the image is reminiscent of ' Telephone ' Gaga . When she sits nearly makeup @-@ free at her piano in the cornfields , there are of the teary @-@ eyed makeup @-@ less Gaga from the ' Bad Romance ' video . Flashes of her wedding may remind fans of the wedding dress she wore in the ' Judas ' clip . Robot Gaga 's facial structures recall some of the steampunk looks of her ' Alejandro ' video . Those are only a few of the nods to past personae from her own videography . " Devin Brown from CBS News felt that Gaga had finally returned to form with the video . " After some visually pleasing but generally lackluster videos , she has finally come out with something to write home about . ' You and I ' is arguably the best song on her sophomore release , Born This Way , and now has a video to match . " A writer from Slant Magazine commented that the publication had a mixed reaction to the video , saying that it " is essentially a collection of disconnected images we couldn 't make heads or tails of . " 
 = = = Fashion films = = = 
 On September 1 , 2011 , Gaga announced on her Twitter account that she had shot five " fashion films " related to the music video of the song , with Dutch photographer duo Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin . The characters are : Jo Calderone ( gaga 's alter ego ) , Yuyi ( a mermaid ) , Nymph , Bride , and finally Barn Hooker and Mother . After the tweet , Gaga released the first video , titled " Haus of Ü Featuring Nymph " . The two @-@ minute black @-@ and @-@ white video featured Gaga with minimal make @-@ up and performing ballet choreography , while wearing a short dress . As wind blows around her , the singer looks intently towards the camera , with the parting shot being in color film . The second video featured her as the bride from the opening sequence of the original video . The fashion film portrayed her in the same costume , gradually removing it and her wig . At the end , she becomes topless with her hand covering her breasts . Interspersed between are scenes portraying people dressed like Gaga , and appearances by Taylor Kinney from the music video and the singer 's stylist Nicola Formichetti . The third fashion film portrayed the singer as the mermaid Yüyi . She sits on a director 's chair , flopping her tail . Furthermore , it shows two crew members carrying Yuyi toward the barn , where the original video was filmed . Formichetti also makes a cameo in this video too . In March 2012 , the fourth film featuring Jo Calderone was published to Gaga 's YouTube channel , and in August 2012 , the fifth and final film titled " Haus of Ü feat . Barn Hooker and Mother " was officially published ; The film , also featured Taylor Kinney and people characterized as Gaga . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 After the first performance of " You and I " at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball , Gaga performed the song live on television program Today on July 9 , 2010 , before an estimated crowd of 18 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 people , the largest ever to pack Rockefeller Plaza . It was next performed on the July 31 , 2010 , Phoenix stop of the Monster Ball Tour , where Gaga contested Arizona 's immigration law SB 1070 — which mandates that state police officers " question any person they suspect to be an illegal immigrant and imprison any aliens not carrying one of four allowed forms of proper identification " — and dedicated her performance of " You and I " to a boy whose family was affected by the law . Gaga performed the album version of the track on The Oprah Winfrey Show on May 5 , 2011 , using a piano constructed from a wire high @-@ heel structure while sitting on a high stool . The " less organic " version for the final " Harpo <unk> " episode featured an electric guitar and modified lyrics to include Oprah 's name . 
 The song was included in the setlist of the HBO television special , Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden , which originally aired on May 7 , 2011 , in the United States . Gaga 's performance of " You and I " from the HBO special aired on American Idol , the night after she mentored the four remaining contestants and the week following Haley Reinhart 's performance of the song . A jazz version of " You and I " was performed by her at Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria on May 18 , 2011 . The album version of the song , was the third performance on the Paul O 'Grady Live show in London , on June 17 , 2011 . Wearing a dress by the late Gianni Versace , Gaga was perched atop a New York City inspired fire escape , from where she sang the song . Ryan Love of Digital Spy had a preview of the show 's recording , and said that it was a " real treat " to hear Gaga sing the song . In August 2011 , Gaga performed " You and I " on the American talk show program The View . On August 28 , 2011 , Gaga attended the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards dressed as Jo Calderone . As Calderone , Gaga opened the show with a four @-@ minute monologue , explaining his broken relationship with Gaga . Following the monologue , she performed " You and I " while joined on stage by Brian May . On October 6 , 2011 , she filmed a pre @-@ recorded interview and performance for the single on The Jonathan Ross Show . Later , on October 16 , 2011 she performed the song during a concert at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles for the Clinton Foundation . 
 On the ABC special , A Very Gaga Thanksgiving , the singer performed the song with a " piano @-@ and @-@ trumpet arrangement " . On November 30 , during the CBS special titled The Grammy Nominations Concert Live ! – Countdown to Music 's Biggest Night — where the nominations for the 54th Grammy Awards were revealed — Gaga performed " You and I " along with Jennifer Nettles of the country band Sugarland while Kristian Bush played the guitar . During the performance she changed the lyrics to fit the occasion : " With your high cowboy boots on . Oh Sugarland , it 's been six whole years . " According to James Montgomery of MTV News , she performed a " husky , musky version " of " You and I " . The song was performed on her 2012 Born This Way Ball tour . During the performance Gaga played the piano . Like previous concert tours , the piano was an elaborate prop that tied into the theme of her show . In keeping with the hair metal theme of Born This Way , the piano was fused to a motorcycle . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Prior to the release of Born This Way , season ten American Idol contestant Haley Reinhart sang " You and I " as one of two performances for the " Songs from Now and Then " episode . It was requested by Jimmy Iovine , head of Gaga 's record label and Reinhart received Gaga 's permission prior to the performance . Reviews of Reinhart 's performance were mostly positive . Len <unk> from The Star @-@ Ledger considered the selection to be risky , since the song had not been released , but accepted that Reinhart " sounded amazing " by hitting " some really high notes " . Brian Mansfield from USA Today described Reinhart 's performance as an " old @-@ fashioned dance @-@ hall groove , kind of like a mid- ' 70s Elton John number . It 's perfectly suited to that slippery growl that such a distinctive component of Haley 's style . By the end of the song , she turns it into a gospel @-@ style rocker , and she takes it to the house . " Mansfield also noted that the American Idol judges — Randy Jackson , Jennifer Lopez and Steven Tyler — reacted positively to it . On the contrary , Jim Farber from New York Daily News considered the choice as risky and was thankful when Reinhart performed a more familiar song for her second round . On May 5 , 2011 , Reinhart 's studio recording of " You and I " was released as a digital single to the iTunes Store , and also appeared on the compilation album American Idol Top 5 Season 10 . Mansfield , who had initial misgivings about Reinhart as a singer , complimented her studio recording of the track , feeling that if Reinhart could " get another 10 songs this good when it comes time to cut the record , then all my initial misgivings about this girl will vanish into thin air . " 
 British singer Amelia Lily covered the song in November 2011 during her time on UK talent show The X Factor . In November 15 , 2011 , comedy @-@ drama musical TV series Glee featured a mash @-@ up of Gaga 's " You and I " and Eddie Rabbitt and Crystal Gayle 's " You and I " in episode " Mash Off " , performed by Matthew Morrison and Idina Menzel ( respectively as their characters Will Schuester and Shelby Corcoran ) . The mash @-@ up sold 23 @,@ 000 digital downloads , and debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 69 , on the issue dated December 3 , 2011 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and management 
 Recorded at Warehouse Productions ( Omaha , Nebraska ) and <unk> Hill ( United Kingdom ) 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California ) 
 Contains elements of the composition " We Will Rock You " , written by Brian May and sung by band Queen 
 Published by Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga , Sony / ATV Songs LLC , House of Gaga Publishing Inc . , GloJoe Music Inc. and Sony / ATV Music Publishing 
 All rights on behalf of itself and Interscope Records , a division of UMG Recordings , Inc . 
 Brian May appears courtesy of Hollywood Records ( for US and Canada distribution ) and Universal International ( for worldwide distribution ) 
 Personnel 
 Lady Gaga – lead vocals , songwriter , producer , background vocals , piano and keyboards 
 Robert John " Mutt " Lange – producer , background vocals , audio mixing 
 Tom Ware and Horace Ward – recording 
 Olle Romo – programming , recording 
 Brian May – guitar 
 Justin Shirley Smith – guitar recording 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering 
 Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rocks and Honey = 
 Rocks and Honey is the sixteenth studio album by Welsh singer Bonnie Tyler , first released by ZYX Music on March 8 , 2013 . Eight years since Wings was released in 2005 , this was the longest gap between album releases in Tyler 's career , and is the first of her studio albums to chart in the United Kingdom since 1988 . With tracks written by Nashville @-@ based songwriters such as Frank J. Myers , Desmond Child , Brett James and Beth Hart , the album consists of a number of country songs reminiscent to Tyler 's country albums from the 1970s with elements of rock . 
 The album received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised Tyler 's vocals as well as the album 's consistency . Rocks and Honey charted in Europe , reaching number 28 in Denmark , number 52 in the UK and number 59 in Germany and Switzerland . Tyler embarked on her South Africa Tour 2013 following the Eurovision Song Contest . The single " Believe in Me " represented the United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 in Malmö , Sweden on 18 May 2013 , and has charted in the UK Singles Chart at number 93 . The album was named in reference to the contrast between the voices of Tyler and duet partner Vince Gill on the track " What You Need From Me " . The follow @-@ up singles , " This Is Gonna Hurt " and " Love Is the Knife " , were released in August and September 2013 respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 Plans for the release of Rocks and Honey date back to as early as 2008 , where an interview with Tyler was published in a Turkish newspaper precessing a concert in Northern Cyprus . She announced that she would be working with Jim Steinman for her new album and was aiming for a release in summer 2009 . Due to health reasons , Steinman did not end up working on the album . Then in September 2008 , Tyler was interviewed on an internet radio show called The Bat Segundo Show , where she stated that she had recorded demos for several tracks and had approached Bryan Adams to do a duet for the album , but he said that it was " not the right time " . 
 During a 2010 interview in New Zealand when preparing to perform at a charity concert , Tyler stated that she had recorded six tracks for the album , expecting a release at some point in 2011 . In years leading up to the album 's release , Tyler has performed new songs such as " You Are The One " , " Don 't Tell Me It 's Over Now " , " It 's My Name " , and " Is That Thing Loaded ? " . However , none of these songs were added to the album , despite Tyler announcing during various concerts that they had been recorded , or were due to be recorded for it . " Under One Sky " was also due to be released on the new album , but was instead released on Tyler 's 2011 compilation album , Best of 3 CD . During an interview while promoting the album in the UK , she said that it was a possibility that " Is That Thing Loaded ? " may be included on a future album . 
 On 22 February 2012 , Desmond Child announced on his Twitter account that Tyler had been recording some of his songs in Nashville with David Huff as producer . An update about news of the new album was posted on Tyler 's old website on 13 February 2012 , where it was announced that Tyler had been recording in Nashville . News of a demo recording of " What You Need From Me " was added on 16 April 2012 , where it also said that she had visited Los Angeles to help with the mixing of some tracks . Tyler made the title of the album public during an interview in Norway in July later that year . 
 Between the release of Rocks and Honey and Wings in 2005 , Tyler had released a number of compilations including Best Of 3 CD with Stick Music , her previous record company . ZYX Music , the first record company to release Rocks and Honey , first signed Tyler in 2011 and released Live in Germany 1993 , a CD and DVD . 
 = = = Album title = = = 
 " What You Need From Me " was written by Jon Randall and Jessi Alexander and a demo was played to Tyler when visiting a publishing company in Nashville in 2011 . After hearing the song she approached Vince Gill to record the track as a duet . After recording the song , Tyler stated that someone compared her and Gill 's voices to a combination of rocks and honey , which led Tyler to name the album " Rocks and Honey " . American singer @-@ songwriters Melissa <unk> and Bill <unk> wrote a song with the same title for Tyler , though she had already finalised the naming of the album and turned down the song . 
 = = Development = = 
 The majority of songs were recorded in various studios in Tennessee between February and May 2012 . Tyler has already stated that she has enough remaining material from Nashville @-@ based publishers for a seventeenth studio album . 
 Two songs were written by Desmond Child . This was the first time Tyler had worked with Child since 1988 , on her Hide Your Heart album . All thirteen tracks were newly recorded by Tyler , with the inclusion of two covers ; " Flat on the Floor " was originally recorded by Carrie Underwood on her 2007 album Carnival Ride , and " All I Ever Wanted " was first recorded by Beau Davidson in 2010 . 
 While Tyler and her manager were living in Nashville , they visited the Bluebird Cafe on a songwriters ' evening where she first discovered some tracks that would be included on Rocks and Honey . 
 " You have to cue up to get in there , it was like a tiny little house , and all these songwriters sit around a table with their guitars and they all sing their original material . This is where I heard one of the songwriters on the album - I do a song on there called " Mom " , it 's all about a baby talking to God before it 's born . - I heard this singer there , and he was just amazing . There 's so much talent there , it 's just fabulous . I want to do another album there before the end of my career . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Tyler first announced the title of the album on BBC Radio Wales in August 2012 . On the same show , " What You Need From Me " became the first track of the album to be played on radio internationally . The second track to be made public was " All I Ever Wanted " , which Tyler performed live in Germany for a New Year 's Eve show , and again in February , though the middle eight was cut . 
 Rocks and Honey was due to be released in October 2012 , though after Tyler was asked to participate in the Eurovision Song Contest , the release was postponed for five months . The album was first made available for sale on the French Amazon store in February 2013 . A promotional album artwork was later added before the official artwork was made public . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Believe in Me " was announced to be the UK 's Eurovision Song Contest entry on 7 March , and was released in the UK as a download single on 13 March and on a maxi CD on 15 March in Europe . The song was well received by BBC Radio 2 , who A @-@ listed the single on their music playlist . On March 28 , 2013 , they also listed the single as " record of the week " . In an interview with Female First Magazine in April 2013 , Tyler announced that it was likely that the track " Sunshine " will be a second single for the album . However it was later announced that " This Is Gonna Hurt " would be the second single , and was released in August 2013 . On 16 September it was announced via Bonnie 's unofficial fan page that " Love Is the Knife " would be the third single , and would be performed on the Danish TV show , Charlies <unk> broadcast on Danish TV2 , along with another one of her hit singles . 
 Although Tyler herself did not release the song , " Mom " was later released as a single by Garth Brooks on his 2014 album Man Against Machine . 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 Tyler has expressed her wishes to tour with the new album in the UK and France . While promoting the album in France , she met with a tour company on 1 June 2013 to discuss a tour of France . In August 2013 , Tyler began her South Africa Tour 2013 , in which she performed at five concerts in three different South African cities . 
 = = = Bonnie Tyler in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 = = = 
 On 28 April , Tyler underwent several interviews with media organisations including Digital Spy , The Sun , and the Daily Mail . At mid @-@ day , Tyler was interviewed and then performed an acoustic version of the song on BBC Radio 2 's Weekend Wogan with her Eurovision group . 
 For further promotion , Tyler was a guest on The One Show on March 19 , 2013 , and was interviewed on several British radio stations leading up to the Grand Final . On 19 May , a day after the Eurovision Song Contest , the Official Charts Company announced that Tyler 's song charted highest of all Eurovision entries in the UK . 
 After the contest finished , the BBC published the reaction of several journalists and singers towards Tyler finishing 19th . Irish entrant and three @-@ time winner of Eurovision Johnny Logan complimented Tyler , but argued that the song wasn 't strong enough . He continued , " If you 're going to win Eurovision , to go through some of the incredible voting I 've noticed over the last few years , you have to have something that 's going to stand out above everything else . Otherwise you 're just going to hope to pick up 10 or 11 votes . " Similarly , Nathan Moore agreed that the song was not strong enough , but said " It was a great idea to get Bonnie involved , there 's a lot of love for Bonnie out there . " Mick Dalley ( of Yahoo ! News ) agreed that " although Tyler herself was on form , singing beautifully and rousing the crowd with her <unk> finale , " Believe in Me " was simply not good enough as a song " . 1997 UK winner Katrina <unk> ( of Katrina and the Waves ) stated that she was underwhelmed by Denmark 's entry , and expected Tyler to have scored higher than she did . British journalist Dave Goodman acknowledged that Tyler 's entry was an improvement on the previous year , though argued that it was a combination of a poor position in the running order and the song that kept the UK from scoring higher . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rocks and Honey has received mixed reviews from critics since its release . Dirk <unk> of Country Rock Magazine published a favourable review of the album , crediting David Huff and Matt Davis for the album production and called " What You Need From Me " a " fantastic track . " Norbert <unk> of G + J Entertainment Media highlighted the tracks " Sunshine " as a " pleasantly catchy " song , and " What You Need From Me " as " sensational . " He described the whole album as " outstanding . " Jeremy Williams of The Yorkshire Times gave the album a 5 / 5 rating . He asks , " has the gritty vocal of Bonnie Tyler still got what it takes to make you tingle ? The simple answer is YES , " and marks the album as an " impressive return to her country roots " . He also questions that the track " Little Superstar " was not chosen for the UK 's Eurovision song over " Believe in Me " . Similarly , Music @-@ News ' Andy <unk> suggested that the track " Mom " would have been better suited as the Eurovision song , though describes Rocks and Honey as " a fine album . " 
 The album received a mixed review from Adam Carroll from Seen It Heard It . He says that " This is Gonna Hurt " provides a solid start to the album , with " Sunshine " being his favourite song , and though not keen on ballads , describes " Believe in Me " as a fantastic song . However , he considers " What You Need From Me " to be one of the weakest tracks on the album , describing Tyler 's voice as " rough and beaten " and that her and Vince Gill 's voices do not go together well . Despite this , he still describes the album as solid , and ends with " Bonnie Tyler proves that she is still one of the greatest vocalists out there . " Virgin Media 's Ian Gittins gave the album 3 stars . He stated that the album has nothing new to offer , and could have been recorded any time between 1978 and the present day . The most critical of the album has been Thomas Ingham from OMH Media , who gave the album 2 and a half stars , described the album 's format as " simple – loud , quiet , loud , quiet " and is compiled of a mixture of " cheesy ballads " and " country pop @-@ rock " songs , describing " Flat On The Floor " as " clichéd , but worryingly catchy . " He ended with predicting that Tyler will not be able to take the UK out of its poor Eurovision results trend . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic : 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Walls of Constantinople = 
 The Walls of Constantinople are a series of defensive stone walls that have surrounded and protected the city of Constantinople ( today Istanbul in Turkey ) since its founding as the new capital of the Roman Empire by Constantine the Great . With numerous additions and modifications during their history , they were the last great fortification system of antiquity , and one of the most complex and elaborate systems ever built . 
 Initially built by Constantine the Great , the walls surrounded the new city on all sides , protecting it against attack from both sea and land . As the city grew , the famous double line of the Theodosian Walls was built in the 5th century . Although the other sections of the walls were less elaborate , when well @-@ manned , they were almost impregnable for any medieval besieger , saving the city , and the Byzantine Empire with it , during sieges from the Avars , Arabs , Rus ' , and Bulgars , among others ( see Sieges of Constantinople ) . The advent of gunpowder siege cannons rendered the fortifications vulnerable , but cannon technology was not sufficiently advanced to capture the city on its own , and the walls could be repaired between reloading . Ultimately the city fell from sheer weight of numbers of the Ottoman forces on 29 May 1453 after a six @-@ week siege . 
 The walls were largely maintained intact during most of the Ottoman period , until sections began to be dismantled in the 19th century , as the city outgrew its medieval boundaries . Despite the subsequent lack of maintenance , many parts of the walls survived and are still standing today . A large @-@ scale restoration program has been under way since the 1980s . 
 = = Land Walls = = 
 = = = Walls of Greek and Roman Byzantium = = = 
 According to tradition , the city was founded as Byzantium by Greek colonists from Megara , led by the eponymous Byzas , around 658 BC . At the time the city consisted of a small region around an acropolis , located on the easternmost hill ( corresponding to the modern site of the Topkapı Palace ) . According to the late Byzantine Patria of Constantinople , ancient Byzantium was enclosed by a small wall , which began on the northern edge of the acropolis , extended west to the Tower of Eugenios , then went south and west towards the <unk> and the Baths of Achilles , continued south to the area known in Byzantine times as <unk> , and then turned , in the area of the Hagia Sophia , in a loop towards the northeast , crossed the regions known as <unk> and <unk> and reached the sea at the later quarter of Mangana . This wall was protected by 27 towers , and had at least two landward gates , one which survived to become known as the Arch of Urbicius , and one where the Milion monument was later located . On the seaward side , the wall was much lower . Although the author of the Patria asserts that this wall dated to the time of Byzas , the French researcher Raymond Janin thinks it more likely that it reflects the situation after the city was rebuilt by the Spartan general Pausanias , who conquered the city in 479 BC . This wall is known to have been repaired , utilising tomb stones , under the leadership of a certain Leo in 340 BC , against an attack by Philip II of Macedon . 
 Byzantium was relatively unimportant during the early Roman period . Contemporaries described it as wealthy , well peopled and well fortified , but this affluence came to an end due to its support for Pescennius Niger ( r . 193 – 194 ) in his war against Septimius Severus ( r . 193 – 211 ) . According to the account of Cassius Dio ( Roman History , 75 @.@ 10 @-@ 14 ) , the city held out against Severan forces for three years , until 196 , with its inhabitants resorting even to throwing bronze statues to the besiegers when they ran out of other projectiles . Severus punished the city harshly : the strong walls were demolished and the city was deprived of its civic status , being reduced to a mere village dependent on Heraclea Perinthus . However , appreciating the city 's strategic importance , Severus eventually rebuilt it and endowed it with many monuments , including a Hippodrome and the Baths of Zeuxippus , as well as a new set of walls , located some 300 – 400 m to the west of the old ones . Little is known of the Severan Wall save for a short description of its course by Zosimus ( New History , <unk> @-@ 4 ) and that its main gate was located at the end of a porticoed avenue ( the first part of the later Mese ) and shortly before the entrance of the later Forum of Constantine . The wall seems to have extended from near the modern Galata Bridge in the <unk> quarter south through the vicinity of the <unk> Mosque to curve around the southern wall of the Hippodrome , and then going northeast to meet the old walls near the Bosporus . The Patria also mention the existence of another wall during the siege of Byzantium by Constantine the Great ( r . 306 – 337 ) during the latter 's conflict with Licinius ( r . 308 – 324 ) , in 324 . The text mentions that a fore @-@ wall ( <unk> ) was running near the <unk> , located at about the middle of the later , Constantinian city , suggesting the expansion of the city beyond the Severan Wall by this time . 
 = = = Wall of Constantine = = = 
 Like Severus before him , Constantine began to punish the city for siding with his defeated rival , but soon he too realized the advantages of Byzantium 's location . During 324 – 336 the city was thoroughly rebuilt and inaugurated on 11 May 330 under the name of " Second Rome " . The name that eventually prevailed in common usage however was Constantinople , the " City of Constantine " ( Gk . <unk> , <unk> ) . The city of Constantine was protected by a new wall about 2 @.@ 8 km ( 15 stadia ) west of the Severan wall . Constantine 's fortification consisted of a single wall , reinforced with towers at regular distances , which began to be constructed in 324 and was completed under his son Constantius II ( r . 337 – 361 ) . Only the approximate course of the wall is known : it began at the Church of St. Anthony at the Golden Horn , near the modern Atatürk Bridge , ran southwest and then southwards , passed east of the great open cisterns of <unk> and of Aspar , and ended near the Church of the Theotokos of the Rhabdos on the Propontis coast , somewhere between the later sea gates of St. Aemilianus and <unk> . 
 Already by the early 5th century however , Constantinople had expanded outside the Constantinian Wall , in the extramural area known as the <unk> or <unk> . The wall survived during much of the Byzantine period , even though it was replaced by the Theodosian Walls as the city 's primary defence . An ambiguous passage refers to extensive damage to the city 's " inner wall " from an earthquake on 25 September 478 , which likely refers to the Constantinian wall , and Theophanes the Confessor reports renewed earthquake damage in 557 . It appears that large parts survived relatively intact until the 9th century : the 11th @-@ century historian Kedrenos records that the " wall at <unk> " , likely a portion of the Constantinian wall , collapsed in an earthquake in 867 . Only traces of the wall appear to have survived in later ages , although Van Millingen states that some parts survived in the region of the İsakapı until the early 19th century . The recent construction of <unk> Transfer Center has unearthed a section of the foundation of the wall of Constantine . 
 = = = = Gates = = = = 
 The names of a number of gates of the Constantinian Wall survive , but scholars debate their identity and exact location . 
 The Old Golden Gate ( Latin : Porta Aurea , Ancient Greek : <unk> Πύλη ) , known also as the <unk> Gate and the Gate of Saturninus , is mentioned in the Notitia Urbis Constantinopolitanae , which further states that the city wall itself in the region around it was " ornately decorated " . The gate stood somewhere on the southern slopes of the Seventh Hill . Its construction is often attributed to Constantine , but is in fact of uncertain age . It survived until the 14th century , when the Byzantine scholar Manuel <unk> described it as being built of " wide marble blocks with a lofty opening " , and crowned by a kind of stoa . In late Byzantine times , a painting of the Crucifixion was allegedly placed on the gate , leading to its later Ottoman name , İsakapı ( " Gate of Jesus " ) . It was destroyed by an earthquake in 1509 , but its approximate location is known through the presence of the nearby İsakapı <unk> mosque . 
 The identity and location of the Gate of At [ t ] <unk> ( Πόρτα <unk> [ τ ] <unk> , Porta At [ t ] <unk> ) are unclear . Cyril Mango identifies it with the Old Golden Gate ; van Millingen places it on the Seventh Hill , at a height probably corresponding to one of the later gates of the Theodosian Wall in that area ; and Raymond Janin places it further north , across the Lycus and near the point where the river passed under the wall . In earlier centuries , it was decorated with many statues , including one of Constantine , which fell down in an earthquake in 740 . 
 The only gate whose location is known with certainty , aside from the Old Golden Gate , is the Gate of Saint Aemilianus ( Πόρτα τοῦ ἀγίου <unk> , Porta tou hagiou <unk> ) , named in Turkish <unk> Kapısı . It lay at the juncture with the sea walls , and served the communication with the coast . According to the Chronicon Paschale , the Church of St Mary of Rhabdos , where the rod of Moses was kept , stood next to the gate . 
 The Old Gate of the Prodromos ( <unk> Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> , <unk> Porta tou Prodromou ) , named after the nearby Church of St John the Baptist ( called Prodromos , " the Forerunner " , in Greek ) , is another unclear case . Van Millingen identifies it with the Old Golden Gate , while Janin considers it to have been located on the northern slope of the Seventh Hill . 
 The last known gate is the Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα τῆς <unk> , Porta tēs <unk> ) , whose location is also debated . Van Millingen considered it to be a gate of the Theodosian Wall ( the <unk> Gate ) , while more recently , Janin and Mango have refuted this , suggesting that it was located on the Constantinian Wall . Again however , while Mango identifies it with the Gate of the Prodromos , Janin considers the name to have been a corruption of the ta <unk> quarter , and places the gate to the west of the <unk> cistern . Other authors identified it with the Gate of Adrianople ( A. M. Schneider ) or with the Gate of <unk> ( A. J. <unk> ) . 
 = = = Theodosian Walls = = = 
 The double Theodosian Walls ( Greek : τείχος <unk> , teichos <unk> ) , located about 2 km to the west of the old Constantinian Wall , were erected during the reign of Emperor Theodosius II ( r . 408 – 450 ) , after whom they were named . The work was carried out in two phases , with the first phase erected during Theodosius ' minority under the direction of Anthemius , the praetorian prefect of the East , and was finished in 413 according to a law in the Codex Theodosianus . An inscription discovered in 1993 however records that the work lasted for nine years , indicating that construction had already begun ca . 404 / 405 , in the reign of Emperor Arcadius ( r . 395 – 408 ) . This initial construction consisted of a single curtain wall with towers , which now forms the inner circuit of the Theodosian Walls . 
 Both the Constantinian and the original Theodosian walls were severely damaged , however , in two earthquakes , on 25 September 437 and on 6 November 447 . The latter was especially powerful , and destroyed large parts of the wall , including 57 towers . Subsequent earthquakes , including another major one in January 448 , compounded the damage . Theodosius II ordered the praetorian prefect Constantine to supervise the repairs , made all the more urgent as the city was threatened by the presence of Attila the Hun in the Balkans . Employing the city 's " Circus factions " in the work , the walls were restored in a record 60 days , according to the Byzantine chroniclers and three inscriptions found in situ . It is at this date that the majority of scholars believe the second , outer wall to have been added , as well as a wide moat opened in front of the walls , but the validity of this interpretation is questionable ; the outer wall was possibly an integral part of the original fortification concept . 
 Throughout their history , the walls were damaged by earthquakes and floods of the Lycus river . Repairs were undertaken on numerous occasions , as testified by the numerous inscriptions commemorating the emperors or their servants who undertook to restore them . The responsibility for these repairs rested on an official variously known as the Domestic of the Walls or the Count of the Walls ( <unk> / <unk> τῶν <unk> , <unk> / <unk> tōn <unk> ) , who employed the services of the city 's populace in this task . After the Latin conquest of 1204 , the walls fell increasingly into disrepair , and the revived post @-@ 1261 Byzantine state lacked the resources to maintain them , except in times of direct threat . 
 = = = = Course and topography = = = = 
 In their present state , the Theodosian Walls stretch for about 5 @.@ 7 km from south to north , from the " Marble Tower " ( Turkish : <unk> Kule ) , also known as the " Tower of Basil and Constantine " ( Gk . Pyrgos <unk> kai <unk> ) on the Propontis coast to the area of the Palace of the Porphyrogenitus ( Tr . <unk> <unk> ) in the Blachernae quarter . The outer wall and the moat terminate even earlier , at the height of the Gate of Adrianople . The section between the Blachernae and the Golden Horn does not survive , since the line of the walls was later brought forward to cover the suburb of Blachernae , and its original course is impossible to ascertain as it lies buried beneath the modern city . 
 From the Sea of Marmara , the wall turns sharply to the northeast , until it reaches the Golden Gate , at about 14 m above sea level . From there and until the Gate of Rhegion the wall follows a more or less straight line to the north , climbing the city 's Seventh Hill . From there the wall turns sharply to the northeast , climbing up to the Gate of St. Romanus , located near the peak of the Seventh Hill at some 68 m above sea level . From there the wall descends into the valley of the river Lycus , where it reaches its lowest point at 35 m above sea level . Climbing the slope of the Sixth Hill , the wall then rises up to the Gate of Charisius or Gate of Adrianople , at some 76 m height . From the Gate of Adrianople to the Blachernae , the walls fall to a level of some 60 m . From there the later walls of Blachernae project sharply to the west , reaching the coastal plain at the Golden Horn near the so @-@ called Prisons of Anemas . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 The Theodosian Walls consist of the main inner wall ( <unk> τείχος , mega teichos , " great wall " ) , separated from the lower outer wall ( <unk> τείχος , <unk> teichos or <unk> τείχος , <unk> teichos , " small wall " ) by a terrace , the peribolos ( <unk> ) . Between the outer wall and the moat ( <unk> , <unk> ) there stretched an outer terrace , the <unk> ( τὸ <unk> <unk> ) , while a low breastwork crowned the moat 's eastern escarpment . Access to both terraces was possible through posterns on the sides of the walls ' towers . 
 The inner wall is a solid structure , 4 @.@ 5 – 6 m thick and 12 m high . It is faced with carefully cut limestone blocks , while its core is filled with mortar made of lime and crushed bricks . Between seven and eleven bands of brick , approximately 40 cm thick , traverse the structure , not only as a form of decoration , but also strengthening the cohesion of the structure by bonding the stone façade with the mortar core , and increasing endurance to earthquakes . The wall was strengthened with 96 towers , mainly square but also a few octagonal ones , three hexagonal and a single pentagonal one . They were 15 – 20 m tall and 10 – 12 m wide , and placed at irregular distances , according to the rise of the terrain : the intervals vary between 21 and 77 m , although most curtain wall sections measure between 40 and 60 meters . Each tower had a battlemented terrace on the top . Its interior was usually divided by a floor into two chambers , which did not communicate with each other . The lower chamber , which opened through the main wall to the city , was used for storage , while the upper one could be entered from the wall 's walkway , and had windows for view and for firing projectiles . Access to the wall was provided by large ramps along their side . The lower floor could also be accessed from the peribolos by small posterns . Generally speaking , most of the surviving towers of the main wall have been rebuilt either in Byzantine or in Ottoman times , and only the foundations of some are of original Theodosian construction . Furthermore , while until the Komnenian period the reconstructions largely remained true to the original model , later modifications ignored the windows and embrasures on the upper store and focused on the tower terrace as the sole fighting platform . 
 The outer wall was 2 m thick at its base , and featured arched chambers on the level of the peribolos , crowned with a battlemented walkway , reaching a height of 8 @.@ 5 – 9 m . Access to the outer wall from the city was provided either through the main gates or through small posterns on the base of the inner wall 's towers . The outer wall likewise had towers , situated approximately midway between the inner wall 's towers , and acting in supporting role to them . They are spaced at 48 – 78 m , with an average distance of 50 – 66 m . Only 62 of the outer wall 's towers survive . With few exceptions , they are square or crescent @-@ shaped , 12 – 14 m tall and 4 m wide . They featured a room with windows on the level of the peribolos , crowned by a battlemented terrace , while their lower portions were either solid or featured small posterns , which allowed access to the outer terrace . The outer wall was a formidable defensive edifice in its own right : in the sieges of 1422 and 1453 , the Byzantines and their allies , being too few to hold both lines of wall , concentrated on the defence of the outer wall . 
 The moat was situated at a distance of about 20 m from the outer wall . The moat itself was over 20 m wide and as much as 10 m deep , featuring a 1 @.@ 5 m tall crenellated wall on the inner side , serving as a first line of defence . Transverse walls cross the moat , tapering towards the top so as not to be used as bridges . Some of them have been shown to contain pipes carrying water into the city from the hill country to the city 's north and west . Their role has therefore been interpreted as that of aqueducts for filling the moat and as dams dividing it into compartments and allowing the water to be retained over the course of the walls . According to Alexander van Millingen , however , there is little direct evidence in the accounts of the city 's sieges to suggest that the moat was ever actually flooded . In the sections north of the Gate of St. Romanus , the steepness of the slopes of the Lycus valley made the construction maintenance of the moat problematic ; it is probable therefore that the moat ended at the Gate of St. Romanus , and did not resume until after the Gate of Adrianople . 
 The weakest section of the wall was the so @-@ called <unk> ( <unk> , " Middle Wall " ) . Modern scholars are not in agreement over the extent of this portion of the wall , which has been variously defined from as narrowly as the stretch between the Gate of St. Romanus and the Fifth Military Gate ( A.M. Schneider ) to as broad as from the Gate of Rhegion to the Fifth Military Gate ( B. <unk> ) or from the Gate of St. Romanus to the Gate of Adrianople ( A. van Millingen ) . 
 = = = = Gates = = = = 
 The wall contained nine main gates , which pierced both the inner and the outer walls , and a number of smaller posterns . The exact identification of several gates is debatable for a number of reasons . The Byzantine chroniclers provide more names than the number of the gates , the original Greek names fell mostly out of use during the Ottoman period , and literary and archaeological sources provide often contradictory information . Only three gates , the Golden Gate , the Gate of Rhegion and the Gate of Charisius , can be established directly from the literary evidence . 
 In the traditional nomenclature , established by Philipp Anton Dethier in 1873 , the gates are distinguished into the " Public Gates " and the " Military Gates " , which alternated over the course of the walls . According to Dethier 's theory , the former were given names and were open to civilian traffic , leading across the moat on bridges , while the latter were known by numbers , restricted to military use , and only led to the outer sections of the walls . Today however , this division is , if at all , retained only as a historiographical convention . First , there is sufficient reason to believe that several of the " Military Gates " were also used by civilian traffic . In addition , a number of them have proper names , and the established sequence of numbering them , based on their perceived correspondence with the names of certain city quarters lying between the Constantinian and Theodosian walls which have numerical origins , has been shown to be erroneous : for instance , the Deuteron , the " Second " quarter , was not located in the southwest behind the Gate of the Deuteron or " Second Military Gate " as would be expected , but in the northwestern part of the city . 
 = = = = = First Military Gate = = = = = 
 The gate is a small postern , which lies at the first tower of the land walls , at the junction with the sea wall . It features a wreathed Chi @-@ <unk> <unk> above it . It was known in late Ottoman times as the Tabak Kapı . 
 = = = = = Golden Gate = = = = = 
 Following the walls from south to north , the Golden Gate ( Greek : <unk> Πύλη , <unk> Pylē ; Latin : Porta Aurea ; Turkish : <unk> or <unk> ) , is the first gate to be encountered . It was the main ceremonial entrance into the capital , used especially for the occasions of a triumphal entry of an emperor into the capital on the occasion of military victories or other state occasions such as coronations . On rare occasions , as a mark of honor , the entry through the gate was allowed to non @-@ imperial visitors : papal legates ( in 519 and 868 ) and , in 710 , to Pope Constantine . The Gate was used for triumphal entries until the Komnenian period ; thereafter , the only such occasion was the entry of Michael VIII Palaiologos into the city on 15 August 1261 , after its reconquest from the Latins . With the progressive decline in Byzantium 's military fortunes , the gates were walled up and reduced in size in the later Palaiologan period , and the complex converted into a citadel and refuge . The Golden Gate was emulated elsewhere , with several cities naming their principal entrance thus , for instance Thessaloniki ( also known as the Vardar Gate ) or Antioch ( the Gate of Daphne ) , as well as the Kievan Rus ' , who built monumental " Golden Gates " at Kiev and Vladimir . The entrance to San Francisco Bay in California was similarly named the Golden Gate in the middle of the nineteenth century , in a distant historical tribute to Byzantium . 
 The date of the gate 's construction is uncertain , with scholars divided between Theodosius I and Theodosius II . Earlier scholars favored the former , but the current majority view tends to the latter , meaning that the gate was constructed as an integral part of the Theodosian Walls . The debate has been carried over to a Latin inscription in metal letters , now lost , which stood above the doors and commemorated their gilding in celebration of the defeat of an unnamed usurper : 
 <unk> loca <unk> <unk> post fata <unk> . 
 aurea <unk> <unk> qui <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 ( English translation ) 
 Theodosius adorned these places after the downfall of the tyrant . 
 He brought a golden age who built the gate from gold . 
 Curiously , the legend has not been reported by any Byzantine author . However , an investigation of the surviving holes wherein the metal letters were riveted verified its accuracy . It also showed that the first line stood on the western face of the arch , while the second on the eastern . According to the current view , this refers to the usurper Joannes ( r . 423 – 425 ) , while according to the supporters of the traditional view , it indicates the gate 's construction as a free @-@ standing triumphal arch in 388 – 391 to commemorate the defeat of the usurper Magnus Maximus ( r . 385 – 388 ) , and which was only later incorporated into the Theodosian Walls . 
 The gate , built of large square blocks of polished white marble fitted together without cement , has the form of a triumphal arch with three arched gates , the middle one larger than the two others . The gate is flanked by large square towers , which form the 9th and 10th towers of the inner Theodosian wall . With the exception of the central portal , the gate remained open to everyday traffic . The structure was richly decorated with numerous statues , including a statue of Theodosius I on an elephant @-@ drawn quadriga on top , echoing the Porta <unk> of Rome , which survived until it fell down in an earthquake in 740 . Other sculptures were a large cross , which fell in an earthquake in 561 or 562 ; a Victory , which was cast down in the reign of Michael III ; and a crowned Fortune of the City . In 965 , Nikephoros II Phokas installed the captured bronze city gates of Mopsuestia in the place of the original ones . 
 The main gate itself was covered by an outer wall , pierced by a single gate , which in later centuries was flanked by an ensemble of reused marble reliefs . According to descriptions of Pierre Gilles and English travelers from the 17th century , these reliefs were arranged in two tiers , and featured mythological scenes , including the Labours of Hercules . These reliefs , lost since the 17th century with the exception of some fragments now in the Istanbul Archaeological Museum , were probably put in place in the 9th or 10th centuries to form the appearance of a triumphal gate . According to other descriptions , the outer gate was also topped by a statue of Victory , holding a crown . 
 Despite its ceremonial role , the Golden Gate was one of the stronger positions along the walls of the city , withstanding several attacks during the various sieges . With the addition of transverse walls on the peribolos between the inner and outer walls , it formed a virtually separate fortress . Its military value was recognized by John VI Kantakouzenos ( r . 1347 – 1354 ) , who records that it was virtually impregnable , capable of holding provisions for three years and defying the whole city if need be . He repaired the marble towers and garrisoned the fort with loyal Catalan soldiers , but had to surrender it to John V Palaiologos ( r . 1341 – 1391 ) when he abdicated in 1354 . John V undid Kantakouzenos ' repairs and left it unguarded , but in 1389 – 90 he too rebuilt and expanded the fortress , erecting two towers behind the gate and extending a wall some 350 m to the sea walls , thus forming a separate fortified enceinte inside the city to serve as a final refuge . In the event , John V was soon after forced to flee there from a coup led by his grandson , John VII . The fort held out successfully in the subsequent siege that lasted several months , and in which cannons were possibly employed . In 1391 however , John V was compelled to raze the fort by Sultan Bayezid I ( r . 1382 – 1402 ) , who otherwise threatened to blind his son Manuel , whom he held captive . Emperor John VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1425 – 1448 ) attempted to rebuild it in 1434 , but was thwarted by Sultan Murad II . 
 According to one of the many Greek legends about the Constantinople 's fall to the Ottomans , when the Turks entered the city , an angel rescued the emperor Constantine XI Palaiologos , turned him into marble and placed him in a cave under the earth near the Golden Gate , where he waits to be brought to life again to conquer the city back for Christians . The legend explained the later walling up of the gate as a Turkish precaution against this prophecy . 
 = = = = = Yedikule Fortress = = = = = 
 After his conquest of Constantinople in 1453 , Sultan Mehmed II built a new fort in 1458 . By adding three larger towers to the four pre @-@ existing ones ( towers 8 to 11 ) on the inner Theodosian wall , he formed the Fortress of the Seven Towers ( Turkish : Yedikule <unk> or <unk> ) . It lost its function as a gate , and for much of the Ottoman era , it was used as a treasury , archive , and state prison . It eventually became a museum in 1895 . 
 = = = = = Xylokerkos Gate = = = = = 
 The Xylokerkos or <unk> Gate ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> / <unk> ) , now known as the Belgrade Gate ( <unk> Kapısı ) , lies between towers 22 and 23 . Alexander van Millingen identified it with the Second Military Gate , which however is located further north . Its name derives from the fact that it led to a wooden circus ( amphitheatre ) outside the walls . The gate complex is approximately 12 m wide and almost 20 m high , while the gate itself spans 5 m . 
 According to a story related by Niketas Choniates , in 1189 the gate was walled off by Emperor Isaac II Angelos , because according to a prophecy , it was this gate that Western Emperor Frederick Barbarossa would enter the city through . It was re @-@ opened in 1346 , but closed again before the siege of 1453 and remained closed until 1886 , leading to its early Ottoman name , <unk> Kapı ( " Closed Gate " ) . 
 = = = = = Second Military Gate = = = = = 
 The gate ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> ) is located between towers 30 and 31 , little remains of the original gate , and the modern reconstruction may not be accurate . 
 = = = = = Gate of the Spring = = = = = 
 The Gate of the Spring or <unk> Gate ( Πύλη τῆς <unk> ) was named after a popular monastery outside the Walls , the <unk> <unk> ( " Life @-@ giving Spring " ) in the modern suburb of <unk> . Its modern Turkish name , Gate of Selymbria ( Tr . Silivri Kapısı , Gk . Πύλη τῆς <unk> ) , appeared in Byzantine sources shortly before 1453 . It lies between the heptagonal towers 35 and 36 , which were extensively rebuilt in later Byzantine times : its southern tower bears an inscription dated to 1439 commemorating repairs carried out under John VIII Palaiologos . The gate arch was replaced in the Ottoman period . In addition , in 1998 a subterranean basement with 4th / 5th century reliefs and tombs was discovered underneath the gate . 
 Van Millingen identifies this gate with the early Byzantine Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα <unk> ) , but more recent scholars have proposed the identification of the latter with one of the gates of the city 's original Constantinian Wall ( see above ) . 
 It was through this gate that the forces of the Empire of Nicaea , under General Alexios Strategopoulos , entered and retook the city from the Latins on 25 July 1261 . 
 = = = = = Third Military Gate = = = = = 
 The Third Military Gate ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> ) , named after the quarter of the Triton ( " the Third " ) that lies behind it , is situated shortly after the <unk> Gate , exactly before the C @-@ shaped section of the walls known as the " Sigma " , between towers 39 and 40 . It has no Turkish name , and is of middle or late Byzantine construction . The corresponding gate in the outer wall was preserved until the early 20th century , but has since disappeared . It is very likely that this gate is to be identified with the Gate of <unk> ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> ) . 
 = = = = = Gate of Rhegion = = = = = 
 Modern Yeni <unk> Kapısı , located between towers 50 and 51 is commonly referred to as the Gate of Rhegion ( Πόρτα <unk> ) in early modern texts , allegedly named after the suburb of Rhegion ( modern <unk> ) , or as the Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> ) after the hippodrome faction of the Reds ( <unk> , <unk> ) which was supposed to have taken part in its repair . From Byzantine texts however it appears that the correct form is Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα <unk> ) , named according to the 10th @-@ century Suda lexicon after an ancient general of Greek Byzantium . A.M. Schneider also identifies it with the Gate of <unk> [ i ] on or <unk> ( " Place of Many Men " ) , possibly a reference to its proximity to a cemetery . It is the best @-@ preserved of the gates , and retains substantially unaltered from its original , 5th @-@ century appearance . 
 = = = = = Fourth Military Gate = = = = = 
 The so @-@ called Fourth Military Gate stands between towers 59 and 60 , and is currently walled up . Recently , it has been suggested that this gate is actually the Gate of St. Romanus , but the evidence is uncertain . 
 = = = = = Gate of St. Romanus = = = = = 
 The Gate of St. Romanus ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> <unk> ) was named so after a nearby church and lies between towers 65 and 66 . It is known in Turkish as Topkapı , the " Cannon Gate " , after the great Ottoman cannon , the " <unk> " , that was placed opposite it during the 1453 siege . With a gatehouse of 26 @.@ 5 m , it is the second @-@ largest gate after the Golden Gate . It is here that Constantine XI Palaiologos , the last Byzantine emperor , was killed on 29 May 1453 . 
 = = = = = Fifth Military Gate = = = = = 
 The Fifth Military Gate ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> ) lies immediately to the north of the Lycus stream , between towers 77 and 78 , and is named after the quarter of the <unk> ( " the Fifth " ) around the Lycus . It is heavily damaged , with extensive late Byzantine or Ottoman repairs evident . It is also identified with the Byzantine Gate of [ the Church of ] St. <unk> , and called <unk> ( " Water @-@ Tower Gate " ) or <unk> Kapısı ( " Assault Gate " ) in Turkish , because there the decisive breakthrough was achieved on the morning of 29 May 1453 . In the late 19th century , it appears as the <unk> <unk> ( " Walled Gate " ) . 
 Some earlier scholars , like J. B. Bury and Kenneth Setton , identify this gate as the " Gate of St. Romanus " mentioned in the texts on the final siege and fall of the city . 
 = = = = = Gate of Charisius = = = = = 
 The Gate of Char [ i ] <unk> ( <unk> [ ι ] <unk> πύλη / πόρτα ) , named after the nearby early Byzantine monastery founded by a vir illustris of that name , was , after the Golden Gate , the second @-@ most important gate . In Turkish it is known as <unk> ( " Adrianople Gate " ) , and it is here where Mehmed II made his triumphal entry into the conquered city . This gate stands on top of the sixth hill , which was the highest point of the old city at 77 meters . It has also been suggested as one of the gates to be identified with the Gate of <unk> or <unk> ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> ) , because it led to a cemetery outside the Walls . The last Byzantine emperor , Constantine XI , established his command here in 1453 . 
 = = = = = Minor gates and posterns = = = = = 
 Known posterns are the Yedikule Kapısı , a small postern after the Yedikule Fort ( between towers 11 and 12 ) , and the gates between towers 30 / 31 , already walled up in Byzantine times , and 42 / 43 , just north of the " Sigma " . On the Yedikule Kapısı , opinions vary as to its origin : some scholars consider it to date already to Byzantine times , while others consider it an Ottoman addition . 
 = = = = = Kerkoporta = = = = = 
 According to the historian Doukas , on the morning of 29 May 1453 , the small postern called Kerkoporta was left open by accident , allowing the first fifty or so Ottoman troops to enter the city . The Ottomans raised their banner atop the Inner Wall and opened fire on the Greek defenders of the peribolos below . This spread panic , beginning the rout of the defenders and leading to the fall of the city . In 1864 , the remains of a postern located on the Outer Wall at the end of the Theodosian Walls , between tower 96 and the so @-@ called Palace of the Porphyrogenitus , were discovered and identified with the Kerkoporta by the Greek scholar A.G. <unk> . Later historians , like van Millingen and Steven Runciman have accepted this theory as well . However , excavations at the site have uncovered no evidence of a corresponding gate in the Inner Wall ( now vanished ) in that area , and it may be that Doukas ' story is either invention or derived from an earlier legend concerning the Xylokerkos Gate , which several earlier scholars also equated with the Kerkoporta . 
 = = = = Later history = = = = 
 The Theodosian Walls were without a doubt among the most important defensive systems of Late Antiquity . Indeed , in the words of the Cambridge Ancient History , they were " perhaps the most successful and influential city walls ever built – they allowed the city and its emperors to survive and thrive for more than a millennium , against all strategic logic , on the edge of [ an ] extremely unstable and dangerous world ... " . 
 With the advent of siege cannons , however , the fortifications became obsolete , but their massive size still provided effective defence , as demonstrated during the Second Ottoman Siege in 1422 . In the final siege , which led to the fall of the city to the Ottomans in 1453 , the defenders , severely outnumbered , still managed to repeatedly counter Turkish attempts at undermining the walls , repulse several frontal attacks , and restore the damage from the siege cannons for almost two months . Finally , on 29 May , the decisive attack was launched , and when the Genoese general Giovanni Giustiniani was wounded and withdrew , causing a panic among the defenders , the walls were taken . After the capture of the city , Mehmed had the walls repaired in short order among other massive public works projects , and they were kept in repair during the first centuries of Ottoman rule . 
 = = = Walls of Blachernae = = = 
 The Walls of Blachernae connect the Theodosian Walls , which terminate at the height of the Palace of the Porphyrogenitus ( Turkish : <unk> <unk> ) , with the sea wall at the Golden Horn . They consist of a series of single walls built in different periods , which cover the suburb of Blachernae . Generally they are about 12 – 15 meters in height , thicker than the Theodosian Walls and with more closely spaced towers . Situated on a steep slope , they lacked a moat , except on their lower end towards the Golden Horn , where Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos had dug one . 
 The question of the original fortifications in this area has been examined by several scholars , and several theories have been proposed as to their course . It is known from the Notitia Urbis Constantinopolitanae that the XIV region , which comprised Blachernae , stood apart and was enclosed all around by a wall of its own . Further it is recorded that originally , and at least as late as the Avar siege of 626 , when they were burned down , the important sanctuaries of Panagia <unk> and St. Nicholas lay just outside the quarter 's fortifications . Traces of the quarter 's walls have been preserved , running from the area of the Porphyrogenitus Palace in straight line to the so @-@ called Prison of Anemas . The original fortified quarter can thereby be roughly traced to have comprised the two northern spurs of the city 's Seventh Hill in a triangle , stretching from the Porphyrogenitus Palace to the Anemas Prison , from there to the church of St. Demetrios <unk> and thence back to the Porphyrogenitus Palace . These fortifications were apparently older than the Theodosian Walls , probably dating to sometime in the 4th century , and were then connected to the new city walls under Theodosius II , with the western wall forming the outer face of the city 's defenses and the eastern wall fell into disrepair . 
 Today , the Theodosian Walls are connected in the vicinity of the Porphyrogenitus Palace with a short wall , which features a postern , probably the postern of the Porphyrogenitus ( <unk> τοῦ <unk> ) recorded by John VI Kantakouzenos , and extends from the Palace to the first tower of the so @-@ called Wall of Manuel Komnenos . As recorded by the historian Niketas Choniates , that wall was built by Emperor Manuel I Komnenos ( r . 1143 – 1180 ) as a protection to the imperial Palace of Blachernae , since the late 11th century the emperors ' preferred residence . It is an architecturally excellent fortification , consisting of a series of arches closed on their outer face , built with masonry larger than usual and thicker than the Theodosian Walls , measuring some 5 m at the top . It features eight round and octagonal towers , while the last is square . The wall stretches for 220 m , beginning at an almost right angle from the line of the Theodosian Walls , going westward up to the third tower and then turning sharply north . The quality of the wall 's construction was shown in the final Ottoman siege , when repeated attacks , intensive bombardment ( including the large bombard of Orban ) and attempts at undermining it came to naught . The Komnenian wall lacks a moat , since the difficult terrain of the area makes it unnecessary . The wall features one postern , between the second and third towers , and one large gate , the <unk> Kapı ( " Crooked Gate " ) , between the sixth and seventh towers . Its Turkish name comes from the sharp bend of the road in front of it to pass around a tomb which is supposed to belong to <unk> Hafiz , a companion of Muhammad who died there during the first Arab siege of the city . It is usually , but not conclusively , identified with the Byzantine <unk> Gate ( πόρτα ἐν τοῖς <unk> , porta en <unk> <unk> ) , the " Gate of the <unk> ' Quarter " ( cf . Latin <unk> , " sandal " ) . 
 From the last tower of the Wall of Manuel Komnenos to the so @-@ called Prison of Anemas stretches another wall , some 150 m in length , with four square towers . It is probably of later date , and of markedly inferior quality than the Komnenian wall , being less thick and with smaller stones and brick tiles utilized in its construction . It also bears inscriptions commemorating repairs in 1188 , 1317 and 1441 . A walled @-@ up postern after the second tower is commonly identified with the <unk> Gate ( πύλη τῆς <unk> , pylē tēs <unk> ) , named after the <unk> <unk> , the " Silver Lake " , which stood at the head of the Golden Horn . It probably serviced the Blachernae Palace , as evidenced by its decoration with three imperial busts . Schneider however suggests that the name could refer rather to the <unk> Kapı . 
 Then comes the outer wall of the Anemas Prison , which connects to a double stretch of walls . The outer wall is known as the Wall of Leo , as it was constructed by Leo V the Armenian ( r . 813 – 820 ) in 813 to safeguard against the siege by the Bulgarian ruler Krum . This wall was then extended to the south by Michael II ( r . 820 – 829 ) . The wall is a relatively light structure , less than 3 m thick , buttressed by arches which support its parapet and featuring four towers and numerous loopholes . Behind the Leonine Wall lies an inner wall , which was renovated and strengthened by the additions of three particularly fine hexagonal towers by Emperor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) . The two walls stand some 26 m apart and are pierced by a gate each , together comprising the Gate of Blachernae ( πόρτα τῶν <unk> , porta tōn <unk> ) . The two walls form a fortified enclosure , called the <unk> or <unk> ( " bracelet " ) of Blachernae ( <unk> / <unk> τῶν <unk> ) by the Byzantines , and known after the Ottoman capture of the city in Greek as the <unk> ( <unk> , " Five Towers " ) , in allusion to the Yedikule ( Gk . <unk> ) fortress . The inner wall is traditionally identified by scholars like van Millingen and Janin with the Wall of Heraclius , built by Emperor Heraclius ( r . 610 – 641 ) after the Avar siege to enclose and protect the Church of the <unk> . Schneider however identified it in part with the <unk> ( <unk> , " wing " ) , built at the time of Theodosius II to cover the northern flank of the Blachernae ( hence its alternate designation as <unk> , " outwork " ) from the Anemas Prison to the Golden Horn . Consequently , Schneider transferred the identity of the Heraclian Wall on the short stretch of sea wall directly attached to it to its east , which displays a distinct architecture . The identity of the <unk> remains an unresolved question among modern scholars , however . 
 Another , short wall was added in later times , probably in the reign of Theophilos , stretching from the junction of the land and sea walls to the sea itself , and pierced by the so @-@ called Wooden Gate ( <unk> πύλη , <unk> pylē , or <unk> , <unk> ) . Both this wall and the gate were demolished in 1868 . 
 = = = Preservation and restoration work on the Land Walls = = = 
 The land walls run through the heart of modern Istanbul , with a belt of parkland flanking their course . They are pierced at intervals by modern roads leading westwards out of the city . Many sections were restored during the 1980s , with financial support from UNESCO , but the restoration program has been criticized for destroying historical evidence , focusing on superficial restoration , the use of inappropriate materials and poor quality of work . This became apparent in the 1999 earthquakes , when the restored sections collapsed while the original structure underneath remained intact . The threat posed by urban pollution , and the lack of a comprehensive restoration effort , prompted the World Monuments Fund to include them on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world . 
 = = Sea Walls = = 
 The seaward walls ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) enclosed the city on the sides of the Sea of Marmara ( Propontis ) and the gulf of the Golden Horn ( <unk> κέρας ) . Although the original city of Byzantium certainly had sea walls , traces of which survive , the exact date for the construction of the medieval walls is a matter of debate . Traditionally , the seaward walls have been attributed by scholars to Constantine I , along with the construction of the main land wall . However , the first actual reference to their construction comes in 439 , when the urban prefect Cyrus of <unk> ( in sources often confused with the praetorian prefect Constantine ) was ordered to repair the city walls and complete them on the seaward side . This activity is certainly not unconnected to the fact that in the same year , Carthage fell to the Vandals , an event which signaled the emergence of a naval threat in the Mediterranean . This two @-@ phase construction remains the general consensus ; Cyril Mango however doubts the existence of any seaward fortifications during Late Antiquity , as they are not specifically mentioned as extant by contemporary sources until much later , around the year 700 . 
 The Sea Walls were architecturally similar to the Theodosian Walls , but of simpler construction . They were formed by a single wall , considerably lower than the land walls , with inner circuits in the locations of the harbours . Enemy access to the walls facing the Golden Horn was prevented by the presence of a heavy chain or boom , installed by Emperor Leo III ( r . 717 – 741 ) , supported by floating barrels and stretching across the mouth of the inlet . One end of this chain was fastened to the Tower of Eugenius , in the modern suburb of Sirkeci , and the other in Galata , to a large , square tower , the <unk> , the basement of which was later turned into the <unk> ( underground ) Mosque . At the same time , on the Marmara coast , the city 's defence was helped by strong currents , which made an attack by a fleet almost impossible . According to Geoffrey of Villehardouin , it was for this reason that the Fourth Crusade did not attack the city from this side . 
 During the early centuries of its existence , Constantinople faced few naval threats . Especially after the wars of Justinian , the Mediterranean had again become a " Roman lake " . It was during the first siege of the city by the Avars and the Sassanid Persians that for the first time , a naval engagement was fought off the city itself . However , after the Arab conquests of Syria and Egypt , a new naval threat emerged . In response , the sea walls were renovated in the early 8th century under <unk> III ( r . 698 – 705 ) or Anastasios II ( r . 713 – 715 ) . Michael II ( r . 820 – 829 ) initiated a wide @-@ scale reconstruction , eventually completed by his successor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) , which increased their height . As these repairs coincided with the capture of Crete by the Saracens , no expense was spared : As Constantine Manasses wrote , " the gold coins of the realm were spent as freely as worthless pebbles " . Theophilos ' extensive work , essentially rebuilding the sea walls , is testified to by the numerous inscriptions found or otherwise recorded that bear his name , more than those of any other emperor . Despite future changes and restorations , these walls would essentially protect the city until the end of the empire . 
 During the siege of the city by the Fourth Crusade , the sea walls nonetheless proved to be a weak point in the city 's defences , as the Venetians managed to storm them . Following this experience , Michael VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1259 – 1282 ) took particular care to heighten and strengthen the seaward walls immediately after the Byzantine recapture of the city in 1261 , since a Latin attempt to recover the city was regarded as imminent . Furthermore , the installation of the Genoese at Galata across the Golden Horn , agreed upon in the Treaty of Nymphaeum , posed a further potential threat to the city . Time being short , as a Latin attempt to recover the city was expected , the sea walls were heightened by the addition of two @-@ meter high wooden and hide @-@ covered screens . Ten years later , facing the threat of an invasion by Charles d 'Anjou , a second line of walls was built behind the original maritime walls , although no trace of them survives today . 
 The walls were again restored under Andronikos II Palaiologos ( r . 1282 – 1328 ) and again under his successor Andronikos III Palaiologos ( r . 1328 – 1341 ) , when , on 12 February 1332 , a major storm caused breaches in the wall and forced the seaward gates open . In 1351 , when the empire was at war with the Genoese , John VI Kantakouzenos again repaired the walls , and even opened a moat in front of the wall facing the Golden Horn . Other repairs are recorded for 1434 , again against the Genoese , and again in the years leading up to the final siege and fall of the city to the Ottomans , partly with funds provided by the Despot of Serbia , George Brankovic . 
 = = = Golden Horn Wall = = = 
 The wall facing towards the Golden Horn , where in later times most seaborne traffic was conducted , stretched for a total length of 5 @,@ 600 metres from the cape of St. Demetrius to the Blachernae , where it adjoined the Land Walls . Although most of the wall was demolished in the 1870s , during the construction of the railway line , its course and the position of most gates and towers is known with accuracy . It was built further inland from the shore , and was about 10 metres tall . According to Cristoforo Buondelmonti it featured 14 gates and 110 towers , although 16 gates are known that are of Byzantine origin . The northern shore of the city was always its more cosmopolitan part : a major focal point of commerce , it also contained the quarters allocated to foreigners living in the imperial capital . Muslim traders had their own lodgings ( <unk> ) there , including a mosque , while from the time of Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) on , the emperors granted to the various Italian maritime republics extensive trading quarters which included their own wharfs ( <unk> ) beyond the sea walls . 
 The known gates of the Golden Horn wall may be traced in order from the Blachernae eastwards to the Seraglio Point , as follows : 
 The first gate , very near the land walls , was the <unk> Gate ( <unk> Πόρτα , <unk> Porta , " Rolled Gate " ) , in Turkish Küçük <unk> Kapısı . Shortly after stood the Gate of St. Anastasia ( Πύλη τῆς <unk> <unk> , Pylē tēs <unk> <unk> ) , located near the Atik Mustafa Pasha Mosque , hence in Turkish Atik Mustafa Paşa Kapısı . In close proximity on the outer side of the walls lay the Church of St. Nicholas <unk> , which in 1597 – 1601 served as the cathedral of the Patriarch of Constantinople . 
 Further down the coast was the gate known in Turkish as Balat Kapı ( " Palace Gate " ) , preceded in close order by three large archways , which served either as gates to the shore or to a harbour that serviced the imperial palace of Blachernae . Two gates are known to have existed in the vicinity in Byzantine times : the <unk> Gate ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> / τῶν <unk> , Pylē tou <unk> / tōn <unk> , " Gate of the Hunter ( s ) " ) , whence the quarter behind it was named <unk> , and the Gate of St. John the Forerunner and Baptist ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> <unk> και <unk> , Porta tou hagiou Prodromou kai <unk> ) , though it is not clear whether the latter was distinct from the <unk> Gate . The Balat Kapı has been variously identified as one of them , and as one of the three gates on the Golden Horn known as the Imperial Gate ( Πύλη <unk> , Pylē <unk> ) . 
 Further south was the Gate of the Phanarion ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> , Pylē tou <unk> ) , Turkish <unk> Kapısı , named after the local light @-@ tower ( <unk> in Greek ) , which also gave its name to the local suburb . The gate also marked the western entrance of the Petrion Fort ( <unk> τῶν <unk> , <unk> tōn <unk> ) , formed by a double stretch of walls between the Gate of the Phanarion and the Petrion Gate ( Πύλη τοῦ <unk> , Pylē tou <unk> ) , in Turkish Petri Kapısı . According to Byzantine tradition , the area was named thus after Peter the Patrician , a leading minister of Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) . A small gate of the western end of the fort 's inner wall , near the Phanarion Gate , led to the city , and was called the Gate of <unk> . It was at the Petrion Gate that the Venetians , under the personal leadership of Doge Enrico Dandolo , scaled the walls and entered the city in the 1204 sack . In the 1453 siege however , an Ottoman attack on the same place was repelled . 
 The next gate , Yeni <unk> ( " New Gate of the Saint " ) , is not Byzantine , unless it replaces an earlier Byzantine entrance . It was constructed by the great Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan in 1582 . Shortly after it lies the older <unk> ( " Gate of the Saint " ) , known in Greek as the St. Theodosia Gate ( Πύλη τῆς <unk> <unk> ) after the great <unk> church of St. Theodosia ( formerly identified with the Gül Mosque ) . The next gate is that of <unk> <unk> ( Πύλη εἰς <unk> , Pylē eis <unk> ) , known by Latin chroniclers as Porta <unk> or Porta del Pozzo , modern <unk> Kapısı . It was named so because it looked towards the quarter of Pegae ( <unk> , <unk> , " springs " ) on the other shore of the Golden Horn . Next was the now @-@ demolished Gate of the <unk> ( Πόρτα τῆς <unk> , Porta tēs <unk> ) follows , rendered as Porta della Piazza by Italian chroniclers , and called in Turkish <unk> Kapısı ( " Gate of the Flour Depot " ) . It was named after the local quarter of Plate [ i ] a ( " broad place " , signifying the broad shoreline at this place ) . The next gate , <unk> Kapısı ( " Gate of the Holy Well " ) , is in all probability an Ottoman @-@ era structure . 
 The next gate is the Gate of the <unk> ( Πύλη τῶν <unk> , Pylē tōn <unk> ) , modern <unk> ( " Wood Gate " ) . Its Byzantine name derives from the high official known as the Drungary of the Watch . It marked the western end of the Venetian quarter . It is followed by the Gate the Forerunner , known as St. John de <unk> by the Latins , named after a nearby chapel . In Turkish it is known as <unk> Kapısı ( " Dungeon Gate " ) . The destroyed Gate of the Perama ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> , Porta tou <unk> ) lay in the suburb of Perama ( " Crossing " ) , from which the ferry to Pera ( Galata ) sailed . It marked the eastern limit of the Venetian quarter of the city , and the beginning of the <unk> quarter to its east . In Buondelmonti 's map , it is labelled Porta <unk> , on account of the <unk> that used to be held there , a name that has been preserved in its modern Turkish appellation , <unk> Kapısı , " Gate of the Fish @-@ market " . This gate is also identified with the Gate of the Jews ( <unk> Πόρτα , <unk> Porta ) , Porta <unk> in Latin sources , although the same name was apparently applied over time to other gates as well . In its vicinity was probably also the Gate of St. Mark , which is recorded in a single Venetian document of 1229 . Its identity is unclear , as is the question whether the gate , conspicuously named in honour of the patron saint of Venice , was pre @-@ existing or opened after the fall of the city to the Crusaders in 1204 . 
 To the east of the Perama Gate was the <unk> Gate ( Πόρτα τῆς <unk> , Porta tēs <unk> ) , a name perhaps derived from the imperial tagma of the <unk> . The gate marked the eastern end of the <unk> quarter of the city and the western edge of the Pisan quarter . Further east lay the Gate of the <unk> ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> , Porta tou <unk> ) , recorded as the <unk> Gate ( Πύλη <unk> , Pylē <unk> , " Beautiful Gate " ) in late Byzantine and Ottoman times . As its names testifies , it led to the leading to the <unk> , the main harbour of ancient Byzantium and the oldest naval arsenal of the city . In the early Ottoman period , it was known in Turkish as the <unk> ( " Hebrew Gate " ) , but its modern name is <unk> ( " Garden Gate " ) . The eastern limit of the Pisan quarter was located a bit eastwards of the gate . 
 The 12th @-@ century Genoese quarter of the city extended from there to the east , and in the documents conferring privileges on them one finds mention of two gates : the Porta <unk> ( " Gate of Bonus " , probably transcribed from Greek Πόρτα <unk> ) , and the Porta Veteris <unk> ( " Gate of the old rector " ) . It is very likely that these two names refer to the same gate , probably named after an otherwise unknown rector Bonus , and located somewhere in the modern Sirkeci district . Finally , the last gate of the Golden Horn wall was the Gate of Eugenius ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> , Porta tou <unk> ) , leading to the <unk> harbour . In close proximity was the 4th @-@ century Tower of Eugenius or <unk> , where the great chain that closed the entrance to the Golden Horn was kept and suspended from . The gate was also called <unk> ( <unk> , " Marble Gate " ) , because it was covered in marble , and featured a statue of the Emperor Julian . It is usually identified with the Ottoman <unk> Kapısı , and was destroyed in 1871 . 
 = = = Propontis Wall = = = 
 The wall of the Propontis was built almost at the shoreline , with the exception of harbours and quays , and had a height of 12 – 15 metres , with thirteen gates , and 188 <unk> and a total length of almost 8 @,@ 460 metres , with further 1 @,@ 080 metres comprising the inner wall of the <unk> harbour . Several sections of the wall were damaged during the construction of the Kennedy Caddesi coastal road in 1956 – 57 . The wall 's proximity to the sea and the strong currents of the Propontis meant that eastern and southern shores of the peninsula were comparatively safe from attack , but conversely , the walls had to be protected against the sea itself : a breakwater of boulders was placed in front of their base , and marble shafts were used as bonds in the walls ' base to enhance their structural integrity . From the cape at the edge of the ancient acropolis of the city ( modern Sarayburnu , Seraglio Point ) , south and west to the Marble Tower , the Propontis Wall and its gates went as follows : 
 The first gate , now demolished , was the Eastern Gate ( <unk> Πύλη , <unk> Pylē ) or Gate of St. Barbara ( Πύλη τῆς <unk> <unk> , Pylē tēs <unk> <unk> ) after a nearby church , in Turkish Top Kapısı ( " Gate of the Cannon " ) , from which Topkapı Palace takes its name . Unique among the seaward gates , it was , like the Golden Gate , flanked by two large towers of white marble , which in 1816 was used to construct the nearby Marble Kiosk of Sultan Mahmud II . Twice it served as the entry @-@ point for an emperor 's triumphal return : in 1126 , when John II Komnenos returned from the recapture of his ancestral Kastamonu , and in 1168 , when Manuel I Komnenos returned from his victorious campaign against Hungary . 
 Next was the gate known in Turkish as <unk> Kapı ( " Mill [ stone ] Gate " ) , whose Byzantine name is unknown . Close by and to its north stood the great Tower of Mangana , which was intended to hold the one end of the chain , planned ( but probably never actually installed ) by Manuel I Komnenos to close off the Bosphorus , the other end being at a tower erected on the island of the modern Maiden 's Tower ( <unk> <unk> ) off Chrysopolis ( modern Üsküdar ) , known as Damalis ( <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) in Byzantine times . The next gate is now known as the <unk> ( " Iron Gate " ) , and is an Ottoman @-@ era structure . A Greek name is not known , and it is not known whether a gate stood there in Byzantine times . Behind these two gates extended the quarter of the Mangana ( <unk> , " Arsenal " ) , with its numerous monasteries , the most famous of which were those of St. George of Mangana , the Church of Christ <unk> , and of the Theotokos Hodegetria , and the Palace of Mangana . Four small posterns , in two pairs of two , stand at the southern edge of the Mangana quarter , and probably serviced the numerous churches . The names , but not the identity , of two of them have been recorded , the Postern of St. Lazarus ( <unk> τοῦ <unk> <unk> , <unk> tou hagiou Lazarou ) , and the Small Gate of the Hodegetria ( <unk> πύλη τῆς <unk> , <unk> pylē tēs <unk> ) , both named after the respective monasteries located near them . It is also probable that one of them is to be identified with the Postern of Michael the <unk> ( <unk> τοῦ Μιχαήλ τοῦ <unk> , <unk> tou <unk> tou <unk> ) . 
 Further south , at the point where the shore turns westwards , are two further gates , the <unk> Kapısı ( " Gate of the Fish @-@ House " ) and <unk> ( " Stable Gate " ) . Their names derive from the buildings inside the Topkapı Palace they led to . Their Byzantine names are unknown . The next gate , on the southeastern corner of the city , was the gate of the imperial <unk> Palace , known in Byzantine times as the Gate of the Lion ( Gk . Πόρτα <unk> , Porta <unk> , in Latin Porta Leonis ) after the marble lions that flanked its entrance , as well as Gate of the Bear ( πόρτα τῆς <unk> , porta tēs <unk> ) after depictions of that animal at the quay . In Turkish it is known as <unk> ( " Broken Gate " ) . 
 To the west of the <unk> Palace lies the Church of SS . Sergius and Bacchus , and the first of the harbours of the city 's southern shore , that of the Sophiae , named after the wife of Emperor Justin II ( r . 565 – 578 ) and known originally as the Port of Julian . A small postern is situated in front of the church , while the first larger gate , the Gate of the Sophiae ( Πόρτα τῶν <unk> , Porta tōn <unk> ) or Iron Gate ( Πόρτα <unk> , Porta <unk> ) , opened to the harbour . In Turkish , it is known as <unk> Kapısı , " Gate of the Harbour of the Galleys " . Next was the Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> ) , modern <unk> ( " Sand Gate " ) , which opened to the late Byzantine harbour of the same name , intended to replace the long silted @-@ up Harbour of the Sophiae . 
 The next harbour to the west is the large Harbour of <unk> or Theodosius , in the area known as <unk> . The harbours are now silted up and known as the <unk> <unk> park . Immediately before it to the east stands the gate known in Turkish as the <unk> ( " New Gate " ) . A Latin inscription commemorates its repair after the 447 earthquake It is usually identified with the Jewish Gate of late Byzantine times . Immediately to the west after the harbour lies the next gate , <unk> Kapısı ( " Gate of <unk> Pasha " ) , usually identified with the Gate of Saint Aemilianus ( Πόρτα τοῦ ἀγίου <unk> , Porta tou hagiou <unk> ) , which is known to have stood at the junction of the sea wall with the city 's original Constantinian Wall . That view however is disputed by Janin , as the junction of the walls occurred considerably to the west from the modern gate 's location . 
 Further to the west , where the shoreline turns sharply south , stood the Gate of <unk> ( Πόρτα τοῦ <unk> / <unk> , Porta tou <unk> / <unk> ) , modern <unk> Kapısı , leading to the suburb of the same name . Further south and west lies the gate known today as <unk> ( " Pomegranate Gate " ) . Its Byzantine name is unknown , but is prominent on account of its proximity to the famed Monastery of Stoudios . 
 = = Garrisons of the city = = 
 During the whole existence of the Byzantine Empire , the garrison of the city was quite small : the imperial guards and the small city watch ( the <unk> or <unk> ) under the urban prefect were the only permanent armed force available . Any threat to the city would have to be dealt with by the field armies in the provinces , before it could approach the city itself . In times of need , such as the earthquake of 447 or the raids by the Avars in the early 7th century , the general population , organized in the guilds and the hippodrome factions , would be conscripted and armed , or additional troops would be brought in from the provincial armies . 
 In the early centuries , the imperial guard consisted of the units of the <unk> and Scholae Palatinae , which by the late 7th century had declined to parade @-@ ground troops . At about that time Justinian II established the first new guards units to protect the imperial palace precinct , while in the 8th century the emperors , faced with successive revolts by the thematic armies and pursuing deeply unpopular iconoclastic policies , established the imperial tagmata as an elite force loyal to them . As the tagmata were often used to form the core of imperial expeditionary armies , they were not always present in or near the city . Only two of them , the <unk> and the <unk> , the palace guard units established by Justinian II , remained permanently stationed in Constantinople , garrisoned around the palace district or in various locations , such as disused churches , in the capital . The units present in the city at any one time were thus never very numerous , numbering a few thousands at best , but they were complemented by several detachments stationed around the capital , in Thrace and Bithynia . 
 The small size of the city 's garrison was due to the uneasiness of emperors and populace alike towards a permanent large military force , both for fear of a military uprising and because of the considerable financial burden its maintenance would entail . Furthermore , a large force was largely unnecessary , because of the inherent security provided by the city walls themselves . As historian John Haldon notes , " providing the gates were secured and the defenses provided with a skeleton force , the City was safe against even very large forces in the pre @-@ gunpowder period . " 
 = = Fortifications around Constantinople = = 
 Several fortifications were built at various periods in the vicinity of Constantinople , forming part of its defensive system . The first and greatest of these is the 56 km long Anastasian Wall ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , teichos <unk> ) or Long Wall ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> teichos , or <unk> <unk> , <unk> Souda ) , built in the mid @-@ 5th century as an outer defence to Constantinople , some 65 km westwards of the city . It was 3 @.@ 30 m thick and over 5 m high , but its effectiveness was apparently limited , and it was abandoned at some time in the 7th century for want of resources to maintain and men to garrison it . For centuries thereafter , its materials were used in local buildings , but several parts , especially in the remoter central and northern sections , are still extant . 
 In addition , between the Anastasian Wall and the city itself , there were several small towns and fortresses like Selymbria , Rhegion or the great suburb of Hebdomon ( " Seventh " , modern <unk> , so named from its distance of seven Roman miles from the Milion , the city 's mile @-@ marker ) , the site of major military encampments . Beyond the Long Walls , the towns of Bizye and Arcadiopolis covered the northern approaches . These localities were strategically situated along the main routes to the city , and formed the outer defenses of Constantinople throughout its history , serving to muster forces , confront enemy invasions or at least buy time for the capital 's defenses to be brought in order . It is notable that during the final Ottoman siege , several of them , such as Selymbria , surrendered only after the fall of Constantinople itself . In Asia Minor , their role was mirrored by the cities of Nicaea and Nicomedia , and the large field camp at Malagina . 
 = = = Walls of Galata = = = 
 Galata , then the suburb of <unk> , was an integral part of the city by the early 5th century : the Notitia Urbis Constantinopolitanae of ca . 425 names it as the city 's 13th region . It was probably fortified with walls in the 5th century , and under Justinian I it was granted the status of a city . The settlement declined and disappeared after the 7th century , leaving only the great tower ( the <unk> tou <unk> ) in modern Karaköy , that guarded the chain extending across the mouth of the Golden Horn . After the sack of the city in 1204 , Galata became a Venetian quarter , and later a Genoese extraterritorial colony , effectively outside Byzantine control . Despite Byzantine opposition , the Genoese managed to surround their quarter with a moat , and by joining their castle @-@ like houses with walls they created the first wall around the colony . The Galata Tower , then called <unk> Turris ( " Tower of Christ " ) , and another stretch of walls to its north were built in 1349 . Further expansions followed in 1387 , 1397 and 1404 , enclosing an area larger than that originally allocated to them , stretching from the modern district of <unk> north to <unk> , from there to <unk> and thence to Karaköy . After the Ottoman conquest , the walls were maintained until the 1870s , when most were demolished to facilitate the expansion of the city . Today only the Galata Tower , visible from most of historical Constantinople , remains intact , along with several smaller fragments . 
 = = = Anadolu and Rumeli Fortresses = = = 
 The twin forts of Anadoluhisarı and Rumelihisarı lie to the north of Istanbul , at the narrowest point of the Bosphorus . They were built by the Ottomans to control this strategically vital waterway in preparation for their final assault on Constantinople . Anadoluhisarı ( Turkish for " Fortress of Anatolia " ) , also called <unk> and <unk> ( " beautiful fortress " ) in earlier times , was constructed by Sultan Bayezid I in 1394 , and initially consisted of just a 25 m high , roughly pentagonal watchtower surrounded by a wall . The much larger and more elaborate Rumelihisarı ( " Fortress of Rumeli " ) was built by Sultan Mehmed II in just over four months in 1452 . It consists of three large and one small towers , connected by a wall reinforced with 13 small watchtowers . When seen from a bird 's eye view , the walls and the towers are placed accordingly to write Muhammad in Arabic letters . With cannons mounted on its main towers , the fort gave the Ottomans complete control of the passage of ships through Bosporus , a role evoked clearly in its original name , <unk> ( " cutter of the strait " ) . After the conquest of Constantinople , it served as a customs checkpoint and a prison , notably for the embassies of states that were at war with the Empire . After suffering extensive damage in the 1509 earthquake , it was repaired , and was used continuously until the late 19th century . 
 = Stone @-@ Age Poland = 
 The Stone Age in territory of today 's Poland is divided into the Paleolithic , Mesolithic and Neolithic eras . The Paleolithic extended from about 500 @,@ 000 BCE to 8000 BCE . The Paleolithic is subdivided into periods , the Lower Paleolithic , 500 @,@ 000 to 350 @,@ 000 BCE , the Middle Paleolithic , 350 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 BCE , the Upper Paleolithic , 40 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 BCE , and the Final Paleolithic , 10 @,@ 000 to 8000 BCE . The Mesolithic lasted from 8000 to 5500 BCE , and the Neolithic from 5500 to 2300 BCE . The Neolithic is subdivided into the Neolithic proper , 5500 to 2900 BCE , and the Copper Age , 2900 to 2300 BCE . 
 The Stone Age era lasted 800 @,@ 000 years , and involved three different human species : Homo erectus , Homo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens . The Stone Age cultures ranged from early human groups with primitive tools to advanced agricultural societies , which used sophisticated stone tools , built fortified settlements and developed copper metallurgy . As elsewhere in eastern and central Europe , the Stone Age human cultures went through the stages known as the Paleolithic , Mesolithic and Neolithic , each bringing new refinements of the stone tool making techniques . The Paleolithic period human activities ( the earliest sites are about 500 @,@ 000 years old ) were intermittent because of the recurring periods of glaciation . With the recession of the last glaciation , a general climate warming and the resulting increase in ecologic environment diversity was characteristic of the Mesolithic ( from 9000 @-@ 8000 BCE ) . The Neolithic brought the first settled agricultural communities ; their founders migrated from the Danube River area ( from 5500 BCE ) . Later the native post @-@ Mesolithic populations also adopted and further developed the agricultural way of life ( from 4400 to about 2000 BCE ) . 
 = = Paleolithic = = 
 = = = Glaciation = = = 
 The Pleistocene colder ( glacial ) and warmer ( interglacial ) periods in Poland began with the South Poland glaciation ( San River glaciation , until 450 @,@ 000 BCE ) , followed by the Masovian interglacial ( 450 @,@ 000 @-@ 370 @,@ 000 BCE ) , the Middle Poland glaciation ( 370 @,@ 000 @-@ 128 @,@ 000 BCE ) , the Eemian interglacial ( 128 @,@ 000 @-@ 115 @,@ 000 BCE ) , and the Vistula glaciation ( 115 @,@ 000 @-@ 10 @,@ 000 BCE ) . 
 = = = Homo erectus = = = 
 Human settlements on Polish lands occurred later than in the more climatically hospitable regions of southern and western Europe and were dependent on the recurring episodes of glaciation . Gatherer @-@ hunter Homo erectus campsites , together with their inhabitants ' primitive stone tools ( choppers and microliths ) , bones of the large mammals they hunted and the fish they caught , were found below the San River glaciation period sediments in <unk> and are about 500 @,@ 000 years old . Younger sites related to the same species were found at Rusko near <unk> , located , like <unk> , in the Lower Silesia region . This represents the microlithic complexes of the Lower Paleolithic period . Homo erectus , earlier known as Pithecanthropus erectus , was a species of early humans . 
 = = = Homo neanderthalensis = = = 
 Now often also considered a distinct species , Homo neanderthalensis ( otherwise known as Homo sapiens neanderthalensis ) lived in the southern half of Poland during the Middle Paleolithic period , that is between 300 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 BCE . Various relics were found and different Neanderthal cultures are distinguished . Acheulean handaxes from Silesia dated 200 @,@ 000 @-@ 180 @,@ 000 years ago are among the older tools . Gatherer @-@ hunter sporadic groups of Neanderthals penetrated southern Poland also during the Eemian interglacial , 128 @,@ 000 @-@ 115 @,@ 000 BCE . Examination of the <unk> @-@ Prądnik culture ( East <unk> complex ) sites in the Prądnik River Valley north of Kraków and in <unk> near Radom from about 85 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 BCE ( early phase of the Vistula River glaciation period ) shows that some Neanderthals were skilled collective hunters , able to kill numerous large mammals characteristic of the cold Pleistocene climate and process the meat , skin and bones using specialized tools . 
 = = = Homo sapiens = = = 
 Homo sapiens proper ( Homo sapiens sapiens , the Cro @-@ Magnon type ) appears in the Upper Paleolithic , which lasted from 40 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 BCE . During the coldest part of this Ice age period , 20 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 BCE , humans did not inhabit Poland . The latter , warmer part , after the climatic discontinuity and the reappearance of humans , is considered the Late Paleolithic . 
 Upper Paleolithic people specialized in organized , group hunting of large mammals ; they sometimes pursued and drove entire herds into traps . Their nutritional needs were met largely by meat consumption , as the vegetation was limited to tundra and steppe and the land was covered by ice and snow ( Vistula final glaciation ) for long periods . More sophisticated tool making methods resulted in the production of long ( some over two feet ) , narrow and sharp <unk> splits . In a cave near Nowy Targ ( East @-@ <unk> culture ) , a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old boomerang , the world 's oldest , was found . It is a crescent @-@ shaped 70 cm long object with a fine finish , made of mammoth tusk . Mammoths were hunted in the Kraków area during 25 @,@ 000 @-@ 20 @,@ 000 BCE . Also 30 @,@ 000 years old are the so @-@ called <unk> blades of the Aurignacian culture , made of bone , found in <unk> , Kraków County . 
 A 27 @,@ 500 @-@ year old burial of an 18 @-@ month old child , complete with burial gift decorative artifacts , pendant or necklace elements made of teeth of large ungulates , was discovered in Borsuk Cave near Kraków ( southern Kraków @-@ Częstochowa Upland ) . It is believed to be the oldest intentional burial located in Poland . 
 <unk> is a complex of archeological sites along the <unk> River valley between <unk> @-@ <unk> and <unk> . Several hundred Paleolithic campsites have been located there , which makes it the world 's largest accumulation of such finds . They extend over a number of periods , beginning with the Mousterian ( Neanderthal ) culture , followed by the Hamburg culture of reindeer hunters . The Final Paleolithic is represented there by the <unk> culture , named after a village in Legionowo County . The best known Late Paleolithic campsites in the area , which include some dugout huts , belonged to the people preoccupied with hematite ore mining , from which ochre pigment used for body painting was being made . The red dye was widely traded , which is why rocks and minerals originating from distant regions of today 's Poland , Slovakia and Hungary are found at <unk> . Pieces of " chocolate " flint brought into this area for processing were stored in quantities that were always multiples of three . Because of this and other evidence , it is believed that the Paleolithic people developed a counting system based on this number . A 12 @,@ 600 BCE Hamburg culture site with tents , camp @-@ fire and stone meat baking devices was discovered in <unk> , Wschowa County . 
 A rich source of Late Paleolithic sites and artifacts ( the Magdalenian culture of 14 @,@ 500 BCE ) is the Prądnik River Valley . The <unk> Cave there contained the remains of a typical ( at that time ) social unit of several families , 20 @-@ 30 people , as well as numerous tools and other artifacts of their culture , including ornamented bone utensils . Remnants of a 15 @,@ 000 to 17 @,@ 000 years old Magdalenian culture dwelling ( a dugout cabin site with traces of supporting posts , a hearth and imported materials ) were discovered recently in <unk> , <unk> <unk> County . Traces of younger ( Final Paleolithic ) campsites identified with the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> cultures were located at Stare <unk> near Świecie , among other places . 
 = = Mesolithic = = 
 The Mesolithic lasted from 9000 BCE ( rapid climate warming ) to 5500 BCE ( arrival of first farmers from the Danube River area ) . It was the last period when the food production economy was entirely opportunistic , based on assimilation of plant and animal material found in nature , that is gathering and hunting . Because of warmer temperatures , complex forest ecosystems and wetlands developed and this natural diversity necessitated new hunting and fishing strategies . As new populations entered Poland from the west , hunters and fishermen working individually or in small groups had to pursue single large and small animals using traps , javelins , bows and arrows , boats and fishing equipment , and utilizing dogs . Women engaged in gathering of such products as roots , herbs , nuts , bird eggs , mollusks , fruit or honey , which possibly was even more important than hunting . Mesolithic human settlements became quite numerous and by the end of this period the economy of harvesting nature became very highly developed . Tools and devices were made of materials such as stone ( flint strip mines have been found at the northern edge of Świętokrzyskie Mountains ) , bone , wood , horn , or plant material for rope and baskets , and included such fine utensils as fishing hooks and sewing needles . Animal figurines were made of amber . At least during the later Mesolithic , the dead were placed in graves and outfitted with familiar objects of their surroundings . One such well preserved grave of an apparent tool @-@ maker , together with his tools and other items , was found in <unk> near <unk> and dated 5500 BCE . 
 = = Neolithic = = 
 = = = Introduction of agriculture - Danubian cultures of farming communities = = = 
 Early Neolithic era began around 5500 BCE with the arrival from the middle Danube area of people , who kept livestock , cultivated crops , made pottery and smooth @-@ surface tools . Their land tilling predecessors had been coming into the Balkans and then the Danube region from Anatolia beginning a thousand years earlier . They formed the first settled rural communities , thus forging the most fundamental civilizational advance . 
 The original newcomers represented the Linear Pottery culture . Their uniform culture survived in Poland in its original form until about 4600 BCE . Despite the big impact they made , the first waves came in small numbers - hundreds , or at most a few thousand people , judging by the sizes of the known settlements . They populated mainly fertile soils of southern highlands and river valleys further north , all the way to the Baltic Sea . They lived alongside the more numerous native people who were still pursuing the Mesolithic lifestyle , but during the Linear Pottery culture times there wasn 't much interaction , as the two groups inhabited different environments . Their villages consisted of several , but sometimes up to a dozen or so rectangular communal long @-@ houses , some over 30 meters long , supported by wooden posts , the oldest of which come from the Lower Silesia region . One such location from about 5000 BCE was also unearthed at <unk> , which is now at the west end of Kraków just within the city limits . 
 Large Danubian complexes were in recent years excavated in the <unk> and <unk> ( Wieliczka County ) area of fertile <unk> hills . The settlements , which included massive post construction houses even over 50 meters long as well as industrial facilities , extended continuously over a stretch of land more than three kilometers long . Some of the identified structures functioned together , as was the case when the buildings were connected by a courtyard and protected by a common fence . 
 Plants were cultivated mostly in small nearby gardens , but wheat and barley were also grown on small fields obtained by burning the forest . In the absence of animal @-@ drawn plowing devices , soil was being <unk> manually . The forest burning activity brought about significant ecological and environmental changes in Lesser Poland , Silesia and Kujawy . Further out were the pastures , the entire area utilized by a single settlement having a radius of about 5 km . Cattle , sheep and goats were even more numerous in the northern flatlands , where the land was less fertile . The Danubian people communities kept in touch and exchanged goods over large areas , all the way to their regions of origin beyond the Carpathian Mountains . 
 After 5000 BCE new waves of immigrants arrived from the south again , which accelerated the process of differentiation of the agrarian society into several distinct cultures during the first half of 5th millennium BC and afterwards . In the Oder River basin mostly there was the culture named after the punctured variety of Linear Band pottery - <unk> Pottery culture , while in the Vistula River basin the Lengyel and Polgár cultures appeared . The two regions developed in some separation , but within them the different cultural traditions of the younger Danubian circle often overlapped . The houses were now of an elongated trapezoidal shape , up to 40 meters long , grouped in larger complexes , often protected by beam and earth walls , moats and other fortifications , as such defensive measures apparently became necessary against people from the still Mesolithic native population or other Danubian settlements . These defensive structures , built from the mid 5th millennium BCE on , were complicated and consumed significant time and resources . Their design followed that of the similar construction that was taking place in the Danube River areas , starting in the early part of this millennium . Large cemeteries and graves supplied with fancier objects such as jewelry , including the first so @-@ called " princely " graves ( the princesses had imported copper necklaces , earrings and diadems in addition to locally made decorations ) , testify to the emergence of a relatively more affluent society . Cattle raising and trading ( large varieties resulted from cross @-@ breeding with the aurochs ) and land tillage provided basic sustenance . Salt was obtained and traded and became a much sought after commodity , at first probably to help preserve stored food . The salt springs around Wieliczka were utilized already by the Lengyel culture people , who left ceramic vessels used in salt production there . The Danubian people produced many richly decorated objects , including clay containers with animal head ornaments and figurines of women . 
 A settlement and cemetery of the Lengyel @-@ Polgár cultural zone , dated around or after 4600 BCE , was discovered in <unk> , Wrocław County . It consisted of a central long trapezoidal house accompanied by several post @-@ built supporting structures . Among the large explored settlements of the Lengyel culture from the 4400 @-@ 4000 BCE period , there is one in Brześć Kujawski , and another one in <unk> , solidly fortified about 4200 BCE after an assault incident involving arson and murder , both located in the Kujawy region . At the <unk> settlement nearly 30 trapezoidal houses and over 80 graves were located , some of them with many copper ornaments . The agricultural and construction activities of the communities centered on the two large settlements ( hunting and fishing were also practiced ) caused very likely an accumulation of environmental damage , which eventually forced them to abandon the area . 4th millennium BC constructions reinforced with ditches and palisades and ceramics molded into figural representations of the Lengyel @-@ Polgár culture were located in Podłęże , Wieliczka County . 
 The Malice farming culture of southern Poland ( all of 5th millennium and until 3800 BCE , named after a site in Malice near Sandomierz ) was the first Neolithic culture to originate north of the Carpathian Mountains and spread south . A rare discovery of 5th millennium Malice culture buildings and decorated pottery was made in <unk> , Wieliczka County . 
 = = = Neolithic cultures developed by native populations = = = 
 After 4500 BCE the <unk> culture of northwestern origin entered a ceramic phase with its own forms of pottery ( characteristic pointed bottoms ) . They lived by the Baltic Sea shores and were specialized in utilizing the resources of the sea , thus still representing the Mesolithic ways of life . At their settlement in <unk> near <unk> Stroke @-@ ornamented pottery was found , obtained probably through trade with the Danubian people . 
 The native Mesolithic populations were slow in gradually assimilating the agricultural way of life , beginning with just the use of ceramics . It took a thousand years into the Neolithic period before they adopted animal husbandry ( which became especially important to them ) and plant cultivation to any appreciable degree . When they eventually developed interest in the more fertile areas utilized by the late Danubian cultures , they became the threat that compelled the Danubian farmers to fortify their settlements . The native post @-@ Mesolithic groups expanded beyond the traditional Danubian areas of agricultural development , moving also into ecologically less favorable environments , which included utilization of sandy soils . 
 The first truly native Neolithic culture was the Funnelbeaker culture , named after the shape of their typical clay vessels . It developed starting around 4400 BCE and lasted some two thousand years . Like other post @-@ Mesolithic cultures , the Funnelbeaker culture was Megalithic . They built tombs of large stones , some of them huge ( for example trapezoidal structures up to 150 meters long ) and resembling pyramids . Few survived until now because of the demand for stone as building material , but a well @-@ preserved one from the first half of 4th millennium BC was found in <unk> near Włocławek . From this place and period came the skull , on which the trepanation procedure was performed for medical or magic reasons . <unk> the beginnings of the post @-@ Mesolithic cultures in Poland coincide with the beginnings of the <unk> period in the Balkans . Copper objects , mostly ornamental or luxurious items , were traded and then developed locally , first by the Danubian and then by the indigenous people . Copper metallurgy facilities were identified in Złota near Sandomierz . Clay decorative objects include realistic representations of animals and containers with images engraved on them . A pot from <unk> , <unk> County ( 3400 BCE ) has a unique narrative scene and the world 's oldest semblance of a four @-@ wheeled cart drawn on its surface . Stone tools became most highly developed and acquired their then characteristic smooth surfaces . Well preserved settlements with rectangular buildings were unearthed in Gródek <unk> near Hrubieszów ( where remnants of a vertical loom for weaving were found ) , in <unk> near Kraków , and in northern Poland in <unk> , <unk> <unk> County , where the structures are similar to the ones in <unk> . In <unk> three post supported houses were discovered , the largest of which had the main part 16 meters long and 6 @.@ 5 meters wide . As dated from the ceramics found , they represent the developed , " <unk> " phase of the Funnelbeaker culture . 
 Originating from central European lowlands , the Funnelbeaker people were able to utilize large expanses of less fertile soils , obtained by extensive reduction of forested areas , with the increased role of livestock . They moved south into the regions previously developed by the Danubian cultures , all the way to Bohemia and Moravia . Being more numerous , better fit for the environment , organized and economically more productive , the Funnelbeaker culture people replaced the Danubian cultures in their late phase . 
 The Globular Amphora culture was the next major Neolithic culture . It originated in the Polish lowlands during the first half of 4th millennium BC , lasted to about 2400 BCE in parallel with the Funnelbeaker culture , and is named after the bulging shape of its representative pottery . They specialized in breeding domestic animals and lived in a semi @-@ settled state , seeking optimal pastures and moving as needed . This semi @-@ nomadic lifestyle was probably necessitated by the poor condition of the soils , by that time depleted and rendered infertile because of the preceding centuries of forest burning and extensive exploitation . Globular Amphora were the first culture in Poland known for utilizing the domesticated horse , and swine became important as the source of food . Ritual animal , especially cattle burial sites , often with two or more individuals buried together and supplied with objects as strange as drums have been discovered , but their role is not well understood . Globular Amphora people were involved in the north @-@ south amber trade . Their megalithic burials included ceramics , stone tools and ornamental gifts . 
 The Baden culture in southern Poland was the latest of the Danubian ancestry cultures and continued between 3200 and 2600 BCE . They made vessels with characteristic protruding radial ornaments . A large fortified Baden culture settlement of around 3000 BCE was found in <unk> near <unk> . 
 Finally there were still in existence the forest zone cultures , representing the ceramic phase of hunting and gathering communities . Some of them lasted into the early Bronze Age . 
 The major industry of this period was <unk> mining . One of the largest Neolithic ( middle to late periods ) flint mines in Europe with over 700 vertical shafts and preserved underground passages was located in <unk> <unk> near <unk> <unk> . The axes produced from the material obtained there were exported to distant parts of the continent . 
 = = = Late Neolithic arrivals from eastern and western regions of Europe = = = 
 The Corded Ware culture , in existence in central Europe between 3000 and 2000 BCE , originated most likely from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European nomadic people of the Black Sea steppes . It was a pastoral culture at least in its early stages , for the most part lacking permanent settlements and known primarily from the burial grounds ( a large one with many richly furnished graves was discovered in Złota near Sandomierz ) . They moved together with their herds of cattle , sheep , goats and horses along the river valleys of southern Poland , but also engaged in flint mining and manufacturing of tools and weapons for their own use and trade . 
 A Corded Ware culture princely burial was found in <unk> , <unk> Voivodeship . The grave , well @-@ secured three meters below the surface , contained a man 's skeleton and a funerary gift collection of highly valuable copper decorations , containers , stone tools and arrowheads . The uniquely equipped burial of a warrior @-@ chief has close analogies with finds from Transylvania , a testimony to geographically extensive contacts of Corded Ware culture nomadic people . 
 The <unk> culture ( named after the village near Puck where the discoveries took place ) developed from northern populations of the Corded Ware culture as an offshoot specialized in exploitation of the sea resources and lasted in parallel with their mother culture for a comparable period of time . Their settlements consisting of characteristic sea erosion reinforced houses were located along the Bay of Gdańsk and east of there . They engaged in fishery and hunting , especially of seals , then numerous along the Baltic coast . The <unk> culture people produced in special shops the widely used and traded amber decorative items . 
 From the opposite end of Europe ( the Iberian Peninsula ) came the few people who formed during the 2500 @-@ 1900 BCE period the Bell @-@ Beaker culture . It was named after the shape of their typical , carefully finished and precisely ornamented pottery . Southwestern Poland was at the eastern edge of their range . Because of their mobility , the Bell @-@ Beaker people helped spread new inventions , including developing metallurgy , over large areas of Europe . 
 = Mara Carfagna = 
 Maria <unk> " Mara " Carfagna ( born December 18 , 1975 ) is an Italian politician and former showgirl and model . After obtaining a degree in law , Carfagna worked for several years on Italian television shows and as a model . She later entered politics and was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for Forza Italia party in 2006 . From 2008 to 2011 she served as Minister for Equal Opportunity in Berlusconi IV Cabinet . Carfagna had been named " the most beautiful minister in the world " , and was ranked number one on Maxim 's " World ´ s Hottest Politicians " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Carfagna was born in Salerno , where she attended the Liceo <unk> Giovanni da Procida . In 2001 she graduated in law from the University of Salerno , with a thesis on information law and broadcasting systems . 
 = = Career as showgirl and model = = 
 After having studied dance and piano , she participated in the Miss Italy contest in 1997 , finishing in sixth place . About the experience she later said : " That competition makes you as a woman , it matures you ... all that stress , that desire to win , it makes you understand who you are . " 
 Later she started working in television for the company Mediaset , controlled by the family of Silvio Berlusconi . From 2000 to 2006 she participated as a showgirl in the television program La <unk> del <unk> ( " Sunday in the Village " ) with Davide <unk> . In 2006 she led the program Piazza grande ( " Main Square " ) together with Giancarlo <unk> . Carfagna has also been part of the television programs I <unk> , <unk> la voce and Domenica in . 
 Mara Carfagna has in the past posed nude on several occasions , for magazines such as Maxim . Reluctant to talk about her modeling past , she has nevertheless suggested that she had certain reservations about the work . On one occasion she said : " I am a bit of a prude and I found getting undressed in front of a camera not a pleasant experience . " She states that she is a firm believer in family values , and claimed in an interview that she once refused to take part in a movie directed by erotic filmmaker Tinto Brass . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Carfagna entered politics in 2004 , and became responsible for the women 's movement in the political party Forza Italia ( presently The People of Freedom ) . In the elections of 2006 she was elected into the Chamber of Deputies for Forza Italia , and in the 2008 elections – running as the third candidate from The People of Freedom in the district " Campania 2 " – she was reelected . When she first entered parliament Berlusconi jokingly commented that Forza Italia practiced the law of <unk> <unk> ; the right of a feudal lord to take the virginity of his female subjects . As a deputy she was secretary of the Commission for Constitutional Affairs , and has been described as a diligent , hard @-@ working parliamentarian . On May 8 , 2008 she was appointed Minister for Equal Opportunity , in the fourth cabinet of Silvio Berlusconi , an appointment that was widely publicised internationally , with focus on her special background . 
 Carfagna has been vocal on certain issues , such as the level of crime in her home town of Salerno , after having herself been the victim of burglary on three different occasions . She describes herself as an antifeminist , as she believes that " liberty " depends not on independence , but on rules and discipline . She opposes gay marriage , and says that matrimonial rights should be tied to reproduction . Soon after her accession she refused to back a gay pride march , arguing that discrimination was no longer a problem for homosexuals in Italy because the homophobia was just a thinking offence , a statement that was strongly criticised by gay rights groups . 
 In September 2008 , Carfagna introduced proposal for a new law making street prostitution a crime , with fines for both clients and prostitutes . The bill was her first major initiative as a minister . She said that at present in Italy , " as in the great majority of Western countries " , brothels and the exploitation of prostitutes by pimps were illegal but prostitution as such was not . She described street prostitution as a " shameful phenomenon " . Carfagna was criticized by prostitutes ' representatives and other charities for introducing the bill . However , some Catholic charities praised her for having the courage to " take on prostitution as a serious social evil " . 
 In 2009 she became the first political promoter of the law against stalking offence . This law was finally approved on 23 February 2009 , introduced as a package of bills known as the <unk> Maroni . In the same year she signed a campaign against homophobia in Italy , with television spots , images on magazines and wall attachments on cities . She also proposed a bill against homophobia , in which homophobia was considered as an aggravating circumstance in bullying events . This bill was next refused by the Parliament . 
 In 2010 during political debate for the 8th March celebration she claimed that women gained the right to vote in Italy in 1960 ( while they did in 1946 ) and that the law that rules <unk> relationship was reformed in 1970 ( while it was in 1975 ) 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In January 2007 , Carfagna was at the center of a controversy that received international attention . On the evening of the <unk> award show , Berlusconi said about Carfagna that " If I was not already married I would have married her immediately " . The comment caused Berlusconi 's wife , Veronica Lario , to demand an apology through a national newspaper , something which she also received . Carfagna herself has later described the comment as " gallant and harmless , " and said that she did not quite understand Lario 's reaction . 
 On July 5 , 2008 , the Argentine journal Clarín reported about telephone wiretap records authorized for an anti @-@ corruption investigation . Reporter Julio <unk> wrote that Carfagna and Silvio Berlusconi engaged in a telephone conversation with explicit allusions to oral sex . The wiretap transcripts have not been published , but the Italian newspaper La Repubblica interviewed the former vice @-@ minister of Foreign Affairs in the Berlusconi II Cabinet and socialist executive Margherita <unk> , who admitted the existence of some messages . 
 = History of Georgetown University = 
 The history of Georgetown University spans nearly four hundred years , from the early settlement of America to the present day . Georgetown University has grown with both its city , Washington , D.C. , and the United States , each of which date their founding to the period from 1788 to 1790 . Georgetown 's origins are in the establishment of the Maryland colony in the seventeenth @-@ century . Bishop John Carroll established the school at its present location by the Potomac River after the American Revolution allowed for free religious practice . 
 The role of the Society of Jesus in the school 's operation has evolved from that of founders and financiers to faculty and advisers . Their focus on liberal studies and religious pluralism have helped to give the school its identity . Georgetown was also affected by its times , including the American Civil War , which disrupted the growing school and significantly changed its student body . University presidents like Patrick Francis Healy modernized the institution into an active research university with several graduate and undergraduate schools , and oversaw the expansion of educational opportunities on campus , around the city , and abroad . 
 = = Founding = = 
 The history of Georgetown University traces back to two formative events , in 1634 and 1789 . Until 1851 , the school used 1788 , the start of construction on the Old South building , as its founding date . In that year a copy @-@ edit in the college catalog began mislabeling the construction as beginning in 1789 . This was discovered in preparation for the centennial celebration in 1889 , at which point rather than correct the annual , the date of Georgetown 's foundation was fixed to the date January 23 , 1789 . 
 = = = First establishments = = = 
 On November 22 , 1633 Jesuits Andrew White , John Altham <unk> , and Thomas Gervase set sail on The Ark for British North America under the leadership and financing of the Lord Baltimore , Leonard Calvert . Their landing on March 25 , 1634 on St. Clement 's Island marks the birth of the Maryland colony , this anniversary now celebrated as Maryland Day . These Jesuits were joined in 1637 by Thomas Copley and Ferdinand Poulton , together establishing near St. Mary 's City some means of Christian education for the native <unk> tribe . 
 Inquiring about patronage for their school , Poulton wrote to Vincenzo Carafa , the Superior General of the Society of Jesus in Rome under Pope Urban VIII , who on September 15 , 1640 approved the institution of a school in principle . That year they moved to a permanent building at Calverton Manor on in the Wicomico River . This early establishment was burnt in 1645 as part of the English Civil War , and the remaining Jesuits were brought to trial in England . The new Protestant administration had their school outlawed , though it was functioning by 1648 , when Thomas Copley managed to return there . 
 Newtown Manor , also known as " Bretton 's Neck " , near modern @-@ day Leonardtown , Maryland , become available to the Jesuits in 1677 . This house served as the Jesuit schoolhouse until 1704 when its existence was alerted to British authorities . The school afterward conducted itself periodically and in secrecy at the new Jesuit colony of Bohemia Manor . John Carroll attended this school from 1745 until 1748 . Carroll then left for studies in Europe . He joined the Jesuits in 1753 , and was ordained in 1769 , but in 1774 Pope Clement XIV ordered the suppression of the Jesuit order , forcing Carroll to return to Maryland . This put Carroll in the right place at the right time , when the American Revolution pushed out the English administration , opening up new possibilities for scholastic expansion . 
 = = = Georgetown Heights = = = 
 After returning in 1774 to live on the Rock Creek in Maryland , Carroll established Saint John the Evangelist Church , in Silver Spring , Maryland . In 1776 , his cousin , Charles Carroll , a signer of the Declaration of Independence , invited John to join him , Samuel Chase , and Benjamin Franklin in traveling to Quebec and attempt to persuade the French Canadian population to join the revolution . The mission was unsuccessful , but John Carroll 's association with Benjamin Franklin proved useful . In 1784 , Franklin , as ambassador to France , recommended Carroll to the papal nuncio in Paris as the head of the Catholic Church in America , and on June 9 , 1784 Carroll was anointed Superior of Missions in the United States of North America . On November 6 , 1789 Carroll 's authority was confirmed after being elected by the clergy as the first Bishop of Baltimore . 
 Beginning in 1783 , Carroll convened meetings of area clergy , mostly ex @-@ Jesuits , at Sacred Heart Church in White Marsh , outside Annapolis , Maryland . This body , known as the General Chapters , resolved on November 13 , 1786 , that " a school be erected for the education of youth " and that the location for the school would be in Georgetown . The site was influenced by Carroll 's experience with Jesuit colleges in Europe , which were located in urban centers . Port towns were used by Jesuits because of their missionary focus . By March 1787 , they formed a fund raising committee , and Carroll solicited formal proposals for an " academy , at George @-@ town , <unk> @-@ River , Maryland . " The District of Columbia 's borders wouldn 't be defined until the passage and implementation of the Residence Act in 1790 . 
 On April 24 , 1787 , Georgetown landowner John Threlkeld donated a plot of land to Carroll , which was ultimately where he founded Holy Trinity Church . In April 1788 , construction began at a larger neighboring plot on Georgetown 's first building , later called " Old South " , leading Carroll to write " We shall begin the building of our Academy this summer . On this Academy are built all my hopes of permanency and success of our holy religion in the United States . " On January 23 , 1789 , John Carroll , Robert Molyneux and John Ashton completed the purchase from Threlkeld and William Deakins , Jr. for " seventy five pounds current money " of the acre and a half on which construction had already started . This land became the core of Georgetown 's campus . As a result , the University celebrates this date as its founding . 
 Carroll had difficulty filling the position of president of the university , with many candidates declining the job before Robert Plunkett first took the office in 1791 , though he only served 18 months . He oversaw the division of the academy into " college " , " preparatory " , and " elementary " , with the youngest starting at age eight . Jean @-@ Edouard de <unk> became the first teacher in late October 1791 , and the first student , William Gaston , was enrolled on November 22 , 1791 . Classes commenced on January 2 , 1792 , with around 69 students attending in its first year . Georgetown 's second building , Old North , which survives to this day , began construction in 1794 . At three times the size of Old South , it greatly increased the number of classrooms and sleeping space on campus . Upon the building 's completion , George Washington visited and spoke from the porch , a position since reserved for U.S. Presidents . 
 = = Early growth = = 
 In its early years , Georgetown suffered from considerable financial strain , relying on private sources of funding and the limited profits from local farms that had been donated to the Jesuits by wealthy landowners . Some of these farms included African slaves . By September 1792 , tuition had to be increased for the first time . In 1796 , Louis William Valentine Dubourg arrived and became president . Dubourg brought with him a collection of books from his own collection and others from St. Mary 's Seminary , the Baltimore Society of Saint @-@ Sulpice , and these books formed the nucleus of Georgetown 's library . On January 1 , 1798 , Dubourg released the first prospectus to advertise the college abroad , but also drove the school into debt by hiring numerous new faculty , including fencing teachers , and by buying silver and a school piano . The first board of directors organized in 1797 , and quickly became antagonized with Dubourg because of his spending and preference for French faculty , particularly during the Quasi @-@ War . The board forced him to resign in December 1798 . 
 Beginning in 1798 , Leonard Neale and his brother Francis Neale oversaw the growth of the university as presidents for a combined eleven years . At Carroll 's request , Neale was also appointed coadjutor bishop by Pope Pius VI in 1800 . In 1799 Neale invited three sisters of the Order of the Visitation of Holy Mary to open a monastery at Georgetown . On June 24 , 1799 , the young Georgetown Visitation Monastery under Mother Teresa Lalor began a Saturday school for young women . This developed into an academy , now Georgetown Visitation Preparatory School , in 1802 . Leonard Neale remained as president of Georgetown until 1806 when he was succeeded by Robert Molyneux , who died in 1808 . Leonard Neale 's brother , Francis Neale , then became president of Georgetown College in 1809 . 
 When the suppression of the Society of Jesus in Maryland ended in 1805 , several former Jesuits rejoined , including Leonard Neale , and Carroll commenced a series of agreements to ensure Jesuit involvement in the school . Carroll however never rejoined the Society . In 1806 the school began a novitiate for Jesuit recruits moving from Russia , which had harbored the Society during the suppression . 
 Carroll didn 't seek civil recognition for Georgetown until after the suppression of the international Society ended in 1814 . Instead of a state charter , he went to the federal government , then in charge of the District of Columbia . William Gaston , now a Congressman , sponsored the legislation , and Georgetown received the first federal charter on March 1 , 1815 . This allowed Georgetown to grant academic degrees , and the college 's first two recipients , a pair of brothers from New York named Charles and George <unk> , were awarded the degree of bachelor of arts in 1817 . Graduate degrees were first awarded in 1821 , and other Jesuit schools conferred degrees under Georgetown 's charter for many years afterward . In 1833 , the Holy See empowered Georgetown to confer degrees in philosophy and theology . 
 Founder John Carroll died December 3 , 1815 , at age eighty , and in his will he left Georgetown four @-@ hundred pounds sterling , which marked the beginning of Georgetown 's endowment . In 1830 , construction of an infirmary in the new Gervase Building brought the first hospital beds to Georgetown . In 1838 , school presidents Thomas F. Mulledy and William McSherry organized the sale of 272 slaves from a Jesuit owned tobacco plantation in Maryland to a Louisiana plantation , and funds from that sale were used to repay debts from recent school expansion . Mulledy was later disciplined in Rome by the Jesuit Society for ignoring their order to keep families of slaves intact . The slaves were shipped to the Deep South in the domestic slave trade , sold primarily to two sugar cane plantations . Some of the money was also used to found two Catholic high schools in New York City and Philadelphia , as the Jesuits saw a demand for urban ministry to serve the increasing number of immigrants from Europe , including Catholics from Ireland . 
 On June 10 , 1844 , the growing school was reincorporated by Congress under the name The President and Directors of Georgetown College . Georgetown 's Observatory , completed in 1844 , was used in 1846 to determine the latitude and longitude of Washington , D.C. , which was the first such calculation for the nation 's capital . In 1849 , four Catholic doctors frustrated with what they felt were discriminatory practices at neighboring Columbian College petitioned Georgetown President James Ryder to found a medical program . A building for this purpose was purchased at 12th and F Streets , and the School of Medicine was founded in 1850 , holding its first classes the following year . 
 = = = Early student life = = = 
 From its beginning , Georgetown was not intended to be exclusively Catholic , and over its first ten years , nearly one @-@ fifth of students were Protestant . A fifth of students were also from the Caribbean . By 1830 , Jewish students were known to be attending . European immigrants and Napoleonic War refugees also made up significant parts of the early student body . School rules were harshly enforced . Leonard Neale , a strict moralist , regulated students ' movements such that founder John Carrol accused him of running Georgetown " on the principles of a convent . " There were three student organized rebellions against the Georgetown administration in the antebellum period . The most notable of these occurred in January 1850 , against the administration of James A. Ryder over the school food . Students damaged the dormitories and took charge of a local hotel . 
 The first student society , the Sodality of Our Lady , was founded in 1810 as a religious devotional group . A strict revision of school rules in 1829 forbade personal conversations or particular associations . Despite this the Philodemic Society was founded in 1830 as the school 's debating and literary society , the oldest of its kind in America and the oldest secular group at Georgetown . Other debating societies were founded in its model , or in opposition to it in later years , such as the short lived <unk> Society and the <unk> Society , which lasted from 1839 until 1935 . The College Cadets were officially organized in 1836 , becoming the oldest military unit native to the District of Columbia . The Dramatic Association of Georgetown College , renamed the Mask and Bauble Dramatic Society after World War I , was founded in 1852 , and is itself the oldest surviving student dramatic society in America . 
 = = The Civil War = = 
 The Civil War was an important and tragic time for the University . Beginning on December 11 , 1859 the Philodemic Society debated whether or not the southern states should secede . The debate lasted weeks , and after the Society affirmed secession , a brawl ensued , and debates were canceled for the rest of 1860 . Fist fights on campus between northern and southern students soon became common . Beginning in 1861 , many students left their studies to join the war . 925 students ultimately enlisted with the Confederate Army and 216 with the Union Army ; between them 106 died in the war . Enrollment dropped from 313 students in 1859 to only 17 late in 1861 . By 1862 , Georgetown only had 120 total students , about ten percent of what it was just a few years earlier . Only seven students graduated in 1869 , down from over 300 a decade prior . 
 Responding to lack of adequate hospital beds and housing for soldiers needed to protect the District , the Union commandeered University buildings , and by the time of President Abraham Lincoln 's May 1861 visit to campus , 1 @,@ 400 Union Army troops were stationed in temporary quarters there . Of these 1 @,@ 300 were from the 69th Infantry Regiment , which established itself in Maguire Hall from May 4 , 1841 to June when the unit was replaced by the 79th New York Volunteer Infantry . The occupation ended in July when the unit left to fight in the First Battle of Bull Run , but the university remained home to soldiers as an infirmary for the remainder of the war . 
 Georgetown would later be connected to the assassination of Abraham Lincoln . Several of John Wilkes Booth 's conspirators had associations to Georgetown : David Herold , who accompanied Booth in his escape , attended the school between 1855 and 1858 and received a certificate in pharmacology in 1860 , while Samuel Arnold , who conspired with Booth to kidnap Lincoln , attended in the mid @-@ 1840s , and Dr. Samuel Mudd , who set Booth 's broken ankle following the assassination , studied medicine between 1851 and 1854 . Charles H. Liebermann , one of the founders of the medical school , was among the doctors who treated Lincoln the night he died . 
 The war drastically changed Georgetown , making it both more northern and more Catholic . Increasingly larger percentages of the student body came from northern cities , more populated with Catholic immigrants , while the student body had been primarily southern before the war . This dynamic is expressed in Georgetown 's official school colors . In 1876 , Georgetown College Boat Club , the school 's rowing team , adopted blue , from the uniform of the Union Army , and gray , from the uniforms of the Confederate States military forces , as their team colors in order to signify the peaceful unity between students from the North and those from the South . Students at Georgetown Visitation wove the first blue and gray uniforms for the team . Georgetown 's motto <unk> Unum , " both into one , " though used before the war , helped capture the unity spirit . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 In 1874 , Patrick Francis Healy became president of Georgetown University , becoming the first African American president of a predominantly white university . Healy 's influence on Georgetown was so far @-@ reaching that he is often referred to as the school 's " second founder . " He modernized the curriculum by requiring courses in the sciences , particularly chemistry and physics . Healy and his successors sought to bind the professional schools into a university , and concentrate on higher education . The most visible result of Healy 's presidency was the construction of a large building begun in 1877 and first used in 1881 , later named Healy Hall in his honor . 
 A school of law was approved by the Board of Directors in March 1870 , and graduated its first students in 1872 . In 1884 the " Law Department " moved to 6th and F Streets , N.W. , not far from the Medical School , and then again in 1891 to 506 E Street , N.W. In 1870 , Georgetown raised the raise the minimum age of enrollment at Georgetown Preparatory School from eight to twelve . This was raised again in 1894 to thirteen . As part of the focus on higher education , Georgetown Preparatory School relocated from campus in 1919 to nearby North Bethesda , Maryland , and fully separated from the University in 1927 . Georgetown Visitation Preparatory School has remained attached to the university campus , and while independently run , the two occasionally share facilities . 
 Numerous new schools were founded during twentieth @-@ century . The School of Foreign Service ( SFS ) was founded in 1919 by Edmund A. Walsh to prepare students for leadership in foreign commerce and diplomacy . The School of Languages and Linguistics was organized in 1949 and the School of Business was created out of the SFS in 1957 . New developments also came to School of Medicine . In 1898 , Georgetown University Hospital was first established on campus . Georgetown obtained the Washington Dental College in 1901 , and integrated it with the medical school . In 1903 , Georgetown University began an undergraduate medical program with the School of Nursing . A new Medical @-@ Dental Building on Reservoir Road was completed in 1930 and classes then moved to the main campus . In 1951 the School of Dentistry separated from the School of Medicine as an independent unit of Georgetown University . 
 On October 4 , 1966 , Congress passed a bill that recognized the school 's name as " Georgetown University " for the first time . The 1844 bill in effect until then had referred only to " Georgetown College " , which at that point was known as the College of Arts and Sciences and was just one branch of the university . In 1970 Lauinger Library was also completed , bringing space for a rapidly growing library collection . In 1971 , following the completion of the Bernard P. McDonough Hall , the law school moved to its present location at 1st and F Streets at 600 New Jersey Avenue . 
 = = Across borders = = 
 The 1960s saw major changes in administration as well as in the student body . Female students have been admitted to the School of Medicine since 1880 , to the School of Nursing since its founding , to the Graduate School since 1943 , and to the School of Foreign Service since 1944 . While most of the university was made available to women on a limited basis by 1952 , it wasn 't until the College of Arts and Sciences welcomed its first female students in the 1969 – 1970 academic year that Georgetown became fully coeducational . 
 Freshmen hazing rituals , long tolerated by the administration , were banned in 1962 after one student brought suit against the school for injuries he sustained . President Lawrence C. Gorman phased out restrictions on attendance by African Americans , and Samuel Halsey Jr. became the first black undergraduate in 1950 . The Black Student Alliance was formed in 1968 , and in 1969 Georgetown named the first black member of the Board of Directors since Patrick Francis Healy . 
 Modern Georgetown is largely a product of substantial changes during the 1980s . In 1982 , the School of Foreign Service moved into its new home in the Edward B. Bunn S.J. Intercultural Center . The 1984 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament championship by Georgetown 's men 's basketball team helped make Georgetown University a household name with stars such as Patrick Ewing and Dikembe Mutombo under Coach John Thompson . Georgetown ended its bicentennial year of 1989 by electing Leo J. O 'Donovan as president . He subsequently launched the Third Century Campaign to build the school 's endowment . In December 2003 , Georgetown completed the campaign , joining twenty other universities worldwide to raise at least $ 1 billion in a single fund drive . The campaign supported financial aid , academic chair endowment , and new capital projects . 
 In 1987 , the University decided to close the School of Dentistry following the class of 1990 for financial reasons , as the number of dental students dropped nationwide . Supplies and equipment from the school were sent to Pontifical <unk> University in Bogotá , Colombia . In 1994 , the School of Languages and Linguistics was folded into the College , and is now the Faculty of Languages and Linguistics . On October 7 , 1998 , the School of Business was renamed the McDonough School of Business in honor of alumnus Robert Emmett McDonough and in 2009 , it moved into the newly constructed Rafik B. Hariri Building . In 1999 the School of Nursing added three other health related majors and appended its name to become the School of Nursing and Health Studies . 
 John J. DeGioia , Georgetown 's first lay president , has led the school since 2001 . DeGioia has continued its financial modernization and has sought to " expand opportunities for intercultural and interreligious dialogue . " In October 2002 , Georgetown University began studying the feasibility of opening a campus of the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service in Qatar , when the non @-@ profit Qatar Foundation first proposed the idea . The School of Foreign Service in Qatar opened in 2005 along with four other U.S. universities in the Education City development . That same year , Georgetown began hosting a two @-@ week workshop at Fudan University 's School of International Relations and Public Affairs in Shanghai , China . This later developed into a more formal connection when Georgetown opened a liaison office at Fudan on January 12 , 2008 to further collaboration . 
 DeGioia also founded the annual Building Bridges Seminar in 2001 , which brings global religious leaders together , and is part Georgetown 's effort to promote religious pluralism . In 1974 , Woodstock College was refounded as the Woodstock Theological Center on Georgetown 's campus . The Center for Contemporary Arab Studies was opened on September 3 , 1975 with grants from Oman , the United Arab Emirates , Egypt , and Mobil Oil . In 1993 the Center for Muslim @-@ Christian Understanding was opened and after a $ 20 million grant from Saudi Prince Al @-@ Waleed bin Talal in 2005 , the center was renamed the " Prince Alwaleed Center for Muslim – Christian Understanding " . The Berkley Center for Religion , Peace , and World Affairs was begun as an initiative in 2004 , and after a grant from William R. Berkley , was launched as an independent organization in 2006 . Additionally , The Center for International and Regional Studies opened in 2005 at the new Qatar campus . 
 = = Fictional depictions = = 
 Georgetown , as a major world university , has been featured in many media over the years . The most prominent example is the 1971 horror novel , The Exorcist , written by William Peter Blatty , who received an English degree from Georgetown in 1950 . The novel is loosely based on a series of 1949 exorcisms conducted on a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old boy at Georgetown University Hospital , nearby Maryland , and in St. Louis , Missouri . In 1973 , Blatty 's bestselling novel was made into a film , also titled The Exorcist . Like the novel , the film was set at Georgetown and filmed on campus during the fall semester in 1972 . The climatic scene uses a steep staircase between Prospect Street and Canal Road , previously know popularly as the " Hitchcock Steps " for their spooky appeal . However , since the film 's release they have been called the " Exorcist steps . " 
 The 1985 " Brat Pack " film St. Elmo 's Fire also revolved around a group of students who had just graduated from Georgetown . The bar that much of the film takes place in is based on The Tombs , a bar and restaurant known for its large student clientele and rowing <unk> , located one block from Georgetown 's front gates in a historic university owned house . Georgetown denied the producers the rights to film on campus , so parts of the film were shot at the nearby University of Maryland , College Park . Additionally , Georgetown University has been a destination for characters in films such as Above the Rim , Save the Last Dance , Election , and The Girl Next Door , as well as television shows such as The Sopranos and The West Wing , which also filmed scenes on campus . The film Memento was written by Jonathan Nolan , a Georgetown alumnus , and the main character 's nemesis , John G. , is said to be named after John Glavin , a full professor of Victorian literature and screenwriting in Georgetown 's Department of English . 
 = Wehrmacht forces for the Ardennes Offensive = 
 This is a sub @-@ article of Battle of the Bulge 
 The Wehrmacht forces for the Ardennes Offensive were the product of a German recruitment effort targeting German males between the ages of 16 and 60 , to replace troops lost during the past five months of fighting the Western Allies on the Western Front . Although the Wehrmacht ( German Armed Forces ) was keeping the Allied forces contained along the Siegfried Line , the campaign had cost the Wehrmacht nearly 750 @,@ 000 casualties , mostly irreplaceable . However , the rapid advance of the Allied armies in August and September after Operation Overlord had created a supply problem for the Allies . By October , the progress of the Western Allies ' three army groups had slowed considerably , allowing the Germans to partly rebuild their strength and prepare for the defense of Germany itself . The German leader , Adolf Hitler , decided that the only way to reverse his fortunes would be to launch a counter @-@ offensive on the Western Front , forcing both the United States and Great Britain to an early peace , and allowing the Wehrmacht to shift its forces to the Eastern Front , where it could defeat the Soviet Red Army . 
 Hitler earmarked three field armies for the offensive : the Sixth Panzer , Fifth Panzer and Seventh . These accumulated over 240 @,@ 000 soldiers , spread over seven panzer divisions , two panzer brigades and thirteen infantry divisions . The bulk of the offensive 's armored strength was in the Sixth Panzer Army , which was tasked with the capture of the Belgian port of Antwerp . To its south was the Fifth Panzer Army , outfitted to protect the Sixth 's flank while it crossed the Meuse river . The southernmost flank was covered by the Seventh Army , composed of three infantry corps and ordered to protect the Fifth Army 's southern flank and tie down American reserves in Luxembourg . 
 Apart from these three armies the Wehrmacht also designed two special units to aid the offensive . One of these was a battalion @-@ sized airborne formation tasked with dropping behind American lines during the first day of the offensive , allowing a panzer division from the Sixth Panzer Army easy access across the Meuse . The second unit was a panzer brigade , intending to go behind enemy lines dressed in American uniforms to give false orders and spread confusion among American defenders in the Ardennes . Also earmarked for the offensive were around 800 aircraft , deployed by the Luftwaffe ( German Air Force ) , to provide air support to German forces and destroy much of the Allied air power on the ground . 
 To prepare these forces the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( German High Command ) increased the call @-@ up age range and recruited from Eastern European countries controlled by German forces , increasing manpower on the Western Front from roughly 400 @,@ 000 to just over 1 million soldiers . Hastily organized into new divisions , these infantrymen lacked training and sometimes even weapons . Despite an immense German effort in the face of intense Allied bombing to build the necessary stocks for the offensive , there were shortages of fuel , ammunition , weapons and manpower by the scheduled date of the counterattack . Even the elite Waffen @-@ SS divisions were often deficient in manpower . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1 December 1944 , the only sector of the front where the Western Allies were not on the offensive was along the Ardennes . In late July 1944 , Allied forces in fighting in Normandy were able to break out of the Normandy beachhead in Operation Cobra , forcing a general eastwards retreat of German forces . General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander on the Western Front , used the opportunity to encircle the German army in Normandy . In an effort to reverse their misfortunes , the Wehrmacht launched Operation Lüttich on 7 August in the vicinity of the town of Mortain . Despite efforts to break through the U.S. 30th Infantry Division to cut off Allied forces in Northern France , by 13 August it was clear that the offensive had failed . Even while battle was raging around Mortain , Allied armies continued the encirclement of the Wehrmacht in Normandy , closing what would be known as the Falaise Pocket on 20 August ; the encirclement cost the Germans an estimated 10 @,@ 000 dead and another 50 @,@ 000 wounded . Although a much larger number of German soldiers were able to escape eastwards , they were forced to leave behind their heavy weapons and equipment . Paris was liberated on 25 August 1944 , marking the end of Operation Overlord . 
 Almost immediately , the Allied drive across the Seine River continued , although the Wehrmacht was able to prevent a complete rout ; according to the Germans , the equipment abandoned as they retreated from the Seine was as much of a disaster as the Falaise Pocket . Field Marshal Walter Model , who had temporarily replaced Gerd von Rundstedt as commander of German troops in France , reported that some panzer divisions only had five to ten operational tanks , while he could not match the Western Allies ' mobility with his poorly outfitted infantry divisions . By early September , as the Allies pushed to the German border , Model calculated that the actual strength of the 74 divisions at his disposal was no more than that of 25 . In an effort to stabilize German lines in the West , von Rundstedt was reappointed as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief West on 7 September 1944 . Approaching the Belgian border in early September the Allied offensive came to a grinding halt , as its supply lines struggled to keep up with the pace of the advance . For example , on 2 September , Lieutenant General George Patton 's U.S. Third Army requested 2 @,@ 840 @,@ 000 liters ( 750 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) of gasoline , and received 96 @,@ 000 liters ( 25 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) . 
 The Wehrmacht began to reorganize itself along a defensive front known as the Siegfried Line . Eisenhower felt that he could relieve the supply problem by using Antwerp to unload supplies in Europe ; however , German troops held the Scheldt estuary and consequently Allied shipping could not get through to the Belgian port city . In an effort to open the Scheldt estuary , Eisenhower approved Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery 's Operation Market Garden , which was launched on 17 September . However , by 21 September the operation had failed to dislodge German defenders from the southern Netherlands and open the seaway to Antwerp ; the supply problem was at its worst . 
 Using the opportunity to rebuild their strength , the German Army in the West was able to accumulate a strength of around 500 tanks and assault guns by late September , despite prioritization of new equipment for the Eastern Front . This was in stark contrast to the estimated 100 which had been available before . German defenses along the Siegfried Line continued to strengthen , and the Wehrmacht was able to establish a defensive depth of an average of 4 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) , with the strongest defenses built opposite of Patton 's Third Army . 
 Despite Germany 's reorganization , their manpower was still incomparable to that of the Western Allies . While Germany 's Army Group B was able to increase their armored strength from 100 to 239 vehicles , these were opposed by 2 @,@ 300 Allied tanks . Field Marshal Model reported that only 6 @,@ 500 replacements had been sent to cover the 75 @,@ 000 casualties suffered during the month of September . General Eisenhower commanded three army groups , totaling eight field armies with 55 divisions ; these provided a two @-@ to @-@ one advantage in artillery guns and a twenty @-@ to @-@ one advantage in tanks , and could count on almost 14 @,@ 000 combat aircraft , as compared to the Luftwaffe 's 573 . 
 = = = Battles along the Siegfried Line = = = 
 Patton 's Third Army was tasked with the capture of Metz and the Lorraine ; his first obstacle was Fort Driant , built in 1902 and improved over the years by both the French and the Germans . Expecting only a small garrison , the Third Army launched its attack on 27 September 1944 . Despite heavy aerial and artillery bombardment , no appreciable damage was done to the giant fortress . Several ground attacks carried out between 27 September and 11 October failed in taking the fort , and ultimately General Patton was forced to call off the attack and look for another route to Metz . Fort Driant did not fall until after Patton had successfully taken Metz and the majority of forts around Driant . The Third Army 's battle around Metz had cost an estimated 47 @,@ 000 American casualties . This was reflected in the fact that , while in August the Third Army had advanced 600 kilometers ( 370 mi ) , it advanced only 35 kilometers ( 22 mi ) between September and December 1944 . 
 The 256 @,@ 300 man strong U.S. First Army , commanded by General Courtney Hodges , was ordered to break through the Siegfried Line around the area of Aachen , in order to reach the Rur river . Although the First Army began to encircle the area around Aachen in early September , the Battle of Aachen did not end until 21 October . The city cost the Americans roughly 3 @,@ 000 casualties , but had opened the path to the Rur ( river ) river . Despite the casualties taken the ground gained was comparatively worthless , and the fighting for Aachen had not necessarily brought German defeat any closer . 
 The Germans , too , had suffered heavy casualties ; the 116th Panzer Division , for example , had lost its offensive capabilities after countless attempts to break the U.S. First Army 's encirclement of Aachen . This gave American and British commanders a false sense of security , believing that the Wehrmacht did not have the strength to launch a counteroffensive . Given their view on the state of the German armed forces and their need to push to the Rur , the First Army decided to drive German forces out of the Hürtgen Forest — located on the Belgian – German border — in an attempt to take a series of dams which could be used by the Germans to flood the valley below . 
 The Battle of Hürtgen Forest began on 19 September , with the assault of the 3rd Armored and 9th Infantry Divisions . The battle quickly turned into one of attrition ; by mid @-@ October the two Allied divisions had lost nearly 80 % of their total combat strength , or roughly 4 @,@ 500 men , while the Germans had lost close to 3 @,@ 300 . On 2 November the U.S. 28th Infantry Division entered the fight , but was not able to make headway and was forced to defend itself against German counterattacks between 5 – 7 November . The 28th Infantry Division lost over 6 @,@ 100 combat casualties in Hürtgen . 
 Unable to pry the Hürtgen from German hands , the Americans pitted the 4th Infantry Division into the battle and between 7 November and 3 December this division lost over 7 @,@ 000 personnel . After also throwing the 8th Infantry Division into the attack it was able to take the town of Hürtgen , but was not able to advance much farther given the amount of casualties it had sustained . In total , American forces suffered 24 @,@ 000 combat casualties and had failed to reach their original objectives , the dams . 
 The Germans also suffered heavily ; the 47th Panzer Corps had committed its last reserves into the battle and could hardly afford to maintain its defensive line , while the 47th Volksgrenadier Division had suffered over 4 @,@ 300 casualties during the fighting and the 340th Division had lost nearly 2 @,@ 000 soldiers . This latter division was replaced by the 363rd Volksgrenadier and 10th SS Panzer Divisions , as the 340th was pulled out in order to be rebuilt . 
 While the Allied armies continued their slow eastward drive between September and November 1944 , the Germans prepared for a counteroffensive . Adolf Hitler , the German leader , believed that by launching an offensive in the West he could force the United States and Great Britain to an early peace , and thereby transfer the entirety of the Wehrmacht to the Eastern Front , where he could bring the Soviet offensive to a standstill and defeat it . 
 A German victory would be of greater magnitude against the Western Allies than it would against the Soviet Union . According to General Alfred Jodl , " The Russians had so many troops that even if we had succeeded in destroying thirty divisions it would have made no difference . On the other hand , if we destroyed thirty divisions in the West , it would amount to more than a third of the whole invasion Army . " Hitler believed that inaction in the West would only conclude in an inevitable German defeat . His basic plan involved an early morning breakthrough along the lightly defended sector of the Ardennes Forest , with the eventual task of crossing the Meuse River and capturing Antwerp in order to deny the Western Allies a crucial port . 
 = = Wehrmacht dispositions = = 
 By December 1944 , German forces defending against continued Western Allied offensives were organized into four separate army groups ; three ( Army Groups H , B. and G ) fell under the command of Field Marshal von Rundstedt , while the fourth ( Army Group <unk> ) fell under the command of Heinrich Himmler . Army Group H , containing the Twenty @-@ fifth and First Parachute Armies was commanded by Luftwaffe Colonel General Kurt Student , while to his south lay Model 's Army Group B , containing the Fifteenth , Sixth Panzer , Fifth Panzer and Seventh Armies . The Sixth and Fifth Panzer armies , as well as the Seventh Army , were slated to take part in the upcoming Ardennes offensive . Model 's southern flank was protected by Army Group G , commanded by General Hermann Balck , which was composed of the German First Army . In total , the attack would involve thirty divisions , including twelve panzer divisions — roughly 240 @,@ 000 men . 
 The offensive 's main effort would come from the Sixth Panzer Army , commanded by SS General Sepp Dietrich . The core of the Sixth Panzer Army , composed of four Schutzstaffel ( SS ) panzer divisions , had been withdrawn from battle early and had gone through a period of rest and refit , redeploying to the front in early November . This army was made up of the I SS Panzer Corps , commanded by General Hermann <unk> ; this corps included the 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler , 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend , 3rd Panzergrenadier Division , and the 12th and 277th Volksgrenadier divisions . The I SS Panzer Corps also included a number of ad hoc vanguard units , including Kampfgruppe Peiper ( forming part of the 1st SS Panzer Division ) , which contained a panzer battalion ( 72 mixed Panzer IV and Panther tanks ) from the 1st SS Panzer Regiment , the 501st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion ( 45 Tiger Is ) and the 3rd SS Panzer Grenadier Battalion . Under the 12th SS Panzer Division was Battle Group Kuhlmann , containing the 1st SS Panzer Battalion ( 80 tanks ) and the 560th SS Heavy Panzer Battalion . Also in the Sixth Panzer Army was the II SS Panzer Corps , offering the 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich and the 9th SS Panzer Division Hohenstaufen . Finally , Dietrich 's army also included the 326th and 246th Volksgrenadier divisions , forming the 67th ( LXVII ) Infantry Corps under the command of General Otto Hitzfeld . 
 South of Dietrich 's forces was General Hasso von Manteuffel 's Fifth Panzer Army . <unk> 's army was formed up by the 66th Infantry Corps ( 18th and 62nd Volksgrenadier divisions ) , 58th Panzer Corps ( 116th Panzer Division and 560th Volksgrenadier Division ) , the 47th Panzer Corps ( 2nd Panzer Division and 26th Volksgrenadier Division ) , the Panzer @-@ Lehr @-@ Division and the Führer <unk> Brigade . Although held as a reserve , the Panzer @-@ Lehr @-@ Division was officially attached to the 47th Panzer Corps . The Fifth Panzer Army was tasked with supporting the Sixth Panzer Army 's left flank , and breach the Meuse River by the third day of the offensive . The Fifth Panzer Army was positioned directly opposite the American 28th Infantry Division . 
 The third army which was to take part in the impending German offensive was General Erich <unk> 's Seventh Army , which was tasked with protecting the Fifth Panzer Army 's left flank and tying down Allied reserves in Luxembourg . This army included General Baptist <unk> ' 85th Infantry Corps ( consisting of the 5th Fallschirmjäger and 352nd Volksgrenadier divisions ) , General Franz Beyer 's 80th Infantry Corps ( <unk> and 212th Volksgrenadier Divisions ) and Kavallerie Graf von <unk> und <unk> 's 8th Infantry Corps . These three armies offered five panzer divisions , thirteen infantry @-@ type divisions ( airborne and <unk> ) for immediate assault , and another two panzer divisions and a panzer brigade in immediate support ; these represented 70 % of the strength which Hitler had originally decided to allot to the Ardennes offensive . 
 = = = Special units = = = 
 The Germans also planned an airborne operation ( Operation <unk> ) in the area north of <unk> in order to take the road junction at <unk> Michel , allowing the Sixth Army 's 12th SS Panzer Division to advance to the Belgian city of Liège . The operation would be undertaken by a special unit formed up of one hundred paratroopers from each battalion of Army Group H 's First Parachute Army . The battalion @-@ sized unit would be commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte and was named Battle Group von der Heydte . Although von der Heydte originally requested to use the entirety of the 6th Parachute Regiment , this was denied on the basis that it would alert the Western Allies to the intentions of the Wehrmacht ; ultimately , however , the German general was allowed to hand pick his platoon and company commanders . 
 Unfortunately , many of the men to choose from were not even airborne qualified , and about 20 % of those chosen for the operation were not qualified to jump with weapons . General von der Heydte immediately dismissed the worst 150 men given to him and replaced them with volunteers from the parachute school , some of whom did not have any jump experience . In the little time available some men received basic jump training , although matters were complicated by the lack of transport aircraft . Kampfgruppe von der Heydte also had at their disposal some 300 dummy parachutists , meant to be dropped north of the actual drop zone in order to confuse American forces . By 15 December 1944 , von der Heydte was able to put together a decent fighting force . 
 Operation Greif , commanded by Otto Skorzeny 's 150th Panzer brigade , was designed to capture certain bridges over the Meuse River . Skorzeny was ordered to dress his brigade in American and British uniforms , while using Western Allied vehicles and speaking English , in an effort to not only capture those bridges , but to pass on false orders and confuse Allied forces defending the breakthrough sector . The unit 's men were not alerted to the intentions of the offensive until the very last minute ; they were warned that their preparations were for an impending Allied offensive . The effort to recruit for the unit was nearly compromised by an army @-@ wide order requesting the names of English @-@ speaking personnel and any captured Allied vehicles ; although Skorzeny originally attempted to cancel the operation , he later turned the misfortune around by allowing rumors of the unit to circulate freely in order to hide the truth . Skorzeny was also wary of the fact that he and his men would have to wear American uniforms , which risked having them shot as spies if captured ; ultimately , his men were allowed to wear German uniforms under their American clothing . 
 Ultimately , of the 500 men attached to the force , only around 10 were able to speak English fluently , while 30 – 40 could speak it well enough , 120 – 150 fairly well and the rest only what they had learned in grade school . With only two working M4 Sherman tanks available , 13 Panther tanks were doctored to resemble American tanks and attached to the unit ; Skorzeny was also given 10 Allied scout cars , with six of them breaking down during the training period . The unit was also low on American small @-@ arms and ammunition , not to mention American uniforms ; nevertheless , the unit continued training . 
 = = = Luftwaffe deployments = = = 
 Hitler promised his army commanders complete air support , reporting that Goering had told him that the Luftwaffe was able to deploy some 3 @,@ 000 fighters for the operation ; although the German leader also commented to discount 1 @,@ 000 from the report , due to Goering 's tendency to exaggerate , he said that there would be nonetheless at least 2 @,@ 000 fighters to protect German ground forces . These aircraft were to support the Fifth and Sixth Panzer Armies , as well as launch a preemptive aerial offensive aimed at destroying Allied aircraft on the ground , before they had a chance to be used against the Germans . This figure was later revised to 800 – 900 aircraft , which would be taken from squadrons slotted to defend against Allied bombing raids over German cities . The offensive had also been scheduled to take place when the weather prohibited Allied air support . 
 = = Mobilization and movements = = 
 The Wehrmacht suffered nearly 750 @,@ 000 casualties between June and November 1944 , forcing the German leadership to recruit from the Kriegsmarine , Luftwaffe , and industry , while extending the call @-@ up age to all males between 16 and 60 years of age . This extension allowed the Germans to increase their manpower in Western Europe from around 410 @,@ 000 on 1 December to just over 1 @.@ 3 million on 15 December . These new soldiers were poorly trained , and this was exacerbated by the fact that most did not know of the offensive until days before it was launched , meaning many were not even informed of their objectives . The <unk> divisions ordered to protect the flanks of the three advancing armies were not even properly reinforced , because the Germans found it difficult to detach these units from areas of the front being pressured by the slow Allied advance . 
 Field Marshal von Rundstedt made repeated requests for more men , noting that the Western Allies were completely superior in manpower , yet was denied by Wehrmacht High Command . Rundstedt noted the difficulty of holding encircled American troops once the operation began , due to the lack of sufficient infantrymen . New infantrymen received a maximum of eight weeks worth of training , and the new divisions were deficient of anti @-@ tank and artillery weapons ; their make @-@ up was at best eclectic , as divisions were formed from the remnants of units which had taken heavy casualties in fighting in the West or on the Eastern Front . Some new infantrymen had been recruited from occupied territories in the East , and so many new soldiers did not even know German . 
 The forces in best condition , earmarked for the Ardennes Offensive , were those which belonged to the Waffen @-@ SS ; these forces were refitted and trained inside Germany , and then deployed to the front . But , even these were sometimes undermanned ; the 2nd SS Panzer Division , for example , was 10 % below the established manpower requirements . Even by 15 December , the transfer of personnel to the West had not been completed . 
 Although Western Allied bomber missions increased in intensity as the war progressed , 1944 was marked with some of the highest production rates for German industry ; for example , while in January 1944 1 @,@ 017 fighter aircraft had been manufactured , in September of that year 2 @,@ 878 were built . Similarly , in 1943 6 @,@ 083 tanks of all types had been produced , while 8 @,@ 466 were manufactured in 1944 . However , the effects of the air raids did deal damage ; for example , Panzer IV production decreased from 300 in August 1944 to only 180 in September , because the steel plant producing the tank 's armor had been destroyed by Allied bombers . Panther tank production also decreased since July 1944 due to the Allied bombing raids . 
 Nevertheless , the Germans amassed close to 1 @,@ 400 armored fighting vehicles for the offensive . Allied bombers also affected the movement of supplies to the front , though some 500 trainloads of equipment , fuel and ammunition were delivered without being discovered , despite Allied control of the skies . This , however , was not able to cope with the shortage of small @-@ arms ; 1 @.@ 5 million infantry weapons were required to arm the new <unk> . Ammunition was in dire need , as well , and ultimately the rail system was forced to stop troop movements in favor of moving more supplies to the front . 
 Fuel was in considerable shortage , as well ; although the Germans stockpiled the 2 @,@ 303 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 litres ( 507 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of fuel required for the initial phase of the offensive , half of it was not delivered because of transportation shortages . Of the petroleum stocked for the offensive , much of it was released to units operating along the front , fighting against American and British actions in the Lorraine and around Aachen . Some 18 @,@ 184 @,@ 360 litres ( 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) were supposed to be accumulated for the first days of the offensive , in the hope that much more would be captured by the advance ; by early December less than 9 @,@ 092 @,@ 180 litres ( 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) were available , and only around 14 @,@ 411 @,@ 100 litres ( 3 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 imp gal ) were available by the start of the offensive . Furthermore , initial fuel consumption estimates were incorrect because they had not taken into account the increase in fuel consumption which resulted from movement over the terrain of the Ardennes , including the snow . 
 = = Impact on the Eastern Front = = 
 On the eve of the Soviet Vistula – Oder Offensive , in January 1945 , the Red Army had an impressive force of 1 @,@ 670 @,@ 000 soldiers , 28 @,@ 360 artillery guns and heavy mortars , over a thousand Katyusha rocket launchers , 3 @,@ 300 armored fighting vehicles and nearly 3 @,@ 000 aircraft . Against this , two out of five army groups positioned on the Eastern Front , Army Group Center and Army Group A , lay in the path of the Soviet offensive ; together , they could count on roughly 980 @,@ 000 personnel , 1 @,@ 800 armored fighting vehicles , and nearly 900 combat aircraft . During December 1944 the Wehrmacht had concentrated the bulk of its mechanized forces and logistical support on the Western Front , reducing its ability to defend Germany 's eastern border from the Soviet Union . For example , 2 @,@ 299 new and refitted tanks had been delivered to the Western Front by December 1944 , while German forces in the East had only received approximately 920 . In January 1945 the Wehrmacht was roughly 800 @,@ 000 men short of complete strength , despite the reorganization of German units in order to take into consideration manpower losses , much if its strength used for the Ardennes Offensive . 
 This was made clear to the German Armed Forces ' high command when General Heinz Guderian presented them with intelligence on the impending Soviet assault , and on a comparison of strength ; the German general claimed that the Red Army had an advantage of eleven to one in infantry , seven to one in armor and twenty to one in artillery . It was then mentioned that the defense of the Eastern Front would require the redeployment of armored divisions from the Ardennes . In fact , von Rundstedt had asked for the Ardennes Offensive to be called off on 22 December 1944 , in favor of reorienting Germany 's armored strength to the East , but this was flatly refused by Hitler . The offensive against American forces in the Ardennes forest had preoccupied Hitler 's mind , and the Eastern Front had suddenly become of secondary importance to the Wehrmacht High Command For example , the Sixth Panzer Army would not be transferred to the Eastern Front until 16 January 1945 . 
 = 2007 USC Trojans football team = 
 The 2007 USC Trojans football team ( variously " Trojans " or " USC " ) represented the University of Southern California during the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season , winning a share of the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference ( Pac @-@ 10 ) championship and winning the 2008 Rose Bowl . The team was coached by Pete Carroll and played its home games at the Los Angeles Coliseum . 
 The team entered the season with high expectations . It was ranked No. 1 in all national pre @-@ season polls , picked unanimously to win the Pac @-@ 10 Conference and expected to contend for a national championship . Those hopes were dealt a major blow when the Trojans lost to 41 @-@ point underdog Stanford in a mid @-@ season game that was named one of the greatest upsets in a season that became defined by them . After their second loss , there were questions as to whether the team would be able to even win their own conference , let alone compete nationally . However , USC defied mid @-@ season expectations and rallied , finishing the season ranked No. 2 in the Coaches ' Poll and No. 3 in the Associated Press ( AP ) Poll . By the end of the season various sports journalists said the Trojans were playing the best football of anyone in the country . 
 The Trojans accomplished two major feats : They became the first team to win ( or share ) six straight Pac @-@ 10 titles , and were the first team in major college football to achieve six straight 11 @-@ win seasons . After the season , ten USC players were selected in the 2008 NFL Draft , with a school @-@ record seven players selected in the first two rounds . As of the completion of the 2012 NFL Draft , 39 players from the 2007 USC Trojans football team were drafted into the NFL . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season outlook = = = 
 The Trojans ended the 2006 season with a victory in the 2007 Rose Bowl Game and a No. 4 ranking in both AP and Coaches polls , their fifth straight year winning the Pac @-@ 10 Championship and finishing in the top 4 . During that 5 @-@ year period , the team won two national championships ( 2003 , 2004 ) . Prior to the 2007 season , the Trojans were ranked No. 1 in all national pre @-@ season polls and were expected to challenge for the National Championship . The team received a boost in the offseason when many draft @-@ eligible juniors decided to return to school for their senior seasons ; the holdover of talented veterans was a major factor in the Trojans being considered preeminent favorites for a national championship . As expected , USC was at the top of the first Coaches Poll of the season , released on August 3 , 2007 , with 45 of a possible 60 first @-@ place votes ; other teams receiving first @-@ place votes were No. 2 Louisiana State University ( LSU ) with 4 votes , No. 3 Florida with 6 votes , and No. 5 Michigan with 2 votes . USC was also at the top of the first AP Poll , released on August 18 , with 62 of 65 first @-@ place votes , with No. 2 LSU receiving 2 votes and No. 3 West Virginia receiving one . In mid @-@ August , all twelve experts polled by ESPN picked USC to win the season 's BCS Championship Game . On August 29 , 2007 , the day before the season began , three of four experts at SI.com predicted USC would win the BCS Championship Game , attributing the decision to the Trojans defense . 
 In terms of overall talent , Carroll stated that the 2007 squad is the " most competitive team we 've had " during his six @-@ year tenure as coach . Senior starting quarterback John David Booty entered the season as a front @-@ runner for the Heisman Trophy . Booty , along with returning senior tackle Sam Baker , were ranked as two of the " Top 20 Players Heading Into 2007 " by Sports Illustrated . 
 The Trojans entered pre @-@ season fall camp well stocked at the running back position , with 10 former high school Super Prep All @-@ Americans , nine of whom were Prep Star all @-@ Americans and seven were Parade all @-@ Americans . The exceptional running back situation at USC was a major factor in Sports Illustrated forecasting the 2007 season as " The Year of the Running Back . " In judging USC as a pre @-@ season favorite , particular emphasis was made on the defense . Considered to be one of the best defenses during the 2006 season , the Trojans entered 2007 with 10 returning starters and key backups . After a one @-@ season experiment with the 3 – 4 defense formation , the defense returned to using the 4 – 3 . The highlight of the defense was the linebacking corp , led by Brian Cushing , Keith Rivers and Rey Maualuga . 
 At the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference media day , the Trojans were the unanimous pre @-@ season pick to win the conference ; this was USC 's fifth year in a row as the favorite to win the conference title , and only the third time in conference history that a team had been picked unanimously ( the other two were USC in 2004 and 2005 ) . 
 = = = Recruiting class = = = 
 USC 's stellar recruiting class was highlighted by the three highest ranked players from the " ESPN 150 " : No. 1 Joe McKnight ( RB ) ; No. 2 Chris <unk> ( LB ) ; and No. 3 Marc Tyler ( RB ) . The Trojans also landed Scout.com 's National Player of the Year and top overall prospect for 2007 , Everson Griffen . Other notable signees included Rivals.com 's No. 1 WR Ronald Johnson and 5 @-@ star OL Kristofer O 'Dowd . Despite recruiting substantially fewer players than other programs , USC signed the No. 1 or No. 2 recruiting class in various rankings , along with the Florida Gators , the winners of the 2006 National Championship . In the pre @-@ season , McKnight and Johnson were named two of the top @-@ 10 impact freshman for 2007 . 
 The football program received 18 letters of intent on National Signing Day , February 7 , 2007 , listed below : 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 In May , the Trojans were joined by former Arkansas quarterback Mitch Mustain , who had an 8 – 0 win / loss record as a starter during his freshman ( and only ) year with the team . Mustain joined fellow Arkansas teammate and wide receiver Damian Williams , who transferred from Arkansas before the 2006 bowl season . Due to NCAA transfer rules all would be unable to compete until 2008 , although they would be allowed on the scout team . 
 In early summer , Jordan Cameron , a former freshman basketball player from Brigham Young University , also transferred to USC to play football as a wide receiver . However , when USC refused to accept some of Cameron 's credits from Brigham Young , he was forced to withdraw and attend Ventura College . He missed the football season but was given the option to try to rejoin the team in 2008 . Even if he had stayed at USC , due to NCAA transfer rules he would have been ineligible to play in 2007 . Cameron ended up enrolling at USC a year later . 
 With the late 2006 dismissal of Troy Van <unk> ( academics ) and the death of Mario Danelo , USC was left with only one experienced kicker : David Buehler , a 2006 junior college transfer from Santa Ana College who competed mainly at fullback and safety , but was used for one successful field goal attempt the previous season . In July 2007 , Joe Houston , a junior college kicker from El Camino College , joined the team as a " preferred walk @-@ on " , guaranteed a non @-@ scholarship spot on the team . As a junior college transfer , Houston would be able to play for the Trojans immediately . USC also recruited former University of Nebraska kicker , Jordan Congdon , who was not eligible for the 2007 season ; and Brad Smith , formerly of Davidson College . Smith was able to play immediately under an NCAA rule that permits non @-@ scholarship players who have already received a degree to transfer once with immediate eligibility . 
 = = = Departures = = = 
 Following the 2006 season , several players graduated , including starting senior All @-@ Americans Steve Smith ( wide receiver ) and Ryan Kalil ( center ) , as well as all @-@ conference linebackers Dallas <unk> and Oscar Lua . Junior All @-@ American Dwayne Jarrett , who was their leading receiver in 2005 and 2006 , renounced his eligibility and joined the NFL . 
 The Trojans entered fall training camp with a high number of scholarship running backs ( 10 ) , all of whom were highly touted recruits . In August , midway through camp , running back Emmanuel Moody announced he was leaving USC . Moody , who was the second @-@ leading rusher in the 2006 season , had gained 458 yards on 79 carries in a rotating platoon of running backs in 2006 and had recently been one of three USC running backs appearing on the regional cover of Sports Illustrated 's college football preview edition . Injuries had limited his playing and practice time : he suffered an ankle injury that caused him to miss the team 's last four games of the 2006 season , then missed almost all of spring practice due to a hamstring injury . Halfway through the summer training camp , Moody bruised his knee and was forced to stop practicing . He wished to be a featured player and stated he had " felt forgotten " coming into training camp due to his recent lack of playing and practice time . After looking at several schools , including Oklahoma State and North Carolina , Moody transferred to the University of Florida . 
 At about the same time , backup receiver and redshirt freshman <unk> Holland was dismissed from the team , although not for any violation of team rules . He was allowed to stay on scholarship for the year . Holland redshirted the previous season after breaking his collarbone , reinjured it during spring practice and had clashed with coaches during his return to fall camp . He would later transfer to the University of Oregon . 
 = = = Offseason news = = = 
 On January 6 , 2007 , Shortly after the Trojans ended their 2006 season with a win at the 2007 Rose Bowl , two @-@ year starting placekicker Mario Danelo was found dead at the bottom of a cliff in San Pedro , California . Danelo had been expected to start during the 2007 season . For the 2007 season , USC players wore a # 19 sticker on their helmets in honor of Danelo ; in addition the Kennedy @-@ Jones practice field had the number " 19 " sprayed onto its end zones and the Coliseum hung a banner above the player 's tunnel with Danelo 's name and also paid tribute to him on the goal @-@ post pads . 
 The Trojans lost their offensive coordinator , Lane Kiffin , on January 23 , 2007 , when he was hired to be the new head coach of the Oakland Raiders ; the 31 @-@ year @-@ old Kiffin became the youngest head coach in Raiders history , and the youngest head coach since the formation of the modern NFL . The following week , Pete Carroll named Steve Sarkisian as his team 's new offensive coordinator . Sarkisian had interviewed with the Raiders for their vacant head coach position but withdrew from the process to stay at USC , where he had been the assistant head coach and quarterbacks coach . 
 Intra @-@ conference controversy arose in March 2007 , when Stanford coach Jim Harbaugh was quoted as saying " [ Pete Carroll ] ' s only got one more year , though . He 'll be there one more year . That 's what I 've heard . I heard it inside the staff . " Upon further questions , Harbaugh claimed he had heard it from staff at USC . At the Pac @-@ 10 Conference media day ( July 26 , 2007 ) , Harbaugh praised the Trojans , stating " There is no question in my mind that USC is the best team in the country and may be the best team in the history of college football " ; the declaration , especially in light of his earlier comment , garnered more media attention . 
 In early July , LSU coach Les Miles stirred inter @-@ conference controversy when he publicly criticized USC 's 2007 schedule in front of LSU boosters ; though the two schools had not played each other since 1984 , the LSU Tiger faithful maintained a strong grudge against the Trojans after they shared the national title in the controversial 2003 season . LSU and Michigan were ranked as the pre @-@ season No. 2 team in various polls . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The 2007 Trojans schedule was ranked the 8th hardest in the country . Before the season , the road schedule was ranked as the 6th toughest . Within the Pac @-@ 10 , the schedule ranked as the 2nd toughest . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Idaho = = = 
 USC opened its season hosting the University of Idaho Vandals of the Western Athletic Conference , under first year coach Robb <unk> . Trojans Defensive Coordinator Nick Holt had previously been the head coach of the Idaho Vandals for two seasons ( 2004 – 05 ) ; before that he was USC 's linebackers coach from 2001 – 03 under Carroll ( Holt had been an assistant coach at Idaho for eight seasons , from 1990 to 1997 ) . The game was scheduled in 2005 , during Holt 's tenure with the Vandals . After Holt 's sudden resignation in early 2006 , Idaho tried to get out of the game to no avail ; the Vandals athletic program received $ 600 @,@ 000 for their appearance in the game . The last time the Vandals played USC , in 1929 , they were in the same conference , the Pacific Coast Conference . During their time as conference rivals , USC dominated the Vandals , winning all seven games between 1922 and 1929 by a combined score of 215 – 20 . USC entered the 2007 contest as six @-@ touchdown favorites . 
 USC controlled the game , but did not exert the level of domination expected . After taking a 21 – 0 lead into the second quarter , the offense showed signs of sputtering ; the second teams took over for the 4th quarter . Booty completed 21 of 32 passes for 206 yards , threw for three touchdowns and one interception ; though he did not convert on a fourth down play in short yardage and was unable to find a rhythm . Primary receiver Patrick Turner was held out of the game to recover from a stinger received in the previous week 's practice ; cornerback Josh <unk> was also held out to recover from knee soreness . As a result , young receivers David Ausberry and Vidal Hazelton handled the primary wide receiver duties . The highlight of the Trojans offense was the running game , which rushed for 214 yards while Idaho was held to 98 . The role was run by committee : with the debut of redshirt freshman Stafon Johnson ( 64 yards in 12 carries , two touchdown runs ) , who scored the first touchdown of the game , as well as C.J. Gable ( 68 yards in eight carries , one touchdown reception ) , who made an impressive 33 @-@ yard run , and fullback Stanley Havili who made several receptions , including one for a touchdown . The game marked the debut of USC true freshman running back Joe McKnight , who made a spectacular run in the third quarter that was likened to those of predecessor Reggie Bush . Kristofer O 'Dowd became the first true freshman to start at center for the Trojans due to an injury to Matt Spanos , earning positive reviews for his performance . Although the defense did not cause many turnovers and lost key linebacker Brian Cushing to an ankle sprain in the first quarter , it met enough expectations to remain ranked among the top defenses in the country . 
 In honor of Trojans kicker Mario Danelo , who died just after the 2006 season , a special ceremony was held before the beginning of the game . Also , after scoring its first touchdown , USC intentionally lined up for the PAT without a kicker in tribute to their late teammate , taking a 5 @-@ yard delay of game penalty before David Buehler came on the field to kick the extra point . The moment was chosen by ESPN as one of the Pac @-@ 10 's Top 10 Moments Of BCS Era . 
 = = = Nebraska = = = 
 After a bye week , the Trojans visited the Nebraska Cornhuskers in Lincoln , Nebraska . In the pre @-@ season , the game was named as one of the candidates for the 10 most important games of 2007 . For the Huskers , the game was especially critical to their hopes of showing progress under 4th year head coach Bill Callahan . The game marked the first time a No. 1 @-@ ranked team visited Lincoln since 1978 . Because of the game 's significance , ESPN College GameDay chose it as the site of its weekly broadcast . 
 Callahan had been criticized for his conservative play @-@ calling during the 2006 game in Los Angeles ; instead of playing to win , it appeared the Huskers were playing to not get blown out by the then @-@ favored Trojans . In that game the normally prolific West Coast offense of Nebraska , which had produced 541 yards a game , was corralled on the ground and attempted only 17 passes in a 28 – 10 Husker loss . For 2007 , Callahan pledged to play more aggressively , using running back Marlon Lucky and quarterback Sam Keller . Keller , the Huskers redshirt senior starting quarterback , was a 2006 transfer from Arizona State ; as a Sun Devil Keller started the first seven games of his 2005 junior season , throwing for 2 @,@ 165 yards , before a disastrous game against USC where , after leading ASU to a 21 – 3 halftime lead , he and the offense fell apart on the way to a 38 – 28 loss where he was sacked five times and threw five interceptions . Due to NCAA transfer rules , Keller spent the 2006 season on the Huskers ' scout team . 
 The Trojans stayed in nearby Omaha and practiced at a local high school ; Carroll took the rare step of closing practice to outsiders after a local radio station announced the location . The game marked the return of primary receiver Patrick Turner and running back Chauncey Washington from injury ; linebacker Brian Cushing , who injured his ankle early against Idaho , had not fully recovered but was allowed to suit @-@ up as a reserve . Senior center Matt Spanos remained injured , and true freshman Kris O 'Dowd was called to start again . Veteran secondary member Josh <unk> was lost for the season after his sore knee gave out during a bye week practice , resulting in a torn ACL requiring surgery . 
 Anticipation for the game was high in Lincoln , fueling strong demand for tickets and accommodations ; the game brought celebrities including USC fans Will Ferrell ( also an alumnus ) and Keanu Reeves , Nebraska fans Larry the Cable Guy , Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas , Rush Limbaugh , and Ward Connerly ; past Husker Heisman @-@ winner Mike Rozier , Trojans Heisman @-@ winner Marcus Allen and star Trojans safety Ronnie Lott were also on hand for the game . The game fell on Pete Carroll 's 56th birthday ; as a surprise , Carroll was treated to a recorded message by actor Kiefer Sutherland , star of his favorite television show , 24 . The morning recording of College GameDay attracted 13 @,@ 293 fans , second to the all @-@ time record of 15 @,@ 808 set by Nebraska in 2001 . With 84 @,@ 959 in attendance , Nebraska recorded its NCAA @-@ record <unk> consecutive home sellout dating back to 1962 . 
 USC dominated the game 49 – 31 , in a game that was not as close as the final score indicated : the Trojans led 42 – 10 going into the fourth quarter ; Nebraska scored two touchdowns in the final five minutes during garbage time . The Trojans dominated on the ground , as they out @-@ gained Nebraska 313 – 31 in rushing yards and averaged 8 @.@ 2 yards per carry , the most ever against a Nebraska team . Stafon Johnson led USC running backs with a career @-@ best 144 yards in 11 carries with one touchdown ; other major contributors were C.J. Gable ( 69 yards in four carries , including a 40 yard run ) , Washington ( 43 yards in 12 carries with two touchdowns ) , and another versatile performance by fullback Stanley Havili ( 52 rushing yards in two rushes with one touchdown , and three pass receptions for 22 yards with one touchdown ) . The Trojans passing game again did not find a rhythm , with several dropped passes , but the defense was able to frustrate the Husker offense for most of the game and cause two pivotal 3rd quarter interceptions . 
 The Trojans did not escape injuries , as linebacker Clay Matthews , substituting for the recovering Brian Cushing , broke his thumb , causing Cushing to enter the game as his replacement . The Trojans also suffered two injuries on kick returns : fullback Alfred Rowe suffered a mild concussion , and there was a moment of worry when returner Vincent Joseph , after being tackled and fumbling the ball , lay on the turf for over 10 minutes before being removed by stretcher with a bruised larynx and a neck sprain , but no serious injuries . Linebacker Rey Maualuga was flagged during a field goal attempt for the rarely called penalty of " disconcerting " , which is given for " words or signals that disconcert opponents when they are preparing to put the ball in play " . 
 After losing first place votes in the polls during the bye week , USC 's performance regained six after their performance against the Huskers in a hostile environment . Receiving specific praise was the Trojans offensive line , as well as the continued poise and ability of freshman center O 'Dowd . 
 = = = Washington State = = = 
 USC opened Pac @-@ 10 conference play by hosting the Washington State Cougars . Entering the game , Trojans quarterback John David Booty and the receiver corp remained unproven after an uninspiring performance against Idaho and a run @-@ dominated game against Nebraska . Hoping to take advantage , Washington State elected to go into the game using a man @-@ to @-@ man pass coverage to allow more focus on stopping the Trojans running game . The Cougars had given the then @-@ No. 3 Trojans a scare in their 2006 meeting , with the game coming down to the final seconds . 
 In the end , USC routed the Cougars 47 – 14 , with a primarily aerial attack . Booty reestablished his presence , completing 28 of 35 passes for 279 yards and four touchdowns before leaving the game early in the fourth quarter . Tight end Fred Davis had a career night with nine receptions for 124 yards and two touchdowns . Davis ' performance marked the most yards receiving ever in a game by a Trojans tight end . The Trojans ' first offensive drive set the tone with 13 plays , 83 yards and a touchdown on fourth down ; mostly coming from the air . Receivers Patrick Turner and Vidal Hazelton were able to find a groove and make plays after sputtering against Nebraska . In the rushing game , Chauncey Washington started and rushed for 84 of USC 's 207 yards . Stafon Johnson , who led the Trojans ground game against Nebraska , had nine carries and finished with 48 yards . Joe McKnight also got his first extended work and gained 48 yards in seven carries . USC built a 27 – 7 halftime lead and then scored on its first three possessions in the second half . The Trojans defense kept the Cougars in check , putting pressure on quarterback Alex Brink and limiting Washington State to 64 yards rushing . 
 Junior cornerback Cary Harris dislocated his right shoulder during the game and was replaced by Shareece Wright . Linebacker Brian Cushing reinjured the ankle he sprained in the opener against Idaho . Sixth @-@ year senior running back Hershel Dennis played for the first time since the 2004 season during the fourth quarter , gaining 14 yards in four carries ; he had sat out the two previous seasons due to injury . 
 The victory continued the Trojans ' domination of the series , 55 – 8 – 4 ; it also extended the record of top @-@ ranked USC teams against the Cougars to 5 – 0 . The game marked the first time it had ever rained during a USC game in September ; as a result the attendance was 86 @,@ 876 , the first time in 16 home games that the Trojans failed to draw at least 90 @,@ 000 . USC extended its home winning streak to 35 games . 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 The Trojans played their first Pac @-@ 10 road game of the season , visiting the Washington Huskies under coach Tyrone Willingham , at Husky Stadium in Seattle , Washington . In 2006 , the unranked Huskies gave No. 3 USC a scare ; quarterback Isaiah Stanback led Washington to the USC 15 but the offense was unable to start a play before the final two seconds ticked off the clock , preserving a 26 – 20 USC victory . The Huskies entered the game 0 – 6 when facing a number @-@ one ranked USC team . 
 Going into the 2007 contest , Carroll expressed concern about containing the Huskies redshirt freshman quarterback Jake Locker , a dual @-@ threat quarterback who led his team in passing and rushing . The Huskies announced prior to the game that they would be wearing throwback uniforms : instead of their standard purple and gold , the Huskies wore dark blue and gold jerseys with plain , gold helmets that were replicas of those worn by the 1960 team that beat No. 1 Minnesota in the Rose Bowl , still the only time Washington had beaten a top @-@ ranked opponent . 
 In a day where half of the week 's top @-@ 10 teams were defeated , USC escaped becoming the sixth in a messy , mistake @-@ prone 27 – 24 victory in a wet , windy game in Seattle . Although USC had a 460 – 190 edge in total yards , their errors helped the Huskies significantly : They committed three turnovers and 16 penalties — their most in more than two seasons — for 161 yards , missed a field goal and had a punt blocked . A disappointed Pete Carroll noted " We just couldn 't do more things wrong in the game [ . . . ] I thought Washington was there for it . They were there to take it . All they needed was one more chance . " 
 USC quarterback John David Booty completed 20 of 37 passes for 236 yards and a touchdown but had two interceptions , one of which was returned 54 yards for a touchdown tying the game at 14 – 14 in the second quarter . The Huskies gained momentum early in the fourth quarter when they came to within 24 – 17 and forced USC to punt ; however , on the return Terrell Thomas stripped the ball from Anthony Russo for a fumble and recovered the ball at the Huskies ' 43 yard line , setting up David Buehler 's 33 @-@ yard field goal with 3 : 01 remaining . The Huskies did not give up , blocked a USC punt with 1 : 15 left and scored on quarterback Jake Locker 's one @-@ yard run to pull to within three with 34 seconds left . On the ensuing onside kick , Thomas was able to recover the ball for USC , ending the game . 
 Locker displayed the dual passing / running threat Carroll had expressed concern about , but also showed his youth with erratic passing , finishing 12 @-@ for @-@ 27 with 83 yards passing and one interception , plus another 50 yards on 16 carries with two touchdowns . USC did have positive showings in the running game , with Stafon Johnson running for 122 yards and a touchdown and Chauncey Washington also adding 106 yards and a score . In the end , Carroll and the Trojans described the game as less a victory than an escape , a game where USC 's raw athleticism took advantage of Washington 's youth . 
 The Trojans suffered numerous injuries during the game : starting freshman center Kristofer O 'Dowd hurt his kneecap and guard Chilo Rachal sprained his knee on the same play in the first quarter ; they were replaced by senior center Matt Spanos , who had just been cleared for play after tearing a triceps before the season , and reserve guard <unk> <unk> . Starting cornerback Shareece Wright , in his first start after replacing the injured Cary Harris , sustained a pulled hamstring muscle and was replaced by <unk> <unk> . Tailback Stafon Johnson suffered a foot injury and fellow tailback C.J. Gable dressed but did not play because of a groin injury suffered just before the trip to Washington . 
 The game drew comparisons to USC 's 33 – 31 loss to Oregon State the previous season . As a result of the close finish , USC lost the No. 1 ranking in the AP Poll , falling to No. 2 with 1 @,@ 591 points and 32 first @-@ place votes to LSU 's 1 @,@ 593 points and 33 first @-@ place votes ; however , the Trojans remained No. 1 in the Coaches Poll , keeping a more substantial lead : 1 @,@ 483 points and 45 first @-@ place votes to LSU 's 1 @,@ 454 points and 14 first @-@ place votes . 
 = = = Stanford = = = 
 USC continued Pac @-@ 10 play by hosting the struggling Stanford Cardinal , under first @-@ year coach Jim Harbaugh . In a major upset , USC stumbled at home to the 41 point underdog , losing 24 – 23 . 
 Harbaugh made headlines prior to the season by claiming 2007 would be Carroll 's last year with USC before departing to the NFL , drawing a terse rebuke from Carroll ; Harbaugh later called the 2007 Trojans one of the best teams in history at the Pac @-@ 10 Media Day , reiterating the position in the week before their game . However , there were no hard feelings between the coaches . The two kept in cordial phone contact and Carroll made light of Harbaugh 's comments several times during the season . 
 The Stanford starting quarterback , redshirt senior T. C. Ostrander , suffered a seizure on the afternoon of September 30 , one day after their game against Arizona State ; he was released from Stanford Hospital after a few hours , but as a precautionary measure he was held out of the game against USC . The starting quarterback position fell to <unk> Pritchard , a redshirt sophomore with three passes in his college career . Stanford was also without two other key starters : defensive lineman <unk> <unk> ( ankle ) and offensive lineman Allen Smith ( knee ) . On October 3 it was announced that USC running back C.J. Gable , who was averaging a team @-@ best 11 yards a carry , would undergo season @-@ ending abdominal surgery to correct a nagging sports hernia that had limited his ability since the previous season ; because he had only played in the first three games , he would seek a medical redshirt season . Gable 's fellow running back , Stafon Johnson , was also held out of the game due to a foot bruise suffered the previous week . 
 Stanford was the last team to beat USC at the Coliseum , doing so on September 29 , 2001 under Tyrone Willingham ( now the coach of Washington ) against then @-@ first year coach Carroll . By game week , the line for the game favored the Trojans by 39 @.@ 5 points , and reached 41 points by gametime . The loss ended multiple USC streaks , including a five @-@ game win streak against Stanford and a 35 @-@ game home winning streak . For sportsbooks , the loss to a 41 @-@ point underdog marked the biggest upset in their history . 
 There were a few positive efforts for the Trojans : Tight end Fred Davis caught five passes for a career @-@ best 152 yards , including a 63 @-@ yard touchdown ; and nose tackle Sedrick Ellis had three sacks . However , there were many more errors and substandard performances : quarterback John David Booty , who broke a bone in the middle finger of his throwing hand in the first half , had four passes intercepted in the second half . The offensive line had been suffering since losing two starters in one play during the previous week 's game at Washington , but the effect was severe against Stanford ; the offensive line gave up four sacks , one more than the Trojans had surrendered all season , and USC gained only 95 yards rushing . Key receiver Patrick Turner dropped several passes , the defense gave up 17 points in the fourth quarter and USC had an extra @-@ point attempt blocked , a point which became a crucial difference . Like their previous game against Washington , USC out @-@ gained Stanford by 224 yards ( 459 to 235 ) but made many crucial turnovers and penalties . In the press conference following the game , Coach Carroll summarized his concerns : " It 's real clear that we have fallen out of line with our philosophy that has guided this program for years ; we 're turning the ball over too much . " 
 Opinions in the sports press ranged from proclaiming the end of the USC 's era of dominance in college football to calling the loss a major , but not fatal set @-@ back to any hopes for a Trojans run at the national championship . The Trojans fell to No. 10 in the AP Poll ; however , USC only fell to No. 7 in both the Coaches Poll and Harris Poll , both of which are the human components for determining who the BCS chooses for the National Championship Game . As a result , USC remained in outside title contention with upcoming games against consensus @-@ No. 2 California and top @-@ 10 Oregon . The upset landed the Trojans in ESPN.com 's Bottom 10 . 
 In an interview the following month , Carroll assessed the mistakes that led to the loss as his own : 
 We really blew it against Stanford . We screwed it up because we played a guy that was hurt . I made a mistake on that . That was me . ... If anything really was a factor , it was my cockiness that there was no way we could lose a game . It didn 't matter — we could keep running our offense , keep working on stuff , and they would never beat us . ... Broken hand ? What was I thinking ? I 'm the one that screwed it up . He 's a warrior . He 's the one telling me " I can play . " That 's what he should be telling me . ... I missed a big one . It cost us a game that really cost us the flavor of this season . We 've been tainted ever since , for obvious reasons . We gave away a game to a team that 's won two or three games . Amazing . But it 's awesome for football , it 's awesome for Stanford and all that . Great for those guys . Sucks to be us in that regard . We screwed it up . 
 At the end of the regular season , Sports Illustrated chose Stanford 's upset of USC as the second " Biggest Upset of 2007 " after Division I FCS Appalachian State 's upset of No. 5 Michigan . 
 = = = Arizona = = = 
 After the previous week 's upset loss to Stanford , the Trojans hosted the Arizona Wildcats , led by head coach Mike Stoops , aiming to correct mistakes and demonstrate that they were still in contention for the Pac @-@ 10 title and to remain an outside candidate for the national title game . Matters were complicated when it was announced that starting quarterback John David Booty would not start due to a broken middle finger on his throwing hand , suffered during the previous week 's loss . As a result , redshirt sophomore Mark Sanchez made his first start for the Trojans ; previously he had only played during garbage time . The Trojans also remained without offensive linemen Chilo Rachal and Kris O 'Dowd , as well as leading rusher Stafon Johnson , who remained idle for a second week after bruising his left foot during the game against Washington . The Trojans entered the game a 21 @-@ point favorite . 
 The Trojans again showed inconsistency for most of the game before coming alive in the fourth quarter and pulling away to a 20 – 13 victory . USC started out well , going ahead 10 – 0 in the second quarter after running back Chauncey Washington 's 18 @-@ yard touchdown run and David Buehler 's 27 @-@ yard field goal . However , the offense began to sputter ; the Trojans amassed only 12 total yards in the second quarter and 50 in the third . Part of the offense 's problems were turnovers ; Sanchez threw two interceptions in the second quarter , allowing Arizona to tie the game going into halftime . The Wildcats kicked another field goal early in the third quarter to go up 13 – 10 , raising speculation that USC was going to be upset for the second consecutive week . The momentum of the game quickly changed in the fourth quarter after freshman running back Joe McKnight , touted as the next great Trojans tailback but yet to meet expectations , made a 45 @-@ yard punt return that Sanchez followed up on the next play with a 25 @-@ yard touchdown pass to tight end Fred Davis . After a defensive stop , Arizona punter <unk> Crier kicked an 83 @-@ yard punt to the Trojans one @-@ yard line . The Trojans pushed forward with fullback Stanley Havili before McKnight again made a big play , running 59 yards and setting up what would be a Trojans field goal . The USC defense then forced an Arizona turn @-@ over on downs to preserve the victory . Sanchez recovered from his poor first half performance with a strong performance in the second , where he completed 11 of 15 passes for 74 yards and a touchdown while later making a key 10 @-@ yard scramble on third and seven late in the fourth quarter . 
 The injuries that had plagued USC throughout the season continued as All @-@ American tackle Sam Baker left the game because of a hamstring strain and freshman guard Zack <unk> , already substituting for an injured Chilo Rachal , suffered a shoulder bruise . On the defense , linebacker Rey Maualuga suffered a hip injury and safety Kevin Ellison broke his nose . An uncommon number of injuries , especially along the offensive line , depleted reserve players and forced Trojans to reach out to the general student population in order to find students with previous lineman experience to help on the scout team 's offensive line ; however , none were officially added to the roster . 
 In light of the Trojans close victory , USC dropped in both major polls , falling to No. 13 in the AP Poll and No. 9 in the Coaches Poll , tied with previously No. 2 California , which had just lost an upset to Oregon State . The Trojans debuted at No. 14 in the season 's first Bowl Championship Series standings , used to determine which two teams play in the BCS National Championship Game . 
 = = = Notre Dame = = = 
 USC visited inter @-@ sectional rival Notre Dame for their 79th annual game for possession of the Jeweled Shillelagh . Pre @-@ season demand for tickets was among the highest in Notre Dame history as USC made its first visit back to Notre Dame Stadium since the notable 2005 " Bush Push " game ; demand remained high although , going into the season , the Fighting Irish were unranked . 
 Notre Dame had the worst start to their season in program history , opening 0 – 5 ( the previous record was 0 – 3 ) and headed into their game with USC at 1 – 6 . With significant problems at most positions , Notre Dame head coach Charlie Weis made several changes at quarterback : Starting the opener with sophomore Demetrius Jones , he chose to start heralded freshman Jimmy Clausen for games two through seven ; during which time Jones transferred from the program . After Clausen also showed trouble at the position , Weis elected to go with junior Evan Sharpley as the starter for the USC game ; Sharpley had backed up Brady Quinn the previous season . In response to controversy over the length of the grass in Notre Dame Stadium during the 2005 game , where USC kickoff returner Desmond Reed suffered torn right knee ligaments and nerve damage while trying to turn on the field , the Fighting Irish cut the grass significantly shorter . Notre Dame entered the game ranked last in total offense ( 190 @.@ 9 yards a game ) and rushing ( 32 @.@ 1 yards a game ) , and next to last in scoring ( 11 @.@ 4 points ) ; their offensive line had given up 34 sacks . 
 With starting quarterback John David Booty still recovering from a broken finger on his throwing hand , USC elected to start Mark Sanchez for the second straight week . On the Thursday night before the game , the Trojans charter flight experienced severe turbulence on approach to South Bend Regional Airport during a lightning storm ; their aircraft dropped and threw several passengers ( players , coaches and their spouses ) from their seats and hit their heads on the ceiling during an initial approach that was aborted before the plane circled and landed safely . 
 Breaking with tradition , the Fighting Irish announced in June that they would be wearing their alternative green jerseys instead of blue against USC ; Weis noted that it was in honor of the 1977 Irish team that switched to green jerseys before defeating the Trojans en route to a national championship ( Weis was a student at Notre Dame at the time ) . Previously , the Irish did not let the public know when they would be wearing their green jerseys . 
 The Trojans dominated the game , shutting out Notre Dame 38 – 0 , USC 's largest margin of victory in the series . Quarterback Mark Sanchez made significant improvements over the previous week , completing 21 of 38 passes for 235 yards and four touchdowns and no interceptions . There were several highlight plays : Tight end Fred Davis made a one @-@ handed touchdown catch in the first quarter , wide receiver Vidal Hazelton made a 48 @-@ yard touchdown run after evading several Irish defenders , and freshman running back Joe McKnight made a 51 @-@ yard fourth quarter run for his first touchdown . The USC defense stifled the Irish offense : allowing only 165 yards to the Trojans ' 462 yards , making five sacks , and keeping the Irish from rushing for a first down until the fourth quarter . There were several special teams miscues : The Irish blocked a USC punt , the Trojans blocked a 40 @-@ yard field goal attempt and the Irish had a fumbled punt return that was recovered by USC . The Trojans had several key players return from injuries and make significant contributions , including linebacker Brian Cushing and running back Stafon Johnson . 
 After two weeks of moving down in the rankings , the Trojans moved up to No. 8 in the Coaches Poll , No. 9 in the AP Poll ( tied with Florida ) and No. 12 in the BCS standings . 
 = = = Oregon = = = 
 With the Ducks as three @-@ point favorites , the Trojans entered a Pac @-@ 10 game as underdogs for the first time since November 17 , 2001 ; the game was the first between top @-@ 10 teams in the 41 @-@ year history of Oregon 's Autzen Stadium . The match @-@ up was framed as a battle between Oregon 's highly productive offense and USC 's defense . 
 The Trojans were affected by the massive wildfires affecting Southern California that week ; air quality during outdoor practices in Los Angeles dropped significantly , and Trojans quarterback Mark Sanchez ' father , a fire captain with the Orange County Fire Authority , was on the front line fighting the blazes . With John David Booty still recovering from a broken finger , Sanchez was given the start for the third week in a row . The Trojans were also set to return from injury all @-@ American offensive tackle Sam Baker and guard Chilo Rachal . Despite having won the previous three contests , the Trojans noted concerns about playing in the famously loud and raucous Autzen Stadium . 
 Before a stadium @-@ record crowd of 59 @,@ 277 , the Ducks defeated the Trojans 24 – 17 in a game decided in the final seconds . The Trojans made key mistakes and did not exploit several opportunities against the Ducks . After Oregon fumbled the opening kickoff , USC failed to score with the Ducks stopping running back Joe McKnight on a fourth @-@ and @-@ one play at the Oregon 12 yard line . Later in the first quarter , an apparent 65 @-@ yard touchdown run by McKnight was nullified by a holding penalty away from the play . 
 The Trojans trailed 10 – 3 going into halftime , but tied the game in the third quarter on a Sanchez to Patrick Turner touchdown pass . However , on the next possession , fullback Stanley Havili fumbled the ball and Oregon recovered on the USC 16 yard line , leading to an Oregon touchdown . On USC 's next series , Sanchez threw an interception . During the Trojans ' following series , Oregon safety Matthew Harper intercepted a pass and returned it 27 yards to the Oregon 42 . The Ducks took a 24 – 10 lead with 11 : 39 left as running back Jonathan Stewart scored his second touchdown . The Trojans rallied ; Sanchez led an 85 @-@ yard , five @-@ play drive that he capped with a 14 @-@ yard touchdown pass to wide receiver David Ausberry . The USC defense forced an Oregon three @-@ and @-@ out and starting at their 17 ; the Trojans then advanced to Oregon 's 33 with 26 seconds left . However , on second down , Sanchez misread the defensive coverage and threw his second interception of the game to Harper with 11 seconds left in the game . After taking a knee to run out the clock on first down , USC used their final timeout to stop the clock . Unaware of the timeout , Oregon fans stormed the field before the game officially finished , and after being cleared away the Ducks took a second knee and ran out the clock , sealing the victory . 
 The Trojans defense did slow down the Oregon offense , keeping them 212 yards below their season average , allowing the USC offense to out @-@ gain the Ducks , 378 yards to 339 . The Ducks ' senior quarterback , Dennis Dixon , ran for 76 yards and a touchdown in 17 carries and completed 16 of 25 passes for 157 yards without an interception . However , the Oregon defense ultimately won the game for the Ducks . Sanchez threw for 277 yards and two touchdowns , but also had the two interceptions , including the game @-@ ender . USC Offensive Coordinator Steve Sarkisian 's decisions on several key plays were called into question by fans in the week following the game . Eugene 's newspaper , The Register @-@ Guard , recorded the crowd noise at 127 @.@ 2 decibels , making it the loudest crowd for a college football game ; 1 @.@ 2 decibels louder than the 126 decibels made by 77 @,@ 381 Clemson fans during a game in 2005 . 
 The game was viewed as marking Oregon 's rise to a national title contender and a break in USC 's dominance of the Pac @-@ 10 conference . The game also marked the first season since 2002 that the Trojans were going into November no longer considered a national title contender . Despite losing the game , the Trojans were still regarded as a legitimate threat in the conference and were projected as a potential at @-@ large team for the BCS bowl games . However , there were voices in the media that believed the loss signaled the " death " of the " Trojan Dynasty " that had reigned in college football since 2002 . 
 The Trojans fell to No. 13 in the AP Poll , No. 15 in the Coaches Poll , and No. 19 in the BCS standings . 
 = = = Oregon State = = = 
 USC celebrated homecoming by hosting the Oregon State Beavers , coached by Mike Riley . In 2006 , the unranked Beavers stunned the No. 3 Trojans in a 33 – 31 upset in Corvallis . The Beavers had not won at USC since 1960 . 
 Oregon State entered the game with the nation 's best rushing defense , allowing only 54 @.@ 5 yards rushing a game and also recording a nation @-@ leading 34 sacks . The Beaver defense ranked 13th nationally in total defense , surrendering 299 @.@ 9 yards a game . Trojans quarterback John David Booty returned from injury to start ; offensive lineman Sam Baker remained out after re @-@ injuring a hamstring against the Ducks . Oregon State star running back <unk> Bernard was initially expected to play despite a sprained shoulder , but did not . Former USC linebacker Richard Wood , who was chosen for the College Football Hall of Fame , was honored at halftime . 
 In a strong defensive performance , the Trojans defeated the Beavers 24 – 3 . The USC defense made nine sacks and intercepted a pass ; they limited Oregon State to 176 total yards and a field goal off a Trojans fumble in the USC red zone . True freshman Everson Griffen had 3 ½ sacks , safety Kevin Ellison added two , end Lawrence Jackson had 1 ½ and nose tackle Sedrick Ellis and linebacker Brian Cushing had one each ; cornerback Terrell Thomas made the interception . The Trojans offense had its second lowest total of the season , gaining 287 yards , but it rushed for 100 yards against the Beavers ' tight rush defense , led by Chauncey Washington who gained 60 yards in 12 carries . Booty , returning from injury , could not find his rhythm but still completed 19 of 33 passes for 157 yards without an interception ; the Trojans converted only five of 16 third downs . Both teams missed field goals in the first quarter , then exchanged field goals going into the second quarter . The Trojans then scored 21 unanswered points in less than eight minutes to close the half . Neither team scored in the second half . USC running back Stafon Johnson was allowed to play a few downs but was kept out for most of the game to allow his foot to heal fully . 
 The Trojans rose slightly in the polls to No. 12 in the AP Poll , No. 15 in the Coaches Poll , and No. 17 in the BCS standings . The 2007 Holiday Bowl was mentioned as a possible destination for the Trojans . Holiday Bowl executive director Bruce <unk> said they would be very interested in pitting the Trojans against the Texas Longhorns . The two teams last met in the 2006 Rose Bowl for the BCS National Championship . 
 = = = California = = = 
 In the pre @-@ season , the Trojans ' game against California was named as one of the candidates for the 10 most important games of 2007 ; the Trojans national title hopes hinged on proving themselves against a veteran team led by head coach Jeff Tedford in California Memorial Stadium . Prior to the season , Cal star receiver DeSean Jackson , an early Heisman Trophy candidate , called out USC cornerback Terrell Thomas in ESPN The Magazine , stating that he would best the cornerback who contributed to limiting him to two catches in the 2006 match @-@ up . After USC 's loss to Stanford , the game was still referred to as the Pac @-@ 10 game of the year ; however , after Cal 's mid @-@ season losses to Oregon State and UCLA and USC 's loss to Oregon , the game took on less importance . 
 On a rain @-@ soaked evening in Strawberry Canyon , the Trojans gained a 24 – 17 victory over the No. 24 Golden Bears behind a career @-@ best effort by running back Chauncey Washington . After seeing his early success against the Cal defense , USC began handing the ball almost exclusively to Washington who ran for 220 yards on 29 rushes . Due to the rain and Washington 's success on the ground , Booty only attempted 20 passes for 129 yards in 11 completions with one touchdown and no interceptions ; the Trojans offensive line did not give up a sack . USC returner Ronald Johnson returned four kicks for 102 yards , including one for 41 yards and another for 35 , giving USC favorable field position . Cal running back Justin <unk> had an effective night , running for 164 yards in 31 carries . However , the Trojans defense had another solid effort , holding Cal to 14 points below its scoring average and forcing quarterback Nate Longshore into two interceptions and a sack . Cal 's one @-@ time Heisman Trophy candidate , wide receiver DeSean Jackson , was limited to five receptions for 64 yards and was kept from returning any kicks . 
 The game turned to the Trojans favor during the fourth quarter , when the Trojans put together a 10 play , 96 @-@ yard drive behind Washington and capped by a three @-@ yard touchdown run by Stafon Johnson . Cal received the ball back with 7 : 38 left , but the Trojans forced turnovers in the Bears ' subsequent two drives ; after Lawrence Jackson recovered a fumbled snap on the first drive , cornerback Terrell Thomas intercepted a Longshore pass at the USC 17 with 2 : 47 to play to seal the victory . As part of its Hall of Fame weekend , Cal wore throwback jerseys based on its 1975 team in honor of All @-@ American quarterback Joe Roth ; it was the third team to wear throwback jerseys in their game against the Trojans . Linebacker Keith Rivers suffered a high ankle sprain . 
 After the victory and the subsequent bye week , the Trojans again rose slightly in the polls to No. 11 in the AP Poll , No. 11 in the BCS standings , and No. 12 in the Coaches Poll . 
 = = = Arizona State = = = 
 In the pre @-@ season , the game against veteran head coach Dennis Erickson 's first squad at ASU was identified as a potential trap game for the Trojans . With No. 2 Oregon 's loss during the bye week , Arizona State rose to No. 9 in the polls and the top of the Pac @-@ 10 standings while USC remained in contention for at least a share of the Pac @-@ 10 title if they could win out . 
 Scheduled for prime time television on Thanksgiving Day , it was the only major college game shown on the holiday evening time slot . It was Arizona State 's first Thanksgiving Day game and USC 's 20th , though its first since 1938 . The game attracted a number of celebrities , including former USC Heisman @-@ winners Marcus Allen and Matt Leinart , who was joined by Arizona Cardinals teammate Larry Fitzgerald , Heisman @-@ winner Gino <unk> , Bob Davie and Charles Barkley ; it also included a halftime performance by singer Little Richard . In honor of the holiday , the Sun Devils added a turkey leg to the end of Sparty 's pitchfork painted at the center of the field . 
 Eleven years removed from their last Rose Bowl berth , Arizona State had made a quick turn @-@ around under Erickson , returning to national prominence with a 9 – 1 record . Using an NFL @-@ style offense under junior quarterback Rudy Carpenter , the Sun Devils put extra pressure on their offensive line , allowing in 43 sacks , the most in the Pac @-@ 10 Conference and second most in the nation . In order to relieve Carpenter , who had suffered injuries over the season in his throwing hand , Arizona State planned to also work in the running game behind Keegan Herring and Dimitri Nance . USC entered the game ranked first in the Pac @-@ 10 and third nationally in defense , giving up 267 @.@ 9 yards per game . The Sun Devils had trailed in every Pac @-@ 10 conference game in the season up to that point . 
 Behind a strong performance by John David Booty , the Trojans defeated the Sun Devils , 44 – 24 , in front of a sold @-@ out Sun Devil Stadium . Under an even passing attack , Booty threw for 26 of 39 passes for 375 yards and four touchdowns with no interceptions . He distributed the ball to eight different receivers , including four separate players for his touchdowns ; Booty also rushed for a touchdown . Tight end Fred Davis made five receptions for 119 yards and a touchdown . David Buehler kicked three field goals . The Trojans defense also had a strong game , making six sacks as the Sun Devils were shut down for most of the second half and held to only 16 yards rushing ; two of the Sun Devil 's scores were from a 98 @-@ yard kick return for a touchdown and a score off a blocked punt in the fourth quarter . Defensive end Lawrence Jackson made four of USC 's sacks , the most by a USC player since 1989 , including one that split Carpenter 's lip and caused him to throw his helmet towards the sideline in frustration ; Jackson also finished with a school @-@ record 5 ½ tackles for losses . Ronald Johnson had another strong game on special teams , returning the opening kickoff 49 yards . 
 Two days later Oregon lost to UCLA , leaving the Trojans in a tie for first place in the Pac @-@ 10 standings with Arizona State ( winning the tiebreaker ) . USC 's strong victory , along with several upsets during the week , led the Trojans to rise to No. 8 in the AP Poll , No. 8 in the BCS standings , and No. 9 in the Coaches Poll . 
 = = = UCLA = = = 
 The Trojans ended the regular season by hosting the UCLA Bruins , led by head coach Karl Dorrell , in the 77th edition of their annual crosstown rivalry game for possession of the Victory Bell . In the 2006 season , the Bruins ' 13 – 9 upset of the then @-@ No. 2 Trojans in the final week of the regular season ended the Trojans ' hopes for reaching the National Championship game . With both teams ranked going into the season ( USC first , UCLA 14th in the AP Poll ) , there was buzz in Los Angeles that both teams might reach their December 1 game undefeated . UCLA made it as high as 11th in both polls before suffering a 44 – 7 upset loss at unranked Utah in week 3 that knocked them out of the top 25 . It was the 36th time that a Rose Bowl berth was on the line for one of the two teams in the game : A USC victory would guarantee them at least a share of the Pac @-@ 10 Conference title and a berth in the 2008 Rose Bowl Game ; UCLA , despite entering the game 6 – 5 ( 5 – 3 in the Pac @-@ 10 ) , also entered the game with a chance at the Pac @-@ 10 title and a Rose Bowl berth if they could defeat the Trojans and Arizona could beat Arizona State in a game later in the day . 
 During the 2006 contest , UCLA Defensive Coordinator DeWayne Walker had the Bruins apply aggressive pressure to John David Booty , limiting the quarterback 's ability to drive the passing game while holding the Trojans to 55 yards rushing and an average of only 1 @.@ 9 yards per carry . USC entered the 2007 game averaging 186 @.@ 6 yards rushing and 4 @.@ 8 yards per carry , significantly higher than the 128 yards rushing per game in 2006 . UCLA 's season was marked by numerous injures , particularly at quarterback . Original starting quarterback Ben Olson injured his knee early in the season and missed over four games . Backup quarterback Patrick Cowan also suffered a knee injury but returned for two more games before suffering a collapsed lung against Arizona . As a result , the Bruins had resorted to playing walk @-@ on McLeod Bethel @-@ Thompson and converted @-@ wide receiver <unk> <unk> . 
 In the week leading up to the game , a dispute between USC and the Coliseum Commission , the public managers of the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , went public . USC threatened to move to the Rose Bowl ( home of the UCLA Bruins since 1982 ) if an agreement could not be reached . In addition to honoring the outgoing seniors during their final game in the Coliseum , the Trojans also honored late players <unk> Rucker and Mario Danelo , who would have both been members of the 2007 senior class . Rucker , a linebacker from Moreno Valley , drowned during the summer before his freshman year with USC ( and was honored during the 2004 season ) and Danelo died from a fatal fall immediately following the 2006 season ; members of both families attended . The stadium also held a moment of silence for the passing of Trojans alumnus and donor Louis Galen . USC entered the game as a 20 point favorite . 
 The Trojans defense dominated the Bruins in a 24 – 7 victory before a sold @-@ out Coliseum crowd . The Trojans held the Bruins to a season @-@ low 168 yards , sacking quarterback Patrick Cowan four times for 31 yards in losses and held the Bruins to 12 net rushing yards . USC forced four turnovers , recovering three UCLA fumbles and intercepting a pass . The Bruins did not convert any of its 11 third down situations . The Bruins sole score came in a drive in the closing minutes of the first half . USC gained 231 rushing yards and 437 overall . On the ground , running back Joe McKnight rushed for 89 yards and a touchdown , Stafon Johnson ran for 73 yards and senior Chauncey Washington gained 66 yards and scored a touchdown . Booty completed 21 of 36 passes for 206 yards with a touchdown and an interception . 
 The victory assured USC a share of the Pac @-@ 10 title . Although Arizona State would defeat Arizona later in the night to become co @-@ champions , the Trojans clinched a berth in the Rose Bowl by virtue of their victory over the Sun Devils the previous week . USC extended its streak of Pac @-@ 10 titles to six in a row , having already broken the record the previous season with five . Dorrell was fired by UCLA the following Monday . USC 's victory , coupled with another week of upsets , led the Trojans to rise to No. 6 in the AP Poll , No. 6 in the Coaches Poll , and No. 7 in the BCS standings . 
 = = = Rose Bowl = = = 
 The Trojans ended the 2007 season by participating in the 2008 Rose Bowl , held on New Year 's Day in the Rose Bowl stadium in Pasadena , California ; it was the Trojans ' fourth Rose Bowl game and sixth BCS Bowl in six years . Although it traditionally hosts the champions of the Big Ten and Pac @-@ 10 conferences , the 2007 Big Ten Champion , Ohio State , was ranked No. 1 in the final BCS poll and instead participated in the 2008 BCS National Championship Game . The rules governing BCS bowl selections allowed the Rose Bowl to select a BCS " at @-@ large " team from the top 14 teams ranked in the BCS Standings that have at least nine wins . Keeping with its traditional bowl ties , the Rose Bowl selected the No. 13 @-@ ranked Illinois Fighting Illini ( 9 – 3 ) , under third @-@ year head coach Ron Zook . 
 The Illini entered the Rose Bowl after a Cinderella season where they won nine games , including an upset victory over at @-@ the @-@ time No. 1 Ohio State , after winning a total of four games the previous two seasons . It was Illinois ' first bowl game since winning the 2001 Big Ten Championship and playing in the 2002 Sugar Bowl . The Illini offense was led by sophomore quarterback " Juice " Williams , who in the regular season passed for 13 touchdowns and ran for seven , junior running back Rashard Mendenhall , who averaged 127 yards rushing per game and scored 18 touchdowns , and freshman receiver Arrelious Benn , who caught 49 passes and had 158 yards in 32 carries . For taking Illinois to the Rose Bowl a year after going 2 – 10 , Zook won both national and Big Ten coach of the year honors . The Illini entered the game 13 @.@ 5 point underdogs , the biggest of any of the season 's 32 bowl games . It was USC 's 31st appearance in " The <unk> of Them All " , having won in 22 of its previous appearances and leading in both categories by a significant margin . 
 The Trojans routed the Illini 49 – 17 before a sold @-@ out Rose Bowl crowd . USC set a Rose Bowl @-@ record of 633 offensive yards and tied the record for points scored . John David Booty completed 25 of 37 passes for 255 yards , three touchdowns and one interception . Seven different Trojans rushed the ball , led by running back Joe McKnight who had 125 rushing yards and touchdown ( McKnight totaled 206 yards for the game ) . Tight end Fred Davis led the receivers with seven receptions for 87 yards and a touchdown . Mendenhall led the Illini , rushing 17 times for 155 yards and one touchdown , with 214 yards overall . Williams had 245 yards passing , completing 21 of 35 passes with two interceptions and was sacked five times . The second Trojans touchdown was a trick play thrown by walk @-@ on receiver @-@ quarterback Garrett Green , who caught a ball thrown backward by Booty and then threw a 34 @-@ yard touchdown pass to running back Desmond Reed , who <unk> into the endzone , resulting in an excessive celebration penalty . The fourth quarter included a touchdown by sixth @-@ year senior and one @-@ time starter Hershel Dennis , his first score since 2004 , leading to a bench @-@ clearing celebration that resulted in USC receiving another excessive celebration penalty . 
 USC 's 32 @-@ point victory was the largest margin of victory in the Rose Bowl since 1984 , when UCLA defeated Illinois 45 – 9 . The lopsided score amplified existing criticism of the Tournament of Roses for scheduling the lower @-@ ranked Fighting Illini as the at @-@ large team . Booty was selected as the Rose Bowl Offensive MVP , and set a Rose Bowl record with seven career touchdowns . USC linebacker Rey Maualuga was selected as the Defensive MVP with three sacks , an interception and a forced fumble . It was USC 's fifth victory in six consecutive appearances in a BCS Bowl . 
 USC ended the season as No. 2 in the final Coaches ' Poll and No. 3 in the final AP Poll with one first @-@ place vote . 
 = = After the season = = 
 = = = Comments = = = 
 The 2007 USC Trojans entered the season picked as the unanimous No. 1 team , with expectations of playing in the BCS National Title Game . After the loss to 41 @-@ point underdog Stanford the team 's opportunities for national success came into serious question , and following the loss to Oregon there were questions as to whether USC would even win the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference . The Trojans regrouped and salvaged their season , winning a share of the conference and the Rose Bowl , and by the end of the season were said to be playing the best football of anyone in the country . Injuries to key players , particularly quarterback John David Booty 's broken finger during the Stanford game , had a significant impact over the season , leading to questions of how USC would have fared if injuries had not taken their toll . 
 USC finished the season ranked No. 2 in the Coaches Poll and No. 3 in the AP Poll , trading the respective No. 3 and No. 2 spots with Georgia , another team that finished with a strong 11 – 2 record and a dominating performance in its BCS Bowl game . The teams finished close to each other in the final polls : In the Coaches Poll , USC received 1380 votes to Georgia 's 1370 ; and in the AP Poll Georgia received 1515 to USC 's 1500 . USC received one first @-@ place vote in the final AP Poll . With LSU 's dominating win over Ohio State in the BCS National Championship Game , college football had its first two @-@ loss national champion , and with teams like USC and Georgia locked out of playing LSU or Ohio State , the season served as another example for those advocating for some form of Football Bowl Subdivision playoff . 
 The Trojans accomplished two feats : USC became the first team to win six straight Pac @-@ 10 titles and became the first team in major college football to achieve six straight 11 @-@ win seasons . In addition , USC also remained tied for the most BCS Bowl appearances at six , all consecutive . 
 Immediately after the 2007 – 08 bowl season , in early looks at the 2008 season , USC was ranked as the pre @-@ season No. 4 ( Sports Illustrated ) and No. 5 ( ESPN.com ) due to key player departures mitigated by the overall talent level . Sports Illustrated soon revised its ranking to No. 3 after nearly all draft @-@ eligible juniors decided to remain with the program instead of entering the NFL Draft . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 Of all the Trojans ' draft @-@ eligible juniors , only offensive guard Chilo Rachal declared himself available for the 2008 NFL Draft . Twelve USC players , eleven seniors and a junior , were invited to the NFL Scouting Combine , the most of any school in 2008 : the seniors were offensive tackle Sam Baker , quarterback John David Booty , tight end Fred Davis , nose tackle Sedrick Ellis , defensive end Lawrence Jackson , offensive tackle Drew Radovich , linebacker Keith Rivers , center Matt Spanos , cornerback Terrell Thomas , running back Chauncey Washington , linebacker Thomas Williams , and the junior was offensive guard Rachal . 
 USC did well in the 2007 draft ; ten players were taken overall , the most of any school , and a school @-@ record seven players were selected in the first two rounds , beating the previous record of five ( 1968 and 2006 ) and the most in the first round . The first round selections were Ellis ( seventh , New Orleans Saints ) , Rivers ( ninth , Cincinnati Bengals ) , Baker ( 21st , Atlanta Falcons ) and Jackson ( 28th , Seattle Seahawks ) ; the second round picks were Rachal ( 39th , San Francisco 49ers ) , Davis ( 48th , Washington Redskins ) and Thomas ( 63rd , New York Giants ) ; the fifth round selections were Booty ( 137th , Minnesota Vikings ) and Williams ( 155th , Jacksonville Jaguars ) ; in the seventh round Washington was selected 213th by the Jacksonville Jaguars . Radovich signed as an undrafted free agent with the Minnesota Vikings ; Spanos signed with the Miami Dolphins . 
 One year later , eleven more players were selected in the 2009 NFL Draft , again leading all universities in the number of players drafted into the NFL that season . The first round selections were Mark Sanchez ( fifth , New York Jets ) , Brian Cushing ( 15th , Houston Texans ) and Clay Matthews ( 26th , Green Bay Packers ) ; the second round picks were Rey Maualuga ( 38th , Cincinnati Bengals ) and Fili Moala ( 56th , Indianapolis Colts ) ; in the third round was Patrick Turner ( 87th , Miami Dolphins ) ; in the fourth round were <unk> Maiava ( 104th , Cleveland Browns ) and Kyle Moore ( 117th , Tampa Bay Buccaneers ) ; in the fifth round was David Buehler ( 172nd , Dallas Cowboys ) ; and in the sixth round Cary Harris ( 183rd , Buffalo Bills ) and Kevin Ellison ( 189th , San Diego Chargers ) . 
 During the 2010 NFL Draft , USC had seven more players from the 2007 team drafted into the NFL , though none in the first round . The second round picks were Taylor Mays ( 49th , San Francisco 49ers ) and Charles Brown ( 64th , New Orleans Saints ) ; in the third round were Damien Williams ( 77th , Tennessee Titans ) and Kevin Thomas ( 97th , Indianapolis Colts ) ; in the fourth round were Everson Griffen ( 100th , Minnesota Vikings ) and Joe McKnight ( 112th , New York Jets ) ; and in the sixth round Anthony McCoy ( 185th , Seattle Seahawks ) . 
 At the 2011 NFL Draft , USC tied for the most players drafted from any university into the NFL that year with nine . Of those , six were on the 2007 team , though none of those particular players were in the first round . Shareece Wright was selected in the third round ( 89th , San Diego Chargers ) ; in the sixth round were Ronald Johnson ( 182nd , San Francisco 49ers ) and Allen Bradford ( 187th , Tampa Bay Buccaneers ) ; and in three consecutive picks in the seventh round were Stanley Havili ( 240th , Philadelphia Eagles ) , David Ausberry ( 241st , Oakland Raiders ) and Malcolm Smith ( 242nd , Seattle Seahawks ) . Jordan Cameron , who had tried to transfer onto the team but forced to wait a year at a junior college before enrolling , was also drafted in the third round ( 102nd , Cleveland Browns ) . 
 Finally , at the 2012 NFL Draft , Rhett Ellison was taken in the fourth round ( 128th , Minnesota Vikings ) . 
 As of 2012 , 39 players from the 2007 USC Trojans football team were drafted into the NFL . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Senior Fred Davis became the first Trojan to win the John Mackey Award , awarded to the nation 's top tight end . Five Trojans were selected to the various 2007 College Football All @-@ America Teams . In addition to Fred Davis , tackle Sam Baker earned his third @-@ straight spot on an All @-@ American team . On the defense , tackle Sedrick Ellis , linebacker Keith Rivers , and safety Taylor Mays all earned All @-@ American honors . Ellis was named the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference Defensive Player of the Year by league coaches , and selected to the All @-@ Conference first team defense along with defensive end Lawrence Jackson , linebackers Rivers and Rey Maualuga , and cornerback Kevin Ellison . The All @-@ Conference first team offense included Davis , Baker , and offensive lineman Chilo Rachal . 
 The Trojans had nine players invited to participate in the Senior Bowl in Mobile , Alabama : Baker , quarterback John David Booty , Davis , Ellis , Jackson , offensive linemen Drew Radovich , Rivers , cornerback Terrell Thomas and running back Chauncey Washington . All nine players were placed on the North team , which was coached by Lane Kiffin , who had coached for the Trojans between 2001 and 2006 before becoming the head coach of the Oakland Raiders . The nine players sent by USC were the second @-@ most ever invited from one team in a single season , one less than the 10 players by Alabama in 1987 and tied with the nine players sent by Auburn in 1988 , though the earlier selection rules favored the two locally based schools . 
 = Joe 90 = 
 Joe 90 is a 1960s British science @-@ fiction television series that follows the adventures of a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy , Joe McClaine , who starts a double life as a schoolchild @-@ turned @-@ superspy after his scientist father invents a device capable of duplicating expert knowledge and experience and transferring it to a different human brain . Equipped with the skills of the foremost academic and military minds , Joe is recruited by the World Intelligence Network ( WIN ) and , as its " Most Special Agent " , pursues the objective of world peace and saving human life . Created by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson and filmed by Century 21 Productions , the 30 @-@ episode series followed Thunderbirds and Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons . 
 First broadcast in the UK between September 1968 and April 1969 on the ATV network , Joe 90 was the sixth and final of the Andersons ' productions to be made exclusively using the form of marionette puppetry termed " Supermarionation " . Their final puppet series , The Secret Service , used this process only in combination with extensive live @-@ action filming . As in the case of its antecedent , Captain Scarlet , the puppets of Joe 90 are of natural proportions as opposed to the more caricatured design of the characters of Thunderbirds . 
 Although not as successful as Century 21 's previous efforts , since its inception , Joe 90 has been praised , among other aspects , for the level of characterisation of its smaller puppet cast and the quality of its model sets and special effects . Critics have interpreted Joe 90 's spy @-@ fi theme and the choice of a child character as the protagonist as either a " kids play Bond " concept or an enshrinement of children 's powers of imagination . Points of criticism range from the violence depicted in a number of episodes to the absence of female characters , which is interpreted either as the inevitable result of the series ' composition as a " boy 's own adventure " or as being tantamount to sexism . 
 As for its earlier productions , Century 21 launched a number of merchandising campaigns based on Joe 90 , which included toy cars and comic strips featuring the continuing adventures of Joe McClaine . Syndicated in the United States in 1969 , re @-@ broadcast in the UK during the 1990s and released on DVD in most regions in the 2000s , the idea of a live @-@ action film adaptation of Joe 90 has been considered more than once since the 1960s , but without further development . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Joe 90 is set in the near future . The timeframe is most commonly stated to be 2012 and 2013 ; various other sources point to an undetermined year in the early 21st century , while the official scriptwriters ' guide states that the year is 1998 . Based on visual evidence , the events of " The Unorthodox Shepherd " occur in 2013 . 
 Nine @-@ year @-@ old British schoolboy Joe McClaine is the adopted son of Professor Ian " Mac " McClaine , a computer expert . Outwardly , the <unk> are a simple father @-@ and @-@ son pair , who live in an antiquated Elizabethan @-@ style cottage overlooking Culver Bay in Dorset , and are waited on by their housekeeper , Mrs Harris . Yet residing in a secret underground laboratory is Mac 's latest invention , the " BIG RAT " ( Brain Impulse <unk> Record And Transfer ) , a machine capable of recording knowledge and experience from leading experts in various fields and transferring it to another human brain . At the heart of the design is the " Rat Trap " : a spherical , rotating cage in which a subject is seated during the transfer of " brain patterns " . 
 Sam Loover , a family friend and an agent of World Intelligence Network ( WIN ) , persuades Mac to dedicate the services of Joe and the BIG RAT to the organisation : Joe will become a WIN operative with a difference , the unlimited possibilities offered by the BIG RAT serving as an invaluable tool for completing missions . After requisite knowledge and experience has been transferred , and provided that Joe is wearing customised glasses containing hidden electrodes ( a portable storage device for brain impulses ) , he is able to carry out missions requiring proficiency in – among other disciplines – flying fighter aircraft , spaceflight , performing advanced neurosurgery and piano . 
 Since a boy would never be suspected of espionage , Joe 's innocence is as useful an asset as the BIG RAT , and he comes to be regarded as WIN 's " Most Special Agent " . Reporting to Shane Weston , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of WIN 's London Headquarters , Joe is also equipped with a special briefcase , which externally appears to be nothing more than a school case but which secretly contains an adapted handgun and transceiver . There is some inconsistency as to why Joe is assigned the codename " 90 " . Contemporary series publicity stated that , in the pilot episode , Joe enlists in WIN as its 90th London @-@ based agent . However , in the episode " Project 90 " , reference is made to the BIG RAT being documented in WIN 's " File Number 90 " , from which Joe 's designation is explicitly stated to originate . The series ends with a clip show episode , " The Birthday " , in which a selection of Joe 's missions are presented as flashbacks at a surprise party on the day that the character turns ten . 
 Like antecedent series , plot elements of Joe 90 include hi @-@ tech gadgetry , rescue operations , secret organisations and criminal or terrorist threats to world security . An example of the advanced technology demonstrated is Professor McClaine 's " Jet Air Car " : a multiple @-@ configuration land- , sea- and air @-@ based vehicle built prior to the events of the series . The in @-@ joke of " WIN " , the abbreviated form of " World Intelligence Network " , is similar to that of " WASP " , the acronym for the World <unk> Security Patrol that appears in Stingray . 
 In the fictional universe of Joe 90 , the Cold War – significant at the time of the series ' TV debut due to the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 – has ended , and a world government has been established . WIN is the successor organisation to MI6 , the CIA and the KGB , all of which have been merged in the formation of the global network . Although the pilot sees Joe hi @-@ jacking a Russian jet fighter to expose the secrets of its construction to the West , the storyline is ultimately revealed to be a speculative fiction posited by Weston as an example of the espionage that Joe would have to perform if he were to join WIN . The plot twist , in particular the revelation that Russia and the West are allies in the future , is praised by academic Nicholas J. Cull for its " progressiveness of spirit " , and for exemplifying Anderson 's " [ taking ] an end to the Cold War as a given in his work . " Anderson was motivated by what he perceived as a " duty to the rising generation to avoid perpetuating Cold War stereotypes " , once stating that he " tried very hard not to put [ his ] ten cents into creating World War Three . " 
 Despite the existence of a global government and intelligence organisation , the nations of Earth are still politically divided into Western and Eastern blocs ; here , Cull argues , Joe 90 is similar to other Anderson series in that it " unashamedly capitalized on the Cold War cult of the secret agent whose skills defend the home from enemies unknown . " The recurring antagonist of WIN and Joe is the non @-@ aligned " Eastern Alliance " , which dominates Asia and appears in the episodes " Attack of the Tiger " and " Mission X @-@ 41 " . Meanwhile , villains in " International Concerto " , " Business Holiday " , " Arctic Adventure " and " The Professional " speak with Slavic accents . " Arctic Adventure " and " Attack of the Tiger " combine the threat from the East with the hazards of nuclear technology : in the former , Joe must recover a stray atomic warhead from the ocean floor while avoiding enemy submarines , while in the latter , he is tasked with destroying an Eastern nuclear device that is about to be launched into Earth orbit . By contrast , an episode that presents the benign aspects of such technology is " Big Fish " , in which Joe labours to remove a defective nuclear submarine from the territorial waters of a Latin American police state . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , Joe 90 was purposely conceived and developed to be a different kind of Supermarionation series , placing the narrative emphasis less on action , advanced technology and visual effects and more on characterisation and plotlines subscribing more to the spy thriller genre than science fiction . Co @-@ creator Gerry Anderson explained , " The show majored on its characters , which I thought were all very good . The puppets had become so lifelike , I now strongly believed that they could carry the action without the usual massive assistance from futuristic hardware . " Explaining his inspiration for the series , Anderson remembered his pre @-@ Supermarionation days when he served as an assistant editor for such films as The Wicked Lady , handling recording tape on a daily basis . While pondering on the blanking and re @-@ use of such tape , Anderson made a connection to the human brain 's electrical activities , explaining , " I read somewhere that the human brain is controlled by electrical impulses and how thoughts are stored electronically . I started toying with the story potential of a process that would allow the recording of brain patterns and transferring them to another brain . I was really likening it to magnetic recording , where material could be stored or transferred to another tape . " When it came to naming the lead character and , from that , the name of the new series , Anderson recalled that on one of his earlier productions , Fireball XL5 , the surname " Ninety " had been an early proposal for Colonel Steve Zodiac , and selected it for the new schoolboy protagonist . 
 Commissioned by ITC financier Lew Grade in the autumn of 1967 , with pre @-@ production completed in October while the final episodes of Captain Scarlet were still being filmed , principal photography for Joe 90 ran from 13 November 1967 to mid @-@ August 1968 using two puppet stages at the Century 21 Studios on the Slough Trading Estate in Berkshire . The average shooting period for each episode was two weeks , as had been the case with the previous series . The script for the pilot ( titled only in production documentation as " The Most Special Agent " ) was written by Anderson and his wife , Sylvia , as was the custom for every new puppet series that the couple developed in the 1960s . Before the concept of WIN was devised , Joe was to have become the " Most Special Agent " of the CIA . Most of the other episodes were written by Tony Barwick , with Shane Rimmer contributing six scripts . Rimmer was hired to write for Joe 90 while co @-@ writing a book with Barwick , who initially offered him a two @-@ script contract ( they were filmed as the episodes " Splashdown " and " Big Fish " ) . Since he was occupied by post @-@ production on the second Thunderbirds feature film , Thunderbird 6 , and the development of his live @-@ action film , Doppelgänger , Gerry Anderson was unable to fulfil the producer role as he had done for Captain Scarlet , and instead passed the responsibility to Reg Hill and David Lane . Lane recalls that , in his role as producer , he was " responsible for looking at the scripts , the effects , the puppets , the whole thing really " . He found support in Anderson 's long @-@ serving collaborator Desmond Saunders , who directed the pilot and served as production controller for the rest of the series . Other directors for Joe 90 included Leo Eaton , Alan Perry and Ken Turner , all of whom had contributed to Captain Scarlet , and Peter Anderson , who was promoted from his earlier position as assistant director to replace the outgoing Brian Burgess and Robert Lynn . 
 A Christmas @-@ themed episode , " The Unorthodox Shepherd " , featured location filming to an extent unprecedented for a puppet @-@ based Anderson series . The Secret Service , the Andersons ' next production after Joe 90 , developed the hybridity further with the incorporation of extensive footage of live actors in long shot , intercut with scale puppet sequences . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Keith Wilson and Grenville Nott superseded Bob Bell as heads of the art department and built the interior of Culver Bay Cottage from a design by Mike Trim . Anderson remembered his satisfaction with the cottage set : " The interior , with its beams and lovely soft furnishings , was really beautiful . " The construction of the BIG RAT model , meanwhile , was entrusted to the newly formed incorporated company Century 21 Props ( or Electronics ) , which was responsible for the various gadgets that appeared in the series and was based in Bourne End in Buckinghamshire . 
 Although mostly occupied with Thunderbird 6 and Doppelgänger , Derek Meddings briefly reprised his role as head of special effects to construct Professor McClaine 's Jet Air Car . The design concept was a disappointment to Anderson , who commented : " The car looked like no other piece of hardware we had had previously but I was wary of canning it as I feared I might be becoming stereotyped . Maybe the whole thing was becoming a bit narrow ; all the ideas were becoming similar . " Stephen La Rivière , writer of Filmed in Supermarionation : A History of the Future , views the Jet Air Car as an update of Supercar , the vehicle that appeared in Anderson 's 1961 series of the same name , but agrees that while the Jet Air Car is the " star vehicle " of Joe 90 , it is visually unappealing in comparison to the " beautiful , sleek design of its predecessor . " 
 = = = Puppets = = = 
 The Supermarionation puppets featured in Joe 90 are of the more accurately proportioned kind introduced for Captain Scarlet , and which would also be used for the Andersons ' final puppet series , The Secret Service . Simultaneously , the drive for enhanced realism across all major design aspects which started with the preceding series continued for Joe 90 . Main character puppets from Captain Scarlet were re @-@ used for Joe 90 with the exceptions of the Captain Scarlet and Captain Blue marionettes . Few new puppets were constructed , the only notable exceptions being Professor McClaine ( sculpted by Mary Turner ) , Joe ( sculpted by Tim Cooksey ) , and Mrs Harris . 
 The Joe puppet was the first child marionette to be made as part of the new generation of Supermarionation puppets introduced for Captain Scarlet , for which the sculpting team were careful to achieve realistic proportions for the body of a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy . The puppets of Sam Loover and Shane Weston had each made several appearances in the previous series , but for their regular role in the new series a variety of alternative heads were created from the " expressionless " templates – including " <unk> " , " <unk> " and " blinkers " – and the Shane Weston puppet was re @-@ wigged . Many of the recycled " revamp puppets " , used to depict supporting characters for Captain Scarlet , were also duplicated with darker skin colours to portray characters from a range of ethnicities . Further to these requirements , the use of two shooting soundstages necessitated the duplication of all the " expressionless " main character puppets to avoid conflicts over resources between the two filming units . As in the previous series , " under control " puppets , manipulated by levers from below as opposed to wires from a gantry above , feature in Joe 90 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The opening and ending theme and incidental music of Joe 90 composed by Barry Gray , who was responsible for music on other Anderson series . Episodes of Joe 90 start with either a cold open ( the first Anderson series to do so ) or the main title sequence , which sees Joe sitting in the BIG RAT 's " Rat Trap " and receiving transferred knowledge from the machine . The sequence is accompanied by Gray 's opening theme , which is dominated by the notes of guitarist Vic Flick , known for performing lead guitar in the recording of the " James Bond Theme " for Dr. No ( 1962 ) . In Anderson 's biography , What Made Thunderbirds Go ! , the Joe 90 theme is described as a " dizzying piece of psychedelic pop art that could have been produced only in the late Sixties . " The closing credits are superimposed over images of objects such as Joe 's BIG RAT spectacles , his WIN badge , and also his briefcase , gun , and transceiver ; while the concepts for these images were photographic , the final versions were augmented with airbrush artwork . 
 In addition to the themes and tracks for the pilot , " The Most Special Agent " , Gray composed incidental music for 20 additional episodes of Joe 90 . Music for the Joe 90 episodes was recorded between 18 January and 27 September 1968 , starting with the titles and the pilot in a session at the London Olympic Sound Studios and ending with one of the final instalments , " See You Down There " at CTS Studios . Scores were also recorded at Gray 's residence in Esher , Surrey . 
 Gray 's compositions for Joe 90 occasionally required the hiring of guest talent . The piano music featured extensively in the episode " International Concerto " was performed by Robert Docker ( the human hands seen in the close @-@ up shots of Joe 's playing belonged to Gray 's son , Simon ) . " Lone @-@ Handed 90 " includes a recurring harmonica , played by the Canadian musician Tommy Reilly . 
 A CD of the Joe 90 soundtrack , running to 28 pieces , was released by Silva Screen Records in 2006 . Awarding a rating of 3 @.@ 5 stars out of five , AllRovi reviewer William Ruhlmann comments that the scores are " not great writing " , but adds that Gray 's work was " perfectly adequate , if not inspired . " Previous releases include a 45 rpm gramophone record , Title Theme from the ATV Series Joe 90 , also featuring various incidental music . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 In comparison to Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , Joe 90 features a smaller cast , voicing just five regular characters . Like Captain Scarlet , the series has been viewed as more " English @-@ sounding " , the Andersons abandoning their stipulation dating from the production of Thunderbirds that the puppet cast be American and thus dispensing with the established format of their series ' principal character being a " square @-@ jawed , fair @-@ skinned male with a Mid @-@ Atlantic accent " . Instead , in a manner similar to the Captain Scarlet , Joe 90 focuses on the strong American supporting characters of Sam Loover and Shane Weston . 
 Len Jones as Joe McClaine , a nine @-@ year @-@ old adoptee who balances schoolwork with missions as a spy for the World Intelligence Network ( WIN ) , using the aid of knowledge and experience captured by a brilliant invention , the Brain Impulse <unk> Record And Transfer ( BIG RAT ) . For realism , Joe is voiced by child actor Jones rather than an actress as had usually been the case for the representation of younger characters on earlier Supermarionation series . On the subject of female casting , Gerry Anderson recalled , " ... it always sounded rather odd to me . It never sounded like a real little boy ... With Joe 90 , I suggested finding a British kid and making him repeat the lines parrot fashion . That 's what we did with Len Jones . His performance was only adequate , but at least it sounded authentic . " 
 Rupert Davies as Professor Ian " Mac " McClaine , Joe 's adoptive father and inventor of the BIG RAT . At the time of production , Davies was well known for acting the leading role in the 1960s TV adaptation of the Maigret novels , and was the most distinguished actor yet to contribute to an Anderson series . Experiencing typecasting as a result of his earlier role as the fictional French detective , voice acting provided Davies with the opportunity to broaden the horizons of his career . In Gerry Anderson 's biography , What Made Thunderbirds Go ! , Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn credit Mac 's " warm yet distinguished " English tones as a " perfect counterpoint " to the American voices of the characters of Sam Loover and Shane Weston . 
 Keith Alexander as Sam Loover , a long @-@ time friend of Mac and Deputy Head of WIN 's London offices , whom Joe affectionately calls " Uncle " . Australian actor Alexander had provided voices for the second Thunderbirds film , Thunderbird 6 , as a replacement for actor Ray Barrett . During the 1960s , he provided the voice for another puppet character , Topo <unk> , on The Ed Sullivan Show in the United States . 
 David Healy as Shane Weston , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of WIN 's London Headquarters and Deputy Head of the international organisation , who has a penchant for feeble jokes . Healy , an American actor resident in the United Kingdom , had voiced supporting characters in Captain Scarlet , and was often contracted to play transatlantic characters in British television . 
 Sylvia Anderson as Mrs ( Ada ) Harris , the <unk> ' long @-@ suffering housekeeper , who is unaware that Mac and Joe are members of an intelligence organisation . Anderson , whose voice had first featured in the 1961 series Supercar , was best known for voicing the character of Lady Penelope in Thunderbirds and its two feature films . ( The reason for the choice of the name " Ada Harris " is unclear ; whether it was a coincidence or by deliberate choice , the name is also that of the protagonist of author Paul Gallico 's Mrs. ' Arris novels . ) 
 Supporting characters were voiced by Alexander , Healy and Anderson as well as earlier Anderson contributors Gary Files , Martin King , Jeremy Wilkin , Shane Rimmer and ( for one episode , " Viva Cordova " ) Liz Morgan . Rimmer and Morgan , however , are not credited in the closing titles . Files recalls that he felt honoured to be asked to rejoin the Andersons for another production following Captain Scarlet , and that he was " tickled pink " to be performing with Davies , adding , " I hated the way that so many so @-@ called producers wouldn 't meet his eye . He was Maigret forever , you see , in their eyes . " Morgan , meanwhile , explains how she was contracted for her single voice role in Joe 90 : " They needed a voice , they called around and everyone else was out shopping . So they called me in . " 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the starts of the regional broadcasts were staggered , with Joe 90 premiering on ATV Midlands and Tyne Tees in late September 1968 and moving on to LWT , Southern and Anglia shortly after . The series reached the Harlech and Channel regions in November and finally Granada on Christmas Day , although the first episode to air was the Christmas @-@ themed " The Unorthodox Shepherd " rather than the pilot , " The Most Special Agent " . Granada was one of several regions to broadcast the series under the alternative title The Adventures of Joe 90 . Although the series was re @-@ run several times in various regions during the 1970s , it was not transmitted in the Yorkshire region until 1981 , when it was secured by ITV for a syndicated run . In the United States , Joe 90 was broadcast in first @-@ run syndication in 1969 . 
 Joe 90 was later purchased for early @-@ morning network transmissions on BBC1 in 1994 . Rights holder PolyGram cleared the programme for broadcast on the condition that the " zooming " Joe 90 logo in the title sequence be replaced with a new static version to distinguish it from the logo for the American G.I. Joe toy brand , which , PolyGram believed , appeared too similar . The videotapes used for broadcast were 16 mm transfers of the 35 mm film and were edited for timeslot constraints , with the cold open re @-@ arranged where applicable so that the titles now opened each episode , and the closing credits minimised to permit a BBC Children 's presenter to read out viewer birthday cards . A separate 1994 run on Nickelodeon made none of these alterations to the 1960s material . With Thunderbirds and Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons , the series commenced a run on the UK Sci Fi Channel in 2009 . 
 For Joe 90 's original run , in some regions the end of the title sequence incorporated a zoom @-@ in shot of Joe 's WIN glasses accompanied by a voice @-@ over provided by actor Tim Turner , stating , " These are Joe 90 's special glasses . Without them , he 's a boy . Wearing them , he 's an expert . " This short speech , intended to warn child viewers not to put themselves at risk by imitating Joe 's exploits , has been erroneously attributed to Keith Alexander on the Joe 90 Region 2 DVD box set , on which it is a special feature . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In an episode guide to the Anderson TV series , science @-@ fiction writer John Peel questions Mac 's ethics in " experimenting on " Joe to further the development of the BIG RAT . On the subject of Joe as a secret agent he remarks , jokingly , " Presumably there are no child labour laws in the future ! " La Rivière 's attention is drawn to one of Mac 's lines at the end of the pilot , in a scene that he considers " amusing " ; the professor 's admonition " Don 't come crying to me if you get hurt ! " represents his preparedness to " <unk> all parental responsibility " towards his adoptive son . Observing the series ' subscription to " wider themes in Cold War culture " , Cull likens the BIG RAT 's powers to brainwashing , but concludes that it is a fundamentally " benign " technology . The more violent style introduced in Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons is sometimes evident in Joe 90 : in " Hi @-@ jacked " , Joe kills an enemy with a grenade , while in " Project 90 " , Professor McClaine is menaced by a drill poised to <unk> his head . On the subject of violence , episode director Desmond Saunders comments : " There was an unpleasant side to it which I never really understood . There was something about it that was very strange and sinister . " 
 On the other hand , producer David Lane praises the series for its increased humour following the dark tone of Captain Scarlet and sees Joe 90 as much more family @-@ orientated in comparison to its forerunner , summing up the series as " a great little programme . " Anthony Clark of the British Film Institute commends Joe 90 for more effective characterisation than Captain Scarlet , and also compliments the quality of its scripts and Barry Gray 's musical score . La Rivière underlines a connection between the child protagonist and the theme of espionage , writing , " The premise that drives Joe 90 taps into the fantasy indulged by most boys that they , even at nine years old , can be James Bond . " Writer John R. Cook agrees with La Rivière 's points on audience self @-@ identification , describes the series as a " wish @-@ fulfilment fantasy " and suggests that the character of Joe is a mirror image of the target child viewer . Comparisons have been made to later franchises with child protagonists who are in fact operatives for intelligence agencies , such as Robert Rodriguez 's Spy Kids films , and Anthony Horowitz 's Alex Rider novels . 
 La Rivière noted the intimacy of the series and the predominantly male voice cast and characters , suggesting that Joe 90 is " very much a Boy 's Own adventure . " Out of the 30 episodes , only ten feature appearances from female characters , a fact which La Rivière attributes to the increased demands on Century 21 for its feature film productions , Thunderbird 6 and Doppelgänger . Peel suggests that the female absence leaves Joe 90 , with many other Anderson productions , inferior to previous Supermarionation effort Thunderbirds , in which the character of Lady Penelope has a primary role in several episodes . Grouping Joe 90 with the earlier Supercar and the subsequent The Secret Service , Peel concludes , " It is hardly coincidental that these tend to be the least @-@ loved of [ Anderson 's ] series ; he had , after all , ignored half of his potential audience . " For Peel , this return of the " standard Anderson sexism " is only one aspect of deterioration between Joe 90 and previous productions . Peel challenges La Rivière 's asserted " kids play Bond " theme , writing that , " being a somewhat nerdy kid with glasses and brain implants was not really thrilling . " 
 Peel 's view was contested by Anderson 's and Cull 's belief that the series , with its bespectacled main character of Joe McClaine , can increase the self @-@ confidence of young viewers who wear glasses : " Suddenly they were proud because they had something in common with Joe 90 . " Since the series ' first appearance , the epithet " Joe 90 " has become a popular term of endearment for both children and adults with glasses reminiscent of Joe 's ( such as snooker player Dennis Taylor ) . During UK repeats in the 1990s , similarities were drawn between Joe and then @-@ Prime Minister John Major , also known for wearing large spectacles . Jeff Evans , writer of The Penguin TV Companion , criticises the plot element of the glasses , writing , " Joe simply dons a pair of scientific glasses , making him look like the class swot than a secret agent . " 
 Cook reads further into the concept of child empowerment in Joe 90 , writing that the series creates a " technological utopia " around youth , remarking , " Through the character of Joe , his brain hardwired at the start of each episode into the BIG RAT supercomputer , the young are shown to be literally at one with technology . " He adds that the instant access to brain patterns that the BIG RAT affords to Joe may be interpreted as heralding the development of the Internet over a decade after Joe 90 was produced . With his intellectual horizons broadened , Joe becomes the manifestation of homo superior , yet his youthfulness grants him the power to change the fraught political world in ways that no adult could due to the limitations of their imagination . In this respect , Cook holds up Joe 90 as a precursor to the 1970s television series The Tomorrow People , which also concerned ideas of human transcendence in children . This idea , Cook says , was evident in the title of Joe 90 itself : " no longer is he a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy but instead his status and capacities have been multiplied tenfold to transform him into agent ' Joe 90 ' , his name an appealing futuristic echo of the then distant year of 1990 . " 
 Ultimately , Joe 90 has proven to be less successful than previous series made by Anderson . In the Anderson @-@ related book , Supermarionation Classics , the model work and scripts are praised , but it is conceded that the series " failed to arouse more than a passing interest with some Anderson fans . " Stephen Hulse refers to Joe 90 as " clearly the most child @-@ oriented of the latter Anderson Supermarionation series " and " technically accomplished " , but " one of the Anderson stable 's lesser series " . However , its spy @-@ fi theme led on to the final Supermarionation series , The Secret Service , which too features an unconventional secret agent ( a vicar , Father Stanley Unwin ) and an intelligence organisation with a contracted name ( BISHOP , an acronym for " British Intelligence Service Headquarters , Operation Priest " ) . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1981 , a compilation film of the Joe 90 episodes " The Most Special Agent " , " Splashdown " , " Attack of the Tiger " and " Arctic Adventure " , titled The Amazing Adventures of Joe 90 , was created under the supervision of Robert Mandell of ITC Entertainment 's New York offices . Intended to boost American syndication sales , The Amazing Adventures of Joe 90 is one of a number of composite films of Gerry Anderson productions , which were released both to stations and on home video under the promotional banner of " Super Space Theater " . Material for " The Most Special Agent " was re @-@ edited to remove the framing sequences set at Culver Bay Cottage and WIN Headquarters London , with the result that Joe 's fictitious mission to steal the Russian prototype fighter appears to be a real assignment for the nine @-@ year @-@ old WIN agent . Despite each of the episodes in this compilation receiving a U certificate from the British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) , The Amazing Adventures of Joe 90 was rated PG . 
 From the 1980s , the distribution rights to the ITC productions belonged to PolyGram Television . Subsequent sales were made to Carlton International in the late 1990s and finally Granada International which , through a merger with Carlton International in 2004 , now forms ITV Global Entertainment , a division of ITV plc . During the 1990s , the possibility of a live @-@ action film adaptation of Joe 90 was mooted by PolyGram . The idea re @-@ emerged in the 2000s , when in 2003 the magazine Variety reported that a film version was in the planning stages , to be produced by Disney . However , to date , the film proposal remains to be developed . In 2005 , Anderson said of negotiations with Granada , " We have regular meetings and although they are very polite and very nice , nothing ever happens . " 
 When I Love the ' 70s , ' 80s and ' 90s , three British pop culture nostalgia programmes , were broadcast on BBC Two in 2001 , a set of Joe 90 @-@ themed " trailers " were filmed to precede instalments of the last of these series . In each of the three previews , the character of Joe is depicted entering the BIG RAT 's " Rat Trap " to receive the brain pattern of a 1990s household name , from Oasis bandmember Liam Gallagher ( representing 1990 ) to comedian Vic Reeves ( 1991 ) to the character of Garth ( portrayed by Dana Carvey ) from the 1992 film , Wayne 's World . On leaving the " Rat Trap " , Joe has assumed the identity of each BIG RAT subject and acts and speaks using their mannerisms . Edited versions of the trailers missing the BBC Two voiceovers and logos are included as special feature material on the Region 2 release of the Joe 90 DVD box set . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Authentic 1960s associated media for Joe 90 included a Century 21 Toys range comprising friction @-@ drive and battery @-@ operated versions of Professor McClaine 's Jet Air Car and Sam Loover 's futuristic saloon . Also available were Joe 's WIN briefcase ( complete with replica gadgets and pistol ) and his WIN badge ( reading " Most Special Agent " ) . Joe 90 was also given its own weekly comic , Joe 90 Top Secret , which ran for 34 issues and narrated the TV episodes in strip form , while also including strips based on the TV series The Champions and Land of the Giants . In September 1969 , Joe 90 Top Secret merged with the established Anderson tie @-@ in TV21 ( previously titled TV Century 21 ) , which then came to be known as TV21 and Joe 90 . After a further 36 issues , Joe 90 strips were dropped from the comic and the new title discontinued in favour of the original TV21 . 
 The 1990s were marked by a considerable interest in old TV series from the 1960s and 70s – Joe 90 was one of those that was among the repeats and was also the subject of a strip series in the <unk> Times section of The Sunday Times . Strips from Joe 90 Top Secret were reprinted in a new publication , Joe 90 , which was launched to tie in with the 1994 BBC re @-@ runs but which also , after just seven issues , merged into a related comic , on this occasion Fleetway 's Thunderbirds . Other Joe 90 print media include 1968 and 1969 Joe 90 annuals from Century 21 Publishing and two short paperback novels , Joe 90 and the Raiders ( by Tod Sullivan ) and Joe 90 in Revenge ( by Howard Elson ) , published by May Fair Books . 
 = = = VHS and DVD = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the earliest home releases of Joe 90 in the 1980s were controlled by " Channel 5 " , later re @-@ branded as " PolyGram Video " . Released in an eight @-@ volume series and re @-@ packaged in 1992 , the set included " The Most Special Agent " , " Splashdown " , " Attack of the Tiger " and " Arctic Adventure " in their re @-@ edited forms from the 1981 compilation film The Amazing Adventures of Joe 90 , which itself received three video releases both in PAL and NTSC format between 1981 and 1986 . The 1980s and 90s VHS releases used 16 mm prints , which were of a quality poorer than that of the original film . 
 In September 2002 , a DVD box set of all 30 Joe 90 episodes , sourced from a digital remaster of 35 mm film prints , was released in Region 2 by Carlton . The five component discs were also released individually at intervals between September 2002 and January 2003 , and the episodes were also marketed in a new five @-@ volume VHS package . A North American set from A & E debuted in July 2003 before a Region 4 version appeared in October . A French @-@ language release of Joe 90 – Agent Très Spécial ( English : Joe 90 – Very Special Agent ) hit the Canadian market in 2004 . With these DVD releases , the component episodes of The Amazing Adventures of Joe 90 were made commercially available in their unedited form for the first time . 
 = Grand Duchess Tatiana Nikolaevna of Russia = 
 Grand Duchess Tatiana Nikolaevna of Russia ( Tatiana Nikolaevna Romanova ) ( Russian : Великая Княжна <unk> Николаевна ) ( 10 June ( 11th starting in 1900 ) 1897 – 17 July 1918 ) ( starting in 1900 , Tatiana 's birthday was celebrated on 11 June new style ) was the second daughter of Tsar Nicholas II , the last monarch of Russia , and of Tsarina Alexandra . She was born at the Peterhof , Saint Petersburg . 
