 She was better known than her three sisters during her lifetime and headed Red Cross committees during World War I. Like her older sister Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia , she nursed wounded soldiers in a military hospital from 1914 to 1917 , until the family was arrested following the first Russian Revolution of 1917 . 
 Her murder by revolutionaries on 17 July 1918 resulted in her being named as a passion bearer by the Russian Orthodox Church . She was a younger sister of Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia and an elder sister of Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia , Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia and Tsarevich Alexei of Russia . All sisters were falsely rumored to have survived the assassination and dozens of imposters claimed to be surviving Romanovs . Author Michael Occleshaw speculated that a woman named Larissa Tudor might have been Tatiana ; however , all of the Romanovs , including Olga , Tatiana , Maria and Anastasia , were murdered by the Bolshevik assassination squad . 
 = = Early life and characteristics = = 
 Grand Duchess Tatiana 's siblings were Grand Duchesses Olga , Maria , Anastasia , and Tsarevich Alexei of Russia . All of the children were close to one another and to their parents up until the end of their lives . 
 Tatiana was described as tall and slender , with dark auburn hair and dark blue @-@ gray eyes , fine , chiseled features , and a refined , elegant bearing befitting the daughter of an Emperor . She was considered the most beautiful of the four grand duchesses by many courtiers . Of all her sisters , Tatiana most closely resembled their mother . 
 Tatiana 's title is most precisely translated as " Grand Princess , " meaning that Tatiana , as an " imperial highness " , was higher in rank than other princesses in Europe , who were " royal <unk> . " " Grand Duchess " became the most widely used translation of the title into English from Russian . However , her friends , family and the household servants generally called her by her first name and patronym , Tatiana Nikolaevna or by the Russian nicknames " Tanya , " " <unk> , " " <unk> , " or " <unk> . " 
 Like the other Romanov children , Tatiana was raised with some austerity . She and her sisters slept on camp beds without pillows , took cold baths in the morning , and were expected to keep themselves occupied with embroidery or knitting projects if they had a spare moment . Their work was given as gifts or sold at charity bazaars . According to one story , Tatiana , accustomed to being addressed only by her name and patronymic , was so disconcerted when she was addressed as " Your Imperial Highness " by lady @-@ in @-@ waiting Baroness Sophie Buxhoeveden when she was heading a committee meeting that she kicked the woman under the table and hissed " Are you crazy to speak to me like that ? " 
 Tatiana and her older sister , Olga , were known in the household as " The Big Pair . " According to a 29 May 1897 diary entry written by her father 's distant cousin , Grand Duke Konstantin Konstantinovich of Russia , she was given the name " Tatiana " as an homage to the heroine in Alexander Pushkin 's novel in verse Eugene Onegin . Her father liked the idea of having daughters named Olga and Tatiana , like the sisters in the famous poem . Like their two younger sisters , the two older girls shared a bedroom and were very close to one another from early childhood . In the spring of 1901 , Olga had typhoid fever and was confined to the nursery for several weeks away from her younger sisters . When she began to recover , Tatiana was permitted to see her older sister for five minutes but didn 't recognize her . When her governess , Margaretta Eagar , told her after the visit that the sickly child she had been conversing so gently with was Olga , four @-@ year @-@ old Tatiana began to cry bitterly and protested that the pale , thin child couldn 't be her adored older sister . Eagar had difficulty persuading Tatiana that Olga would recover . French tutor Pierre Gilliard wrote that the two sisters were " passionately devoted to one another . " 
 Tatiana was practical and had a natural talent for leadership . Her sisters gave her the nickname " The Governess " and sent her as their group representative when they wanted their parents to grant a favor . Though she was eighteen months Tatiana 's senior , Olga had no objection when Tatiana decided to take charge of a situation . She was also closer to her mother than any of her sisters and was considered by many who knew her to be the Tsarina 's favorite daughter . Tatiana was the conduit of all her mother 's decisions . " It was not that her sisters loved their mother any less , " recalled her French tutor Pierre Gilliard , " but Tatiana knew how to surround her with <unk> attentions and never gave way to her own capricious impulses . " Alexandra wrote Nicholas on 13 March 1916 that Tatiana was the only one of their four daughters who " grasped it " when she explained her way of looking at things . 
 Gilliard wrote that Tatiana was reserved and " well balanced " but less open and spontaneous than Olga . She was also less talented than Olga , but worked harder and was more dedicated to seeing projects through to completion than her elder sister . Colonel Eugene <unk> , the family 's guard at Tsarskoye Selo and Tobolsk , felt Tatiana " had no liking for art . Maybe it would have been better for her had she been a man . " Others felt Tatiana 's artistic talents were better expressed in handiwork and in her talent for choosing attractive fashions and creating elegant hair styles . Her mother 's friend Anna Vyrubova later wrote that Tatiana had a great talent for making clothing , embroidery and crochet and that she dressed her mother 's long hair as well as any professional hair stylist . 
 = = Relationship with Grigori Rasputin = = 
 Tatiana , like all her family , doted on the long @-@ awaited heir Tsarevich Alexei , or " Baby " , who suffered frequent attacks of hemophilia and nearly died several times . Tatiana and her three sisters , like their mother , were all potential carriers of the hemophilia gene ; the Tsarina was a granddaughter of Queen Victoria , from whom the trait was inherited . Tatiana 's younger sister Maria reportedly hemorrhaged in December 1914 during an operation to remove her tonsils , according to her paternal aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia , who was interviewed later in her life . The doctor performing the operation was so unnerved that he had to be ordered to continue by their mother , Tsarina Alexandra . Olga Alexandrovna said she believed all four of her nieces bled more than was normal and believed they were carriers of the hemophilia gene like their mother . Symptomatic carriers of the gene , while not hemophiliacs themselves , can have symptoms of hemophilia including a lower than normal blood clotting factor that can lead to heavy bleeding . 
 The Tsarina relied on the counsel of Grigori Rasputin , a Russian peasant and wandering starets or " holy man " , and credited his prayers with saving the ailing Tsarevich on numerous occasions . Tatiana and her siblings were also taught to view Rasputin as " Our Friend " and to share confidences with him . In the autumn of 1907 , Tatiana 's aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia was escorted to the nursery by the Tsar to meet Rasputin . Tatiana and her sisters and brother were all wearing their long white nightgowns . The children appeared to be friendly with Rasputin and comfortable in his company . Rasputin 's friendship with the children was also evident in some of the messages he sent to them . In February 1909 , Rasputin sent the imperial children a telegram , advising them to " Love the whole of God 's nature , the whole of His creation in particular this earth . The Mother of God was always occupied with flowers and needlework . " Eleven @-@ year @-@ old Tatiana wrote a letter asking Rasputin to visit her and telling him how hard it was to see her mother ill . " But you know because you know everything , " she wrote . 
 However , one of the girls ' governesses , Sofia Ivanovna Tyutcheva , was horrified that Rasputin was permitted access to the nursery when the four girls were in their nightgowns ; she wanted him barred . Rasputin 's contacts with the children were , by all accounts , innocent in nature , but Nicholas did ask Rasputin to avoid going to the nurseries in the future . Young Tatiana was aware of the tension in the nursery and afraid of her mother 's reaction to Tyutcheva 's actions . " I am so afr ( aid ) that S.I. can speak ... about our friend something bad , " the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Tatiana wrote to her mother on 8 March 1910 . " I hope our nurse will be nice to our friend now . " Alexandra eventually had Tyutcheva fired . 
 Tyutcheva took her book to other members of the family . Nicholas 's sister Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia was horrified by Tyutcheva 's story . She wrote in her diary on 15 March 1910 that she could not understand the family 's regard for Rasputin as " almost a saint " when she viewed him as only a " khlyst " . Tyutcheva told Grand Duchess Xenia that the starets visited when Olga and Tatiana were getting ready for bed and sat there talking with them and " caressing " them . The girls hid his presence from their governess and were afraid to talk to her about Rasputin . Maria Ivanovna Vishnyakova , another nurse for the royal children , was at first a devotee of Rasputin , but later was disillusioned by him . She claimed that she was raped by Rasputin in the spring of 1910 . The empress refused to believe her , Vishnyakova told investigators , and said everything Rasputin did was holy . Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna was told that Vishnyakova 's claim had been immediately investigated , but " they caught the young woman in bed with a Cossack of the Imperial Guard . " Vishnyakova was dismissed from her post in 1913 . 
 It was whispered in society that Rasputin had seduced not only the Tsarina but also the four grand duchesses . Rasputin had released ardent , though completely innocent in nature , letters written by the Tsarina and the four grand duchesses to him . They circulated throughout society , fueling more rumors . Pornographic cartoons circulated that depicted Rasputin having relations with the empress , with her four daughters and Anna Vyrubova nude in the background . Nicholas ordered Rasputin to leave St. Petersburg for a time , much to Alexandra 's displeasure , and Rasputin went on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land . Despite the rumors , the imperial family 's association with Rasputin continued until Rasputin was murdered in 1916 . " Our Friend is so contented with our girlies , says they have gone through heavy ' courses ' for their age and their souls have much developed , " Alexandra wrote to Nicholas on 6 December 1916 . Tatiana was rumored to have been present at Rasputin 's murder on 17 December 1916 , " disguised as a lieutenant of the Chevaliers @-@ Gardes , so that she could revenge herself on Rasputin who had tried to violate her " . It was also rumored that Rasputin was castrated in front of Tatiana , wrote Maurice Paléologue , the French ambassador to Russia , in his memoirs . Paléologue was skeptical at the time about the truth of the wild rumors and attributed them to the hatred of Rasputin held by people in St. Petersburg . In his memoirs , A.A. Mordvinov reported that all four grand duchesses appeared " cold and visibly terribly upset " by Rasputin 's death and sat " huddled up closely together " on a sofa in one of their bedrooms on the night they received the news . Mordvinov reported that the young women were in a gloomy mood and seemed to sense the political upheaval that was about to be unleashed . Tatiana attended Rasputin 's funeral on 21 December 1916 , and Rasputin was buried with an icon signed on its reverse side by Tatiana , her mother and sisters . 
 Tatiana later kept a notebook in which she recorded Rasputin 's sayings : " Love is Light and it has no end . Love is great suffering . It cannot eat , it cannot sleep . It is mixed with sin in equal parts . And yet it is better to love . In love one can be mistaken , and through suffering he <unk> for his mistakes . If love is strong — the lovers happy . Nature herself and the Lord give them happiness . One must ask the Lord that he teach to love the luminous , bright , so that love be not torment , but joy . Love pure , Love luminous is the Sun . The Sun makes us warm , and Love caresses . All is in Love , and even a bullet cannot strike Love down . " 
 Tatiana , like her mother , was deeply religious and read her Bible frequently . She also studied theology and struggled with the meaning of " good and evil , sorrow and forgiveness , and man 's destiny on earth " . She decided that " One has to struggle much because the return for good is evil , and evil reigns . " A.A. <unk> , a court official , felt that Tatiana 's reserved nature gave her a " difficult " character , but one with more spiritual depth than her sister Olga . Her English tutor , Sydney Gibbes , who later became a Russian Orthodox priest , disagreed and felt that religion for Tatiana was a duty rather than something she felt in her heart . 
 = = Young adulthood and World War I = = 
 As a young teenager , Tatiana was assigned a regiment of soldiers , the <unk> ( <unk> ) Hussars and given the rank of honorary colonel . She and Olga , who was also given her own regiment , would go out and inspect the soldiers regularly , an occasion they greatly enjoyed . When she was nearly fourteen , an ill Tatiana begged her mother to permit her to get out of bed in time to go to a review so she could watch a soldier she was infatuated with . " I would like so much to go the review of the second division as I am also the second daughter and Olga was at the first so now it is my turn , " she wrote to Alexandra on 20 April 1911 . " ... Yes , Mama , and at the second division I will see whom I must see ... you know whom ... " 
 While she enjoyed the company of the soldiers she met , the young Tatiana also sometimes found their behavior shocking . A group of officers aboard the imperial yacht gave her older sister Olga a portrait of Michelangelo 's nude David , cut out from a newspaper , as a present for her name day on 11 July 1911 . " Olga laughed at it long and hard , " the indignant fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Tatiana wrote to her aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia . " And not one of the officers wishes to confess that he has done it . Such swine , aren 't they ? " The fourteen @-@ year @-@ old found her distant cousin Prince Ioann Konstantinovich of Russia 's engagement to Helen of Serbia " touching " but found the thought of Helen kissing him hilarious . " How funny if they might have children , can ( she ) be kissing him ? " Tatiana wrote Olga Alexandrovna on 14 July 1911 . " What foul , fie ! " 
 That fall , the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Tatiana experienced her first brush with violence when she witnessed the assassination of the government minister Pyotr Stolypin during a performance at the Kiev Opera House . Tatiana and her older sister Olga had followed their father back to his opera box and witnessed the shooting . Her father later wrote to his mother , Dowager Empress Maria , on 10 September 1911 , that the event had upset both girls . Tatiana sobbed and both of them had trouble sleeping that night . 
 A few years later , when World War I broke out , Tatiana became a Red Cross nurse with her mother and Olga . They cared for wounded soldiers in a private hospital on the grounds of Tsarskoye Selo . According to Vyrubova , " Tatiana was almost as skillful and devoted as her mother , and complained only that on account of her youth she was spared some of the more trying cases . " Valentina Ivanovna Chebotareva , who worked with her at the hospital , described in her journal how she planned to boil silk while Tatiana was otherwise occupied , fearing that Tatiana would be too tired to help her . But Tatiana guessed what Chebotareva was doing . " Why can you breathe carbolic acid and I can 't ? " she asked Chebotareva and insisted on helping her with the work . Tatiana was strongly patriotic and apologized in a 29 October 1914 letter for saying something negative about the Germans in her mother 's presence . She explained that she forgot her mother had been born in Germany because she thought of Alexandra as only Russian . The Tsarina responded that she did feel completely Russian and Tatiana had not hurt her feelings with her sharp words , but Alexandra was hurt by the actions of her former countrymen and by the gossip she heard about her own German connections . 
 On 15 August 1915 , Tatiana wrote her mother another letter expressing her desire to help her bear the burdens brought on by the war : " I simply can 't tell you how awfully sorry I am for you , my beloved ones . I am so sorry I can in no way help you or be useful . In such moments I am sorry I 'm not a man . " As Tatiana grew into adulthood , she undertook more public appearances than her sisters and headed committees . Vyrubova recalled that she became better known to the public than her three sisters because of her attention to duty and her ability to engage those she met . In their memoirs , both her mother 's friend , Vyrubova , and lady in waiting Lili Dehn recalled that Tatiana , the most social of the sisters , longed for friends her own age but her social life was restricted by her rank and her mother 's distaste for society . She also had a more introspective side , known only to her closest friends and family . " With her , as with her mother , shyness and reserve were accounted as pride , but , once you knew her and had gained her affection , this reserve disappeared and the real Tatiana became apparent , " Dehn recalled . " She was a poetical creature , always yearning for the ideal , and dreaming of great friendships which might be hers . " 
 Chebotareva , who grew to love " sweet " Tatiana almost like a daughter , described how the shy grand duchess once reached out to hold her hand when Tatiana was nervous about walking in front of a large group of nurses . " I am so terribly embarrassed and frightened – I do not know whom I greeted and whom not , " Tatiana told Chebotareva . Tatiana 's informality also impressed Chebotareva 's son , Gregory . Tatiana once called Chebotareva at her home on the telephone and spoke first to her sixteen @-@ year @-@ old son . Gregory was annoyed when the grand duchess referred to him by his diminutive name , " Grisha . " Not realizing who she was , the affronted Gregory asked the grand duchess to identify herself and she replied , " Tatiana Nikolaevna . " When he asked her again , still not believing he was talking to a Romanov , Tatiana again failed to claim the imperial title of Grand Duchess and replied that she was " Sister Romanova the Second . " 
 On another occasion during the war , when the lady in waiting who usually picked them up from the hospital was detained and sent a carriage without an attendant , Tatiana and her sister Olga decided to go shopping for the first time . They ordered the carriage to stop near a group of shops and went into one of the stores , where they were unrecognized because of their nurses ' uniforms . They came back out without buying anything when they realized they did not have money with them and wouldn 't have known how to use it even if they did . The next day they asked Chebotareva how to use money . 
 = = Romances with soldiers = = 
 Tatiana fell in love on at least one occasion . In an article in the December 2004 edition of the magazine Royalty Digest : A Journal of Record Peter de Malama wrote that his cousin , Dmitri <unk> Malama , an officer in the Imperial Russian Cavalry , met Tatiana when he was wounded in 1914 and a romance later developed between Tatiana and the young man when he was appointed an equerry to the court of the Tsar at Tsarskoye Selo . Dmitri Malama gave Tatiana a French bulldog she named " <unk> " in September 1914 . " Forgive me about the little dog , " Tatiana wrote to her mother on 30 September 1914 . " To say the truth , when he asked should I like to have it if he gave it to me , I at once said yes . You remember , I always wanted to have one , and only afterwards when we came home I thought that suddenly you might not like me having one . But I really was so pleased at the idea that I forgot about everything . " The dog died , but Malama gave her a replacement puppy . Tatiana took it with her to Yekaterinburg , where it died with the rest of the family . Malama paid the imperial family a visit some eighteen months after he gave Tatiana the first dog . " My little Malama came for an hour yesterday evening , " wrote Alexandra to Nicholas on 17 March 1916 . " ... Looks flourishing more of a man now , an adorable boy still . I must say a perfect son in law he w ( ou ) ld have been – why are foreign P ( rin ) ces not as nice ! " Malama was killed in August 1919 while commanding a unit of the White Russians fighting the civil war against the Bolsheviks in the Ukraine , according to Peter de Malama . 
 Tatiana was also fond of an officer named Vladimir <unk> , whom she cared for when he was wounded in 1915 and again in 1916 , according to the diary of Valentina Ivanovna Chebotareva , a nurse who worked with Tatiana during the war . Chebotareva described how Tatiana sometimes sat beside " Volodia " at the piano as he played a tune with one finger and talked to her in a low voice , wearing a mysterious expression on his face . Chebotareva also described how Tatiana and her sister Olga made excuses to come to the hospital to see Volodia . Chebotareva felt the flirtations between the grand duchesses and the wounded officers could cause gossip and damage the girls ' reputations . 
 = = Negotiations for marriage = = 
 According to some sources , Serbian king Peter I wanted Tatiana as a bride for his younger son , Prince Alexander . In January 1914 , the Serbian prime minister Nikola Pašić delivered a letter to Tsar Nicholas in which King Peter expressed a desire for his son to marry one of the Grand Duchesses . Nicholas replied that he would allow his daughters to decide whom to marry , but he noticed that the Serbian prince Alexander often gazed upon Tatiana during a family dinner . Marriage negotiations ended due to the outbreak of World War I. Tatiana exchanged letters with Alexander during World War I and Alexander was distraught when he learned of her death . 
 = = Captivity = = 
 The family was arrested during the Russian Revolution of 1917 and imprisoned first at Tsarskoye Selo and later at private residences in Tobolsk and Yekaterinburg , Siberia . The drastic change in circumstances and the uncertainty of captivity took its toll on Tatiana as well as on the rest of her family . " She pines without work , " wrote her fellow nurse Valentina Chebotareva after receiving a letter from Tatiana on 16 April 1917 . " It is strange to sit in the morning at home , to be in good health and not to go to the change of bandages ! " Tatiana wrote Chebotareva . Tatiana , apparently trying to advocate for her mother , asked her friend Margarita <unk> in a letter on 8 May 1917 why their fellow nurses did not write to Tsarina Alexandra directly . Chebotareva wrote in her journal that , while she pitied the family , she could not write directly to the Tsarina because she blamed her for the Revolution . " If anyone wishes to write us , let them write directly , " Tatiana wrote to " my dear dove " Chebotareva on 9 December 1917 , after expressing concern for fellow nurses and a patient they had once treated together . Chebotareva 's son , Gregory P. <unk> , noted the grand duchess 's " firm , energetic handwriting " and how the letter " reflected the nature which endeared her so much to my mother . " 
 Tatiana 's English tutor , Sydney Gibbes , recalled that Tatiana had grown razor thin in captivity and seemed " <unk> " and more inscrutable to him than ever . In April 1918 the Bolsheviks moved Nicholas , Alexandra and Maria to Yekaterinburg . The remaining children remained behind in Tobolsk because Alexei , who had suffered another attack of haemophilia , could not be moved . It was Tatiana who persuaded her mother to " stop tormenting herself " and make a decision to go with her father and leave Alexei behind . Alexandra decided that level @-@ headed Tatiana must be left behind to manage the household and look after Alexei . 
 During the month of separation from their parents and sister , Tatiana , Olga , Anastasia , and ladies in waiting busied themselves sewing precious stones and jewelry into their clothing , hoping to hide them from their captors , since Alexandra had written she , Nicholas and Maria had been heavily searched upon arrival in Ekaterinburg , and items confiscated . A letter from Demidova to <unk> gave the instructions on how to deal with the ' medicines ' , a predetermined code name for the jewels . The <unk> were successful , as the Bolsheviks were never aware of the jewels in the clothes until after the executions . 
 Pierre Gilliard later recalled his last sight of the imperial children at Yekaterinburg . " The sailor Nagorny , who attended to Alexei <unk> , passed my window carrying the sick boy in his arms , behind him came the Grand Duchesses loaded with <unk> and small personal belongings . I tried to get out , but was roughly pushed back into the carriage by the sentry . I came back to the window . Tatiana Nikolayevna came last carrying her little dog and struggling to drag a heavy brown valise . It was raining and I saw her feet sink into the mud at every step . Nagorny tried to come to her assistance ; he was roughly pushed back by one of the <unk> ... " 
 = = Death = = 
 At Yekaterinburg , Tatiana occasionally joined her younger sisters in chatting with some of the guards over tea , asking them questions about their families and talking about her hopes for a new life in England when they were released . On one occasion one of the guards forgot himself and told the grand duchesses an off @-@ color joke . The shocked Tatiana ran from the room , " pale as death , " and her younger sister Maria scolded the guards for their bad language . She " would be pleasant to the guards if she thought they were behaving in an acceptable and decorous manner , " recalled another of the guards in his memoirs . Later , when a new commander was placed in charge of the Ipatiev House , the family was forbidden from fraternizing with the guards and the rules of their confinement became more strict . Tatiana , still the family leader , was often sent by her parents to question the guards about rules or what would happen next to the family . She also spent a great deal of time sitting with her mother and ill brother , reading to her mother or playing games to occupy the time . At the Ipatiev House , Tatiana and her sisters were required to do their own laundry and make bread . Her nursing skills were called upon at the end of June 1918 when she gave an injection of morphine to Dr. Eugene Botkin to ease his kidney pain . 
 On 14 July 1918 , local priests at Yekaterinburg conducted a private church service for the family and reported that Tatiana and her family , contrary to custom , fell on their knees during the prayer for the dead . The final entry in Tatiana 's final notebook at Yekaterinburg was a saying she had copied from the words of a well @-@ known Russian Orthodox holy man , Father Ioann of Kronstadt : " Your grief is indescribable , the Savior 's grief in the Gardens of Gethsemane for the world 's sins is immeasurable , join your grief to his , in it you will find consolation . " The following day , on 15 July , Tatiana and her sisters appeared in good spirits as they joked with one another and moved the beds in their room so visiting cleaning women could scrub the floor . They got down on their hands and knees to help the women and whispered to them when the guards weren 't looking . All four young women wore long black skirts and white silk blouses , the same clothing they had worn the previous day . Their short hair was " tumbled and disorderly . " They told the women how much they enjoyed physical exertion and wished there was more of it for them to do in the Ipatiev House . On the afternoon of 16 July 1918 , the last full day of her life , Tatiana sat with her mother and read from the Biblical Books of Amos and Obadiah , Alexandra noted in her diary . Later , mother and daughter sat and just talked . As the family was having dinner that night , Yakov Yurovsky , the head of the detachment , came in and announced that the family 's kitchen boy and Alexei 's playmate , 14 @-@ year @-@ old Leonid Sednev , must gather his things and go to a family member . The boy had actually been sent to a hotel across the street because the guards did not want to kill him along with the rest of the Romanov party . The family , unaware of the plan to kill them , was upset and unsettled by Sednev 's absence . Tatiana went that evening to Yurovsky 's office , for what was to be the last time , to ask for the return of the kitchen boy who kept Alexei amused during the long hours of captivity . Yurovsky placated her by telling her the boy would return soon , but the family was unconvinced . 
 Late that night , on the night of 16 July , the family was awakened and told to come down to the lower level of the house because there was unrest in the town at large and they would have to be moved for their own safety . The family emerged from their rooms carrying pillows , bags , and other items to make Alexandra and Alexei comfortable . The family paused and crossed themselves when they saw the stuffed mother bear and cubs that stood on the landing , perhaps as a sign of respect for the dead . Nicholas told the servants and family " Well , we 're going to get out of this place . " They asked questions of the guards but did not appear to suspect they were going to be killed . Yurovsky , who had been a professional photographer , directed the family to take different positions as a photographer might . Alexandra , who had requested chairs for herself and Alexei , sat to her son 's left . The Tsar stood behind Alexei , Dr. Botkin stood to the Tsar 's right , Tatiana and her sisters stood behind Alexandra along with the servants . They were left for approximately half an hour while further preparations were made . The group said little during this time , but Alexandra whispered to the girls in English , violating the guard 's rules that they must speak in Russian . Yurovsky came in , ordered them to stand , and read the sentence of execution . Tatiana and her family had time only to utter a few incoherent sounds of shock or protest before the death squad under Yurovsky 's command began shooting . It was the early hours of 17 July 1918 . 
 The initial round of gunfire killed only the Tsar , the Empress and two male servants , and wounded Grand Duchess Maria , Dr Botkin and the Empress ' maidservant , Demidova . At that point the gunmen had to leave the room because of smoke and toxic fumes from their guns and plaster dust their bullets had released from the walls . After allowing the haze to clear for several minutes , the gunmen returned . Dr Botkin was killed , and a gunman named Ermakov repeatedly tried to shoot Tsarevich Alexei , but failed because jewels sewn into the boy 's clothes shielded him . Ermakov tried to stab Alexei with a bayonet but failed again , and finally Yurovsky fired two shots into the boy 's head . Yurovsky and Ermakov approached Olga and Tatiana , who were crouched against the room 's rear wall , clinging to each other and screaming for their mother . Ermakov stabbed both young women with his 8 @-@ inch bayonet , but had difficulty penetrating their torsos because of the jewels that had been sewn into their chemises . The sisters tried to stand , but Tatiana was killed instantly when Yurovsky shot her in the back of her head . A moment later , Olga too died when Ermakov shot her in the head . 
 Author Michael Occleshaw made the claim in his 1995 book The Romanov Conspiracies : The Romanovs and the House of Windsor that Tatiana might have been rescued and transported to England , where she married a British officer and lived under the name Larissa Tudor . Occleshaw based this claim on studying the diaries of the British agent Richard Meinertzhagen , who hinted at the successful liberation of a Grand Duchess , allegedly Tatiana . However , historians discount this claim . Survival stories persist because two bodies were missing from the mass grave found in the forest outside Yekaterinburg and exhumed in 1991 . Those bodies were identified as Tsarevich Alexei and one of the four grand duchesses , generally thought by Russians to be Grand Duchess Maria and by Americans to be Grand Duchess Anastasia . Most historians believe that all of the Romanovs , including Tatiana , were assassinated at Ekaterinburg . 
 On 23 August 2007 , a Russian archaeologist announced the discovery of two burned , partial skeletons at a bonfire site near Yekaterinburg that appeared to match the site described in Yurovsky 's memoirs . The archaeologists said the bones are from a boy who was roughly between the ages of ten and thirteen years at the time of his death and of a young woman who was roughly between the ages of eighteen and twenty @-@ three years old . Anastasia was seventeen years , one month old at the time of the assassination , while her sister Maria was nineteen years , one month old and their brother Alexei was two weeks shy of his fourteenth birthday . Olga and Tatiana were twenty @-@ two and twenty @-@ one years old at the time of the assassinations . Along with the remains of the two bodies , archaeologists found " shards of a container of sulfuric acid , nails , metal strips from a wooden box , and bullets of various caliber . " The bones were found using metal detectors and metal rods as probes . 
 Preliminary testing indicated a " high degree of probability " that the remains belonged to the Tsarevich Alexei and to one of his sisters , Russian forensic scientists announced on 22 January 2008 . The Yekaterinburg region 's chief forensic expert Nikolai <unk> indicated the results would be compared against those obtained by foreign experts . On 30 April 2008 , Russian forensic scientists announced that DNA testing proved that the remains belong to the Tsarevich Alexei and to one of his sisters . With this result , all of the Tsar 's family are accounted for . 
 = = Sainthood = = 
 For more information , see Romanov sainthood 
 In 2000 , Tatiana and her family were canonized as passion bearers by the Russian Orthodox Church . The family had previously been canonized in 1981 by the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad as holy martyrs . 
 The bodies of Tsar Nicholas II , Tsarina Alexandra , and three of their daughters were finally interred at St. Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg on 17 July 1998 , eighty years to the day after they were murdered . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Books = = 
 <unk> , Alexander and Dr. <unk> , Manfred and <unk> , Vladimir and <unk> , Zinaida and <unk> , Lyubov ; <unk> , Lyudmila ( translator ) ; The Romanovs : Love , Power , and Tragedy . <unk> Publications , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ X 
 Christopher , Peter , Kurth , Peter , and Radzinsky , Edvard . Tsar : The Lost World of Nicholas and Alexandra ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Dehn , Lili . The Real Tsaritsa . 1922 . 
 De Malama , Peter . The Romanovs : The Forgotten Romance in Royalty Digest . December 2004 , p . 184 . 
 Eagar , Margaret . Six Years at the Russian Court , 1906 . 
 Fuhrmann , Joseph T. The Complete Wartime Correspondence of Nicholas and Alexandra : April 1914 – March 1917 . Greenwood Press , 1999 . 
 Gilliard , Pierre . Thirteen Years at the Russian Court . ISBN 0 @-@ 405 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 King , Greg and Wilson , Penny . The Fate of the Romanovs , 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Kurth , Peter , Anastasia : The Riddle of Anna Anderson , Back Bay Books , 1983 , ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 <unk> 
 <unk> , Hugo . Elizabeth : Grand Duchess of Russia . Carroll and Graf Publishers , Inc . , 1998 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7867 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Massie , Robert K. Nicholas and Alexandra . 1967 . ISBN 0 @-@ 575 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Massie , Robert K. The Romanovs : The Final Chapter . 1995 . ISBN 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 <unk> , Andrei and <unk> , Sergei , Galy ( editors ) ; Darya ( translator ) . A Lifelong Passion : Nicholas and Alexandra : Their Own Story . 1997 , Doubleday , ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Occleshaw , Michael , The Romanov Conspiracies : The Romanovs and the House of Windsor , Orion , 1993 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 518 @-@ 4 
 Rappaport , Helen . The Last Days of the Romanovs . 2008 . St. Martin 's Griffin . 2008 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Radzinsky , Edvard . The Rasputin File . Doubleday . 2000 , ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Shevchenko , Maxim . " The Glorification of the Royal Family , " a 31 May 2000 article in the <unk> Gazeta . 
 <unk> , Gregory P. , Russia : My Native Land : A U.S. engineer reminisces and looks at the present , McGraw @-@ Hill Book Company , 1964 , ASIN <unk> 
 Vorres , Ian . The Last Grand Duchess . 1965 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 302 @-@ 0 
 Vyrubova , Anna . Memories of the Russian Court . 
 Zeepvat , Charlotte . The Camera and the Tsars : A Romanov Family Album . 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 = Bradley Wiggins = 
 Sir Bradley Marc Wiggins , CBE ( born 28 April 1980 ) is a British professional road and track racing cyclist who rides for the UCI Continental team WIGGINS , after leaving Team Sky . Nicknamed " <unk> " , he began his cycling career on the track , but has made the transition to road cycling and is one of the few cyclists to gain significant elite level success in both those forms of professional cycling . 
 The son of the Australian cyclist Gary Wiggins , Wiggins was born to a British mother in Ghent , Belgium , and raised in London from the age of two . He competed on the track from the early part of his career until 2008 . He has won seven gold medals at the track world championships , his first in 2003 and his most recent in 2016 ; three in the individual pursuit , two in the team pursuit and two in the Madison . He won a gold in the individual pursuit at the 2004 Olympic Games and two golds in the individual and team pursuit at the 2008 Olympic Games . Wiggins returned to the track at the 2014 Commonwealth Games , and has announced his intention to compete in track cycling at the 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 After the 2008 Olympics , Wiggins took a break from the track to focus on the road . Initially viewed as a time trial specialist and as a <unk> , he showed his ability in stage races when he came fourth in the 2009 Tour de France ; he was later promoted to third after Lance Armstrong 's results were annulled in 2012 . In 2011 he claimed his first victory in a major stage race in the Critérium du Dauphiné , and he also finished third in the Vuelta a España . In 2012 , Wiggins won the Paris – Nice , the Tour de Romandie , the Critérium du Dauphiné , and became the first British cyclist to win the Tour de France and the time trial at the Olympic Games . Following his success in 2012 , Wiggins was the subject of several honours and awards ; the Vélo d 'Or award for best rider of the year , the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award and awarded a knighthood as part of the 2013 New Year Honours . In 2014 he won gold in the time trial at the 2014 road world championships . In June 2015 he set a new hour record with a distance of 54 @.@ 526 km ( 33 @.@ 881 mi ) . 
 = = Early life and amateur career = = 
 Wiggins was born on 28 April 1980 in Ghent , Belgium , to an Australian father , Gary Wiggins and a British mother , Linda . His father lived in Belgium as a professional cyclist . His father left the family when Bradley was two . Bradley moved with his mother to her parents ' flat in Kilburn , north @-@ west London , then to a Church Commission flat at Dibdin House estate in neighbouring Maida Vale . He was educated at St Augustine 's junior school and then St Augustine 's Church of England High School in Kilburn , where his mother was a secretary . He has a younger half @-@ brother , Ryan , from his mother and her partner Brendan , who separated when Bradley was in his late teens . 
 Wiggins played football in his youth and was an Arsenal fan , although he would watch rivals Tottenham Hotspur play because his friends supported them . He had trials as a junior at West Ham . He discovered cycling when his mother told him to watch the television coverage of the individual pursuit final of the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona , which Briton Chris Boardman won . She explained it was one of the events at which his father had been successful . He watched the rest of the Olympics and fell in love with cycling and the Olympics itself . 
 In 1992 , aged 12 , he entered his first race , the West London Challenge 92 , on the unopened <unk> dual carriageway in Hayes , west London . Later that year he broke a collarbone in a road accident . He received £ 1 @,@ 700 compensation for his injuries . He gave his mother £ 700 and used the rest to buy his first racing bicycle . " At 12 " , he recalled , " I told my art teacher , I 'm going to be Olympic champion , I 'm going to wear the yellow jersey in the Tour . " He joined the Archer Road Club , where his father had been a member in the late 1970s . He raced at Herne Hill Velodrome and on the road around Crystal Palace National Sports Centre . He gained domestic sponsorship from Condor Cycles 's Olympia Sport and then Team Brite . He represented Westminster in the London Youth Games as a teenager , and in 2010 he was inducted into the London Youth Games Hall of Fame . 
 At 16 , he won the 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) time trial at the 1996 junior national track championships at Saffron Lane sports centre in Leicester . Selectors invited him to train at weekends at Manchester Velodrome . After leaving school he enrolled on a BTEC foundation course in business studies , but left due to cycling commitments . At the 1997 junior national track championships he won the one @-@ kilometre time trial , 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) individual pursuit , points race and scratch race . He was the only British competitor for the 1997 junior track world championships in Cape Town , coming 16th in the individual pursuit and fourth in the points race . 
 His breakthrough came in June 1998 , winning the three @-@ kilometre individual pursuit at the junior track world championships in Cuba , aged 18 . The following week , he retained his titles at the junior national track championships in Manchester . He represented England at the Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur , finishing fourth in the individual pursuit , and was a member of the team that won a silver medal in the team pursuit , his first senior medal . He became a full @-@ time Lottery @-@ funded athlete , with a grant of nearly £ 20 @,@ 000 a year ( equivalent to £ 32000 in 2016 ) . 
 In 1999 he began training with the Great Britain team pursuit squad and rode the <unk> – now known as the Tour of Britain , his first stage race at that level . In October he competed in the track world championships in Berlin , coming fifth in the team pursuit , and with partner Rob Hayles , came tenth in the Madison , securing qualification for the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney . At the Olympics he won a bronze medal in the team pursuit , beating France in the bronze medal match , and came fourth in the Madison with Hayles . In October 2000 , he took silver in the team pursuit at the track world championships in Manchester , losing to Germany in the final by under half a second . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2001 – 2004 : Early years = = = 
 In 2001 he signed for the Linda McCartney Racing Team , a British professional road cycling team , but it disbanded after internal problems . He was briefly seen in Sigma Sport colours after the collapse of the Linda McCartney team , but then secured further lottery funding , and began racing for the British national team . He came second in the prologue of the Tour of Rhodes , two seconds behind Fabian Cancellara of Mapei – Quick @-@ Step , before winning the general classification in the <unk> a Mallorca and Flèche du Sud . In September he crashed his bike , requiring two metal pins in his right wrist . Two weeks later he went to the track world championships in Antwerp , managing seventh place in the individual pursuit and consecutive silver in the team pursuit . 
 He joined the French team Française des Jeux in 2002 , relocating to Nantes , and soon became homesick , finding it a huge contrast to the British Cycling set @-@ up . At the Commonwealth Games in Manchester he won silver medals in the individual pursuit , losing to Française des Jeux team @-@ mate Bradley McGee ( Australia ) in the final , and team pursuit , beaten by Australia , who set a new world record with a time of three minutes and 59 @.@ 583 seconds . At the track world championships in Copenhagen , he came fifth in the individual pursuit and won a bronze medal in the team pursuit . Wiggins was frustrated with his result in the individual pursuit at the world championships and became disillusioned with his future with Française des Jeux . British Cycling then enlisted the newly retired Chris Boardman as his mentor . 
 In May 2003 , Wiggins made his Grand Tour debut at the Giro d 'Italia . On the 18th stage he was eliminated from the race , finishing outside of the time limit in a group of 53 riders . In the summer he competed in the track world championships in Stuttgart , qualifying fastest in the individual pursuit , before beating Russia 's Alexey Markov in the first round , setting up a place in the final against Australia 's Luke Roberts . He beat Roberts by 0 @.@ 736 seconds to win the gold medal , his first senior world title . He also came away with a silver medal in the team pursuit , beaten by Australia in the final , who broke their own world record with a time of three minutes and 57 @.@ 280 seconds . In September he won stage one of the Tour de l 'Avenir , beating team @-@ mate Benoît <unk> and Rabobank 's Joost Posthuma by 14 seconds . In November he won the Six Days of Ghent with Matthew Gilmore of Vlaanderen – T Interim . 
 Wiggins signed with Crédit Agricole for the 2004 season , advised by Boardman , who rode for them his entire professional road career . He began training for the Olympic Games in Athens , at first struggling with illness and fitness , he arrived in peak form ; he qualified for the individual pursuit with a time of four minutes and 15 @.@ 165 seconds , an Olympic record and fifth fastest time in history . In the final he beat McGee by over four seconds to win the gold medal . Wiggins was brought in to the team pursuit squad for the first round against France , replacing Bryan Steele , and advanced into the final , where the team were beaten by Australia , settling for the silver medal . Wiggins then partnered Rob Hayles in the Madison . With 90 laps left of the 200 , Hayles crashed with Dutchman Robert <unk> , returning after a few laps . They lost a lap to their rivals , but with 30 to go Wiggins attacked , and they regained the lost lap , moving into second place . They lost points in the final sprint , moving them down to third , taking the bronze medal with 12 points , behind Switzerland on 15 and Australia on 22 . Wiggins became the first British athlete in 40 years to win three medals at one Games , the last being Mary Rand at the 1964 Olympic Games in Tokyo . On 31 December 2004 he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 2005 New Year Honours , for services to sport . 
 = = = 2005 – 2007 : On the road = = = 
 In early 2005 , he revealed his desire to compete in road cycling , and in April won the 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) time trial around the town of Briey in northeastern France , on the second stage of the Circuit de Lorraine . In September he won his first race stage since 2001 , stage eight of the Tour de l 'Avenir ; finishing with team @-@ mate Saul Raisin , with third @-@ placed Steve Cummings ( <unk> – Colnago ) coming in three minutes and 24 seconds later . Wiggins competed in the Giro d 'Italia , finishing 123rd overall . He came seventh in the time trial at the road world championships in Madrid , one minute and 31 seconds down on winner Michael Rogers of Australia . He moved to Cofidis for the 2006 season , and was selected to ride in the Tour de France , finishing his first Tour in 124th place . 
 In 2007 March , Wiggins returned to the track for the track world championships in Palma , Majorca , his first appearance at the championships since 2004 . In the qualifying round for the individual pursuit , he set his second fastest time since his personal best at the Olympics in Athens , with a time of four minutes and 15 @.@ 976 seconds ; he beat Germany 's Robert <unk> in the final to win the gold , catching him after 2750 m . He then went on to win gold in the team pursuit , beating Ukraine in the final . He finished in 13th place in the Madison , with Rob Hayles . 
 On the road he won stage one of the Four Days of Dunkirk and the prologue of the Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré , before competing in the Tour de France and finishing fourth in the prologue in London . On stage six Wiggins launched a solo breakaway after 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of racing , leading the race for 190 @.@ 5 km ( 118 @.@ 4 mi ) , before being caught by the peloton with 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . It was seen as a tribute to British rider Tom Simpson , on the 40th anniversary of his death in the 1967 Tour de France , but was a gift to his wife on her birthday , with Wiggins only finding out about the date 's significance after the race . He received the stage 's combativity award , for the most aggressive rider . Cofidis withdrew from the race before stage 16 after Cristian Moreni failed a doping test . Wiggins and his team @-@ mates were interviewed by police and had their hotel rooms searched . In the aftermath of the positive drug tests on Moreni and on race leader Alexander Vinokourov of Astana , Wiggins spoke out against dopers in the Tour and threw away his Cofidis kit in a bin in Pau Pyrénées Airport , vowing never to race for the team again . 
 Despite this Wiggins continued racing for Cofidis , and in August he won the time trial on stage four of the Tour du Poitou @-@ Charentes . In September , with team @-@ mate Michiel <unk> , he won the Duo Normand , a two @-@ man team time trial over a course of 53 @.@ 4 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) . His season on the road ended riding for Great Britain at the road world championships in Stuttgart , coming tenth in the time trial , two minutes and ten seconds behind winner Cancellara of Switzerland ; a result he was disappointed with , after hoping to finish on the podium . 
 In September he signed for the T @-@ Mobile Team – later known as Team High Road – for the 2008 season , joining compatriot Mark Cavendish , forming a partnership in the Madison . Their first race was the Six Days of Ghent in November , finishing in tenth place ; Wiggins still riding for Cofidis . Wiggins then made his only appearance for the T @-@ Mobile Track Team – which is separate from the road team – at the Beijing round of the 2007 – 2008 Track World Cup Classics in December , winning gold in the individual pursuit and silver in the Madison with Cavendish . 
 = = = 2008 : Back to the track = = = 
 For the 2008 season , Wiggins 's focus was on the track and on the Olympic Games in Beijing , deciding not to compete in the Tour de France . In February he travelled to the United States to train , and rode the Tour of California , coming second in the prologue , behind Cancellara ( Team CSC ) . 
 In March Wiggins competed in the track world championships in Manchester , defending his individual pursuit title by beating Dutchman <unk> Huizenga to win , his third world title in the discipline . He then won the team pursuit , setting a new world record of three minutes and 56 @.@ 32 seconds in the final against Denmark . Wiggins was due to partner with Hayles in the Madison , but Hayles failed a routine blood test , and was subsequently banned for two weeks . Cavendish was then brought in as his replacement . At around halfway through the race they appeared to be out of contention , with their closest rivals all gaining a lap ; but with 35 laps left to race , Wiggins launched an attack which helped them reach the field ten laps later , taking the lead , due to their superior points they had collected in the sprints . They held on to win the gold medal , finishing with 19 points , ahead of Germany on 13 . 
 Wiggins then rode the Tour de Romandie and the Giro d 'Italia , as preparation for the Olympics in August . At the Giro he was part of the lead @-@ out train that helped Cavendish win two stages . Wiggins came fourth in the final stage 's 28 @.@ 5 km ( 17 @.@ 7 mi ) -long time trial in Milan , six seconds behind team @-@ mate Marco Pinotti , finishing the race in 134th place , three hours , one minute and 39 seconds down on overall winner Alberto Contador of Astana . 
 At the Olympics he began the defence of his title in the individual pursuit , qualifying with a time of four minutes and 15 @.@ 031 seconds , breaking his own Olympic record from 2004 . In the semi @-@ final he beat Russia 's Alexander Serov , before taking gold in the final against Hayden <unk> of New Zealand , becoming the first rider to defend an Olympic pursuit title successfully . He was a member of the team pursuit that broke the world record in the heats with a time of three minutes and 55 @.@ 202 seconds . The following day , the team won the gold medal , beating Denmark by 6 @.@ 7 seconds with another new world record of three minutes and 53 @.@ 314 seconds , averaging a speed of 61 @.@ 719 km / h ( 38 @.@ 4 mph ) . He paired with Cavendish in the Madison , and as the reigning world champions , they were favourites for the gold medal , but they only finished ninth . Cavendish felt that Wiggins had not performed to the best of his ability in the Madison . 
 In September Wiggins joined the American team Garmin – Slipstream for the 2009 season . On 14 December he came ninth in the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award , with 5 @,@ 633 votes , and was a member of the British cycling team that won the Team of the Year Award . On 31 December he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 2009 New Year Honours . 
 = = = 2009 : Tour de France breakthrough = = = 
 Wiggins switched his focus to road and moved with his family to the city of Girona in north @-@ east Spain , where Garmin – Slipstream were based . He started the season in February by helping the team win the opening team time trial of the Tour of Qatar , crossing the line first to take the leaders jersey . In March he came second to Contador in the opening time trial of Paris – Nice , before riding Milan – San Remo and then placing second in the time trial at Critérium International . In April he won the time trial on the final stage of the Three Days of De Panne , twenty seconds ahead of Vacansoleil rider Lieuwe Westra in second place , then had top @-@ 30 finishes in the Classics : Gent – Wevelgem and Paris – Roubaix . After finishing in 71st position in the Giro d 'Italia and taking second place in the 14 @.@ 4 km ( 8 @.@ 9 mi ) -long time trial on the final stage in Rome , he won the Beaumont Trophy , a domestic one @-@ day race in Northumberland , using it as preparation for the Tour de France three weeks later . 
 Wiggins arrived at the Tour de France having lost 6 kg ( 13 @.@ 2 lb ) , and was nicknamed " <unk> " , instead of the usual " <unk> " . He came third in the time trial on stage one in Monaco , 19 seconds behind Team Saxo Bank 's Cancellara and one behind Contador . He then helped Garmin – Slipstream to second in stage four 's team time trial , despite losing four riders . On stage seven he finished 12th in the first mountain finish and was in fifth place overall at the beginning of the second week . On stage fifteen in Verbier – the second mountain finish , Wiggins finished fifth , rising to third place overall . On stage 17 Contador , Andreas Klöden ( Astana ) and Team Saxo Bank riders Fränk and Andy Schleck attacked on the final climb – the Col de la <unk> , measuring 7 @.@ 5 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) at an average gradient of 8 @.@ 5 % , and was left with Astana 's Lance Armstrong and Vincenzo Nibali of Liquigas , who let Wiggins do all the work before attacking one @-@ kilometre from the summit . Wiggins failed to gain time on the descent and finished three minutes and seven seconds down on winner Fränk Schleck , dropping to sixth overall . 
 Wiggins moved back up to fourth , after finishing in second place in the time trial on stage 19 , finishing in sixth place 42 seconds down on winner Contador . On stage 20 to Mont Ventoux , Wiggins was dropped by the yellow jersey group 1 @.@ 4 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) from the summit , finishing in tenth place and kept fourth overall , three seconds ahead of Fränk Schleck ; he held that position in the final stage , equalling Robert Millar 's highest ever finish by a British rider in the Tour . In October 2012 , following the disqualification of Armstrong , who had originally placed third in the general classification , Wiggins was promoted to third place overall . This decision retroactively gave him the first podium finish by a British rider in Tour de France history . 
 In September Wiggins won the national time trial championship in Buckinghamshire , and in September at the road world championships in Mendrisio , Switzerland , was on course for a bronze medal in the time trial , until a mechanical problem and a delay getting a replacement bike ended with him finishing in 21st place . In October he ended the season by winning the Herald Sun Tour in Victoria , Australia , after helping team @-@ mates for most of the race . He led the race after winning the time trial on stage five in Geelong , beating second @-@ placed team @-@ mate Svein Tuft by fourteen seconds . 
 Wiggins had been contracted to ride for Garmin Slipstream again in 2010 , but it was announced on 10 December that he was to leave to join Team Sky , having signed a four @-@ year contract with the new British team . 
 = = = 2010 : Move to Team Sky = = = 
 Wiggins began 2010 as a team leader for the first time and his main target was to win the Tour de France . In February he was part of the team that won the opening team time trial of the Tour of Qatar , before taking second place in the time trial on stage four of the Vuelta a Andalucía , behind Alex Rasmussen of Team Saxo Bank . He then went on to finish third at the Tour of Murcia in March , behind winner Frantisek Rabon of Team HTC – Columbia and Rabobank rider Denis Menchov in second . 
 In May Wiggins took his first Grand Tour victory on the wet streets of Amsterdam in the opening time trial of the Giro d 'Italia , becoming the second Briton to wear the pink jersey after Cavendish in 2009 . A series of crashes on the second stage put him 32 seconds behind in the general classification to the new leader Cadel Evans ( BMC Racing Team ) . Another crash on stage three cost him a further three minutes and 58 seconds . He recovered time on stage 11 , finishing fourth , from a group of 56 riders , and lay tenth overall . He faded quickly towards the end of the race , however , losing time in the final stages . He came seventh in the 15 @.@ 3 km ( 9 @.@ 5 mi ) final time trial in Verona . He finished the race 40th overall , one hour , 47 minutes and 58 seconds behind overall winner Ivan Basso of Liquigas – Doimo . Throughout the race he told the press he was saving himself for the Tour de France , when asked about his form , but in fact felt physically unfit . 
 Wiggins then went to a training camp in the Alps , testing the mountain stages used for the Tour ; he struggled to find his fitness . He made a poor start in the Tour , taking 77th place in the prologue after an early starting position left him exposed to poor conditions . He finished eighth on stage three , as cobblestones troubled a number of favourites , but on stage eight at Morzine @-@ <unk> , the first mountain summit finish of the Tour , he could only manage 19th place , losing one minute and 45 second to stage winner Andy Schleck ( Team Saxo Bank ) . The following day he lost more time , coming 13th and losing four minutes and 55 seconds to the main contenders . He finished in 36th place on stage fourteen , falling to 18th overall , 11 minutes and 30 seconds behind race leader Andy Schleck ; to the press he described his form as " consistently mediocre " . On stage 19 's time trial from Bordeaux to Pauillac , he finished in ninth place , three minutes and 33 seconds behind winner Cancellara . Wiggins finished the Tour in 24th place , 39 minutes and seven seconds down on winner Contador and seven places behind team @-@ mate Thomas <unk> . In February 2012 , Contador was found guilty of doping and Wiggins 's overall position was upgraded to 23rd . 
 He returned to racing in August , at the GP Ouest @-@ France in <unk> . In September retained his title at the national time trial championships , around the 52 @.@ 7 km ( 32 @.@ 7 mi ) -long course in South Wales , before finishing the season at the Tour of Britain . His season ended at the Giro di Lombardia , where he was forced abandon following a crash . Over the winter he trained with the Great Britain squad at Manchester Velodrome . 
 = = = 2011 : Dauphiné and Vuelta = = = 
 Wiggins was team leader of Team Sky again at the start of 2011 . He opted not to enter the Giro d 'Italia , concentrating instead on shorter events and the classics before undertaking altitude training to improve his climbing for the Tour de France . His season began at the Tour of Qatar in February , before winning the team pursuit at the Manchester round of the 2009 – 2010 Track World Cup Classics , with a time of three minutes 55 @.@ 438 , the fifth @-@ fastest time . He then came second in the 27 km ( 16 @.@ 8 mi ) -long time trial on the sixth stage of the Paris – Nice in March , 20 seconds behind Tony Martin of HTC – Highroad . He finished third overall , behind Martin and Team RadioShack rider Andreas Klöden . In April he rode Paris – Roubaix , and then the Tour de Romandie , finishing third in time trial on stage and helped lead @-@ out team @-@ mate Ben Swift to victory on the final stage . In March he finished second in the time trial on the third stage of the Critérium International , four seconds down on Klöden . In May he won the 26 km ( 16 @.@ 2 mi ) -long time trial on stage four of the Bayern @-@ Rundfahrt , beating Leopard Trek 's Cancellara by 33 seconds , and finished the event in 14th place overall , while also helping team @-@ mate Geraint Thomas to win the event . 
 He then went for altitude training in the Alps , in preparation for the Tour . He took the overall lead in the Critérium du Dauphiné after finishing second in the time trial on stage three . On the final three mountain stages , Wiggins maintained his lead over second @-@ placed Evans to win the race , at that time his biggest victory on the road . In June Wiggins won the national road race championship in Northumberland . On the seventh stage of the Tour , a crash around 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) from the finish in Châteauroux forced Wiggins to retire from the race with a broken collarbone . 
 After he had recovered from his injuries , Team Sky confirmed that Wiggins would ride in the Vuelta a España for the first time , as well as in the road world championships . Wiggins also confirmed that he would take part the Tour in 2012 , even though the Olympics would follow soon after . The Vuelta and the world championships were seen as a dress rehearsal for 2012 . He had a difficult start to the Vuelta , as Team Sky finished 42 seconds behind winners Leopard Trek in the opening team time trial in Benidorm , but a strong first week brought him back into contention , leaving him twentieth overall after stage eight . On stage nine , Wiggins and team @-@ mate Chris Froome attacked on the final climb to finish fourth and fifth respectively , gaining time on Team Katusha rider Joaquim Rodríguez , Michele Scarponi ( Lampre – ISD ) and other contenders . Wiggins was expected to take the overall lead in the time trial on the following day , but Froome confounded expectations by finishing second on the stage , and Wiggins only rose to third overall . He eventually took the lead after the rest day . Stage fourteen saw Wiggins and Froome gaining on most of their rivals . However , Wiggins lost the lead to Geox – TMC 's Juan José Cobo on stage fifteen , when he finished fifth on the climb up the Angliru and dropped to third in the standings , behind Froome , who was second . Wiggins finished the Vuelta in third place – his first podium finish in a Grand Tour . 
 In September he competed in the road world championships in Copenhagen , he won the silver medal in the 46 @.@ 3 km ( 28 @.@ 8 mi ) time trial , finishing one minute and fifteen seconds behind Germany 's Martin , and four seconds ahead of reigning champion Cancellara ( Switzerland ) in third . Four days later , he was part of the Great Britain team that set up Cavendish 's victory in the road race ; Wiggins took over lead on the final lap of 17 around the 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) circuit , setting a high pace to chase down the breakaway and stop attacks from developing . 
 = = = 2012 : Tour de France and Olympic gold = = = 
 In 2012 Wiggins continued to focus on road racing . The individual pursuit was removed from the programme at the Olympics later in the year , and in December 2011 coach Rod <unk> told The Guardian , " The chances of him doing the team pursuit are really slim now " . He began his 2012 season with third place in the Volta ao Algarve , including victory in the concluding time trial , edging out world champion Martin ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) by less than a second . 
 In March Wiggins finished second in the opening time trial of the Paris – Nice , one second behind Vacansoleil – DCM 's Gustav Larsson , who avoided the wet conditions , unlike Wiggins and the other favourites that set off later in the day . The following day he took the lead in the race after being part of a 30 @-@ man breakaway as the peloton split into echelons . He held the lead for the rest of the event , winning the final stage , a time @-@ trial on the Col d 'Èze , to win the race by eight seconds overall and become the first British rider to win the race since Tom Simpson in 1967 . His final stage victory was also good enough to give him the points classification . Wiggins ' time is the fastest time for the traditional time @-@ trial on the Col d 'Èze . 
 On the stage one of the Tour de Romandie in April , Wiggins took a rare sprint victory from a group of 59 riders . He lost the jersey to Rabobank rider Luis León Sánchez after Sánchez won two consecutive stages , but won the final time trial , despite suffering a dropped chain , to take the overall victory and become the first Briton to win the race in its 65 @-@ year history . 
 In June Wiggins competed in the Critérium du Dauphiné , and began the defence of his title with a second @-@ place finish in the prologue , one second behind Orica – BikeExchange 's Luke Durbridge . He took the overall lead the following day , after Durbridge was dropped on one of the stage 's six climbs . Wiggins won the fourth stage of the race , a time trial over a course of 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) , 34 seconds ahead of Martin , his nearest rival , extending his lead over him to 38 seconds . He held the lead to the end , eventually winning by over a minute , with team @-@ mate Rogers in second place . 
 Wiggins entered the Tour de France as one of the favourites to win it . Wiggins began the Tour with second place in the prologue , behind Cancellara of RadioShack – Nissan . He took over the yellow jersey by finishing third on stage seven , the first mountaintop finish , becoming the fifth British rider to wear the jersey , and first since David Millar in 2000 . Wiggins won the time trial on stage nine . On stage ten , he and his team staved off an attack by Nibali on the descent of the Col du Grand Colombier , leading Nibali to accuse Wiggins of disrespecting him . Wiggins extended his lead on stage 11 after Froome helped him to bridge across to his rivals , who had attacked on the finishing climb to La Toussuire . Froome accelerated about 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the finish , and was ordered via his team radio to wait for his leader . 
 During stage fourteen , a mountain stage , a spectator threw carpet tacks onto the narrow road at the top of the Mur de Péguère climb . Several riders suffered punctures , including Evans , the defending champion , who lost approximately two minutes while his team repaired his bicycle . Wiggins and his fellow members of Team Sky emerged without a puncture . Believing that a puncture resulting from an unfortunate incident should not determine the fate of a competitor , Wiggins then had his team @-@ mates and the rest of the peloton slow down to allow Evans and other affected cyclists to catch up . It was perceived as a generous act of sportsmanship and Wiggins was called " Le Gentleman " as a result . On stage 16 , Wiggins and Froome were able to follow attacks by Nibali on the final climb of the day and finished with the same time as the Italian . On stage 17 , the final mountain stage , Froome and Wiggins finished together in second and third place respectively , with Nibali coming in 19 seconds later . Wiggins won the time trial on stage 19 , giving him a lead of three minutes and 21 seconds at the start of the final stage . On that stage , Wiggins helped team @-@ mate Cavendish achieve his fourth consecutive victory on the Champs @-@ Élysées and confirmed his own overall victory in the process . Wiggins became the first , and is currently the only person in history to win the Paris – Nice , the Tour de Romandie , the Critérium du Dauphiné and the Tour de France in a single season . 
 Wiggins was selected to participate in two road cycling events at the Olympic Games in London – the time trial and the road race . Wiggins finished 103rd in the road race . Wiggins won gold in the time trial ahead of Martin of Germany and Froome of Britain . By doing so he became the most decorated British Olympian , with seven medals , surpassing the six won by Sir Steve Redgrave . This record is now shared with Sir Chris Hoy , who also obtained his seventh Olympic medal in 2012 . Wiggins entered the Guinness World Records , becoming the first cyclist to win an Olympic gold medal and the Tour de France in the same year . Wiggins 's boyhood idol Miguel Indurain won five consecutive Tours between 1991 and 1995 , and won a gold medal at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta . 
 Wiggins returned to racing at the Tour of Britain in September , pulling out on the sixth stage with a stomach bug . The road race at the road world championships in Limburg , Netherlands , was his last of the season . In October he was awarded the prestigious Vélo d 'Or trophy in recognition of his achievements in 2012 . In November he was involved in a road accident and taken to hospital with suspected broken ribs , but was released next day with only minor injuries . In December he won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award with 492 @,@ 064 ( 30 @.@ 25 % ) of the votes cast . Wiggins was knighted in the 2013 New Years Honours for services to cycling , although he claimed he would use the title for ' comedy purposes ' , stating that he felt " a little bit inferior " to others receiving knighthoods saying " I ’ ve won a bike race , you know , and I feel a little bit inferior to everyone " , saying " I was just talking to some of the other people getting stuff , and asking them what they ’ ve been honoured for , and they ’ re historic things , ground @-@ breaking sciences or whatever " . He was among the nominees for the Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year , with Jamaican athlete Usain Bolt taking the prize . 
 = = = 2013 : Giro d 'Italia and Tour of Britain = = = 
 It was widely expected that Wiggins would ride to retain his Tour de France title in 2013 . However , in February he asserted that his focus for the season would be the Giro d 'Italia , after which he would ride the Tour de France in support of team @-@ mate Froome . In April he let it be known that he desired to win another Tour , and had hopes of achieving the Tour and Giro double – a feat that has not been achieved since Marco Pantani in 1998 . 
 Wiggins participated in a winter training camp in Mallorca . His first race of the season was the Tour of Oman in February . On the first stage he was caught behind a crash , the time delay pushing him back to the back of the field . For the remainder of the race Wiggins helped Froome , who won the overall classification . Wiggins opted not to defend his title at the Paris – Nice , or ride the Tirreno @-@ Adriatico , instead participating in a training camp on Mount <unk> in Tenerife . He returned to action at the Volta a Catalunya in March , finishing the race in fifth place overall , 54 seconds behind winner Dan Martin of Garmin – Sharp . 
 In April Wiggins rode the four @-@ day Giro del Trentino in Northern Italy as preparation for the Giro d 'Italia . The first day 's race schedule consisted of a road race followed by a team time trial . An unexpected breakaway in the road race caused Wiggins to lose over six minutes . However he led the team to victory later in the day during the team time trial . On stage two he cut his deficit to race leader Maxime Bouet of Ag2r – La Mondiale in half , lifting Wiggins into the top @-@ five overall . On the fourth and final stage Wiggins suffered a mechanical problem at the foot of the final 14 @.@ 6 km ( 9 @.@ 1 mi ) climb . He ended up finishing the race in fifth place , one minute and 40 seconds down on winner Nibali ( Astana ) . 
 Wiggins entered the Giro d 'Italia as one of the favourites for the general classification . Team Sky won the stage two team time trial on the island of Ischia , covering the distance of 17 @.@ 4 km ( 10 @.@ 8 mi ) 14 seconds quicker than Nibali 's Astana squad . On stage four Wiggins lost 17 seconds after being delayed by a crash within the final 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) , dropping him in the standings from second to sixth . A wet stage seven saw Wiggins crash while making a descent some 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from the finish , placing him in difficulty . Team @-@ mates Rigoberto Urán and Sergio Henao helped pace him back toward the leaders , but could not close the gap . Wiggins finished 90 seconds down on the race favourites , dropping him out of the race 's top 20 . In the following stage , a 54 @.@ 8 km ( 34 @.@ 1 mi ) time trial , Wiggins placed second to compatriot Alex Dowsett of Movistar Team . A bike change compelled by a puncture cost Wiggins some time , and he ended up finishing the race ten seconds down on Dowsett . Wiggins struggled on the wet roads of stage nine , losing touch with the peloton on the descent of the Vallombrosa some 60 km ( 37 @.@ 3 mi ) from the finish . A group of team @-@ mates helped pace him back , and the gap was closed . Following stage 11 Wiggins revealed that he was suffering from a chest infection . He withdrew from the race the following day , after losing over three minutes on the day 's stage . 
 The presence of a knee injury was disclosed to the public on 31 May , which forced Wiggins to forgo defending his title in the Tour de France . He subsequently suggested he may never ride the Tour again . He returned to racing at the Tour de Pologne , winning stage seven 's 37 km ( 23 @.@ 0 mi ) time trial , 56 seconds ahead of second placed Cancellara . 
 In September , Wiggins led Team Sky at his home race , the Tour of Britain . He won the time trial on stage three on roads around Knowsley Safari Park , close to his home in Lancashire . He held the lead for the rest of the week to win the race for the first time , and take his first stage race victory of the season . The following week at the world championships , he took the silver medal in the time trial , behind winner Tony Martin and ahead of Cancellara in a repeat of the 2011 podium . Wiggins was also selected to ride the road race , but abandoned after one lap , and was soon followed by the other British riders as none finished the race . 
 = = = 2014 : World time trial champion and track return = = = 
 Wiggins had stated that his main targets for 2014 were the Paris @-@ Roubaix one day Classic , the Tour of California and the road world championships , as well as riding the Tour de France in support of defending champion Chris Froome . 
 Wiggins was called up to ride the Tour of Flanders as a replacement for the injured Ian Stannard , and finished 32nd , one minute 43 seconds behind the winner Fabian Cancellara , having helped Geraint Thomas on his way to eighth . Wiggins contested Paris – Roubaix for the first time since 2011 , becoming the first former Tour de France winner to compete at the race since Greg LeMond in 1992 , and secured a hard @-@ fought ninth position , finishing as part of a group twenty seconds down on race winner Niki Terpstra . 
 At the Tour of California , Wiggins won the time trial on stage two by a margin of 40 seconds over second placed Rohan Dennis ( Garmin – Sharp ) to move into the overall lead which he would keep for the rest of the race . Despite that good result , Wiggins was not selected by his team to be riding the Tour de France , prompting his return to the track cycling team as preparation for the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow . 
 At the Commonwealth Games in July , Wiggins participated in the <unk> team pursuit with Steven Burke , Ed Clancy and Andy Tennant , managing to win the Silver Medal . The following day Wiggins announced that he was " done with the road " and that he would likely never ride a grand tour again . He did not rule out some road events but wants to concentrate his training on preparation for the team pursuit at the 2016 Olympic Games . 
 In September Wiggins rode the Tour of Britain , winning the final 8 @.@ 8 km ( 5 @.@ 5 mi ) time trial in London and ending the race in third overall behind the winner , Garmin – Sharp 's Dylan van Baarle , and Michał Kwiatkowski ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) . Wiggins then won gold in the time trial at the world road championships in <unk> , Spain , with a winning margin of 26 seconds over Tony Martin over the 47 @.@ 1 km ( 29 @.@ 3 mi ) course . 
 = = = 2015 : Paris – Roubaix , WIGGINS and hour record = = = 
 In January 2015 it was confirmed that Wiggins had signed a contract extension with Team Sky to the end of April 2015 , with a focus on attempting to win Paris @-@ Roubaix , before transferring to his newly founded WIGGINS team in order to prepare alongside other members of the British track endurance squad for the team pursuit at the 2016 Summer Olympics . It was also confirmed that he would attempt to break the hour record in 2015 . In March he confirmed that he would make his debut with his eponymous team at the inaugural Tour de Yorkshire at the start of May . 
 Early in the season , Wiggins rode the Tour of Qatar , in which he lost out on contention for the general classification after being caught out by a split in the peloton and then finished third in the race 's individual time trial stage behind Cancellara and Niki Terpstra , his first opportunity to wear his rainbow <unk> . Wiggins then took part in the traditional opening race of the classics season , Omloop Het Nieuwsblad , finishing 44th as his team @-@ mate Ian Stannard took victory . 
 Wiggins returned to Paris – Nice , a race he had won in 2012 . The race opened and closed with time @-@ trials ; Wiggins finished 12th in the prologue , did not feature in the following five stages , often riding at the back of the peloton , and then withdrew before the traditional mountain time @-@ trial up the Col d 'Èze , a stage for which Wiggins holds the fastest ever time , a legacy of his 2012 victory there . Again , his team @-@ mate Richie Porte was victorious in the race . 
 Wiggins was set to ride E3 Harelbeke in March , a return to the cobbled classics in the lead up to his main objective of Paris @-@ Roubaix , but withdrew . Instead he rode Gent – Wevelgem two days later ; however , he abandoned the race , which was hit by severe weather conditions with much heavy wind and rain , and only 39 riders finished the race . During the mid @-@ week Three Days of De Panne , which began on 31 March , Wiggins acted as a lead @-@ out man of Sky 's sprinter , Elia Viviani , and then convincingly won the final stage 's short time trial , expected to be his last in Sky colours , which also gave him 3rd place overall in the race . 
 At Paris @-@ Roubaix , Wiggins 's much publicised last race with Sky and primary goal of the early season , he finished in 18th position . He attacked with 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) left to race , but was reabsorbed by the peloton . A few days after the race it was announced that Wiggins would make his bid to break the hour record on 7 June at Lee Valley <unk> . He participated to the Tour de Yorkshire with WIGGINS Team , but did not register a significant result . A few weeks after leaving Team Sky , Wiggins said he felt " liberated " and " happier " . On 7 June 2015 Wiggins broke the hour record , riding 54 @.@ 526 km ( 33 @.@ 881 mi ) , surpassing Dowsett 's mark of 52 @.@ 937 km ( 32 @.@ 894 mi ) set five weeks earlier . 
 On 16 August , Wiggins joined Cavendish on the track for the first time since the 2008 Olympics , winning the Madison in the first round of the Revolution cycling series at the newly opened Derby Velodrome . In October Wiggins took his first gold medal at the European track championships when he was part of the British squad that won the team pursuit . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 Wiggins competed at the 2016 UCI Track Cycling World Championships in London , where he took two medals : in the team pursuit , he was part of the British squad that qualified for the final , where they took the silver behind Australia despite leading with 500 metres to go and going on to set the fastest time in competition by a British quartet since 2012 . However Wiggins said that he was happy with his performance , stating " that ( was ) the strongest I ’ ve been in a team pursuit , so there ’ s a bit of life left in me yet , and I ’ ve got another four or five months to get a bit better " . Subsequently he raced with Cavendish in the <unk> , where they clinched their second world title in the discipline as a pairing using similar tactics to their 2008 win : accumulating points in the sprints in the early stages of the race , before making up a one lap deficit on their French , Colombian and Swiss rivals by working with the Spanish pairing of Sebastián Mora and Albert Torres in a breakaway , taking the lead and holding on for the win despite Cavendish crashing with 11 laps to go . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Wiggins is married to Catherine ( née <unk> ) , whom he met during the 2002 Commonwealth Games , after first meeting as juniors in 1997 ; they have two children together , Ben and Isabella . The family lives in Eccleston , Lancashire , close to the Manchester Velodrome , the home of British Cycling and Team Sky . 
 Wiggins endured a difficult relationship with his father Gary Wiggins , who made no effort to contact Bradley for fourteen years , since leaving the family when Bradley was two years old . Bradley only knew his father had been a professional cyclist . Their first meeting was in 1999 , when Bradley was at a training camp in Australia ; also meeting his two half @-@ sisters from relationships his father had in Australia before and after the one with his mother . They next met the following year , when Bradley was back in Australia training and had gone out three weeks in advance to stay with Gary . Bradley quickly became disillusioned at his father 's alcohol and drug problems , and they never met again . Gary Wiggins died in Aberdeen , New South Wales in 2008 , aged 55 . Bradley did not attend the funeral . 
 = = = Interests = = = 
 He is a well @-@ known mod and owns a collection of classic motor scooters and guitars from the 1960s and 1970s . He is a keen musician and guitarist and in December 2012 he made a surprise appearance at a Paul Weller charity concert , playing guitar on " That 's Entertainment " ; and together recorded a special for BBC Radio 6 Music discussing their love of music and mod culture , broadcast on Boxing Day . He supports Liverpool Football Club and Wigan Warriors rugby league club , and in 2012 the latter gave him a life membership , which he described as his highlight of the year . Wiggins presented the winner of the Super League 's 2012 Man of Steel Award to the Warriors player Sam Tomkins . 
 In July 2012 it was announced that Wiggins would collaborate with the Fred Perry clothing label " to develop an authentic , non @-@ technical range of cycle wear " . The clothing range , known as the Bradley Wiggins X Fred Perry Collaboration , was launched in July 2012 under a six @-@ year contract . 
 In 2012 Wiggins launched the Bradley Wiggins Foundation to draw people into sport and regular exercise . The foundation backs the professional women 's team Wiggle <unk> , which launched for the 2013 season . However , in February 2015 Wiggins announced that the Foundation would be wound down in the run @-@ up to the 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 On 10 May 2015 , Wiggins was interviewed by Kirsty Young as guest " castaway " on BBC Radio 4 's Desert Island Discs ; his favourite musical piece was Sound and Vision by David Bowie , his book choice was Slaying the Dragon : How to Turn Your Small Steps to Great Feats by Michael Johnson and his luxury item was a family photo album . 
 Wiggins served as guest editor of Radio 4 's The Today Programme on 29 December 2015 : as part of this he interviewed Paul Smith about fashion , Gary Lineker about making the transition from being a sportsman to working in the media , and discussed cycling with Jeremy Corbyn and Steve Hilton . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Wiggins speaks fluent French through his participation with French cycling teams and after living in France for a number of years . 
 In a period after the 2004 Olympics , Wiggins started to drink heavily as he struggled to cope with his newfound fame . He stopped when his son Ben was born . " We had a baby . So then it was a case of , ' well , I 've got to earn some fucking money ' and the responsibility takes over , " he explained . 
 At the 2012 Olympics , Wiggins rang the Olympic Bell to mark the start of the opening ceremony inside the Olympic Stadium . 
 Wiggins has written multiple books about his career . The first , entitled " In Pursuit of Glory " , covers his success as a track cyclist at the Beijing Olympics where he won two gold medals in the team pursuit and the individual pursuit . It also talks about his triumph at the 2009 Tour de France where he finished in fourth place . In " My Time " he talks about the setbacks he faced at the 2010 Tour de France . He also talks about the " golden year " ( 2012 ) , in which he won the Tour de France and then , just days later , the Olympic individual time trial gold medal in front of a British crowd at the London Olympics . ( " My Story " is the junior edition of " My Time " . ) His fourth book , " My Hour " , is an account of his attempt on the hour record in 2015 , covering the record 's history , his training , and the attempt itself . 
 Wiggins ' power output has been measured to be over 450 watts at anaerobic threshold . 
 In March 2014 Wiggins made an appearance as himself in an episode of BBC Radio 4 's soap opera The Archers as part of the Sport Relief charitable appeal . Two years later he appeared in a comedy sketch filmed at the London Olympic Velodrome with Michael Crawford on Sport Relief 2016 where Crawford reprised his Some Mothers Do ' Ave ' Em character Frank Spencer . 
 A sculpture dedicated to and inspired by Wiggins was unveiled in 2014 at St Augustine ’ s CE High School , his former school . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 = = = Major results = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Grand Tour general classification results timeline = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Major stage race general classification results timeline = = = 
 = = = Individual Time Trial timeline = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = World records = = = 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 Cycling Weekly Cyclist of the Year : 2000 
 Officer of the Order of the British Empire : 2005 
 Commander of the Order of the British Empire : 2009 
 London Youth Games Hall of Fame : 2010 
 GQ Lifetime Achievement : 2012 
 Vélo d 'Or : 2012 
 Sports Journalists ' Association 's Sportsman of the Year : 2012 
 Cyclingnews.com Rider of the Year : 2012 
 International <unk> of the Year : 2012 
 Bidlake Memorial Prize : 2012 
 BBC Sports Personality of the Year : 2012 
 Laureus World Sports Sportsman of the Year Award ( nominated ) : 2013 
 Knight Bachelor : 2013 
 = 32nd Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 32nd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was first raised in 1915 as part of the Australian Imperial Force and was initially made up of personnel from South Australia and Western Australia . The battalion served in France and Belgium during the First World War before being disbanded in 1919 . 
 It was re @-@ raised in 1921 as the " 32nd Battalion ( Footscray Regiment ) " , a unit of the part @-@ time Militia , and between the wars the battalion served as a home defence unit in Victoria . During the Second World War the battalion was merged with the 14th Battalion to become the 14th / 32nd Battalion ( Prahran / Footscray Regiment ) , serving firstly as garrison troops in Australia and New Guinea before taking part in the fighting during the New Britain campaign . In July 1945 , that battalion was disbanded . 
 After the war , the battalion was not re @-@ raised in its own right when the Citizens Military Force ( the forerunner to the Australian Army Reserve ) was formed in 1948 , however , it was raised as an amalgamated unit known as the " 58th / 32nd Battalion ( City of Essendon Regiment ) " . This unit remained in existence until 1960 when it was subsumed into the Royal Victoria Regiment . The battalion 's honours and traditions are now maintained by the 5th / 6th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 The 32nd Battalion was raised on 9 August 1915 in Mitcham , South Australia , for overseas service with the all volunteer Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . Its first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Donald Coghill . While ' A ' and ' B ' Companies were made up of recruits from South Australia , ' C ' and ' D ' Companies were formed in Perth , Western Australia , and underwent training at the Blackboy Hill Training Camp before sailing on the transport <unk> and joining the rest of the battalion in Adelaide at the end of August . Most the battalion 's recruits had previously worked as miners or farmers . After completing basic training , the battalion left Australia in November aboard the HMAT Geelong , bound for Egypt . It arrived amidst the aftermath of the failed Gallipoli campaign , which saw a reorganisation and expansion of the AIF in preparation for its dispatch to France and Belgium to take part in the fighting against the Germans along the Western Front . 
 In Egypt , the battalion became part of the newly formed 8th Brigade , which was attached to the 5th Division . After a further period of training , the battalion was shipped to France in June 1916 , to join the fighting on the Western Front . The following month , after spending a short period in the Armentières sector , the battalion was committed to the front for the first time on 16 July 1916 . Three days after taking up position in the trenches the 32nd took part in the fighting around Fromelles , being committed as part of the 8th Brigade 's initial assault on the extreme left of the Australian front that was focused around a position known as the " Sugarloaf " , during which it suffered 718 casualties — a third of the battalion 's total casualties for the entire war — which equalled roughly 90 percent of its effective strength . As a result of these losses , the 32nd Battalion was used mainly in a support role throughout the remainder of 1916 , during which time , while they were not committed to any attacks in an assault role , they continued to suffer further casualties through the attrition of trench warfare . 
 After spending a bitter winter undertaking defensive duties on the Somme , during early 1917 the battalion took part in the operations in pursuit of the German forces as they retreated towards the Hindenburg Line , but found itself in the flank protection role during the Second Battle of Bullecourt in May . On 26 September 1917 , the battalion was heavily committed to the fighting around Polygon Wood near Ypres in Belgium during the Battle of Passchendaele ; again they were employed in a support role , as the 8th Brigade 's assault was led by the 29th and 31st Battalions . Following the assault , the brigade adopted a defensive posture , supporting further efforts around Zillebeke and Anzac Ridge . 
 For the remainder of 1917 and the first half of 1918 the 5th Division mainly undertook a reserve role and as a result the 32nd Battalion had little involvement during the German Spring Offensive ; after the winter of 1917 – 18 , the battalion had re @-@ entered the trenches in the Messines sector , occupying positions near Warneton in January 1918 , remaining there until March . In April , the 8th Brigade had been moved to the Somme , taking up defensive positions around the canal between Corbie and Vaux . After the German advance stalled the 32nd Battalion was involved in a series of minor advances along the Bray – Corbie Road throughout July , taking part in operations around Morlancourt and the <unk> Valley as the Allies sought to regain the initiative . Later , the Allies launched their own offensive around Amiens beginning on 8 August 1918 . During this offensive the 32nd Battalion took part in operations in the Peronne area throughout August and September as the Allies sought to breach the Hindenburg Line , fighting its final engagement of the war between 29 September and 1 October 1918 as part of a joint Australian and American attack along the St Quentin Canal . 
 After this , the Australian Corps was removed from the line for rest and training in preparation for further operations . In order to make up for the losses the Australians had suffered during the previous months , a number of Australian battalions were disbanded at this time to provide reinforcements to those that remained . The 32nd Battalion received a large number of reinforcements from the all @-@ Victorian 29th Battalion , which was subsequently disbanded . It was still out of the line when the Armistice was declared on 11 November 1918 . During the battalion 's final series of battles , the battalion was led by Major Blair Wark , who was later awarded the Victoria Cross for his leadership and bravery . 
 Throughout the conflict the battalion suffered 2 @,@ 079 casualties of which 613 were killed . In March 1919 , after most of its personnel had been repatriated to Australia , the battalion merged with the 30th Battalion before subsequently being disbanded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one Victoria Cross , one Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , one Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBEs ) , three Officers of the Order of the British Empire ( OBEs ) , 27 Military Crosses ( MCs ) with two Bars , 16 Distinguished Conduct Medals ( DCMs ) ; 66 Military Medals with four Bars ; seven Meritorious Service Medals ; 26 Mentions in Despatches ( MIDs ) and 10 foreign awards . 
 = = = Inter war years = = = 
 In 1921 , when the part @-@ time Citizens Force ( later known as the Militia ) was re @-@ organised to perpetuate the numerical designations of the wartime AIF battalions , the 32nd Battalion was re @-@ formed in Melbourne , Victoria , through an amalgamation of the 5th Battalion , 8th Infantry Regiment with part of the 2nd Battalion , 32nd Infantry Regiment , and part of the 29th ( Port Philip ) Light Horse Regiment . The battalion drew most of its personnel from Footscray and several other south @-@ west and western suburbs of Melbourne and in 1927 , when territorial designations were adopted , the unit came to be known as the 32nd Battalion ( Footscray Regiment ) . The same year , the battalion motto , Audax Pro Patria , was approved and it formed an alliance with the Leicestershire Regiment . During this time , it was part of the 2nd Brigade , within the 3rd Military District . Initially the battalion 's manpower was maintained through the compulsory training scheme , but this was suspended in 1929 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , and after this the force was maintained on a volunteer @-@ only basis . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Following Japan 's entry into the Second World War in December 1941 , the battalion was called up for defensive duties . Attached to the 2nd Brigade , the battalion provided garrison troops to vital installations around Melbourne until August 1942 when it was transferred to Western Australia , being attached to the 6th Brigade , which was based around Geraldton . In September 1942 , as part of an Army @-@ wide reduction that came about because of over @-@ mobilisation , the battalion was amalgamated with the 14th Battalion to become the 14th / 32nd Battalion ( Prahran / Footscray Regiment ) . 
 In early 1943 , the 14th / 32nd Battalion carried out amphibious warfare training in Queensland before being deployed to the Buna – Gona area in New Guinea in July . The battalion would remain in mainland New Guinea and New Britain for the next two years , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel William Caldwell . The strategy employed by the Australians during the New Britain campaign was one of containment against the much larger Japanese forces in the area . On 18 March 1945 , the battalion took part in its only major battle of the war when it launched an assault on Bacon Hill and captured it . In April 1945 , the 14th / 32nd Battalion was withdrawn back to Australia in preparation for involvement in future operations , however , in July the decision was made to disband the unit as the end of the war became apparent . During the course of the conflict the battalion suffered 77 casualties , of which 31 were killed in action or died of wounds or other causes . Members of the battalion received the following decorations for their service : one DSO , one OBE , two MCs , one British Empire Medal , one DCM , one MM and seven MIDs . 
 = = = Post Second World War = = = 
 In 1948 , when Australia 's part @-@ time military force was re @-@ raised under the guise of the Citizens Military Force , the battalion was re @-@ raised albeit as an amalgamated unit . It was linked with the 58th Battalion to become the 58th / 32nd Battalion and was known variously as the Melbourne Rifles , the West Melbourne Regiment and the City of Essendon Regiment . The Australian Army was reorganised around pentropic divisions in 1960 . As a result of this reorganisation the CMF was greatly reduced , as 14 infantry battalions were disbanded altogether , while the 17 that remained gave up their old regional regimental ties and were reformed as part of the six newly raised State @-@ based regiments . As a result of this , the 58th / 32nd was absorbed by the pentropic 1st Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment , forming ' E ' Company , which was also known as " The Footscray Company " . The battalion received two battle honours for its service during the Second World War in 1961 ; at the same time it was also entrusted with the honours bestowed upon the 2 / 32nd Battalion , which was a separate battalion formed within the Second Australian Imperial Force . After the abolition of pentropic divisions in 1965 , the unit 's honours and traditions became bound up in the 5th / 6th Battalion , Royal Victoria Regiment , a unit which remains in existence today . The 32nd Battalion 's colours were laid up at St John 's Anglican Church in Footscray in August 1970 . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 32nd Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 First World War : Somme 1916 & 18 , Bapaume 1917 , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Ancre 1918 , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Mont St Quentin , Hindenburg Line , St Quentin Canal , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , Egypt 1915 – 16 @,@ 
 Second World War : South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , <unk> . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 32nd Battalion during the First World War : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Donald Coghill ( 1915 – 16 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert <unk> ( 1916 – 17 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Charles Davies ( 1917 – 18 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel John McArthur ( 1918 ) . 
 = Back Up , Dancer = 
 " Back Up , Dancer " is the second episode of the seventh season of the American television series Will & Grace . It was written by Tracy Poust and Jon Kinnally and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on September 23 , 2004 . Guest stars in " Back Up , Dancer " include Will Arnett , Bobby Cannavale , and Janet Jackson . 
 In the episode , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) auditions to be a backup dancer for singer Janet Jackson , but in order to get the job , he must compete in a dance @-@ off with a fellow named Artemus ( Arnett ) . Meanwhile , Will ( Eric McCormack ) is torn between going out with his boyfriend Vince ( Cannavale ) and staying in to console Grace ( Debra Messing ) following her failed marriage . 
 " Back Up , Dancer " received generally mixed reviews from television critics , who all disliked Jackson 's appearance on the show . According to Nielsen , the episode was watched by 15 @.@ 32 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 7 @.@ 1 rating / 19 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the beginning of the episode Jack ( Sean Hayes ) learns he will have an audition to be a backup dancer for singer Janet Jackson . The audition was set up by singer Jennifer Lopez , whom Jack worked for in the same position after Lopez let him go . At the audition , Jackson decides that she would like five dancers instead of the six originally planned . Jack , " the newbie , " and Artemus ( Will Arnett ) , " the guy who 's been here the longest , " compete in a dance @-@ off to determine the fifth dancer . Before the dance @-@ off , Karen ( Megan Mullally ) — Jack 's friend — visits to support her friend . She sees Artemus and reveals to Jack the two are former lovers . The two get back together which outrages Jack . Karen reassures Jack that their reconciliation will not affect him in any way , only for her to tell Jack to lose the dance @-@ off . Jack tells Karen he will not throw the competition . During the dance @-@ off , Karen pleads with Jack to lose which Jack ultimately does . Believing he won , Artemus tells Karen he used her to win . After deciding that she only needs four dancers , Jackson fires both Jack and Artemus . At the end , Karen apologizes to Jack for getting him fired . 
 Meanwhile , Grace ( Debra Messing ) copes with her failed marriage to Leo ( Harry Connick , Jr . ) . She tries to move on , but mementos of the past do not let her . Her best friend Will ( Eric McCormack ) tries to help her but to no avail . While at dinner with his boyfriend Vince ( Bobby Cannavale ) , and Vince 's superior officer , Grace calls him , displeasing Vince . Believing that Grace might be suicidal , Will leaves to attend to her . Vince shows up at Will and Grace 's apartment to confront her , telling her that she is affecting his relationship with Will because she is too needy . This prompts Grace and Vince to bicker , with the two asking Will to choose between them . He cannot choose between them as Grace is his long @-@ time friend , but he also cares for Vince . The episode concludes with him telling Vince that he wants to work things out , but before they can discuss it , Vince sees Grace 's wedding album , resulting in him being more focused on the album than the relationship . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Back Up , Dancer " was written by Tracy Poust and Jon Kinnally and directed by series producer James Burrows . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 23 , 2004 . It was confirmed in mid @-@ 2004 that singer Janet Jackson would guest star as herself on the television series Will & Grace . She recorded her lines in front of a live audience on August 17 . Jackson 's role in the show had been her first television acting role in nearly two decades . Jackson 's last prime @-@ time role was on NBC 's Fame . She also appeared in the television shows Diff 'rent Strokes and Good Times . In addition , Jackson 's appearance came nine months after the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy . She told the entertainment news program Access Hollywood that she was a " big fan " of the show , and that she could not wait to join the cast for her stint . Also in this interview , she believed that Sean Hayes , who plays Jack , was a decent dancer . " I thought he studied dance . I really did , It 's so funny . I have to catch myself because I 'm cracking up in rehearsals . It 's just funny to watch [ the actors ] . " Jackson " had a tough time " on the set because she constantly messed up her lines . She admitted that it was not as easy as she had hoped it would be . " I <unk> my lines and got so frustrated when I made those mistakes . I haven 't done TV since Different Strokes , and it 's not like Saturday Night Live where you can read cue cards . On Will & Grace , they 're always rewriting , so you 're always memorising . " Jackson , however , said that the dancing was the " easy part of playing myself " . 
 It was also announced that actor Will Arnett would guest star , as Jack 's dance rival . Alex <unk> , executive producer of Will & Grace , revealed Arnett 's subplot in the episode , saying that Hayes and Arnett are " vying for a job as Janet Jackson 's backup dancer . " In an online chat session with the Los Angeles Times , Arnett revealed that the reason for his guest spot was due to knowing one of the writers of the show , and Arnett being friends with Hayes . In an April 2007 interview with The Advocate , Arnett said that he enjoyed doing his guest spot on the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen system , " Back Up , Dancer " was watched by 15 @.@ 32 million households in its original American broadcast . The episode received a 7 @.@ 1 rating / 19 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , and was the eighth highest @-@ rated show on the NBC network that week . " Back Up , Dancer " finished in 13th place in the weekly ratings for the week of September 20 – 26 , 2004 . Since airing the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 In preview of the episode , Phil Rosenthal of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said : " If you 're going to book a former cast member from Good Times as a guest for your sitcom , do yourself a favor and try getting Jimmie Walker , John Amos or Ja <unk> Dubois before settling for Janet Jackson . " Scott D. Pierce of Deseret News reported that Jackson 's appearance " takes the focus off the regular characters " while Mark Harris of Entertainment Weekly commented that Jackson 's guest spot " was an all @-@ time low " . 
 Gary Susman of Entertainment Weekly was complimentary towards Jackson , concluding that she was " all business , playing it straight " in the episode . He reported that " she makes a fabulous entrance and departs with her dignity intact " . Charleston Daily Mail contributor Kevin McDonough wrote that in the season premiere episode " <unk> : I Hurt , Too " of season seven , singer Jennifer Lopez appeared " in a farfetched and laugh @-@ free guest appearance . Tonight [ ' Back Up , Dancer ' ] , it 's Janet Jackson 's turn . At least she has sitcom experience . " In her annual countdown of the best quotes of 2004 , Amy Amatangelo of Knight Ridder included Will Arnett 's line " Like a Sicilian woman 's eyebrows , we could not be kept apart " . In March 2006 , Entertainment Weekly named Jackson 's guest spot as their number nine most memorable guest appearance on Will & Grace . 
 = St Peter 's Church , Llanbedrgoch = 
 St Peter 's Church , Llanbedrgoch , is a small medieval parish church near the village of Llanbedrgoch in Anglesey , north Wales . The oldest parts of the building date from the 15th century ; it was extended in the 17th century and restored twice in the 19th century . The doorway is decorated with carvings of two human heads , one wearing a mitre . The church contains a reading desk made from 15th @-@ century bench ends , one carved with a mermaid holding a mirror and comb . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , as of 2013 , and is one of three in a group of parishes . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , because of its " substantial medieval fabric " . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Peter 's Church is in a rural location along a narrow lane near the village of Llanbedrgoch in Anglesey , north Wales . The village itself is about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Llangefni , the county town . Built on raised ground inside a churchyard , access to which is through a lychgate , the church is dedicated to St Peter . The village takes its name from the church ; the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name , " Pedr " in Welsh . 
 The date of the earliest church on the site of St Peter 's is unknown . The chancel and the nave are thought to date from the 15th century , and a transept was added to the east end of the church probably in the 17th century , to form a cross <unk> . The church was restored twice in the 19th century , in 1840 and again in 1885 ; the 1840 restoration was partially funded by a grant of £ 20 from the Bangor Diocesan Church Building Society . 
 St Peter 's is still used for worship by the Church in Wales . It is one of three churches in the combined benefice of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf with Llanbedrgoch with Pentraeth , and is within the deanery of Tindaethwy and Menai , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 , the rector is the Venerable R. P. Davies , who is also the Archdeacon of Bangor . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Peter 's is built from rubble masonry , with large stones at the corners of the transepts and sandstone dressings around some of the apertures . The roof is made of slate ; the stone bellcote at the west end has one bell and is topped with a cross . The nave and chancel are the oldest parts of the building . The nave measures 23 feet 6 inches by 14 feet ( 7 @.@ 16 by 4 @.@ 3 m ) ; the chancel , which is separated from the nave by a single step , measures 14 feet 6 inches by 4 feet ( 4 @.@ 42 by 1 @.@ 2 m ) . The sanctuary within the chancel is raised by a further step and has a rail around it . The vestry is at the west end of the nave . The transepts to the north and south of the chancel are square in plan , their sides and <unk> approximately 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 42 m ) . The western end of the north wall of the nave has a 15th @-@ century pointed arch doorway set in a square frame , with decorative patterns in the stonework around the door and carved heads on either side of the frame ; the head to the left of the frame wears a mitre . A doorway in the opposite wall of the nave , probably also dating from the 15th century , was partially replaced in the 19th century with a window . 
 The window on the north wall of the nave is to the east of the door , and was added in the 19th century . It has two rounded lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) , in similar style to the two @-@ light 17th @-@ century window in the north wall of the north transept . The second window in the transept , in the east wall , is from the 19th century . The two windows in the south transept , in the south and east walls , are both from the 17th century , and are square @-@ headed with two lights . The window in the east wall of the chancel is from the 19th @-@ century and has three lights topped with stonework trefoils . It has an external hoodmould ( a decorative stone border ) around the top . The glass of all the windows is patterned , and some is coloured ; the coloured glass is used in the same way as in other Anglesey churches whose 19th @-@ century restorations were aided by Henry Stanley , 3rd Baron Stanley of Alderley , an Anglesey nobleman who converted to Islam . 
 The exposed roof timbers date from the 19th century . Most of the fittings date from the middle of the 19th century , with the exception of a reading desk made from two 15th @-@ century bench ends , one of which is carved with a mermaid holding a comb and a mirror . The desk had previously been in St Eilian 's Church , Llaneilian . A survey in 1937 by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire also noted the octagonal font of uncertain date , two 17th @-@ century memorials inside the church , and some memorials from the 17th and 18th centuries outside it . 
 A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded an Elizabethan silver chalice from about 1575 , just over 6 inches ( 150 mm ) tall , and a plain silver paten and a silver flagon both dated 1904 – 05 . The mark " IL " within a shield on the chalice probably refers to John <unk> , an Elizabethan goldsmith from Chester ; it was one of four chalices in the diocese to be marked in this way . The survey also noted that the church no longer had the pewter flagon and dish recorded in the church terriers between 1788 and 1821 . 
 = = Churchyard = = 
 The churchyard contains two Commonwealth war graves , of a Royal Navy sailor of World War I and an ATS officer of World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has statutory protection from unauthorised alteration as it was designated a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , recognising " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " – on 12 May 1970 . Cadw , the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists , describes St Peter 's as " a good rural church retaining substantial medieval fabric " . 
 Writing in 1833 , before the 19th @-@ century restorations , the antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described St Peter 's as " a small beautiful cruciform structure , with a handsome east window , situated on a rocky eminence , in a distant and exposed part of the parish " . Writing in 1847 , in between the two restorations , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that St Peter 's was the only old building in the parish , and that the " rude execution " of the north doorway " will not escape notice . " He said that the chancel window was of the same design as that in the Old Church of St Nidan , Llanidan . He also noted that the font was " anomalously placed near the entrance of the chancel " . 
 The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in December 1849 , and observed that the transepts were " as usual , awkward and sprawling " , and were " much out of proportion to the short chancel and insignificant nave . " He described the east window as a late example of the Middle Pointed style , " of a character very frequent in Anglesey . " 
 = Danny Parslow = 
 Daniel James " Danny " Parslow ( born 11 September 1985 ) is a Welsh professional footballer who plays as a defender for League Two club Cheltenham Town . 
 Parslow started his career with Cardiff City in their youth system , before signing a professional contract in 2005 . He signed for Conference National club York City a year later after being released by Cardiff . He did not establish himself in the team in the 2006 – 07 season , but played in their play @-@ off semi @-@ final defeat by Morecambe . He became a regular starter during 2007 – 08 under the management of Colin Walker , and during 2008 – 09 assumed the captaincy from Mark Greaves . In this season , he was named Clubman of the Year and led the team to the 2009 FA Trophy Final , in which York were beaten 2 – 0 by Stevenage Borough . Parslow was replaced as captain by Michael Ingham during 2009 – 10 , and was an unused substitute in York 's 3 – 1 defeat by Oxford United in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final . He won his second Clubman of the Year award in 2010 – 11 , having appeared in all of York 's matches that season . 
 Parslow was a member of the York team that won the 2012 FA Trophy Final and 2012 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final in 2011 – 12 , with victory in the latter seeing the club promoted into League Two after eight years out of the Football League . He missed only one match in 2012 – 13 , in which he won the Clubman of the Year award for an unprecedented third time . Parslow was out injured for most of 2013 – 14 , and was on loan with Conference Premier club Grimsby Town during 2014 – 15 , playing in their penalty shoot @-@ out defeat in the 2015 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final . He signed for Cheltenham Town of the National League in 2015 , and was part of the tea team that earned promotion into League Two by winning the divisional title in 2015 – 16 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Cardiff City = = = 
 Born in <unk> , Caerphilly , Parslow started his career with Cardiff City 's youth system in 1998 . Having progressed through the club 's centre of excellence he earned a three @-@ year scholarship in May 2002 , which turned into a one @-@ year professional contract on its conclusion . He made an appearance for Cardiff in a 1 – 0 defeat by Bangor City in the FAW Premier Cup on 25 January 2005 and was included in the first team squad for the 2005 – 06 season . Parslow went on trial with League One side Swansea City in March 2006 , before returning to Cardiff the following month after nothing materialised . After making no appearances he was released by Cardiff on 22 May 2006 . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Parslow was signed by Conference National team York City on 18 August 2006 following a successful trial . He made his debut as a 67th @-@ minute substitute for James Dudgeon in York 's 3 – 0 away defeat by Crawley Town on 9 September 2006 . At different points during 2006 – 07 Parslow lost his place in the team to David McGurk , Jason <unk> and János Kovács , but started York 's last seven fixtures , including both legs of the 2 – 1 aggregate defeat by Morecambe in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . Having finished 2006 – 07 with 26 appearances for York , the club exercised their option to extend his contract for 2007 – 08 in May 2007 . 
 Parslow missed the start of 2007 – 08 with an ankle injury , making his first appearance in York 's third match , a 1 – 1 draw away to Exeter City on 20 August 2007 . He went nearly three months without starting a match when being named in the starting XI as part of a three @-@ man central defence for York 's 2 – 1 win away to Weymouth on 24 November 2007 in Colin Walker 's first match as caretaker manager . He established himself in the team under Walker , starting all of York 's remaining matches in 2007 – 08 . Parslow scored his first career goal with the only goal in a 1 – 0 away win over Rushden & Diamonds in the fourth round of the FA Trophy on 23 February 2008 , which came from a diving header eight yards out in the 16th minute . He made 40 appearances and scored two goals in 2007 – 08 , before York exercised their option for Parslow 's contract to be extended for 2008 – 09 in April 2008 . 
 He signed a new contract with York in September 2008 that contracted him to the club until the summer of 2010 . He took over the captaincy when club captain Mark Greaves and vice @-@ captain McGurk were out of the team , starting on 27 January 2009 for a 1 – 1 draw away to Altrincham . Having " led by example " after attaining the captaincy , he was voted by supporters as York 's Clubman of the Year for 2008 – 09 , being presented the award before their penultimate home match against Eastbourne Borough on 18 April 2009 . He started in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 9 May 2009 , which York lost 2 – 0 to Stevenage Borough . Ahead of the Trophy final , he was rested for the final league match away to Lewes on 26 April 2009 ; this was the only match he missed in 2008 – 09 , which he finished with 57 appearances . 
 Parslow and McGurk were appointed as club captains for 2009 – 10 , although Parslow would continue to wear the armband in matches . He signed a new contract with York in January 2010 to tie him to the club until the summer of 2012 . He played in the team as a centre @-@ back and right @-@ back before losing his place to Ben Purkiss after picking up a foot injury in York 's 2 – 1 away defeat to Forest Green Rovers on 6 March 2010 , with the captain 's armband being handed to Michael Ingham . He made his return in York 's 1 – 0 away defeat by Stevenage in the last league match of 2009 – 10 on 24 April 2010 , but was dropped to the bench for the play @-@ off semi @-@ final 1 – 0 victory at home to Luton Town . Parslow appeared as a 90 @-@ minute substitute in the second leg 1 – 0 away win , with the tie ending 2 – 0 on aggregate . However , he was an unused substitute for the 3 – 1 defeat by Oxford United at Wembley Stadium in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final . He made 41 appearances for York in 2009 – 10 . 
 Parslow had been playing mostly at right @-@ back in 2010 – 11 before losing his place to Liam Darville in January 2011 , but retained his place in the team by playing at centre @-@ back in York 's 4 – 0 victory over league leaders AFC Wimbledon on 1 February 2011 with McGurk suspended . Parslow scored his only goal of 2010 – 11 in this match after scoring the opening goal with a header from a free kick taken by Ashley Chambers . Having played at right @-@ back the following match , he returned to playing at centre @-@ back after McGurk 's injury in York 's 0 – 0 draw away to Altrincham on 22 February 2011 . Parslow formed a central defensive partnership with Chris Smith , and manager Gary Mills praised him by calling him " outstanding " . He had played in all of York 's matches in 2010 – 11 before suffering a head injury following a clash of heads with Matthew Barnes @-@ Homer in a 1 – 0 home win against Luton on 19 April 2011 , which led to him missing the remainder of the campaign . Following the end of 2010 – 11 , during which he made 47 appearances and scored one goal , he was named York 's Clubman of the Year for a second time . 
 Parslow started 2011 – 12 out of the team , with McGurk and Smith preferred in central defence . He appeared twice at right @-@ back in the first two months of the season when Lanre Oyebanjo was absent , before falling behind Jon Challinor and Jamal Fyfield for a place in defence . Parslow was used mostly as a substitute from then before a run starting in central defence in late December 2011 , before losing his place after the signing of Chris Doig in February 2012 . He was restored to the starting line @-@ up in early March 2012 due to other defenders being unavailable , before Doig once again took his place in the team . He returned to the starting line @-@ up in early April 2012 due to Smith 's absence and started 10 of York 's last 11 fixtures of the season . Parslow won the 2012 FA Trophy Final with York at Wembley Stadium on 12 May 2012 , in which the side beat Newport County 2 – 0 . Eight days later , he played in the 2 – 1 victory over Luton in the 2012 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley Stadium , seeing the club return into the Football League after an eight @-@ year absence with promotion into League Two . He completed 2011 – 12 with 38 appearances for York , after which he signed a new one @-@ year contract with an option to extend in June 2012 . 
 Parslow started York 's first competitive fixture since promotion away to League One Doncaster Rovers in the first round of the League Cup in the opening match of 2012 – 13 on 11 August 2012 , which the side lost 4 – 2 in a penalty shoot @-@ out following a 1 – 1 draw after extra time . He then played in York 's first League Two fixture , a 3 – 1 home defeat by Wycombe Wanderers on 18 August 2012 . His only goal of 2012 – 13 was the opener in York 's first victory of the season , a 3 – 1 away win at Barnet on 25 August 2012 , with a 20 yard volley into the bottom left corner . Parslow played at right @-@ back , left @-@ back and defensive midfield throughout the season , and played in the latter position in the end of season run @-@ in to form part of a midfield trio also including Tom Platt and Adam Reed that helped York avoid relegation . He became the first York player to be named Clubman of the Year on three occasions , having been presented the award before York 's final home match of the season against Southend United on 20 April 2013 . Parslow missed only one match for York in 2012 – 13 , making 50 appearances and scoring one goal , and signed a new two @-@ year contract with the club in May 2013 . 
 Parslow started 2013 – 14 in and out of the team , but when returning to the starting line @-@ up for a 2 – 1 home defeat to Mansfield Town on 14 September 2013 was handed the captain 's armband in the absence of Smith . He established himself in the centre of defence alongside McGurk , and retained the armband when Smith was recalled into the team . However , he sustained knee ligament damage when colliding into advertising hoardings as he sliced an attempted clearance during York 's 2 – 1 defeat away to Southend on 23 November 2013 . The injury ruled him out for the rest of the season , in which he had made 16 appearances . In his absence , York reached the play @-@ offs with a seventh @-@ place finish in League Two , although they were beaten 1 – 0 on aggregate by Fleetwood Town in the semi @-@ final . 
 Parslow returned to fitness ahead of 2014 – 15 , but having failed to regain his place in the team signed for Conference Premier team Grimsby Town on a one @-@ month loan on 18 September 2014 . He debuted two days later in their 1 – 0 away win over Kidderminster , and made seven appearances for Grimsby before the loan expired on 20 October 2014 . Having been an unused substitute for three matches after returning to York , Parslow rejoined Grimsby on loan until 4 January 2015 on 7 November 2014 , and made his second debut for the club a day later in a 3 – 1 home defeat to Oxford in the FA Cup first round . The loan was extended until the end of the season during January 2015 . He came on as a 74th @-@ minute substitute for Gregor Robertson in the 2015 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final against Bristol Rovers at Wembley on 17 May 2015 ; following a 1 – 1 draw after extra time , Grimsby lost 5 – 3 in a penalty shoot @-@ out . Parslow had made 23 appearances in his second loan spell at Grimsby , and after returning to York was released after nine years at the club . 
 = = = Cheltenham Town = = = 
 After a successful trial , Parslow signed for newly relegated National League club Cheltenham Town on a one @-@ year contract on 29 July 2015 . He made his debut when starting a 1 – 1 away draw with Lincoln City on 8 August 2015 , Cheltenham 's first match of 2015 – 16 , and established himself at centre @-@ back , forming a partnership with Aaron Downes . Parslow scored his first goal for Cheltenham on 31 August 2015 , with a volley in the 59th minute of a 2 – 1 home victory over Wrexham . He stood in as Cheltenham 's vice @-@ captain after a season @-@ ending injury to the captain Downes in January 2016 , . after which he was partnered at centre @-@ back with a number of players , including Cameron Burgess and Asa Hall . According to Oli Fell of the Gloucestershire Echo , it was after Downes ' injury that Parslow " really came into his own and stepped up " , and surmised that Parslow was " perhaps the most crucial component of the side all season " . He finished 2015 – 16 with 50 appearances and two goals , and appeared in nearly every minute of Cheltenham 's 46 league matches . Cheltenham won promotion back into League Two at the first attempt , winning the National League title with 101 points . Parslow was named the Players ' Player of the Year , and signed a new contract with the club in May 2016 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Parslow was capped once by Wales at under @-@ 17 level , appearing as a second @-@ half substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat by Germany on 13 February 2002 . He made his under @-@ 19 debut after starting a 2 – 1 defeat by Portugal on 22 September 2003 . He played two more matches for the under @-@ 19s to finish his career at that level with three caps . Parslow later represented the under @-@ 21 team and made his debut in a 0 – 0 draw with Latvia in August 2004 . He was part of the team that lost 2 – 0 away against England on 8 October 2004 . Parslow was capped four times by Wales at under @-@ 21 level . 
 He was called up by the Wales semi @-@ pro team for the Four Nations Tournament in May 2007 . Parslow 's debut came as a 59th @-@ minute substitute for Gethin Jones in their opening match , a 1 – 0 win over the hosts Scotland on 22 May 2007 . He started the 1 – 1 draw with the Republic of Ireland on 25 May 2007 , and was a 79th @-@ minute substitute for Jones in the championship decider against England , which finished in a 3 – 0 defeat on 27 May . Parslow captained the semi @-@ pro team for the first time in their 2 – 1 away defeat to England in the 2007 – 09 International Challenge Trophy on 20 February 2008 . He retained the armband for the 2008 Four Nations Tournament , starting all of Wales three matches as they finished in second place in the four @-@ team group . His career with the semi @-@ pro team finished with eight caps . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Parslow primarily plays as a centre @-@ back , and has stated he is most comfortable playing this position . A utility player , his intelligence and commitment allow him to play a number of positions , including right @-@ back , left @-@ back and defensive midfield . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Parslow completed a five @-@ year degree in sports science at Manchester Metropolitan University in July 2012 . He married Emma during June 2014 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 30 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 York City 
 Conference Premier play @-@ offs : 2011 – 12 
 FA Trophy : 2011 – 12 
 Cheltenham Town 
 National League : 2015 – 16 
 Individual 
 York City Clubman of the Year : 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 = Lahaina Banyan Court Park = 
 Lahaina Banyan Court Park is a public park located at the corner of Front Street and Canal Street in the town of Lahaina , Hawaii , which was the capital of the Kingdom of Hawaii from 1820 to 1845 . The 1 @.@ 94 acres ( 0 @.@ 79 ha ) park , also known as Lahaina Courthouse Square and commonly called Banyan Tree Park , contains multiple heritage sites on the Lahaina Historic Trail , and a self @-@ guided walking tour through the Lahaina Historic Districts . 
 The park occupies the site of the Old Lahaina Fort , originally built in 1831 . Hoapili , the Royal Governor of Maui , built the fort to protect the town from riotous sailors when Lahaina was used as an anchorage for the North Pacific whaling fleet . After the fort was demolished in 1854 , a courthouse was built on the site . A portion of the old Lahaina Fort was reconstructed in 1964 . The old Lahaina Courthouse was recognized as a contributing property of the Lahaina Historic District in 1965 , and is currently used by the Lahaina Arts Council and the Lahaina Historic Society . 
 Sheriff William Owen Smith planted an Indian banyan tree in the courtyard square in 1873 to memorialize the 50th anniversary of the first American Protestant mission in Lahaina . The banyan tree has become the largest banyan tree in Hawaii , and one of the largest banyan trees in the United States . Its extensive trunk and aerial root system now covers 0 @.@ 66 acres ( 0 @.@ 27 ha ) . The park is managed by the County of Maui and the Lahaina Restoration Foundation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Lahaina Banyan Court Park is located in the port of Lahaina town on the west side of the Hawaiian island of Maui . The park square comprises 1 @.@ 94 acres ( 0 @.@ 79 ha ) on the site of the old Lahaina Fort , directly across the street from the Lahaina small boat harbor . It is bounded by Hotel Street to the north , Canal Street to the south , Wharf Street to the west , and Front Street to the east . Historic sites in the area include the former site of Lahaina 's Beach — dredged during the construction of Lahaina 's Harbor in 1955 , the Pioneer Inn and the <unk> lighthouse to the north , and the campus of King Kamehameha III Elementary School — an archaeological site associated with the aliʻi — to the south . 
 = = Background = = 
 New England whaling ships hunting sperm whales in the Pacific began to arrive in Hawaiʻi in 1819 , and many ships anchored in Honolulu and Lahaina . The impact of the whaling fleets on the Hawaiian Islands during the reign of Kamehameha III ( 1825 – 1854 ) shaped the entire Hawaiian economy and was the primary source of income for the islands until the discovery of oil in Titusville , Pennsylvania , in 1859 and the onset of the American Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) . 
 Ships would generally seek repairs in Honolulu , but captains preferred anchoring off Lahaina because of its easy access from the Lahaina Roads and for the fresh provisions available in town . According to Henry L. Sheldon , " the business of the entire population was the furnishing of supplies to whalers and entertaining the crews " . Sailors who had been hunting whales for months at a time went to Lahaina to drink grog and meet women . Historian <unk> M. Arista notes that by 1825 ; 
 a kapu prohibiting women from going out to ships for the purpose of prostitution was proclaimed by the ali 'i ( Hawaiian chiefs ) , altering that familiar traffic of the burgeoning Pacific seaport towns . Enraged that they could not cajole , coax , or coerce Hawaiian women into violating the kapu , the sailors turned their frustrations on the American missionaries , whom they blamed for the emergence of this new unreasonably strict moral law . 
 Whalers opposed any rules governing alcohol and prostitution , and blamed missionaries for influencing the Kingdom of Hawaii to enforce such rules . Riots broke out at least four times — in 1825 , 1826 , 1827 , and 1843 . In the 1827 riots , sailors on the John Palmer fired their cannons at the home of missionary William Richards and threatened the safety of the community . 
 = = Lahaina Fort = = 
 Queen Kaʻahumanu ( 1768 – 1832 ) visited Maui in February 1832 , just months before she died , to support the construction of a new fort to protect the town from whalers . With her help , Hoapili ( 1775 – 1840 ) , Royal Governor of Maui , built the fort on the Lahaina waterfront and it was completed within a month . The fort was constructed from coral blocks with walls approximately 15 – 20 feet high topped with 47 cannons . An 1848 inventory lists 6 large cannons , 21 small cannons , 6 breech @-@ loaders , and 8 which did not work . The fort stored quantities of gunpowder , guns , rifles , and swords , and was used as a prison . Sailors who docked at Lahaina were subject to a sunset curfew ; it they did not return to their ship when the drums sounded they would be imprisoned in the fort . 
 In 1841 , American naval officer Charles Wilkes ( 1798 – 1877 ) visited Lahaina Fort as commanding officer of the United States Exploring Expedition . Wilkes observed , " After the king 's palace , the fort is the most conspicuous object : it is of little account , however , as a defence , serving chiefly to confine unruly subjects and sailors in . The area within is about one acre , and the walls are twenty feet high . " 
 As the whaling industry declined and the California Gold Rush gained prominence in the late 1840s , Hawaii 's population dropped , and infectious disease epidemics contributed to the loss of local populations . The fort was restored in 1847 but was now used more as a prison than for defending the Kingdom . The cannons were rusting and the fort was mostly empty of personnel except for a few soldiers and the Governor of Maui who lived there . When Henry Augustus Wise visited in 1848 , he met James Young ( 1797 – 1851 ) , then Governor of Maui , who was living in the fort . Wise wrote that it was : 
 an oddly assorted battery of some thirty pieces of artillery , of all sorts of carriages and calibre — long , short , and mediums ; they command the usual anchorage , and no doubt do very well to prevent any acts of violence from merchant ships ; but it is a question , if , at the second discharge of shot , they do not tumble to pieces . 
 In the 1850s , whaling began its steep decline . The forts in the Hawaiian Islands were in poor condition due to damage and neglect , and were either abandoned or removed . Lahaina Fort was demolished in 1854 . Its coral blocks were reused to build Hale <unk> , a new prison at <unk> Street and Prison Road . In 1964 , the State Parks Department placed a reconstruction of the old fort wall in the southwest corner of the park . 
 = = Lahaina Courthouse = = 
 On February 20 , 1858 , Lahaina experienced a violent hurricane that destroyed approximately twenty buildings , including the original courthouse at Hale <unk> , initially intended as a palace for Kamehameha III . The courthouse was rebuilt on the site of Lahaina Fort in 1859 using stones from Hale <unk> . The new courthouse housed offices for customs , the postal service , the tax collector , the governor of Maui , a magistrates ' court , a courtroom , and a jury room . When the Kingdom was overthrown , the flag of Hawaii at the Lahaina Courthouse was lowered by the assistant postmaster on August 12 , 1898 , and the flag of the United States was raised in its place . The Hawaiian flag was placed on display in a permanent exhibit at the courthouse in September 2002 . The post office at the courthouse replaced the Hawaiian stamp with the US stamp on June 14 , 1900 . 
 The courthouse was restored by architect William D 'Esmond in 1925 . D 'Esmond added a new roof and redesigned the entryway and balcony . The building 's tenants included the US Post Office and a tax office . The courtroom was upstairs and the Lahaina jail was housed in the basement . The building was listed as a National Historic Landmark and a contributing property of the Lahaina Historic District in 1965 , and was restored again in 1990 . The courthouse now houses a museum , art galleries , a visitor center , a community meeting room , and public restrooms . The Lahaina Heritage Museum opened upstairs in 2004 with interactive exhibits including videos , photographs , and historical objects . The Lahaina Arts Council and the Lahaina Historic Society have offices in the courthouse . 
 = = Banyan tree = = 
 To memorialize the 50th anniversary of the first American Protestant mission in Lahaina , a banyan tree ( Ficus benghalensis , Hawaiian : <unk> ) seedling was planted on April 24 , 1873 in the courthouse square by sheriff William Owen Smith , who had received it as a gift from missionaries in India . The banyan , native to India , is one of 60 types of fig tree in the Hawaiian islands . The seedling was approximately 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high when it was planted ; by 2005 it had grown to a height of 49 @.@ 2 feet ( 15 @.@ 0 m ) , had 16 trunks , and covered a circumference of 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) within 0 @.@ 66 acres ( 0 @.@ 27 ha ) of the park . 
 It is currently the largest banyan tree in Hawaii , and one of the largest banyan trees in the United States . The tree faces several threats , including soil compaction from foot and vehicle traffic due to tourism and special events in the park , drought , and the interruption of irrigation due to courthouse renovation . New restrictions were imposed in 2000 after the health of the tree began to <unk> common myna birds ( Acridotheres tristis ) roost in the branches of the tree at sunset , causing a cacophony of bird cries as the evening approaches . 
 = = Administration , facilities , and events = = 
 The park is administered by the Maui Parks and Recreation department and maintained by the nonprofit Lahaina Restoration Foundation . Limited public parking is available on Front , Hotel , and Canal Streets , with very limited parking on Wharf Street as it is generally reserved for tour buses . At weekends , the park hosts artists , musicians , dancers , and festivals throughout the year , including the Festival of Canoes , Festivals of Aloha , and the Lahaina Arts Society art fair . Halloween events in the park area , known as the " Mardi Gras of the Pacific " , have long been a divisive issue between Maui County and the Cultural Resources Commission . 
 = Star Trek : Enterprise ( season 4 ) = 
 The fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise commenced airing on the UPN network in the United States on October 8 , 2004 and concluded on May 13 , 2005 after airing 22 episodes . Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . The fourth season saw changes made to the production team , with Manny Coto becoming the show runner . He had joined the team during the third season as a co @-@ executive producer . Other changes included Star Trek novelists Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens being brought on board as writers . 
 Season four was the final season of the series , with the show being cancelled during the filming of the episode " In A Mirror , Darkly " . Following the cancellation , fans of the show conducted protests and raised funds to pay for a fifth season , however their efforts were unsuccessful . " These Are The Voyages ... " was the final episode of the series , and gained the highest number of viewers for the season according to Nielsen Media Research . However , despite critics describing the fourth season in a warmer manner , the finale was received poorly , with Rick Berman later regretting the storyline . The series was nominated for three Emmy Awards for episodes in the fourth season , but the only award won was an Outstanding Visual Effects for a Broadcast Series at the 2005 Visual Effects Society awards . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 Following the season @-@ long Xindi arc during the third season , season four comprised several shorter story arcs . These included a wrap @-@ up to the Temporal Cold War storyline which began with the pilot episode , " Broken Bow " . Other arcs covered the differences between the Klingons seen in Enterprise as compared to those seen in series set later in the Star Trek timeline . The season also featured a greater number of references to Star Trek : The Original Series with Orion slave girls and genetically engineered humans similar to Khan Noonien Singh appearing in a story arc which also featured the return of Brent Spiner to the Star Trek franchise . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Guest cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , episodes are listed by the order in which they aired . 
 = = Production = = 
 The series had been at risk of cancellation following the third season . But the rights holders , Paramount Television , reduced the cost per episode that it charged network UPN from $ 1 @.@ 7 million per episode to $ 800 @,@ 000 . The broadcast schedule was subsequently changed and repeat episodes were moved to Friday nights at 8pm ET / 9pm PT , with season four making its debut in that timeslot on October 8 , 2004 . TV Guide described the new time slot as " where the network was drawing virtually no viewers with what one executive calls ' eighth runs of slasher movies ' " . Enterprise was not the first Star Trek series to be moved to a Friday night timeslot following a budget cut , as Star Trek : The Original Series for the third season was moved to a 10pm ET timeslot where it was subsequently cancelled . 
 The fourth season also saw a change in the production team . Enterprise had previously been run by the show 's creators , Rick Berman and Brannon Braga , who were also the executive producers . Manny Coto joined the production team during the third season as a co @-@ executive producer following his work on the series Odyssey 5 . His scripts were well received , having written such episodes as " Similitude " . For the fourth season , Coto was credited as the show runner . He explained in an interview that " What 's been publicized , that Rick and Brannon have stepped back and I 've moved in , is not exactly true . I 've kinda moved in with them , so to speak , so we 're all three running the show . I 'm actually more in charge of writing , I guess , dealing with the writers and the ' writing room , ' coming up with stories that Rick and Brannon approve or not approve , or give notes on . " He explained that the process was for the three of them to pitch stories together and work on fleshing them out . 
 Following Coto 's appointment as executive producer , he also sought to make changes to the writing team . Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens joined the team , having been known previously for writing Star Trek novels . These books included collaborations with William Shatner on his Shatnerverse novels . Their first television episode written for Star Trek : Enterprise was the first part of the planned Vulcan story arc in season four , " The Forge " . They went to write several further episodes during the course of the season , including " Observer Effect " , " United " , " Divergence " and " Terra Prime " . The series continued linking with NASA , with astronauts Terry W. <unk> and Michael Fincke appearing as engineers on board the Enterprise in the series finale . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 It was announced on February 3 , 2005 that Enterprise had been cancelled . The news was passed to the cast and crew on the sixth day of filming of the second part of " In a Mirror , Darkly " . Following the broadcast of the final episode , " These Are the Voyages ... " , it was the first time in eighteen years that there were no new episodes of a Star Trek series scheduled for broadcast . Star Trek : Enterprise was the first live @-@ action spin @-@ off from The Original Series to last less than seven seasons . The end of series cast and crew party was held on April 13 , 2005 at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel . 
 The President of Paramount Network Television , David <unk> , said that " The creators , stars and crew of Star Trek : Enterprise ambitiously and proudly upheld the fine traditions of the Star Trek franchise . We are grateful for their contributions to the legacy of Trek and commend them on completing nearly 100 exciting , dramatic and visually stunning episodes . All of us at Paramount warmly bid goodbye to Enterprise , and we all look forward to a new chapter of this enduring franchise in the future . " 
 The cancellation of Enterprise was protested by fans of the series . Actions included around a hundred fans picketing the gates of Paramount Studios . The response to the cancellation was organised on websites such as <unk> They raised money which was intended to be used for new Star Trek programming , with $ 48 @,@ 000 raised within a month of the cancellation . The website sought to raise $ 32 million to pay for a full fifth season of the show , but failed to get close only gaining some $ 87 @,@ 000 from general donors plus $ 3 million of anonymous donations from investors who work in the American spaceflight industry . Rallies were also held elsewhere around the world , and a full page advertisement supporting the show was taken out in the Los Angeles Times . The money was refunded after an unsuccessful campaign , with reportedly only one accidental contact between <unk> and Paramount . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The fourth season sought to be different from the previous series of Enterprise in the way that story arcs worked . In the earlier series there was the ongoing Temporal Cold War plot , with the Xindi attack at the end of the second season resulting in a season long story arc during season three . Instead season four was split up into several smaller arcs which had been planned before the start of the season . The first of these arcs was a resolution to the long running Temporal Cold War , with Braga stating that the intention was " to resolve [ it ] ... once and for all " . This would also mark the final appearance of the Suliban in Enterprise as they were tied into that storyline . However , the episodes wrapping up the cold war did not reveal the identity of " future guy " , the person from the future who was advising the Suliban . Braga explained in a pre @-@ season interview that " Well , we 've been debating that for quite some time , and I 'll leave that question open . We haven 't decided yet . We have some ideas about him — or her — or it . But we haven 't settled on any one identity yet . It 's still a question mark . " The identity of " future guy " was later revealed by Braga on Twitter as Archer from the future . 
 Brent Spiner returned to the Star Trek franchise , having previously played the character of Data in Star Trek : The Next Generation . In Enterprise he played the role of Dr. Arik Soong , an ancestor of Data 's creator . Coto compared the character to Hannibal Lecter and talked about the fear that he inspired in the human authorities during the time of Enterprise due to Soong 's actions involving illegal genetics . The storyline involved several references to The Original Series , such as the genetic supermen in the vein of Khan Noonien Singh as first seen in the episode " Space Seed " and later in the 1982 film , Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . The first episode of this Enterprise story arc also saw the re @-@ appearance of the Orion slave girls as seen in the first pilot of Star Trek , " The Cage " . Coto credited this to his idea for the fourth season saying , " What I really wanted to do this season is make the episodes that I as a Star Trek fan would have to see . You know , as a fan of the original series , if I heard that they were doing the Orion slavers and the Eugenics Wars , I would have to be in front of that TV . " 
 The producers also sought to resolve issues with the difference in Enterprise compared to the other series . One of these was the actions and attitudes of the Vulcans ; Coto said that " there 's a difference between the Vulcans of our era and the Vulcans of later eras . Our Vulcans lie , our Vulcans are monolithic , our Vulcans are not pacifistic . " The Vulcan storyline seen in " The Forge " , " Awakening " and " Kir 'Shara " was compared to the Protestant Reformation by Coto . The arc also re @-@ introduced the character of T 'Pau , who was previously seen in The Original Series episode " Amok Time " . For " Awakening " , a younger version of the character was played by Kara Zediker . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Following the move to a Friday evening timeslot , Enterprise was going up directly against episodes of Stargate SG @-@ 1 on the Sci Fi Channel . The overall ratings by Nielsen Media Research placed the show in 150th place for the season . The season opened with ratings of 2 @.@ 0 / 4 percent for the first part of " Storm Front " , but the series lowest ratings were received for the mid season episode " Observer Effect " . Five other episodes equalled the 2 @.@ 0 / 4 percent ratings of " Storm Front " while " Cold Station 12 " , " The Augments " and " Kir 'Shara " each received 2 @.@ 1 / 4 percent ratings . However , the highest ratings of the seasons were received for the series finale , " These Are The Voyages ... " , which gained ratings of 2 @.@ 4 / 4 percent . Rick Berman credited the falling ratings received by the series to a variety of elements saying , " The show certainly had a great start . It got very good reviews and it had a huge audience for the first half a dozen episodes and then it started to slip . I could take the blame for it . I could put the blame into the scripts . I could put the blame into franchise fatigue . I don ’ t know why it didn ’ t work . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The links to The Original Series were seen as positive improvements to Star Trek : Enterprise by critics including elements such as the appearance of the Mirror Universe and the Orion slave girls . Other story arcs praised included the Augment arc with Brent Spiner and the return of the genetic supermen made famous by Ricardo Montalbán 's Khan in The Original Series . Phillip Chung of <unk> bemoaned the loss of the show , because he felt that it had improved over time and due to the franchise 's continued progressive stance in showing racial minorities outside of the normal stereotypes . 
 = = = = These Are The Voyages ... = = = = 
 The critical response to the final episode , " These Are The Voyages ... " was mostly negative . For example , the Wisconsin State Journal described it as " hands down the worst series finale ever " . The episode featured a holodeck simulation on the USS Enterprise ( NCC @-@ 1701 @-@ D ) from Star Trek : The Next Generation during the events of the episode " The Pegasus " and the return of Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) and Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) . It was written by Berman and Braga , who responded to negative criticism of the episode by saying " You have to remember that under normal circumstances most people probably would have thought this was a very cool episode because it has a great concept driving it " . Berman later said that " I would have never done it if I had known how people were going to react . " 
 Iain Miller of The Independent on Sunday criticized the appearance of the two The Next Generation characters in the finale , saying that " It was like watching a once great sprinter now gone to fat falling flat on their face while running for a bus . " The review also compared the use of the holodeck in the episode as the Star Trek equal of the ninth season of Dallas , which was revealed to be a dream of Pam Ewing in the finale . Thomas Connor of The Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the finale half a star in his review , saying that the death of Charles " Trip " Tucker III was " the most anticlimactic and dramatically pointless death in the history of the franchise " . 
 The Boston Herald described the episode as one of the best ways to disappoint fans during 2005 , saying that it " turned out to be an inappropriate ode to Star Trek : The Next Generation . " A preview of the episode in the Daily Herald by Ted Cox suggested that " it could never figure out if it was meant to appeal to devoted trekkies or a general audience . In alienating both , it appealed to neither . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Episodes from the fourth season of Enterprise received three nominations for the 2005 Emmy Awards . The <unk> / stylist team were nominated for Outstanding Hairstyling For a Series for their work in the episode " In A Mirror , Darkly " but lost to the team on Deadwood . Vince Deadrick , Jr was nominated for Outstanding Stunt Coordination for his work in the episodes " Borderland " and " Cold Station 12 " but was beaten by Matt Taylor for 24 . The third nomination was not for a specific episode , but for the overall season with the makeup team nominated for Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup For a Series , Miniseries , Movie Or a Special . The award went to HBO 's The Life and Death of Peter Sellers . The series was nominated for Best Network Television Series at the 31st Saturn Awards , but the award went to Lost . 
 The second part of " Storm Front " was awarded the Outstanding Visual Effects for a Broadcast Series at the 2005 Visual Effects Society awards . Ronald D. Moore received the award on behalf of the production team . The dogfight over New York City seen in that episode was also nominated for Outstanding Created Environment in a Live Action Broadcast Program , but lost to the opening sequence of the television series Spartacus . 
 = = Media information = = 
 Following the end of the series , the fourth season was released on DVD before the end of 2005 . It was also included in a complete set containing all four seasons of the series . 
 = 1936 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1936 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 12 , 1936 , and lasted until December 6 , 1936 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . 
 The 1936 season was fairly active , with 20 tropical cyclones including 3 tropical depressions . Seven storms became hurricanes , of which one became a major hurricane . In addition , the season was unusual in the fact that no storms moved across large portions of the Caribbean Sea . Seven storms , including three hurricanes , struck the United States . The season also set many records for the earliest date for a numbered storm , though all were surpassed by the extreme activity of the 2005 season . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 On June 9 , a tropical cyclone with atmospheric pressure below 988 millibars ( 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) made landfall on the Pacific coast of Guatemala . It moved northeastward across Central America , but dissipated before reaching the western Caribbean Sea on June 12 . The storm quickly re @-@ organized , and again developed into a tropical storm on June 12 . It moved north @-@ northeastward , resulting in light winds as it paralleled the eastern coasts of Belize and the Yucatán Peninsula . After reaching the Gulf of Mexico with peak winds of 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) , the storm turned to the northeast , then to the east . On June 15 , the tropical storm made landfall about 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south of Fort Myers , Florida , and after crossing the state it passed over Miami before entering the Atlantic Ocean . It weakened as it accelerated northeastward through the Bahamas , and on June 17 the system dissipated to the north of Bermuda . 
 While crossing Central America , the storm produced heavy rainfall .. In southern Florida , winds from the storm ranged from 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) to a peak of 39 miles per hour ( 63 km / h ) in Miami . The storm produced heavy rainfall in southern Florida , ranging from 8 to 15 inches ( 200 to 380 mm ) . The rainfall caused flooding of highways and lowlands , drowned several livestock , and some damage . The storm caused three indirect deaths when a Coast Guard airplane crashed in Tampa Bay while in search of small boats . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather was first detected near the Yucatán Peninsula on June 18 . It tracked west @-@ northwestward , and developed into a tropical storm the following day . The storm continued to the west @-@ northwest until June 21 , when the storm turned to the west @-@ southwest . Having remained a minimal tropical storm for all of its lifetime , the 40 @-@ mph ( 70 @-@ km / h ) storm struck northeast Mexico on June 21 , and dissipated the next day . The storm caused higher than normal tides along the Texas coastline , and no damage or deaths were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 A small tropical storm developed on June 26 while located 125 miles ( 201 km ) east of Brownsville , Texas . It moved northwestward and rapidly strengthened almost immediately after formation ( similar to Humberto of 2007 ) , attaining hurricane status with peak winds of 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) by early on June 27 . Later on June 27 , the hurricane made landfall near Port Aransas with a pressure of 987 millibars ( 29 @.@ 15 inHg ) . The storm rapidly weakened over land , and dissipated on June 28 near San Antonio , Texas . A small craft warning was issued for the Corpus Christi area on the morning of the storm making landfall , and the National Weather Bureau issued a Hurricane Warning just 45 minutes prior to the hurricane striking land . 
 Upon making landfall , the storm caused a 3 @.@ 8 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 @-@ m ) storm tide , and many small boats were capsized or driven ashore . The hurricane produced wind gusts of up to 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) in Ingleside and up to 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) in Port Aransas , destroying cooling towers at a local oil refinery and damaging a few houses . Along its path , the storm produced heavy rainfall , though specifics are unknown . Severe crop damage was reported in San Patricio and Nueces Counties . In all , the hurricane caused $ 550 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1936 USD , $ 8 million 2006 USD ) , primarily to oil refinery property , though no deaths or injuries were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 On July 26 , a small tropical storm formed near the western tip of Cuba from a tropical disturbance . It moved quickly northwestward , then turned northward , reaching a peak intensity of 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) . On July 27 , the storm accelerated northeastward and made landfall on southeastern Louisiana with a pressure of 1003 mbar . The storm rapidly weakened over land and dissipated late on the 27th . The Weather Bureau office issued a storm warning for the Louisiana coastline , advising those potentially affected to prepare for strong winds and rising tides . However , the storm caused no serious damage , and no casualties are associated with the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed over the southern Bahamas on July 27 . It tracked to the west @-@ northwest , and made landfall a short distance south of Homestead , Florida , with winds of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . After crossing the state , it intensified over the eastern Gulf of Mexico and became a hurricane on July 30 . The hurricane continued to strengthen , and on July 31 hit the western Florida Panhandle near Camp Walton with peak winds of 105 miles per hour ( 169 km / h ) . It weakened rapidly over land , and dissipated over western Alabama on August 1 . 
 In south Florida , the storm caused a storm tide of 5 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) when it made landfall , causing flooding of up to 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) in coastal areas . Though winds reached 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) , damage was minimal there . In Valparaiso in the Florida Panhandle , the hurricane produced wind gusts of up to 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , along with a storm tide of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . Damage from the storm was relatively minor , totaling to $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1936 USD , $ 3 @.@ 24 million 2013 USD ) . The hurricane indirectly killed four people when a boat capsized in the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 The sixth tropical storm of the season was first spotted on August 4 while located 155 miles ( 249 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda . It tracked northwestward , and reached a peak intensity of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) on August 5 . It retained that intensity throughout its lifetime ( although it is possible it remained a tropical depression but data was conflicting ) , which was followed by a turn to the northeast on August 8 . On August 9 , the storm passed 160 miles ( 260 km ) to the west of Bermuda , and early on August 10 the storm became extratropical over the open Atlantic Ocean . The extratropical storm continued northeastward until dissipating late on August 10 while 280 miles ( 450 km ) south of the eastern tip of Nova Scotia . The storm never affected land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 A weak tropical storm formed on August 7 in the eastern Gulf of Mexico west @-@ northwest of the Dry Tortugas . The system moved northwest towards the northwest Gulf of Mexico through August 9 while maintaining its peak of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . It is possible it weakened to a tropical depression at times , but there is no data supporting or denying such . The storm then began to curve more to the west @-@ southwest on August 10 while located just south @-@ southwest of Port Eads , Louisiana , while maintaining intensity . The storm continued moving southwest through August 11 , weakening to a tropical depression shortly before making landfall near Tampico on August 12 . The system weakened quickly after moving inland , and dissipated shortly afterwards . 
 Advisories were issued early on August 12 from the U.S. Weather Bureau in New Orleans for the system as it neared Mexico shortly before making landfall , but little damage and no deaths were reported in Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight = = = 
 A tropical disturbance was detected in the western to northwest Caribbean Sea near Cancún on August 15 . The system moved northwest into the southwest Gulf of Mexico as a tropical storm on August 16 while slowly strengthening . The system reached hurricane intensity as a Category 1 on August 17 , and reached its peak of 75 miles per hour ( 121 km / h ) shortly afterwards . The hurricane began to move west @-@ southwest late on August 17 and through August 18 , eventually making landfall near Tampico , Tamaulipas , on August 19 as a minimal hurricane or strong tropical storm . The system quickly weakened just after moving inland and dissipated on the same day . 
 The hurricane brought heavy rains to mainland Mexico , while the highest winds recorded at Tampico were 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) on August 19 as the center passed nearby just to the north . Storm warnings were issued on August 17 and 18 as the system initially approached the upper Gulf Coast of Louisiana and Texas , but the system 's west @-@ southwest turn prevented a direct United States landfall . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 A weak tropical storm formed on August 20 near the eastern Bahamas . Moving slowly west @-@ northwest through August 21 , the system strengthened to its peak of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) later on August 21 , and made landfall on August 22 near Daytona Beach at its peak intensity . The system maintained tropical storm intensity inland while slowly weakening and moving westward , and the storm eventually weakened to a depression on August 23 while entering the eastern Florida Panhandle , and the system dissipated shortly afterwards near as it drifted over eastern Mississippi . The storm caused heavy rains across northern and central Florida , and winds of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) were recorded near Titusville . Overall damage was minimal . 
 = = = Hurricane Ten = = = 
 This Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane was first detected in the eastern tropical Atlantic on August 25 . Moving northwest on August 29 , the system continued to strengthen , eventually reaching a peak of 110 miles per hour ( 180 km / h ) as a Category 2 hurricane in the central North Atlantic on September 1 . The hurricane then began to curve northeast late on September 1 while maintaining intensity , eventually weakening to a 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) Category 1 hurricane on September 5 . The system became extratropical on September 6 , and the system dissipated while nearing the British Isles . As the system never affected land , no damage or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Eleven = = = 
 A tropical storm was detected on August 28 in the far western Caribbean Sea . The system moved steadily west @-@ northwest , making landfall shortly afterwards on the Yucatán Peninsula as a 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) tropical storm . The system weakened slightly to a 40 @-@ mph ( 65 @-@ km / h ) tropical storm as it steadily crossed the Yucatán , entering the Bay of Campeche late on August 28 . The system then began to slow down on August 29 while reintensifying , peaking as an 80 @-@ mph ( 130 @-@ km / h ) Category 1 shortly afterwards . The hurricane then began to move to the west @-@ southwest , making a final landfall near Tuxpan as a 75 @-@ mph ( 120 @-@ km / h ) minimal hurricane on August 30 . The system quickly weakened to a tropical storm shortly after moving inland , and the weakening storm dissipated shortly afterwards . 
 Although advisories were issued for Mexico on August 29 and early on August 30 from the U.S. Weather Bureau in New Orleans , little overall damage was reported in mainland Mexico . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twelve = = = 
 On September 7 , a ship reported southwest winds at a location about 405 miles ( 652 km ) northeast of Antigua , indicating the presence of a tropical cyclone . The storm tracked to the west @-@ northwest without strengthening , and the following day no circulation was reported . It is estimated the storm weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated on September 8 while located about 235 miles ( 378 km ) north @-@ northeast of Saint Martin , although it may have remained a tropical depression throughout its short lifespan . The storm never affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Thirteen = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed by a ship on September 8 while located about 750 miles ( 1 @,@ 210 km ) east of Barbados . The storm moved northwestward , and slowly intensified to attain hurricane status on September 10 about 425 miles ( 684 km ) northeast of Barbados . The hurricane continued to slowly strengthen as it decelerated its forward motion , and on September 15 it reached its peak intensity of 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) while located 375 miles ( 604 km ) south @-@ southwest of Bermuda . By the morning of September 15 , the hurricane had winds exceeding 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) in a diameter of about 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) , among the largest tropical cyclones on record . It slowly weakened as it approached the East Coast of the United States , and early on September 17 local weather bureaus began issuing storm warnings from Beaufort , North Carolina , to the Virginia capes . Late on September 18 , the hurricane passed within 45 miles ( 72 km ) of the Outer Banks before it accelerated and turned to the northeast . It remained close to the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England coastline , and passed near Nantucket before turning to the east @-@ northeast . The hurricane remained south of Atlantic Canada by a short distance , and became extratropical on September 21 while located about 480 miles ( 770 km ) east of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The extratropical storm decelerated as it turned northeastward , and the system dissipated on September 25 . 
 In North Carolina , the hurricane produced winds of up to 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) in Manteo . Described as one of the worst hurricanes in record in Hatteras , the storm resulted in $ 25 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1936 USD , $ 360 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) to roads and bridges and $ 30 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1936 USD , $ 440 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) to buildings and piers . Very high tides were reported along the Outer Banks , with Nags Head losing about 35 feet ( 11 m ) of beach . The hurricane destroyed the highway bridge along the Currituck Sound , and resulted in heavy crop damage in northeastern North Carolina . The hurricane was also considered among the worst hurricanes on record in the Norfolk , Virginia , area . Winds of up to 84 miles per hour ( 135 km / h ) at Cape Henry destroyed windows , roofs , and some entire buildings , resulting in around $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1936 USD , $ 7 @.@ 3 million 2006 USD ) . The hurricane produced a storm tide of 9 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) in Sewell 's Point , Virginia , the second highest on record at that location . Two locations along the James River experienced record crest levels of over 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Rough seas washed several boats ashore , and shipping was cancelled in and out of Norfolk . The hurricane resulted in cancelled train service and increased traffic . The hurricane was indirectly responsible for two casualties . The first fatality occurred when debris from the hurricane struck a person in the head and later died . Another person drowned in the Elizabeth River in an effort to recover a rowboat blown adrift . Though hurricane warnings were posted for the northeast United States and hurricane @-@ force winds occurred there , damage , if any , is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fourteen = = = 
 A tropical storm moved northward into Acapulco in the middle of September . Its large area of disturbed weather organized in the Bay of Campeche and developed into a tropical storm on September 10 a short distance off the coast of Tabasco . The storm initially moved westward , then turned to the north . It remained a minimal tropical storm for its entire lifetime , and after turning to the north west it made landfall near Brownsville , Texas , on September 13 with winds of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . The system weakened over Texas , and dissipated over northern Coahuila on September 14 . Winds were generally minor from the storm , and tides were not much above normal . The storm resulted in heavy rainfall totaling 30 @.@ 00 inches ( 762 mm ) at Broome , Texas , between September 15 and 17 . Anticipating further intensification , one bulletin from the local weather bureau recommended citizens on offshore islands to evacuate inland . 
 = = = Hurricane Fifteen = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed about 140 miles ( 230 km ) north of Anguilla on September 19 . The storm moved northwestward and quickly attained hurricane status on September 20 . After turning to the northeast , the hurricane reached a peak intensity of 105 miles per hour ( 169 km / h ) on September 21 while located about 500 miles ( 800 km ) southwest of Bermuda . It turned to the north and slowly weakened . A cold front turned the hurricane to the northeast , and the system became extratropical on September 25 a short time before making landfall on southern Nova Scotia . Hours after hitting land , the extratropical remnant was absorbed by the approaching cold front . Impact , if any , is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Depression = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the western Atlantic Ocean on September 25 . It moved west @-@ northwestward , making landfall on eastern Florida before entering the Gulf of Mexico on September 28 . The depression turned to the northwest , and struck land near Apalachicola as a minimal system . It dissipated over land on October 1 . The minimum central pressure in the depression was 1006 mbar . The depression produced winds of up to 35 miles per hour ( 56 km / h ) in Tarpon Springs . Effects were minimal . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sixteen = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather persisted across the northwestern Caribbean Sea in early October . It tracked northwestward over the Yucatán Peninsula , and subsequent to the development of a low @-@ level circulation the system organized into a tropical storm on October 9 while located about 60 miles ( 97 km ) northwest of the capital of Campeche . After moving northward , the storm turned sharply southward , and made landfall in northern Tabasco as a minimal tropical storm on October 10 . The system quickly weakened over land , and dissipated over Chiapas on October 11 . The system dropped heavy rainfall across southeastern Mexico , though damage , if any , is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seventeen = = = 
 Toward the end of November , a cold front was moving eastward across the central Atlantic Ocean . A broad low formed on November 28 , but it was not evident by two days later . Another low formed on December 2 to the west @-@ southwest of the Canary Islands , which was an occluded low . It moved to the west @-@ northwest and became more tropical , finally transitioning into a tropical storm by December 4 . The transition to a tropical cyclone was determined on ships reporting gale @-@ force winds near the center , although it is possible the system was a subtropical cyclone instead . On December 6 , the storm turned to the west @-@ southwest and reached its peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . An approaching cold front caused the storm to become extratropical early on December 7 . After reaching a position to the northeast of the Lesser Antilles , the extratropical storm turned to the northwest on December 10 , later turning to the northeast on December 14 . A larger extratropical low absorbed the storm on December 16 . 
 = = Accumulated Cyclone Energy Rating ( ACE ) = = 
 The table below shows the ACE for each storm in the season . Broadly speaking , the ACE is a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the duration of its lifetime ; thus , hurricanes that lasted a long time ( such as Thirteen ) have higher ACEs . Despite the high number of storms , most were relatively short @-@ lived and weak , and the ACE only suggested a near @-@ normal season . The ACE rating is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 35 knots ( 40 mph ; 65 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = Tintin and the Picaros = 
 Tintin and the Picaros ( French : Tintin et les Picaros ) is the twenty @-@ third volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The final instalment in the series to be completed by Hergé , in Belgium it was serialized in Tintin magazine from September 1975 to January 1976 before being published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1976 . The narrative follows the young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy and his friends Captain Haddock and Professor Calculus as they travel to the ( fictional ) South American nation of San Theodoros to rescue their friend Bianca Castafiore , who has been imprisoned by the government of General Tapioca . Once there , they become involved in the anti @-@ government revolutionary activities of Tintin 's old friend General Alcazar . 
 Hergé began work on Tintin and the Picaros eight years after completing the previous volume in the series , Flight 714 , creating it with the aid of his team of artists at Studios Hergé . The setting and plot was inspired by Hergé 's interest in Latin American revolutionaries , particularly those active in the Cuban Revolution . The book reflected changes to the appearance and behaviour of several key characters in the series ; Tintin himself for instance no longer wears his trademark plus fours , instead wearing bell @-@ bottoms . The volume was published to a poor reception and has continued to receive negative reviews from later commentators on Hergé 's work . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Tintin and Alph @-@ Art , a story that he never completed , and the series as a whole became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . The story was adapted for an episode of the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tintin and his dog Snowy visit their friends Captain Haddock and Professor Calculus at Marlinspike Hall . There , they learn that Bianca Castafiore , her maid Irma , pianist Igor Wagner and the detectives Thomson and Thompson have been imprisoned in San Theodoros for allegedly attempting to overthrow the military government of General Tapioca . Tapioca 's government have further alleged that the plot was masterminded by Tintin , Haddock , and Calculus themselves . Tapioca invites the trio to visit San Theodores , promising them safe passage , but Tintin deems it to be a trap , leaving Haddock and Calculus to go alone . Once there , the Captain and Professor are taken to a rural villa , where they are closely monitored by the security services . 
 Tintin joins his friends a few days later , where he points out to Haddock and Calculus that their villa is bugged . He recognises one of the staff as Pablo , a man who had saved his life in The Broken Ear . From Pablo , Tintin learns that the entire scenario is a plot organised by Colonel Sponsz , a figure in the Bordurian military who is assisting Tapioca 's government in order to gain revenge against Tintin for the events of The Calculus Affair . 
 With Pablo 's assistance , Tintin , Snowy , Haddock , and Calculus escape from their guards and seek refuge with General Alcazar and his small band of anti @-@ Tapioca guerrillas , the Picaros , who are hiding in the San <unk> jungle . After realising that Pablo is a double agent working for Tapioca , they escape an attempt on their lives and then shelter for a time with the Arumbaya , an indigenous community who live within the forest . Here , Tintin is reunited with his old acquaintance , the explorer Ridgewell , who is living with the Arumbaya . Leaving the Arumbaya settlement , they eventually arrive at the Picaros ' encampment , where they meet Alcazar 's wife , Peggy . 
 Alcazar realises that the Picaros will not be able to launch a successful coup against Tapioca while they remain drunkards ( owing to frequent parachute drops of whisky from Tapioca 's forces ) , and to combat this problem Calculus provides them with tablets which render the taste of alcohol disgusting ( and which he has been secretly testing on Haddock , Tintin , Ridgewell and the Arumbayas in the course of the story ) . Soon afterward , Jolyon Wagg and his troupe of carnival performers , the " Jolly Follies " , arrive at the camp , having lost their way to Tapiocapolis where they mean to take part in the carnival . At Tintin 's suggestion , the Picaros disguise themselves in the Follies ' costumes and enter Tapiocapolis during the carnival . There , they storm the presidential palace and seize control ; Alcazar becomes president , with Tapioca and Sponsz being banished from the country and sent back to Borduria . Thomson and Thompson are rescued from a firing squad while Castafiore and her assistants are released from prison . 
 In the final panel of the book , as Tintin , Haddock and Calculus 's flight back home departs from the newly named <unk> , it flies over a slum that was seen earlier when they flew into the country . In a stroke of political commentary , the upheaval of the government has caused virtually no change to the slum or the lives of its inhabitants . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hergé began Tintin and the Picaros eight years after completing his previous Adventure of Tintin , Flight 714 . It would prove to be the only book that he completed during the final fifteen years of his life . He decided to develop the story around a group of Latin American revolutionaries , having had this idea since the early 1960s , prior to embarking on The Castafiore Emerald . In particular , he had been inspired by the activities of Fidel Castro 's 26th of July Movement when they were launching a guerrilla war from the Sierra Maestra during the Cuban Revolution against President Fulgencio Batista . Specifically , Hergé was interested in Castro 's statement that he would not cut his beard until the revolution had succeeded . Adopting this idea of the revolutionaries ' facial hair , he initially planned to refer to Alcazar 's group as the Bigotudos , a reference to the Spanish word <unk> , meaning " moustached " . As such , the story 's initial working title was Tintin et los Bigotudos , before Hergé later settled on Tintin et les Picaros . 
 Hergé 's depiction of a band of Latin American revolutionaries was also influenced by the French leftist activist Régis Debray 's accounts of his time spent fighting in the Bolivian Andes alongside the Argentine Marxist – Leninist revolutionary Che Guevara . Hergé 's depiction of Bordurian support for Tapioca 's government was a reference to the Soviet Union 's support for various Latin American regimes , most notably that of Castro 's Cuba , with San Theodoros being depicted as having been governed under the ideological system of Borduria 's political leader , <unk> @-@ Tasch . Similarly , Hergé included a reference to Alcazar being backed by the International Banana Company in order to reflect the influence of Western multinational corporations in Latin America . 
 Hergé 's depiction of the city of Tapiocapolis was visually based on the city of Belo Horizonte in Brazil . His depiction of a public sculpture in the city was inspired by the work of sculptor Marcel <unk> , while the paintings that he designed for the Tapiocapolis hotel in which Tintin and Haddock stay are based on the work of Serge Poliakoff . 
 Hergé incorporated many characters from previous Adventures into Tintin and the Picaros ; these include Pablo , Ridgewell , and the Arumbaya tribe from The Broken Ear , as well as Colonel Sponz from The Calculus Affair . The character of General Tapioca , who had been mentioned in previous Adventures but never depicted , was also introduced . Hergé also introduced a new character , Peggy Alcazar , whom he had based upon the American secretary to a Ku Klux Klan spokesman whom Hergé observed in a television documentary . In his preparatory notes for the story , Hergé had considered introducing Peggy as the daughter of arms dealer Basil <unk> – the satirical depiction of the old times real @-@ life arms dealer Basil Zaharoff , who had appeared in The Broken Ear . He also introduced the Jolly Follies into the story , a group who were based on three separate touring party groups that Hergé had encountered . He had initially considered a number of alternative names for the troupe , including the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 For this Adventure , Hergé decided to update his depiction of Tintin 's clothes , having been influenced in doing so by the depiction of the character in the 1969 animated film Tintin and the Temple of the Sun . As such , in Tintin in the Picaros , the young reporter is depicted wearing a motorcycle helmet emblazoned with a CND symbol , while he also wears new flared brown trousers rather than the plus @-@ fours that he had worn in previous instalments . Later commenting on the inclusion of the CND peace symbol , Hergé stated that for Tintin , " That 's normal . Tintin is a pacifist , he was always anti @-@ war . " Hergé also changed the behaviour of several characters within the story , for instance by depicting Tintin practising yoga and Nestor the butler both eavesdropping and drinking Haddock 's whisky . Another new development that Hergé added to the story was through revealing that Haddock 's first name is Archibald for the first time . 
 Hergé 's depiction of the San <unk> carnival was drawn largely from images of the Nice Carnival . Among the revelers , he included those dressed in the costumes of various different cartoon and film characters , such as Mickey Mouse , Donald Duck , Asterix , Snoopy , Groucho Marx , and Zorro . Hergé also included a band known as the Coconuts into the carnival scene ; these were not developed by Hergé himself but were rather the creations of his friend and colleague Bob de Moor , who had devised them for his own comic series , <unk> . The street that they were marching down , Calle 22 de Mayo , was named after Hergé 's own birthday , 22 May . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Tintin et les Picaros began serialisation in both Belgium and France in Tintin @-@ l <unk> magazine in September 1975 . It was then published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1976 . For this publication , a page was removed from the story so that it would fit the standard 62 @-@ page book format . The page in question was located between pages 22 and 23 of the published book , and featured Sponz attempting to smash a glass , but accidentally breaking a statue of Bordurian political leader <unk> @-@ Tasch instead . A launch party was held at the Hilton Hotel in Brussels . 
 Upon publication , it proved a commercial success with one and a half million copies soon sold . It was nevertheless critically panned at the time . Various contemporary critics condemned what they deemed to be the political apathy of the story ; as they pointed out , Hergé 's depiction of regime change in San Theodores does not bring about any improvement for the nation 's populace , with the critics from Belgium 's Hebdo 76 and France 's Révolution thereby characterising it as a reactionary work . On this front , Tintin in the Picaros was defended by the French philosopher Michel Serres , who stated that " The criticism that has been leveled at Picaros is astonishing . There is no talk of revolution ; the people are in the favelas , and they stay there . It is only a government overthrow . A general , aided by several assassins , takes the place of a general protected by his own bodyguards . This is why it is only repetition ; it is just a movement reduced to this . And that is the chloroform ; it is what we see everywhere . You can give as many modern examples of the Alcazar @-@ Tapioca rivalry , or of double identities , as you want . " In June 1977 , Hergé travelled to Britain for Methuen 's launch of the story 's English translation , where he spent two weeks giving interviews and attending book signings . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Harry Thompson felt that Hergé 's use of various characters from earlier stories lent Tintin and the Picaros " the air of a finale " . Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters felt that in this story , the characters were " more passive than in the earlier adventures , submitting to events more than setting them off " , with this being particularly evident for the character of Tintin . Michael Farr stated that " Tintin has changed " , as is evidenced by the change in his clothing , however he felt that " such image modernising only succeeds in dating the adventure " , adding that " to alter Tintin 's appearance at the end of his career was not only superfluous but a mistake " . Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier stated that in this story , Alcazar was " a deflated version of what he used to be " , noting that by the end of the story he had become " a prisoner in his own palace . A sad , yet somehow appropriate , ending . " Farr suggested that the changes to the characters represented " an element of dismantling of the characters and their traits " , something that he believed had also been present in the previous two adventures , Flight 714 and The Castafiore Emerald . In his psychoanalytical study of The Adventures of Tintin , the literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès expressed the view that , as with The Red Sea Sharks , Tintin and the Picaros served as " a kind of retrospective " due to the return of various characters . He also suggested that the carnival revelers in San Theodores evoked the figures from the previous stories : " Scots , Africans , Chinese , Indians , cowboys , bullfighters , and , of course , the inevitable parrot " . The Lofficiers saw the adventure as a partial sequel to The Broken Ear , which was also set in San Theodoros and which contained many of the same characters . 
 Thompson considered Tintin and the Picaros to be " Hergé 's most overtly political book for many years " but felt that , unlike Hergé 's earlier political works , " no campaigning element " is present . Peeters agreed , noting that Tintin in the Picaros is " a far cry from the denunciation of a political system found in Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , and also from the almost militantly anti @-@ Japanese tone of The Blue Lotus . " He thought that in this story , " a sense of disillusionment has taken over " , for it is " quite clear that [ Alcazar 's seizure of power ] is no real revolution but a palace coup " . Farr noted that this story showed that " the idealist of 1930s is by 1970s a realist " , in that while " totalitarianism ... and the manipulation of the multinational concerns ... are still condemned ... Tintin accepts he can do little to change them " . 
 The Lofficiers were ultimately highly critical of Tintin and the Picaros , awarding it two out of five , and describing it as " just sad " . Specifically , they felt that the " undefinable magic of the Hergé line " was " sometimes missing " from the story , believing that this had been caused by too much of the work having been turned over to his assistants in the Studios Hergé . Further , they felt that the " characters seem tired : Tintin is totally reactive — even on the book cover , it is Haddock who takes the lead . " Thompson echoed similar views , believing that " life has not been breathed into the characters as normal " and that there was " something indefinable absent " from the drawings , " enjoyment , perhaps " . He added that while it contained " many fine vignettes " , " over all it is a lacklustre story , missing the sparkle of a genuine Tintin adventure " . Peeters thought that " the comedy here seems mechanical " and " neither the characters , nor the plot , nor the drawings ring true " . 
 The literary critic Tom McCarthy believed that Tintin and the Picaros reflected a number of themes found throughout The Adventures of Tintin . For instance , he believed that the theme of eavesdropping was exhibited in the scene in which Nestor the butler listens in on Tintin and Haddock 's argument . He also expressed the view that Tintin , Haddock , and Calculus ' imprisonment in their Los <unk> hotel reflected the " uneasy host @-@ guest relationship " theme . 
 McCarthy believed that the inclusion of the CND symbol on Tintin 's motorcycle helmet at the start of the story was a sign that Hergé 's left @-@ wing tendency had won out over the right @-@ wing perspectives which dominated his early work . He also placed emphasis on the fact that no executions were held during Alcazar 's revolution , adding that " its blood ... will fail it : it will be anaemic " , thus being a reference to Hergé 's anaemia . Further , he suggested that the loss of the ability to drink alcohol served as a symbolic castration . 
 Apostolidès expressed the view that many of the characters in Tintin and the Picaros could be divided into pairs . He considered Calculus and Alcazar to be one such pair , noting that they are " both masters of power and control , the former in science and the latter in politics " . He also placed Castafiore and Peggy together as a pair , noting that they each embody " love , both maternal and romantic " . Haddock and Wagg were also paired together , both being " driven to succeed , but the former is happy with playing out his success in private lie , whereas the latter tries to <unk> himself everywhere " . Finally , he paired together Ridgewell and Tintin , noting that while in The Broken Ear they had a father @-@ son style relationship , at this point they have become equals . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1991 , a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana adapted 21 of the stories into a series of episodes , each 42 minutes long . Tintin and the Picaros was one of the stories included in the television series . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " , with compositions having been actually directly taken from the panels in the original comic book . 
 = Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) = 
 " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth studio album Loud ( 2010 ) . It features guest vocals from American rapper Eminem , who wrote the song alongside Skylar Grey and the producer Alex da Kid . It is the sequel to the 2010 hit single " Love the Way You Lie " , which appears on Eminem 's seventh studio album Recovery . It received positive reviews from critics and was performed for at the American Music Awards of 2010 on November 21 , 2010 , as part of a medley with " What 's My Name ? " and " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release and commercial success of " Love the Way You Lie " in 2010 , Eminem wanted to record an alternative version with Rihanna as the lead vocalist , viewing aspects of a relationship from a female perspective , unlike the original , which featured Eminem as lead vocalist and was from a male perspective . In an interview for MTV , Rihanna initially stated she was against recording a sequel : " When I first heard the idea about doing a part two , I was just completely against it . I just felt like you couldn 't beat the ' original ' . There 's no way you can outdo that , so why compete with it ? " . She said when she first heard the original demo of the song in the studio with Eminem , sung by American singer @-@ songwriter Skylar Grey , her reservations about recording it went away . While the demo was only accompanied by a piano , Rihanna and her team added drums and later vocals from Eminem . 
 " Love the Way You Lie " and " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " were based on a demo written and recorded in late 2009 by Grey . Grey told PopEater " I wrote the demo initially for myself because I thought , ‘ Oh , I have this big song , and now I have a little bit of a launching pad to put out my own stuff . " Grey continued to discuss how the song was ultimately included on Loud , saying " As soon as Rihanna and her team heard my demo , they were like , ‘ Oh we want it for Rihanna ’ s album , ’ so I had to make the decision if I was going to let them have it or not . But I did and so it was on Rihanna ’ s album , too . " The demo track by Grey is on her extended play The Buried Sessions of Skylar Grey , which was released on January 17 , 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The piano and drums version , which features Eminem , appears as the final song on the standard edition of Loud , while the piano version , which excludes Eminem 's part in the song , appears as a bonus track on the iTunes edition of Loud . " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " is a mid @-@ tempo song , which incorporates the musical genres of hip hop and R & B. According to sheet music published at Musicnotes , the song is written in common time with a moderate tempo of 89 beats per minute and is written in the key of G minor . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of F3 to the high note of D5 . Emily Mackay of NME commented about the vocals provided by Rihanna and Eminem in the song , stating that " There ’ s great contrast in Part II of ‘ Love The Way You Lie ’ . With the balance of vocals neatly flipped and extra cavernous beats ramping up the drama , it wallows ever @-@ deeper in the tortured relationship sketched out in Part I. Eminem at points is practically screaming with rage , and sounding , frankly , mental . The contrast with Rihanna ’ s smoothly pitched pain ( “ Maybe I ’ m a masochist / Try to run but I don ’ t wanna never leave ” ) is delicious . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that “ Loud works the pop gizmos as neatly as any album this year , maintaining the Rihanna brand . But the album has a hermetic , cool calculation until it gets to ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) , ' her take on the tortured hit she shared with Eminem . ' It ’ s sick that all these battles are what keeps me satisfied , ' she sings . A lone piano humanizes her first vocals , and she rides the ascending power ballad to a pained resolve ; then Eminem delivers new verses in a spiraling rage . It ’ s purely theatrical , but it ’ s also , for a moment , raw . Christopher Richards of The Washington Post said that " With ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) , ' the maniac @-@ mouthed rapper is limited to just one verse , giving Rihanna the space to take ownership of the proceedings . Will the real Rihanna please stand up ? She does -- and she sounds as remote as ever . " James Skinner of BBC Online viewed ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) ' as being even better than the original . He said , " Eminem ’ s verse exuding the kind of volatile , simmering menace that got everyone so excited about him in the first place . But it is Rihanna ’ s vocal – at once commanding , soulful and vulnerable – that anchors the song , and Loud itself , elevating it from a hit @-@ and @-@ miss collection into something oddly arresting . " 
 Steve Jones of USA Today gave a mixed review of the collaboration , commenting , " Eminem puts in a cameo on ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) ' , which extends , but doesn 't really add , to their earlier hit about a tortured relationship from his Recovery album . " Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Thomas Conner gave a negative review of the song , stating , " She collaborated with Eminem this summer on the controversial ' " Love the Way You Lie " ' , a song and hotly debated video conflating wild passion with crazed assault . She returns to this on " Loud " with " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , an extension of the melody and the arson metaphor , in which Eminem reappears with more histrionic rapping about hating her , loving her , hitting her and hugging her . It 's an unnecessary sequel that further <unk> the issue : Is this a social statement , or merely an artistic expression about some truly troubled and confused people . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Both the original and the piano version of " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " were not made available to purchase individually in the majority of iTunes stores , and could only be bought along with the iTunes edition of the album . However , the song may be purchased separately as part of the album <unk> omen Volume II . It debuted on Canadian Hot 100 for the week of December 4 , 2010 , at number 19 and stayed on the chart for eight weeks . In South Korea , it peaked at number four on the International Chart . The song also debuted and peaked at number 160 on the UK Singles Chart due to strong digital sales upon the release of Loud . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Rihanna performed a shortened version of the song as part of a medley with " What 's My Name ? " and " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at the American Music Awards of 2010 on November 21 , 2010 . Rihanna opened the performance singing an <unk> version of " Love The Way You Lie ( Part II ) " . She was sitting on a stylized tree hovering above a field of sable @-@ colored blades of grass . Once she had finished the first frame of the song , she plummeted from the tree to the ground . She reemerged from the fog revealing a changed costume now consisting of a black @-@ and @-@ white bra top and shorts singing " What 's My Name ? " . The performance featured an accompaniment of background dancers . Rihanna then ended the performance after transitioning into " Only Girl " , which featured drummers and a background of fire for the finale . 
 Rihanna and Eminem performed the song together for the first time at the 53rd Grammy Awards on February 13 , 2011 as part of a medley with " I Need a Doctor " performed by Eminem , Dr. Dre , Skylar Grey and Adam Levine from Maroon 5 , who provided background vocals . The performance started with Rihanna singing on a B @-@ stage in the middle of the audience , accompanied by Adam Levine on the keys . Eminem then appeared on the main stage to perform his part of the song , whilst Rihanna made her way from the B @-@ stage to join him . The song then transitioned into " I Need a Doctor " , where Dr. Dre emerged to join up with Skylar Grey for her debut performance . The song is also included in the encore section of Rihanna 's Loud Tour , along with " Umbrella " . Rihanna performed " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 , as the eighth song on the set list . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted from the liner notes of Loud . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = M @-@ 60 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 60 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . It runs from the Niles area at a junction with US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) to the Jackson area where it ends at Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) . The trunkline passes through a mix of farm fields and woodlands , crosses or runs along several rivers and connects several small towns of the southern area of the state . The westernmost segment runs along divided highway while the easternmost section is a full freeway bypass of Jackson . 
 M @-@ 60 was originally designed in 1919 with the rest of the state highway system in Michigan . It ran roughly along its current route connecting downtown Niles to downtown Jackson . In the mid @-@ 1920s , the western end was extended to New Buffalo ; since then several bypasses of the smaller towns along the highway were added . One of these bypasses resulted in the creation of an alternate route ( Alternate M @-@ 60 , Alt . M @-@ 60 ) through Concord ; that route has since been decommissioned . When Niles was bypassed in the 1950s , a business loop ( Business M @-@ 60 , Bus . M @-@ 60 ) was created through town . After the western end was truncated to its current location , that business loop was converted to a business spur . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 60 starts at an interchange along US 12 southeast of Niles in southwestern Cass County . From this interchange , the highway runs northeasterly along the divided highway on Detroit Road to an intersection with Bus . M @-@ 60 ( Yankee Road ) . There , the main highway turns due east along the shore of Barron Lake . The trunkline continues through mixed farm fields and woodlands , running northeastward to Cassopolis and rounding Stone Lake on the southern approach to town . M @-@ 60 runs north – south through town on Broadway Street , merging with M @-@ 62 to run concurrently into downtown Cassopolis . M @-@ 60 turns eastward on State Street , separating from M @-@ 62 , and leaves town while crossing a line of the Canadian National Railway . 
 East of Cassopolis , M @-@ 60 runs past Diamond Lake and through farm fields . At Vandalia , the highway passes Donnell Lake before meeting M @-@ 40 north of Bair Lake in Jones . East of Jones , the trunkline crosses into St. Joseph County and meets US 131 on the south side of Three Rivers . The two highways run concurrently northward through a retail business corridor to an intersection with Michigan Avenue . M @-@ 60 turns east along Michigan Avenue following Bus . US 131 into downtown . The business loop turns north at the same intersection where M @-@ 60 meets M @-@ 86 near the Rocky River crossing . Continuing eastward , M @-@ 60 passes the high school and Three Rivers Municipal Dr. Haines Airport while running along the St. Joseph River . The trunkline turns north , runs by Fishers Lake and continues out of town through farm fields . Near Mendon , the highway runs along the river again . East of town , M @-@ 60 meets M @-@ 66 , and the two run east and northeast through Leonidas into the extreme northwest corner of Branch County . 
 South of Athens , M @-@ 66 turns northward and M @-@ 60 continues around Union City and into southern Calhoun County . The road runs through Burlington on Leroy Street . At Marshall Street . M @-@ 60 meets the southern end of M @-@ 311 which runs north to the Battle Creek area . M @-@ 60 continues east through farm fields to Tekonsha where it meets Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) northwest of town . Continuing to Homer , the highway runs along Lehigh Street in town ; M @-@ 99 merges into M @-@ 60 after the intersection with Hillsdale Street . East of town , the highway widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway ; M @-@ 99 turns north along this short section of roadway and M @-@ 60 reverts to a two @-@ lane highway again . The trunkline crosses the Kalamazoo River at Concord before it crosses into Jackson County . At Spring Arbor , M @-@ 60 passes the campus of Spring Arbor University . Outside of Jackson , the highway widens out to a full freeway bypass around the west side of the city . This bypass has one interchange with Michigan Avenue near Jackson County Airport . North of this interchange , the highway picks up the Business Loop I @-@ 94 and crosses the Norfolk Southern Railway line in the area . The freeway ends at a trumpet interchange with I @-@ 94 northwest of Jackson . 
 M @-@ 60 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways . Among these responsibilities , the department tracks the level of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . This is expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . According to MDOT 's surveys in 2009 , the highest traffic counts were 12 @,@ 547 cars and 999 trucks along the freeway immediately south of I @-@ 94 near Jackson ; the lowest AADT was the <unk> cars and 384 trucks west of Union City . Only two sections of M @-@ 60 have been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) : along the US 131 concurrency in Three Rivers and on the BL I @-@ 94 concurrency near Jackson . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 60 was designated with the rest of the original state highway system by July 1 , 1919 , on a series of roads running between Niles and Jackson by way of Cassopolis , Three Rivers and Tekonsha . By the end of 1927 , the western end was extended to terminate at US 12 at New Buffalo . In the early to mid @-@ 1930s , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) realigned the New Buffalo – Niles section to bypass <unk> and Buchanan , and the department extended US 112 concurrently along M @-@ 60 to New Buffalo . M @-@ 60 was rerouted around Concord in 1933 , Tekonsha was bypassed by the MSHD in late 1936 , and the highway was routed around Union City in 1937 . The MSHD continued to improve the highway through the end of the 1930s . The last segment between Tekonsha and Homer was paved in 1940 , making all of M @-@ 60 a hard @-@ surfaced roadway . 
 In late 1949 or early 1950 , the MSHD shifted M @-@ 60 through the Jones area to straighten the roadway . The US 131 bypass of Three Rivers opened in 1953 ; the US 131 / M @-@ 60 concurrency became a Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 60 concurrency through town as a result . On December 1 , 1956 , the highway department opened the first 6 @.@ 6 miles ( 10 @.@ 6 km ) of a new four @-@ lane divided highway around the south side of Niles , with the final 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) of the bypass opening early the next year . Consequently , they converted the former route through town into a business loop . Bus . M @-@ 60 connected the bypass into downtown where it continued along Bus . US 112 back to US 112 / M @-@ 60 . At the end of the 1950s , M @-@ 60 was moved to a freeway bypass along the west side of Jackson ; the final mile was also designated Bus . US 12 as both highways connected to the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway north of the city . The western end was redesignated as a part of US 12 in the late 1961 , and the M @-@ 60 designation was truncated off this roadway in 1966 . M @-@ 60 's routing has remained unchanged since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Special routes = = 
 There have been two different special routes of M @-@ 60 . Business M @-@ 60 ( Bus . M @-@ 60 ) in Niles is still in existence , while Alternate M @-@ 60 ( Alt . M @-@ 60 ) in Concord has been decommissioned . 
 = = = Business M @-@ 60 = = = 
 Business M @-@ 60 ( Bus . M @-@ 60 ) is a state business spur running through the city of Niles and adjacent townships . The spur starts at the intersection with M @-@ 51 ( Main Street , 11th Street ) and runs eastward along a former routing of M @-@ 60 on Oak Street through a residential section of town . Near the Berrien – Cass county line , the highway passes south of the Jerry Tyler Memorial Airport . East of the airport , the street name changes from Oak Street to Yankee Road , and Bus . M @-@ 60 runs to its terminus at M @-@ 60 ( Detroit Road ) . The total length is 2 @.@ 554 miles ( 4 @.@ 110 km ) , and 5 @,@ 284 – 7 @,@ 984 cars and 333 trucks use the route each day . 
 The business route was a loop route , continuing through downtown along Bus . US 112 when the designation was created in late 1956 or early 1957 . M @-@ 60 was truncated west of Niles in 1966 ; at the same time , Bus . M @-@ 60 was truncated at its junction with Bus . US 12 / M @-@ 51 near downtown . 
 = = = Alternate M @-@ 60 = = = 
 Alternate M @-@ 60 ( Alt . M @-@ 60 ) was an alternate loop route running through Concord . It acted as a " business route " into downtown Concord during its short lifetime after a bypass of town along M @-@ 60 was built . Its appearance predated the development of business routes in Michigan . Concord was bypassed in 1933 , resulting in the creation of the alternate route . That route was turned over to local control the next year , decommissioning the designation . 
 = Economic development in India = 
 The economic development in India followed socialist @-@ inspired policies for most of its independent history , including state @-@ ownership of many sectors ; India 's per capita income increased at only around 1 % annualised rate in the three decades after its independence . Since the mid @-@ 1980s , India has slowly opened up its markets through economic liberalisation . After more fundamental reforms since 1991 and their renewal in the 2000s , India has progressed towards a free market economy . 
 In the late 2000s , India 's growth reached 7 @.@ 5 % , which will double the average income in a decade . Analysts say that if India pushed more fundamental market reforms , it could sustain the rate and even reach the government 's 2011 target of 10 % . States have large responsibilities over their economies . The annualised 1999 – 2008 growth rates for Tamil Nadu ( 9 @.@ 9 % ) , Maharashtra ( 9 @.@ 7 % ) , Gujarat ( 9 @.@ 6 % ) , Haryana ( 9 @.@ 1 % ) , or Delhi ( 8 @.@ 9 % ) were significantly higher than for Bihar ( 5 @.@ 1 % ) , Uttar Pradesh ( 4 @.@ 4 % ) , or Madhya Pradesh ( 6 @.@ 5 % ) . India is the seventh @-@ largest economy in the world and the third largest by purchasing power parity adjusted exchange rates ( PPP ) . On per capita basis , it ranks 140th in the world or 129th by PPP . 
 The economic growth has been driven by the expansion of services that have been growing consistently faster than other sectors . It is argued that the pattern of Indian development has been a specific one and that the country may be able to skip the intermediate industrialisation @-@ led phase in the transformation of its economic structure . Serious concerns have been raised about the jobless nature of the economic growth . 
 Favourable macroeconomic performance has been a necessary but not sufficient condition for the significant reduction of poverty amongst the Indian population . The rate of poverty decline has not been higher in the post @-@ reform period ( since 1991 ) . The improvements in some other non @-@ economic dimensions of social development have been even less favourable . The most pronounced example is an exceptionally high and persistent level of child malnutrition ( 46 % in 2005 – 6 ) . 
 The progress of economic reforms in India is followed closely . The World Bank suggests that the most important priorities are public sector reform , infrastructure , agricultural and rural development , removal of labour regulations , reforms in lagging states , and HIV / AIDS . For 2016 , India ranked 130th in Ease of Doing Business Index , which is setback as compared with China 84th , Russia 51st and Brazil 116th . According to Index of Economic Freedom World Ranking an annual survey on economic freedom of the nations , India ranks 123rd as compared with China and Russia which ranks 138th and 144th respectively in 2014 . 
 At the turn of the century India 's GDP was at around US $ 480 billion . As economic reforms picked up pace , India 's GDP grew five @-@ fold to reach US $ 2 @.@ 2 trillion in 2015 ( as per IMF estimates ) . 
 India 's GDP growth during January – March period of 2015 was at 7 @.@ 5 % compared to China 's 7 % , making it the fastest growing economy . During 2014 – 15 , India 's GDP growth recovered marginally to 7 @.@ 3 % from 6 @.@ 9 % in the previous fiscal . During 2014 – 15 , India 's services sector grew by 10 @.@ 1 % , manufacturing sector by 7 @.@ 1 % & agriculture by 0 @.@ 2 % . The Indian government has forecast a growth of 8 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 5 % during 2015 – 16 . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 India ranks first worldwide in farm output . Agriculture and allied sectors like forestry , logging and fishing accounted for 18 @.@ 6 % of the GDP in 2005 , employed 60 % of the total workforce and despite a steady decline of its share in the GDP , is still the largest economic sector and plays a significant role in the overall socio @-@ economic development of India . Yields per unit area of all crops have grown since 1950 , due to the special emphasis placed on agriculture in the five @-@ year plans and steady improvements in irrigation , technology , application of modern agricultural practices and provision of agricultural credit and subsidies since the green revolution . 
 India is the largest producer in the world of milk , cashew nuts , coconuts , tea , ginger , turmeric and black pepper . It also has the world 's largest cattle population ( 193 million ) . It is the second largest producer of wheat , rice , sugar , groundnut and inland fish . It is the third largest producer of tobacco . India accounts for 10 % of the world fruit production with first rank in the production of banana and <unk> , also known as <unk> . 
 The required level of investment for the development of marketing , storage and cold storage infrastructure is estimated to be huge . The government has implemented various schemes to raise investment in marketing infrastructure . Amongst these schemes are Construction of Rural Go downs , Market Research and Information Network , and Development / Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure , Grading and <unk> . 
 Main problems in the agricultural sector , as listed by the World Bank , are : 
 India 's large agricultural subsidies are hampering productivity @-@ enhancing investment . 
 <unk> of agriculture has increased costs , price risks and uncertainty . 
 Government interventions in labour , land , and credit markets . 
 Inadequate infrastructure and services . 
 = = = Research and development = = = 
 The Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( <unk> ) , established in 1905 , was responsible for the research leading to the " Indian Green Revolution " of the 1970s . The Indian Council of Agricultural Research ( ICAR ) is the apex body in <unk> and related allied fields , including research and education . The Union Minister of Agriculture is the President of the ICAR . The Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute develops new techniques for the design of agricultural experiments , analyses data in agriculture , and specialises in statistical techniques for animal and plant breeding . Prof. M.S. Swaminathan is known as " Father of the Green Revolution " and heads the MS Swaminathan Research Foundation . He is known for his advocacy of environmentally sustainable agriculture and sustainable food security . 
 = = Industrial output = = 
 India is tenth in the world in factory output . Manufacturing sector in addition to mining , quarrying , electricity and gas together account for 27 @.@ 6 % of the GDP and employ 17 % of the total workforce . Economic reforms introduced after 1991 brought foreign competition , led to privatisation of certain public sector industries , opened up sectors hitherto reserved for the public sector and led to an expansion in the production of fast @-@ moving consumer goods . In recent years , Indian cities have continued to liberalise , but excessive and burdensome business regulations remain a problem in some cities , like Kochi and Kolkata . 
 Post @-@ liberalisation , the Indian private sector , which was usually run by <unk> of old family firms and required political connections to prosper was faced with foreign competition , including the threat of cheaper Chinese imports . It has since handled the change by squeezing costs , revamping management , focusing on designing new products and relying on low labour costs and technology . 
 = = Services = = 
 India is fifteenth in services output . Service industry employ English @-@ speaking Indian workers on the supply side and on the demand side , has increased demand from foreign consumers interested in India 's service exports or those looking to outsource their operations . India 's IT industry , despite contributing significantly to its balance of payments , accounts for only about 1 % of the total GDP or 1 / 50th of the total services . 
 During the Internet bubble that led up to 2000 , heavy investments in undersea fibre @-@ optic cables linked Asia with the rest of the world . The fall that followed the economic boom resulted in the auction of cheap fiber optic cables at one @-@ tenth of their original price . This development resulted in widely available low @-@ cost communications infrastructure . All of these investments and events , not to mention a swell of available talent , resulted in India becoming almost overnight the centre for outsourcing of Business process . Within this sector and events , the ITES @-@ BPO sector has become a big employment generator especially amongst young college graduates . The number of professionals employed by IT and ITES sectors is estimated at around 1 @.@ 3 million as of March 2006 . Also , Indian IT @-@ ITES is estimated to have helped create an additional 3 million job opportunities through indirect , induced and in helpful manner have created employment . 
 = = GDP growth rate = = 
 Since the economic liberalisation of 1991 , India 's GDP has been growing at a higher rate . 
 = = Companies = = 
 47 Indian companies were listed in the Forbes Global 2000 ranking for 2015 . The 10 leading companies were : 
 = = India 's resource consumption = = 
 = = = Oil = = = 
 India consumes the second @-@ largest amount of oil in the Asia @-@ Pacific region behind China . The combination of rising oil consumption and fairly unwavering production levels leaves India highly dependent on imports to meet the consumption needs . 
 = = = Natural gas = = = 
 As per the Oil and Gas Journal , India had 38 trillion cubic feet ( 1 @.@ 1 × 1012 m3 ) of confirmed natural gas reserves in 2004 . 
 India imports small amounts of natural gas . In 2004 , India consumed about 1 @,@ 089 × 10 ^ 9 cu ft ( 3 @.@ 08 × 1010 m3 ) of natural gas , the first year in which the country showed net natural gas imports . During 2004 , India imported 93 × 10 ^ 9 cu ft ( 2 @.@ 6 × 109 m3 ) of liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) from Qatar . 
 As in the oil sector , India 's state @-@ owned companies account for the bulk of natural gas production . ONGC and Oil India Ltd . ( <unk> ) are the leading companies with respect to production volume , whilst some foreign companies take part in upstream developments in joint @-@ ventures and production sharing contracts ( <unk> ) . Reliance Industries , a privately owned Indian company , will also have a bigger role in the natural gas sector as a result of a large natural gas find in 2002 in the Krishna Godavari basin . 
 The Gas Authority of India Ltd . ( <unk> ) holds an effective control on natural gas transmission and allocation activities . In December 2006 , the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas issued a new policy that allows foreign investors , private domestic companies , and national oil companies to hold up to 100 % equity stakes in pipeline projects . Whilst <unk> 's domination in natural gas transmission and allocation is not ensured by statute , it will continue to be the leading player in the sector because of its existing natural gas infrastructure . 
 = = Issues = = 
 = = = Regulation , public sector , corruption , = = = 
 India ranked 133rd on the Ease of Doing Business Index in 2010 , compared with 85th for Pakistan , 89th for People 's Republic of China , 125th for Nigeria , 129th for Brazil , and 122nd for Indonesia . 
 Corruption in many forms has been one of the pervasive problems affecting India . For decades , the red tape , bureaucracy and the Licence Raj that had strangled private enterprise . The economic reforms of 1991 cut some of the worst regulations that had been used in corruption . 
 Corruption is still large . A 2005 study by Transparency International ( TI ) India found that more than half of those surveyed had firsthand experience of paying a bribe or peddling influence to get a job done in a public office . The chief economic consequences of corruption are the loss to the exchequer , an unhealthy climate for investment and an increase in the cost of government @-@ subsidised services . The TI India study estimates the monetary value of petty corruption in 11 basic services provided by the government , like education , healthcare , judiciary , police , etc . , to be around ₹ 211 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 1 billion ) . India still ranks in the bottom quartile of developing nations in terms of the ease of doing business , and compared with China , the average time taken to secure the clearances for a startup or to invoke bankruptcy is much greater . 
 The Right to Information Act ( 2005 ) and equivalent acts in the states , that require government officials to furnish information requested by citizens or face punitive action , <unk> of services and various central and state government acts that established vigilance commissions have considerably reduced corruption or at least have opened up avenues to redress grievances . The 2006 report by Transparency International puts India at 70th place and states that significant improvements were made by India in reducing corruption . 
 = = = Employment = = = 
 India 's labour force is growing by 2 @.@ 5 % every year , but employment is growing only at 2 @.@ 3 % a year . Official unemployment exceeds 9 % . Regulation and other obstacles have discouraged the emergence of formal businesses and jobs . Almost 30 % of workers are casual workers who work only when they are able to get jobs and remain unpaid for the rest of the time . Only 10 % of the workforce is in regular employment . India 's labour regulations are heavy even by developing country standards and analysts have urged the government to abolish them . 
 From the overall stock of an estimated 458 million workers , 394 million ( 86 % ) operate in the unorganised sector ( of which 63 % are self @-@ employed ) mostly as informal workers . There is a strong relationship between the quality of employment and social and poverty characteristics . The relative growth of informal employment was more rapid within the organised rather than the unorganised sector . This <unk> is also related to the <unk> of employment in the organised sector that is suggested by the increasing use of contract labour by employers in order to benefit from more flexible labour practices . 
 Children under 14 constitute 3 @.@ 6 % of the total labour force in the country . Of these children , 9 out of every 10 work in their own rural family settings . Around 85 % of them are engaged in traditional agricultural activities . Less than 9 % work in manufacturing , services and repairs . Child labour is a complex problem that is basically rooted in poverty . The Indian government is implementing the world 's largest child labour elimination program , with primary education targeted for ~ 250 million . Numerous non @-@ governmental and voluntary organisations are also involved . Special investigation cells have been set up in states to enforce existing laws banning employment of children ( under 14 ) in hazardous industries . The allocation of the Government of India for the eradication of child labour was US $ 10 million in 1995 – 96 and US $ 16 million in 1996 – 97 . The allocation for 2007 is US $ 21 million . 
 = = = Environmental degradation = = = 
 About 1 @.@ 2 billion people in developing nations lack clean , safe water because most household and industrial wastes are dumped directly into rivers and lakes without treatment . This contributes to the rapid increase in waterborne diseases in humans . Out of India 's 3119 towns and cities , just 209 have partial treatment facilities , and only 8 have full wastewater treatment facilities ( WHO 1992 ) . 114 cities dump untreated sewage and partially cremated bodies directly into the Ganges River . Downstream , the untreated water is used for drinking , bathing , and washing . This situation is typical of many rivers in India as well as other developing countries . Globally , but especially in developing nations like India where people cook with <unk> and coal over open fires , about 4 billion humans suffer continuous exposure to smoke . In India , particulate concentrations in houses are reported to range from 8 @,@ 300 to 15 @,@ 000 μg / m3 , greatly exceeding the 75 μg / m3 maximum standard for indoor particulate matter in the United States . Changes in ecosystem biological diversity , evolution of parasites , and invasion by exotic species all frequently result in disease outbreaks such as cholera which emerged in 1992 in India . The frequency of AIDS / HIV is increasing . In 1996 , about 46 @,@ 000 Indians out of 2 @.@ 8 million ( 1 @.@ 6 % of the population ) tested were found to be infected with HIV . 
 = Guttorm of Norway = 
 Guttorm Sigurdsson ( Old Norse : <unk> Sigurðarson ; 1199 – 11 August 1204 ) was the King of Norway from January to August 1204 , during the Norwegian civil war era . As a grandson of King Sverre , he was proclaimed king by the Birkebeiner party when he was just four years old . Although obviously not in control of the events surrounding him , Guttorm 's accession to the throne under the effective regency of Haakon the Crazy led to renewed conflict between the Birkebeiner and the Bagler parties , the latter supported militarily by Valdemar II of Denmark . 
 Guttorm 's reign ended abruptly when the child king suddenly became ill and died . Rumours among the Birkebeiner held that Guttorm 's illness and death had been caused by Haakon the Crazy 's future wife Christina <unk> , a claim considered dubious by modern historians . Low @-@ intensity civil war followed Guttorm 's death , until a settlement was reached in 1207 , temporarily dividing the kingdom . Despite his status as king , Guttorm is not included in the official Norwegian regnal list . 
 = = Background = = 
 Guttorm was an illegitimate son of Sigurd <unk> and thus a grandson of King Sverre . The identity of his mother is unknown . Sigurd predeceased his father , Sverre , who died in 1202 and was succeeded by his younger son Haakon Sverresson . Haakon reigned until his own death on 1 January 1204 . Haakon had pursued a policy of peace and reunification between the Birkebeiner and Bagler during his short reign , but following his death relations between the parties collapsed and a new phase of the Norwegian civil wars began . Parts of the Birkebeiner were disgruntled by Haakon 's policy of reconciliation with the Bagler , which may have led to his death , following which the balance of power within the Birkebeiner switched immediately to the faction around Haakon the Crazy . 
 The day after Haakon 's death , the Birkebeiner designated Guttorm as king at a meeting of the hird , in consultation with Bishop Martin of Bergen . Sverre 's nephew Haakon the Crazy was simultaneously appointed regent as leader of the hird and the army . According to the <unk> <unk> ( Bagler sagas ) , the young king then took a sword and mounted it to Haakon 's side , and handed him a shield . He further gave Haakon the title of earl , with consent from all the chieftains , and had Haakon sit next to him at his throne . Haakon 's unusually strong position was thus symbolised by his sitting at the same level as the king , and not on a lower seat as would have been customary for an earl . Another of Sverre 's nephews , Peter <unk> , together with Einar <unk> , husband of Sverre 's daughter Cecilia , were appointed as Guttorm 's guardians . 
 = = Revolt and death = = 
 The appointment of the warlike and power @-@ hungry Haakon the Crazy ( called " the mad dog " by the Bagler ) to key positions contributed to conflicts within the Birkebeiner , and a worsening of relations with the Bagler . Haakon 's elevation led the Bagler to believe that there was not much hope of peace with the Birkebeiner . The Bagler therefore travelled to Denmark and united around Erling Stonewall , an alleged son of former king Magnus <unk> , whom elements of the party had attempted to proclaim as king in 1203 . Their revolt was actively supported by Valdemar II of Denmark , who sought to regain the ancient Danish overlordship of Viken , in Norway . 
 Valdemar arrived in Viken in June with more than 300 ships , and Erling performed a trial by ordeal before the king in Tønsberg . In turn , the Danish king gave 35 ships to Erling , and together with Philip Simonsson ( another Bagler rival ) , he swore allegiance to Valdemar . Although Philip 's claim to the throne was supported by both Valdemar and the church , in the end , the Bagler proclaimed Erling as king and Philip as earl at <unk> and Borgarting ( things of the southeastern parts of Norway ) , and the Bagler quickly gained control of Viken . Guttorm was in turn proclaimed king ( <unk> ) by the Birkebeiner at Øyrating in Trondheim in the spring or early summer . While Haakon the Crazy was in the process of gathering an army to fight the Bagler , likely at a second purely military assembly at Øyrating , Guttorm suddenly became ill and died on 11 August . He was buried at the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim . 
 In the longer version of the <unk> <unk> , it is insinuated that Guttorm 's illness and death were caused by Swedish @-@ born Christina <unk> , who married Haakon the Crazy shortly after Guttorm 's death . Modern historians consider this claim to be dubious , derived from rumours spread by the Birkebeiner in connection with the sudden death of Haakon Sverresson some months earlier . The same source claims that Haakon was poisoned , allegedly by Sverre 's widow Margaret , Christina 's aunt . Haakon the Crazy 's bid to succeed Guttorm as king foundered because he was not trusted and had made powerful opponents . Guttorm 's death was followed by low @-@ intensity civil war between his successor Inge Bårdsson and the Bagler , until a settlement was reached between Inge , Haakon and the new Bagler pretender Philip Simonsson in 1207 , which for some years divided the kingdom . 
 = In Which We Meet Mr. Jones = 
 " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " is the seventh episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The story begins when a FBI agent collapses from a parasite constricting his heart , and Olivia must meet with biochemist David Robert Jones ( Jared Harris ) in Frankfurt in order to find a cure . It featured the first appearance by Harris . 
 The episode was written by J. J. Abrams and Jeff Pinkner , and directed by Brad Anderson . The writers designed it to serve as the foundation for the " next chapter " in the season 's narrative . 
 It first aired in the United States on November 11 , 2008 on the Fox network to an estimated 8 @.@ 61 million viewers . Reviews of the episode were mostly mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Agent Mitchell Loeb ( Chance Kelly ) , a friend of Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) , is on a group mission in Weymouth , Massachusetts but fails to find evidence of wrongdoing in a truck they targeted . Loeb and Broyles are in a meeting afterwards when Loeb collapses , seemingly of a heart attack or seizure . He is rushed to the hospital , where the medical staff cut open his chest , only to find his heart is being constricted by an engineered parasite . The Fringe division of Olivia , Walter , and Peter are briefed by Broyles , who then shows them the hospitalized Loeb . 
 At Harvard , the Bishops run tests on Loeb while Olivia talks with Loeb 's wife Samantha ( Trini Alvarado ) . Not recognizing the parasite , Walter pokes it with a blade in an attempt to remove it , and it constricts tighter around Loeb 's heart , further endangering his life . Walter is able to get a tissue sample , while Peter administers some medicine to calm Loeb 's heart . After a DNA analysis , Walter discovers a pattern " too organized to be accidental , too perfect to be natural . " Astrid thinks it is a Caesar cipher , and she and Olivia decipher the acronym " ZFT " . After talking with Broyles , Olivia is directed to talk to David Robert Jones ( Jared Harris ) , a biochemist being held incommunicado in " Wissenschaft Prison " , Frankfurt , Germany ( " Wissenschaft " is German for " science " ) . Broyles explains to her that ZFT are privately funded cells in 83 recorded countries that traffic in scientific progress , not weapons or drugs . Some fringe events in previous episodes may have been orchestrated by this group . He says little else is known . 
 Meanwhile , Peter and Walter discover the parasite has slowly worked its roots into Loeb 's circulatory system and extended through the IV into the IV drip ; they estimate Loeb has a day to live . After meeting with old friend Lucas Vogel ( Billy Burke ) , Olivia is able to secure a meeting with Jones , who may know a cure to the parasite slowly killing Loeb . Charlie Francis ( Kirk Acevedo ) finds a sheet of code in Loeb 's briefcase listing agents from their field office . They suspect another mole with access to high level security clearances and tie it to a Joseph Smith , previously mentioned by Loeb as a suspected mole after the truck mission failure . Although she is not able to talk with Jones at first , he arranges for Olivia to be given a piece of paper with instructions demanding he first speak to Smith , a colleague of his , before he helps her . Smith is unfortunately killed soon after in a raid set up by Broyles . Walter , however , devises a way to wire Peter into the dead man 's brain , enabling Peter to speak on his behalf without Jones knowing Smith is dead . Smith 's " response " is " little hill , " which is an answer Jones seems pleased to hear . Jones duly tells Olivia a formula for the parasite , and the subsequent procedure is successful . The parasite is removed , but the team does not realize that the entire incident was orchestrated by Loeb and his wife to get the information Peter extracted from Smith . The final scene shows Samantha Loeb whispering " little hill " into her husband 's ear at the hospital . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams and executive producer Jeff Pinkner wrote the episode , and Brad Anderson directed it . Pinkner has stated that the first six episodes of season one served as a prologue , and that the following episodes , beginning with " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " , would be the " next chapter " in the story . Pinkner further described the episode as " foundational , " as it will set up " a lot of things will be set up which will come to pay off over the next several weeks " . 
 The character David Robert Jones is a reference to English musician David Bowie , who was born with that name . " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " was the first appearance of the character . When actor Jared Harris was first cast for the part , he was told Jones was " possibly a major , important character " , as indicated by the episode 's title . Whether his character would make a reappearance later in the season depended on how well received Jones was by the show 's audience , Harris ' performance , and if the writers felt they had more to tell about the character . Harris later described Jones in a May 2009 interview , " I think you could sense that there was a great bit of ambiguity about the character which was useful . He 's a bad guy that might be on the right side . He just might be fighting for the good guys . Those guys are always great parts because you leave the audience guessing about what side he 's really on . He 's one of those guys that if he 's fighting for the right cause , he 's a tremendous ally . But if he 's fighting on the wrong cause , he 's a formidable opponent . He 's an anti @-@ hero who is fighting for the just cause " . Harris asserted in a February 2009 interview that he did not sign a recurring contract , meaning that the character was not meant to be permanent . He affirmed this by believing the character 's personality rendered Jones incapable of joining the regular cast , " You 'd have to keep [ Jones ] chained like a dog . You couldn 't let him loose . You certainly couldn 't let him use his hands . You know what the <unk> he 'd do " . 
 The crew first considered making the parasite look like " an alien , " but shifted away from that in favor of depicting it like an amoeba to be more familiar to the audience . CGI modeling followed , along with a physical model , which was then used by the CGI department to simulate it being wrapped around Loeb 's heart . To create the actual , physical parasite , the crew used a prosthetic chest and CGI to create the parasite , and a pig torso was used when the doctors made the initial incision at the hospital . 
 During the scene where Broyles is talking with Mitchell Loeb , Mitchell mentions the words " Page 47 " . The number 47 bears a huge significance to another J.J. Abrams show , Alias . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The premiere of " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " was watched by an estimated 8 @.@ 61 million viewers in the United States . It received a 5 @.@ 2 / 8 rating among all households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Travis Fickett of IGN disliked the episode , criticizing it as " sloppy , " the science as " repeating itself , " and the fringe element [ the parasite ] as " especially goofy " ; he rated the episode 6 @.@ 0 / 10 . Writing for Mania.com , critic Stephen Lackey thought Anna Torv 's performance " felt forced " , but heaped praise on John Noble . Lackey believes Torv and Joshua Jackson have good chemistry , and consequently partly disliked the episode because they had few scenes together . He also thought the case of the week was " fairly entertaining , " but the storyline was " just ... passable " , as he wanted the show " to be done with all of the introductions and get more into the mystery of the pattern " . He concluded his review , " Hopefully , next week the story will be just a little more concise , Olivia and Peter back working together and maybe at some point Astrid will actually have something important to do " . The Los Angeles Times thought the episode was " solid if unexceptional " , as he liked Walter but disliked the " vacuum of personality " that is Astrid . 
 UGO Networks writer Jon Lachonis stated , " If you were on the fence before , [ the episode ] will drag you kicking and screaming into the dark world of Fringe 's science wielding bogeymen . " In Which we Meet Mr. Jones " is what Fringe promised it would be from the beginning , a suspense driven procedural that probes deep into our technological phobias . With this new formulation of Fringe , we get the challenge of a sophisticated crime drama mixed with sad sack characters that tempt the everyman into the game , while blowing us away with a level of wordplay and pseudo science that CSI or Alias could only have dreamed of . " A.V. Club 's Noel Murray enjoyed the episode , giving it a B + , while Television Without Pity gave the episode a B- . 
 = Mother ( video game ) = 
 Mother ( Japanese : マザー , MOTHER ) , later released outside Japan as EarthBound Beginnings , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Ape and published by Nintendo for the Famicom . The game is modeled on the gameplay of the Dragon Quest series , but is set in the late 20th century United States , unlike its fantasy genre contemporaries . Mother follows the young Ninten as he uses his great @-@ grandfather 's studies on psychic powers to fight hostile , formerly inanimate objects and other enemies . The game uses random encounters to enter a menu @-@ based , first @-@ person perspective battle system . It is the first game in the Mother series and was followed by two sequels , EarthBound in 1994 and Mother 3 in 2006 . 
 The game 's writer and director , Shigesato Itoi , pitched the game concept to Shigeru Miyamoto while visiting Nintendo 's headquarters for other business . Though Miyamoto denied the proposal at first , he eventually gave Itoi a development team . The game was released in Japan on July 27 , 1989 . A North American version was localized into English , but was abandoned as commercially nonviable . A copy of this prototype was later found and circulated on the Internet under the unofficial , fan @-@ created title EarthBound Zero . The game was eventually released worldwide under the name EarthBound Beginnings for the Wii U Virtual Console on June 14 , 2015 . 
 Reviewers noted the game 's similarities with the Dragon Quest series and its simultaneous parody of the genre 's tropes . They considered the game 's sequel , EarthBound , very similar and a better overall implementation of Mother 's gameplay ideas . Critics also noted the game 's high level of difficulty and issues of balance . Mother sold 150 @,@ 000 copies and received a " Silver Hall of Fame " score from Japanese reviewer Weekly Famitsu . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com wrote that Mother importantly generated interest in video game emulation and the historical preservation of unreleased games . The game was later rereleased in Japan on the single @-@ cartridge compilation Mother 1 + 2 for the Game Boy Advance in 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mother is a single @-@ player , role @-@ playing video game set in a " slightly offbeat " , late 20th century United States as interpreted by Japanese author Shigesato Itoi . The game eschews traits of its Japanese role @-@ playing game contemporaries : it is not set within the fantasy genre and only enters science fiction for its final sequence . The player fights in warehouses and laboratories instead of in standard dungeons . Instead of swords , assault weapons , and magic , the player uses baseball bats , toy guns , and psychic abilities . The game 's protagonist , Ninten , is about 12 years old . 
 Like the Dragon Quest series , Mother uses a random encounter combat system . The player explores the overworld from a top @-@ down perspective and occasionally enters a first @-@ person perspective battle sequence where the player chooses attack options from a series of menus . On their turn , the player selects between options to fight , guard , check enemy attributes , run away , use items , or use offensive , defensive , or healing psychic powers . The player can also set the battle on autopilot with the " auto " option . Critical hits register with the series ' signature " <unk> " text and sound . 
 The player can press a button to have Ninten " check " or " talk " with nearby people , animals , and objects . The game shares similarities with its sequel , EarthBound : there is a game save option through using a phone to call Ninten 's father , an option to store items with Ninten 's sister at home , and an automated teller machine for banking money . The members of Ninten 's party are all visible on the overworld screen at once , and are analogous to EarthBound 's party members in style and function . Mother 's world map does not keep locations separate , and instead connects all areas ( akin to the Pokémon series games ) . The game 's story begins as Ninten discovers a music box and receives the journal of his great @-@ grandfather , who studied psychic powers nearly a century earlier . Ninten is attacked by household items , and ventures outside to find a crazy world with hostile everyday objects and other odd events . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mother begins with the story of a young , married , American couple who mysteriously vanish from their small , rural town . Two years later , the husband , George , returned as mysteriously as he vanished , and began a strange study in complete seclusion . His wife , Maria , was never heard from again . Years later , in the late 1980s , a young American boy named Ninten is attacked at home in a paranormal event . His father explains that Ninten 's great @-@ grandfather studied psychic powers , and asks Ninten to investigate a crisis occurring across the world , the work of an invading alien race . After finishing a few tasks , Ninten is warped to the world of Magicant , where the land 's ruler , Queen Mary , asks Ninten to find her song , the Eight Melodies , and play them for her . Ninten returns to Earth and befriends a young boy , Lloyd , who is being teased at an elementary school . The two travel to the town of Snowman to deliver a lost hat to Ana , a young girl with psychic powers . Ana tells Ninten she saw him in a dream , and joins the party in hopes of finding her missing mother . 
 After finding most of the Melodies , Ninten is harassed at a karaoke bar by Teddy , the boss of a local gang . Teddy surrenders after losing to Ninten in a duel , and joins Ninten 's party with the intent to avenge the deaths of his parents , who were killed at Holy Loly Mountain . Lloyd stays behind . In a cottage at the base of Holy Loly Mountain , Ana pulls Ninten aside and asks him to be with her always . The two dance and profess their mutual love . When about to leave , the party is attacked by a powerful robot that knocks out the entire party . Lloyd arrives with a tank and destroys the robot , but accidentally attacks the party and critically wounds Teddy , so Lloyd rejoins the party . They take a boat out on Holy Loly Lake and a whirlpool pulls them into an underwater laboratory where they find a robot who claims to have been built by George to protect Ninten . When the laboratory floods , they leave for the mountain and the robot helps them ascend . On the way , they find a cave with human prisoners including Ana 's mother . They need to defeat the Mother Ship to free the prisoners . Another robot attacks at the summit , and George 's robot is sacrificed in the struggle . Ninten learns the final melody at the mountain 's summit . The party is warped to Magicant , where Ninten sings the Eight Melodies to Queen Mary . She recalls the rest of the song and reminisces about an alien named Gyiyg that she loved as her own child . Queen Mary reveals that she is George 's wife , Maria , and vanishes . Magicant , a mirage created by her conscience , vanishes with her . 
 The party is warped back to the top of Holy Loly Mountain , where the party discovers George 's grave . Large rocks block the entrance to a cave inside Holy Loly Mountain , but are cleared by the power of Maria 's conscience . The party encounters the Mother Ship and a fluid @-@ filled tank that contains Gyiyg . The alien expresses its gratefulness to Ninten 's family for raising it , but explains that George stole vital information from its people that could have been used to betray them , and proceeds to accuse Ninten of interfering with their plans . Gyiyg offers to save Ninten alone if he boards the Mother Ship . When Ninten declines , Gyiyg attempts to put Ninten to sleep . The party begins to sing the Eight Melodies while Gyiyg tries to quiet the party through an attack . When the party finishes the lullaby , Gyiyg is overcome with emotion at the thought of Maria 's motherly love . Gyiyg says they will meet again and flies off in the Mother Ship . The game ends with Ninten , Ana , and Lloyd facing the player as the credits roll behind them . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mother was developed by Ape and published by Nintendo . While visiting Nintendo for other work , copywriter Shigesato Itoi pitched his idea for a role @-@ playing game set in contemporary times to the company 's Shigeru Miyamoto . He thought the setting would be unique for its incongruence with role @-@ playing genre norms , as daily life lacked the pretense for magic powers and they could not simply give the child characters firearms as weapons . Itoi 's project proposal suggested how the natural limitations could be circumvented . Miyamoto met with him and praised the idea , though he was not sure whether Itoi " could pull it off " . As an advertiser , Itoi was used to concept proposals preceding the staffing process , but Miyamoto explained that video game concepts needed people who signed on to " make " the product . Itoi was overcome with " powerlessness " . 
 Miyamoto was also hesitant to work with Itoi at a time when companies were pushing major celebrity product endorsements , as Itoi 's involvement would be for such a game . When the two met next , Miyamoto brought the documentation from a text adventure game and told Itoi that he would have to write similar documentation himself . Miyamoto said that he knew from his own experience that the game would only be as good as the effort Itoi invested , and that he knew Itoi could not invest the appropriate time with his full @-@ time job . Itoi restated his interest and reduced his workload , so Miyamoto assembled a development team . Upon assessing for compatibility , they began production in Ichikawa , Chiba . Itoi had said earlier that he wanted his work environment to feel like an extracurricular club consisting of volunteers and working out of an apartment , which Miyamoto tried to accommodate . Itoi wrote the game 's script and commuted from Tokyo , a process he found " exhausting " . Even with asking Itoi to prioritize the development process , Miyamoto received criticism of acquiescing to celebrity and of hiring a copywriter not up for the task . Miyamoto said that his decision to pursue the project was based on his confidence in Itoi . Mother was released in Japan on July 27 , 1989 for the Famicom ( known as the Nintendo Entertainment System outside Japan ) . 
 = = = English @-@ language release = = = 
 The game was scheduled for localization into the English language for a North American release as Earth Bound , but was abandoned when the team chose to localize Mother 2 instead . Critics noted in retrospect that the game 's release would have been a waste of money if launched as planned alongside the acclaimed Final Fantasy III on an outdated console in a " niche " genre . Years later , a version of the completed , original Mother localization was found and uploaded to the Internet , where it unofficially became known as EarthBound Zero . The unreleased localization featured tweaks to the original Japanese version . On June 14 , 2015 , before the Nintendo World Championships , Nintendo released the much @-@ awaited official English version of Mother , with the title EarthBound Beginnings , on the Wii U Virtual Console in North America and Europe . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's soundtrack was composed by Keiichi Suzuki and Hirokazu Tanaka . Tanaka was a video game composer working for Nintendo who had previously composed for games such as Super Mario Land and Metroid , while Suzuki was a composer and musician for bands of many different genres . The NES was only able to play three notes at a time , which Suzuki has noted greatly limited what he was able to produce , as he could not create some of the sounds he wanted . 
 An eleven @-@ track album of songs inspired by the game 's soundtrack was recorded in Tokyo , London , and Bath and released by CBS / Sony Records on August 21 , 1989 . The album contained mostly vocal arrangements in English and was likened by RPGFan reviewer Patrick Gann to compositions by the Beatles and for children 's television shows . He found the lyrics " cheesy and trite " but appreciated the " simple statements " in " Eight Melodies " and the " quirky and wonderful " " Magicant " . Only the last song on the album is in chiptune . Gann ultimately recommended the 2004 remastered release over this version . The game 's soundtrack contains several tracks later used in subsequent series games . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Mother received a " Silver Hall of Fame " score of 31 / 40 from Japanese reviewer Weekly Famitsu . Reviewers noted the game 's similarities with the Dragon Quest series and its simultaneous " parody " of the genre 's tropes . They thought the game 's sequel , EarthBound , to be very similar and a better implementation of Mother 's gameplay ideas . Critics also noted the game 's high difficulty level and balance issues . Mother sold 150 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Jeremy Parish of USgamer described the game as a mild @-@ mannered parody ( " between satire and pastiche " ) of the role @-@ playing game genre , specifically the Dragon Quest series . He noted that Mother , like many Japanese role @-@ playing games , emulated the Dragon Quest style : the windowed interface , first @-@ person perspective in combat , and graphics , but differed in its contemporary setting and non @-@ fantasy story . Parish commented that Atlus 's 1987 Digital Devil Story : Megami Tensei was similarly set in the modern day , though it devolved into science fiction and fantasy in ways Mother did not . He added that the game has " a sense of wonder and magic realism ... in the context of childhood imagination " as Ninten can feel more like someone " pretending " to be a Dragon Quest @-@ style hero than a hero in his own right . Parish said this makes the player wonder which game events are real and which are Ninten 's imagination . Parish cited Itoi 's interest in entering the games industry to make a " satirical " role @-@ playing game as proof of the genre 's swift five @-@ year rise to widespread popularity in Japan . 
 Cassandra Ramos of RPGamer praised the game 's graphics and music , and considered it among the console 's best , with " rich , ... nicely detailed " visuals , Peanuts @-@ style characters , and " simple but effective " audio . In contrast , she found the battle sequences aesthetically " pretty bland " and , otherwise , the game 's " least interesting " aspect . Overall , she found Mother " surprisingly complex ... for its time " , and considered its story superior to ( but less " wacky " than ) its sequel . She especially recommended the game for EarthBound fans . 
 Parish credited Itoi for the game 's vision and compared his ability and literary interests with American author Garrison Keillor . Parish felt that Itoi 's pedigree as a writer and copywriter was well suited for the space @-@ limited , 8 @-@ bit role @-@ playing game medium , which privileged Mother ahead of other games written by non @-@ writers . USgamer 's Parish noted how the game 's non @-@ player characters would " contemplate the profound and trivial " instead of reciting the active plot . He added that the game 's lack of an official North American release has bolstered the reputation and revere of its immediate sequel . 
 While Parish said Mother 's script was " as sharp as EarthBound 's " , he felt that the original 's game mechanics did not meet the same level of quality . Mother lacked the " rolling HP counter " and non @-@ random encounters for which later entries in the series were known . Parish also found the game 's balance to be uneven , as the statistical character attributes and level of difficulty scaled incorrectly with the game 's progression . Rose Colored Gaming , a company that made custom reproductions of the NES cartridge , noted that the Japanese release 's was more challenging than the unreleased English localization . RPGamer 's Ramos similarly found balance issues , with a high amount of battles , difficult enemies , reliance on grinding , and some oversized levels . Parish wrote earlier for 1UP.com that in comparison to EarthBound , Mother is " worse in just about every way " , a clone where its sequel was " a satirical deconstruction of RPGs " . He wrote that the game 's historical significance is not for its actual game but for the interest it generated in video game emulation and the preservation of unreleased games . 
 Mother was rereleased in Japan as the single @-@ cartridge Mother 1 + 2 for the Game Boy Advance in 2003 . This version uses the extended ending of the unreleased English prototype , but is only presented in Japanese . Starmen.net hosted a Mother 25th Anniversary <unk> in 2014 with a livestream of the game and plans for a remixed soundtrack . Later that year , fans released a 25th Anniversary Edition ROM hack that updated the game 's graphics , script , and gameplay balance . 
 = Paul Tremo = 
 Paul Tremo ( 1733 / 34 – 1810 ) was the head chef at the court of King Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski of Poland . He was born in Berlin , in a family of French Huguenots . As the king 's favourite cook , he was responsible for the culinary side of royal banquets , including Thursday Dinners to which Stanislaus Augustus invited Warsaw 's leading intellectuals . He followed the king to Saint Petersburg after the latter 's abdication in 1795 , but returned to Warsaw after his death in 1798 . His cooking style combined Polish , French and other west European influences . As a mentor to aspirant Polish chefs and author of recipes which circulated in handwritten copies , he was instrumental in the development of modern Polish cuisine that was more moderate and cosmopolitan than old Polish cookery . 
 = = Life = = 
 Paul Tremo was born on 1 April 1733 or 1734 in Berlin as the middle son of Elie <unk> and his wife , Louise Dinant . Elie 's father , of the same name , was a Huguenot from the French province of Poitou , who at the turn of the 18th century fled religious persecution in France following the Edict of Fontainebleau and settled in Berlin , encouraged by the Edict of Potsdam . Both Paul Tremo 's father and grandfather worked in cotton processing , but two of Elie Junior 's sons – the eldest Jacques ( 1729 – 1788 ) and Paul – chose to pursue their careers as cooks . Their family name is variously noted in Berlin church records as <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , but Jacques and Paul Polonized its spelling to Tremo upon their migration to the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . 
 In 1762 , Paul Tremo landed a job as a court chef to Stanisław Poniatowski , a Polish aristocrat and titular grand <unk> of Lithuania . Two years later , in 1764 , Poniatowski was elected and crowned king of Poland , taking the regnal name Stanislaus Augustus . Paul Tremo and his brother , Jacques , were employed at the royal court in Warsaw , with their jobs titles variously listed in court payrolls as maître d 'hôtel or <unk> ( master chef ) . Of all chefs working at the court , it was Paul Tremo who enjoyed the status of the king 's favourite cook , accompanying him in all his travels . This status can be inferred from his salary compared with those of his colleagues ; in 1795 , he received a payment of 902 @.@ 15 florins , while two other royal master chefs earned 560 and 144 florins , respectively . 
 Tremo lived in apartments at the Royal Castle of Warsaw and in the Royal Baths Park . Additionally , in 1789 , as a token of royal favour , Tremo was given a manor house in the Warsaw suburb of <unk> ( now the part of Warsaw in the vicinity of <unk> Square ) . While Jacques Tremo was married with at least one daughter and two sons , both of whom served in Polish military formations , Paul Tremo remained single and childless . At home , he employed a female cook who prepared simple meals for him , as he never consumed the dishes he concocted at work . 
 Following Stanislaus Augustus 's abdication brought about by the Third Partition of Poland in 1795 , Tremo accompanied the former king to his exile in Grodno and then in Saint Petersburg . After Poniatowski 's death in 1798 , Tremo declined a job offer from Emperor Paul I of Russia on the pretext of travelling to a spa for health reasons and returned to Warsaw . He died in 1810 in his <unk> manor and was buried at an unknown location in the cemetery of the Evangelical Reformed ( Calvinist ) Church in Warsaw . 
 = = Work = = 
 Tremo gained Poniatowski 's trust as the cook able to satisfy both his palate and his dietary requirements . The teetotal king suffered from gastric ailments from an early age . He usually started his day with a cup of hot chocolate or bouillon . His favourite dish was roast or stewed mutton , which he washed down with spring water . Tremo often consulted royal menus with the court physician and occasionally prepared separate dishes specifically for the king to accommodate his sensitive stomach . Tomatoes , for example , were considered detrimental to the monarch 's health and were never used in Tremo 's recipes . 
 In the royal kitchen , Tremo oversaw all stages of meal preparation , from procuring ingredients to composing menus , directing the work of cooks and kitchen boys , to personally seasoning the dishes before serving . To broaden his culinary knowledge , he studied classic cookbooks , such as the ancient Roman Apicius , and also set out on international learning trips , which familiarized him with contemporary German , French and English cooking practices . He introduced novel French flavours and cooking techniques to Polish cuisine , making it lighter and more moderate in the use of fat , sugar , vinegar , salt and expensive exotic spices . His repertoire combined old Polish dishes with French specialities . The former included clear borscht ( beetroot soup ) served over uszka ( ear @-@ shaped stuffed dumplings ) , Polish tripe soup , roast capon , and pike in the Polish style ; the latter , <unk> <unk> , roast duck , and <unk> à la mode . At royal banquets , such as the Thursday Dinners to which Stanislaus Augustus invited Warsaw 's leading intellectuals , he served the king 's favourite mutton , cold cuts , pâtés , as well as game bird dishes , such as larded hazel grouse , wood grouse with red cabbage or black grouse with braised beetroots . 
 In Warsaw , Tremo enjoyed the reputation of being one of the finest chefs in Europe . However , some of his contemporaries complained that his meats were too tough , his sauces too heavy , and his idea of west European culinary trends not always up @-@ to @-@ date . British traveller Elizabeth Craven could not conceal her amusement when , at a banquet given by the Polish king , she was served meat and fish doused generously with melted butter , supposedly in the English style . German @-@ Polish traveller Georg Forster was surprised when a peasant boy whom he had given Tremo 's almond cake , did not enjoy the treat . 
 Tremo wrote at least two books in Polish , which he failed to publish during his lifetime . His <unk> <unk> ( Kitchen botany ) , about the culinary uses of various vegetables , fruits and herbs , has not survived . The other was a cookbook with about 86 recipes , which was widely circulated in manuscript copies , at least two of which have been preserved . One of them , which bears a long , Baroque title translating as " The exact study of the methods of cooking and preparing dishes of meat , fish , vegetables , flour , as well as seasoning of various sauces , making punch essence , etc . " , contains the author 's humorous motto , " not everyone thinks , but everyone eats . " Both copies were published in 1991 in two independent editions . 
 He also influenced the development of modern Polish cuisine by helping raise the next generation of Polish chefs , many of whom worked with him as apprentices . Tremo 's and his brother 's signatures can be found on a master craftsman 's diploma issued in Warsaw in 1783 . One of Tremo 's apprentices was Jan <unk> , who went on to become a prolific food writer , best known for his Kuchnia <unk> ( Hunter 's cuisine ) ; published in 1845 , it is the first Polish cookbook devoted solely to game dishes . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Tremo 's cookbook has been published posthumously in two independent editions , based on two surviving manuscript copies , in the following volumes : 
 <unk> , Danuta ; Dębski , Henryk ( 1991 ) . Kuchnia <unk> [ Royal cuisine ] ( in Polish ) . Wrocław : Condor . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , Jerzy , ed . ( 1991 ) . Kuchnia na <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> JP <unk> , <unk> <unk> Stanisława Augusta <unk> Polskiego [ Cooking for six according to recipes by the Hon. Mr Tremo , first master chef to King Stanislaus Augustus of Poland ] ( in Polish ) . <unk> by Marek Kwiatkowski . Warszawa . 
 = Wignacourt Arch = 
 The Wignacourt Arch known as the Fleur @-@ De @-@ Lys Gate ( Maltese : L @-@ <unk> ta ' Wignacourt <unk> <unk> l @-@ Bieb ta ' Fleur @-@ De @-@ Lys ) is an ornamental arch located on the boundary between Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys ( a suburb of Birkirkara ) and Santa Venera , Malta . The arch was originally built in 1615 as part of the Wignacourt Aqueduct , but it was destroyed between 1943 and 1944 . A replica of the arch was constructed in 2015 , being inaugurated on 28 April 2016 . 
 = = Original arch = = 
 The Wignacourt Aqueduct was constructed between 1610 and 1615 to carry water from springs in Dingli and Rabat to the Maltese capital Valletta . It was named after Alof de Wignacourt , the Grand Master of the Order of St. John , who partially financed its construction . 
 The aqueduct was carried through underground pipes or over a series of stone arches where there were depressions in the ground level . To commemorate the construction of the aqueduct , the Wignacourt Arch was constructed at an area where the aqueduct crossed the road leading from Valletta to Mdina . The Baroque archway had a large arch in the centre , and a smaller arch on either side . It was decorated with three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis , a relief of Wignacourt 's coat of arms , and two marble plaques with Latin inscriptions . The plaque on the side facing Santa Venera reads : 
 HAC <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 VISA EST <unk> <unk> SPIRITUS <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> SPIRITUS <unk> 
 SPIRITUS <unk> SIC <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 ( meaning So far Valletta lay as a corpse . Today the spirit of water has brought life to her . The primordial spirit floated on water . Now water has been drawn to her and that spirit reappears . ) 
 The plaque on the side facing Birkirkara reads : 
 <unk> . <unk> DE <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> 
 ET <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 REN . IN 1739 
 ( meaning Fra Alof de Wignacourt , Grand Master . Valletta city and citadel , the sweetest waters revive eternal salvation . Renovated in 1739 . ) 
 The area around the arch remained rural until the early 20th century . A tram used to pass near the arch between 1905 and 1929 . After World War II , the suburb of Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys developed in the area , and it got its name from the heraldic symbols on the arch . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 On 18 April 1943 , a Royal Air Force breakdown lorry heading to the airfield at Ta ' Qali hit the arch and severely damaged its Santa Venera @-@ facing façade . The central arch was dismantled by military personnel under the supervision of the Public Works Department about two months later . The arch was completely destroyed on 12 February 1944 , when a Royal Army Service Corps truck hit the remaining parts of the structure . A roundabout with a fountain was later built on the site of the arch . Some arches of the aqueduct were demolished in order to widen the road and make way for this roundabout . The arch 's two marble plaques reportedly survived its destruction . 
 = = Reconstruction = = 
 The surviving arches of the Wignacourt Aqueduct were restored between 2004 and 2005 . The chairman of the Bank of Valletta , whose headquarters is located close to the arch , promised to build a replica of the arch but initially nothing materialized . 
 In 2012 , the Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Administrative Committee and the Birkirkara Local Council announced that they were planning to rebuild the arch to the same dimensions of the original . The plans were approved by the Malta Environment and Planning Authority in October of the same year , but they were placed on hold since a tender appeal had to be sorted out . In April 2013 , the tender was awarded to Vaults Ltd instead of V & C Contractors who had originally won the tender . The replica arch cost € 280 @,@ 000 to build , and € 100 @,@ 000 of these were donated by the Bank of Valletta . € 40 @,@ 000 were taken from the Good Causes Fund , while the remaining € 140 @,@ 000 were paid by the Birkirkara Local Council . 
 While preparations were being made for rebuilding the arch , a dispute arose between the Birkirkara and Santa Venera Local Councils on what to call the arch . The former said that it should be called Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Gate , while the latter insisted on using the name Wignacourt Arch . In September 2013 , the Santa Venera council took the Birkirkara council to court and accused it of causing " historical damage " by calling the arch with an incorrect name . The councils agreed on using the name The Wignacourt Arch known as the Fleur @-@ de @-@ Lys Gate in August 2014 . 
 Reconstruction of the arch began on 1 August 2014 , but work stopped soon afterwards after part of the original arch 's foundations was found . Reconstruction continued in January 2015 , and it was complete by the end of November 2015 . Some finishing touches were made in February 2016 , including the installation of two marble plaques . The arch was inaugurated on 28 April 2016 by Prime Minister Joseph Muscat and mayor of Birkirkara Joanne <unk> Grech . 
 A plaque with the coat of arms of Birkirkara and the following inscription was installed to commemorate the reconstruction : 
 IL @-@ <unk> <unk> 
 TA ' <unk> 
 IL @-@ <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> , 
 <unk> MAS @-@ <unk> , IS @-@ <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 <unk> DIN L @-@ <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> L @-@ <unk> TA ' <unk> DE <unk> 
 <unk> 28 TA ' APRIL 2016 
 ( meaning Birkirkara Local Council . Prime Minister Joseph Muscat , together with the mayor , Mrs. Joanne <unk> Grech , inaugurated the Wignacourt Arch known as the Fleur @-@ De @-@ Lys Gate , today 28 April 2016 ) 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 In 2015 , the Central Bank of Malta minted a € 10 silver coin , and <unk> issued a set of two stamps to commemorate the 400th anniversary of the Wignacourt Aqueduct . The Wignacourt Arch is depicted on the coin and one of the stamps . 
 = Kansas City Chiefs = 
 The Kansas City Chiefs are a professional American football team based in Kansas City , Missouri . They compete in the National Football League ( NFL ) as a member club of the league 's American Football Conference ( AFC ) West division . The team was founded in 1960 as the Dallas Texans by businessman Lamar Hunt and was a charter member of the American Football League ( AFL ) . In 1963 , the team relocated to Kansas City and assumed their current name . The Chiefs joined the NFL in the 1970 AFL – NFL merger . The team is valued at just under $ 1 billion . 
 The Chiefs have won three AFL championships , in 1962 , 1966 , and 1969 and became the second AFL team ( after the New York Jets ) to defeat an NFL team in an AFL – NFL World Championship Game , when they defeated the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl IV . The team 's victory on January 11 , 1970 , remains the club 's last championship game victory and appearance to date , and occurred in the final such competition prior to the leagues ' merger coming into full effect . The Chiefs were also the second team , after the Green Bay Packers , to appear in more than one Super Bowl ( and the first AFL team to do so ) and the first to appear in the championship game in two different decades . In the 2015 AFC Wild @-@ Card playoff game , held at NRG Stadium in Houston , Texas on January 9 , 2016 , the Chiefs defeated the Houston Texans 30 – 0 to earn their first NFL playoff win in 23 seasons , dating back to the 1993 – 94 NFL playoffs . The Chiefs ' Wild @-@ Card playoff victory ended what was at the time the third @-@ longest drought in the NFL , and it also ended an NFL record eight @-@ game playoff losing streak . 
 As of 2016 , the Chiefs are the only NFL team based in Missouri , as a result of the St. Louis Rams ' relocation back to Los Angeles . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1959 , Lamar Hunt began discussions with other businessmen to establish a professional football league that would rival the National Football League . Hunt 's desire to secure a football team was heightened after watching the 1958 NFL Championship Game between the New York Giants and Baltimore Colts . After unsuccessful attempts to purchase and relocate the NFL 's Chicago Cardinals to his hometown of Dallas , Texas , Hunt went to the NFL and asked to create an expansion franchise in Dallas . The NFL turned him down , so Hunt then established the American Football League and started his own team , the Dallas Texans , to begin play in 1960 . Hunt hired a little @-@ known assistant coach from the University of Miami football team , Hank Stram , to be the team 's head coach after the job offer was declined by Bud Wilkinson and Tom Landry . 
 Also hired was Don Klosterman as head scout , credited by many for bringing a wealth of talent to the Texans after luring it away from the NFL , often hiding players and using creative means to land them . 
 The Texans shared the Cotton Bowl with the NFL 's cross @-@ town competition Dallas Cowboys for three seasons . The Texans were to have exclusive access to the stadium until the NFL put an expansion team , The Dallas Cowboys , there . While the team averaged a league @-@ best 24 @,@ 500 at the Cotton Bowl , the Texans gained less attention due to the AFL 's relatively lower profile compared to the NFL . In the franchise 's first two seasons , the team managed only a 14 – 14 record . In their third season , the Texans strolled to an 11 – 3 record and a berth in the team 's first American Football League Championship Game , against the Houston Oilers . The game was broadcast nationally on ABC and the Texans defeated the Oilers 20 – 17 in double overtime . The game lasted 77 minutes and 54 seconds , which still stands as the longest championship game in professional football history . 
 It turned out to be the last game the team would play as the Dallas Texans . Despite competing against a Cowboys team that managed only a 9 – 28 – 3 record in their first three seasons , Hunt decided that the Dallas – Fort Worth media market could not sustain two professional football franchises . He considered moving the Texans to either Atlanta , Georgia or Miami , Florida for the 1963 season . However , he was ultimately swayed by an offer from Kansas City Mayor Harold Roe Bartle . Bartle promised to triple the franchise 's season ticket sales and expand the seating capacity of Municipal Stadium to accommodate the team . 
 Hunt agreed to relocate the franchise to Kansas City on May 22 , 1963 , and on May 26 the team was renamed the Kansas City Chiefs . Hunt and head coach Hank Stram initially planned to retain the Texans name , but a fan contest determined the new " Chiefs " name in honor of Mayor Bartle 's nickname that he acquired in his professional role as Scout Executive of the St. Joseph and Kansas City Boy Scout Councils and founder of the Scouting Society , the Tribe of Mic @-@ O @-@ Say . A total of 4 @,@ 866 entries were received with 1 @,@ 020 different names being suggested , including a total of 42 entrants who selected " Chiefs . " The two names that received the most popular votes were " Mules " and " Royals " ( which , 6 years later , would be the name of the city 's Major League Baseball expansion franchise in 1969 , after the Athletics left Kansas City for Oakland following the 1967 season ) . 
 The franchise became one of the strongest teams in the now thriving American Football League , with the most playoff appearances for an AFL team ( tied with the Oakland Raiders ) , and the most AFL Championships ( 3 ) . The team 's dominance helped Lamar Hunt become a central figure in negotiations with NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle to agree on an AFL – NFL merger . In the meetings between the two leagues , a merged league championship game was agreed to be played in January 1967 following the conclusion of the leagues ' respective 1966 seasons . Hunt insisted on calling the game the " Super Bowl " after seeing his children playing with a popular toy at the time , a Super Ball . While the first few games were designated the " AFL – NFL World Championship Game , " the Super Bowl name became its officially licensed title in years to come . 
 The Chiefs cruised to an 11 – 2 – 1 record in 1966 , and defeated the defending AFL Champion Buffalo Bills in the AFL Championship Game . The Chiefs were invited to play the NFL 's league champion Green Bay Packers in the first AFL – NFL World Championship Game . Kansas City and Green Bay played a close game for the first half , but Green Bay took control in the final two quarters , winning the game by a score of 35 – 10 . The Chiefs lost the game but gained the respect of several Packers opponents following the game . The Chiefs ' interleague match @-@ up with the Packers was not the last time that they would face an NFL opponent , especially on the championship stage . The following August , Kansas City hosted the NFL 's Chicago Bears in the 1967 preseason and won the game 66 – 24 . 
 Despite losing to the division rival Oakland Raiders twice in the regular season in 1969 , the two teams met for a third time in the AFL Championship Game where Kansas City won 17 – 7 . Backup quarterback Mike Livingston led the team in a six @-@ game winning streak after Len Dawson suffered a leg injury which kept him out of most of the season 's games . While getting plenty of help from the club 's defense , Dawson returned from the injury and led the Chiefs to Super Bowl IV . Against the NFL champion Minnesota Vikings , who were favored by 12 ½ , the Chiefs dominated the game 23 – 7 to claim the team 's first Super Bowl championship . Dawson was named the game 's Most Valuable Player after completing 12 @-@ of @-@ 17 passes for 142 yards and one touchdown , with 1 interception . The following season , the Chiefs and the rest of the American Football League merged with the National Football League after the AFL – NFL merger became official . The Chiefs were placed in the American Football Conference 's West Division . 
 From 1960 to 1969 , the Chiefs / Texans won 87 games , which is the most in the 10 year history of the AFL . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1970 , the Chiefs won only seven games in their first season in the NFL and missed the playoffs . The following season , the Chiefs tallied a 10 – 3 – 1 record and won the AFC West Division . Head coach Hank Stram considered his 1971 Chiefs team as his best , but they failed to capture their championship dominance from 1969 . Most of the pieces of the team which won Super Bowl IV two years earlier were still in place for the 1971 season . The Chiefs tied with the Miami Dolphins for the best record in the AFC , and both teams met in a Christmas Day playoff game which the Chiefs lost 27 – 24 in double overtime . The Dolphins outlasted the Chiefs with a 37 @-@ yard field goal . The game surpassed the 1962 AFL Championship Game as the longest ever at 82 minutes and 40 seconds . The game was also the final football game at Kansas City 's Municipal Stadium . 
 In 1972 , the Chiefs moved into the newly constructed Arrowhead Stadium at the Truman Sports Complex outside of Downtown Kansas City . The team 's first game at Arrowhead was against the St. Louis Cardinals , a preseason game which the Chiefs won 24 – 14 . Linebacker Willie Lanier and quarterback Len Dawson won the NFL Man of the Year Award in 1972 and 1973 , respectively . The Chiefs would not return to the post @-@ season for the remainder of the 1970s , and the 1973 season was the team 's last winning effort for seven years . Hank Stram was fired following a 5 – 9 season in 1974 , and many of the Chiefs ' future Hall of Fame players would depart by the middle of the decade . From 1975 to 1988 , the Chiefs had become a laughing stock of the NFL and provided Chiefs fans with nothing but futility . Five head coaches struggled to achieve the same success as Stram , compiling an 81 – 121 – 1 record . 
