 Author and talk show host Dennis Prager taught at East Midwood 's Hebrew Day school , and famous congregational members have included Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , who was confirmed at East Midwood , and filmmaker Marc Levin . Levin 's grandfather , Herman Levin , had been a president of the East Midwood Jewish Center , and had also helped found , and been a long @-@ time lay @-@ leader of , the Reconstructionist movement . 
 East Midwood has also had members who have died under tragic circumstances , including Jason <unk> , who was killed in the September 11 , 2001 attacks , and Danny Farkas , a New York police lieutenant and National Guard soldier who died while stationed in Kabul , Afghanistan . 
 = Robert le diable = 
 Robert le diable ( Robert the Devil ) is an opera in five acts composed by Giacomo Meyerbeer from a libretto written by Eugène Scribe and Germain Delavigne . Robert le diable is regarded as one of the first grand operas at the Paris Opéra . It has only a superficial connection to the medieval legend of Robert the Devil . 
 The opera was immediately successful from its first night on 21 November 1831 at the Opéra ; the dramatic music , harmony and orchestration , its melodramatic plot , its star singers and its sensational stage effects compelled Frédéric Chopin , who was in the audience , to say , " If ever magnificence was seen in the theatre , I doubt that it reached the level of splendour shown in Robert ... It is a masterpiece ... Meyerbeer has made himself immortal " . Robert initiated the European fame of its composer , consolidated the fame of its librettist , Scribe , and launched the reputation of the new director of the Opéra , Louis @-@ Désiré Véron , as a purveyor of a new genre of opera . It also had influence on development of the ballet , and was frequently mentioned and discussed in contemporary French literature . 
 Robert continued as a favourite in opera houses all over the world throughout the nineteenth century . After a period of neglect , it began to be revived towards the end of the twentieth century . 
 = = Background = = 
 Giacomo Meyerbeer 's early studies had been in Germany , but from 1816 to 1825 he worked in Italy . There he studied opera , then dominated by Gioachino Rossini , and wrote his own Italian operas , which were moderately successful and also had some performances in other European countries . The success of Il crociato in Egitto ( 1824 ) throughout Europe , including at Paris in 1825 , persuaded Meyerbeer , who was already thirty @-@ three years old , to fulfil at last his ambition to base himself in Paris , and to seek a suitable libretto for an opera to be launched there . 
 Meyerbeer first mentions Robert le diable in his diaries in February 1827 . The Journal de Paris announced on 19 April 1827 that the libretto of Scribe and Delavigne had been passed by the censor and that ' the music is to be entrusted to a composer , M. Meyer @-@ Beer , who , having acquired a brilliant reputation in Germany and Italy , is extending it to our country , where several of his works have been already successfully <unk> 
 The libretto was fabricated on the basis of old legends about Duke Robert the Magnificent of Normandy , the father of William the Conqueror , alleged in some versions to have been the son of the Devil . The librettists padded out this outline with a variety of melodramatic incidents . The plot reflected ' the fantastic legendary elements which fascinated the opera public of 1830 ' , a taste which had evolved from the 1824 Paris production of Carl Maria von Weber 's Der Freischütz ( in its French version Robin des bois ) , which also features a doubtful hero befriended by a demon promising him success . 
 The libretto was originally planned as a three @-@ act opéra comique for the Opéra @-@ Comique theatre . Meyerbeer stopped work on the opera in 1827 when the theatre underwent financial difficulties . In August 1829 , the composer and librettists agreed to refashion the work in a five @-@ act form to meet the requirements of the Paris Opéra . This entailed some significant rewriting of the storyline , reducing the essentially comic role of Raimbaut ( who vanishes after Act 3 in the final version , but whose antics – including the spending of Bertram 's money – continued throughout in the earlier libretto ) . It also meant that the traditional ' pairing ' of lovers in opéra comique ( Robert / Isabelle paralleled throughout by the ' lower @-@ class ' Raimbaut / Alice ) was swept aside in favour of concentration on the more sensational story @-@ line of Robert 's diabolic ancestry . 
 The contract for the opera , specifying it as a " grand opera in five acts and seven scenes " , was signed by the then director of the Opéra , Émile <unk> , on 29 December 1829 . Meyerbeer completed the composition of the work in Spa , Belgium in June and July 1830 . Its characterisation as a ' grand opera ' placed it in succession to Auber 's La muette de Portici ( 1828 ) and Rossini 's Guillaume Tell ( 1829 ) in this new genre . The composer undertook further work on the opera in early 1831 , converting spoken passages to recitatives and adding ballet episodes , including , in Act 3 , the " Ballet of the Nuns " , which was to prove one of the opera 's great sensations , and which Henri Duponchel had suggested to replace the original humdrum scenario set in Olympus . He also rewrote the two major male roles of Bertrand and Robert to suit the talents of Nicolas Levasseur and Adolphe Nourrit , respectively . 
 = = Performance history = = 
 = = = Premiere seasons in Paris = = = 
 The opera premiered on 21 November 1831 at the Paris Opéra . The success owed much to the opera 's star singers – Levasseur as Bertram , Nourrit as Robert — and to the provocative " Ballet of the Nuns " in the third act , featuring the great ballerina , Marie Taglioni . 
 The choreography for the ballet was elaborated by the ballerina 's father , Filippo Taglioni . The audience 's prurient delight in this scandalous scene is well conveyed by the reviewer for the Revue des Deux @-@ Mondes : 
 A crowd of mute shades glides through the arches . All these women cast off their nuns ' costume , they shake off the cold powder of the grave ; suddenly they throw themselves into the delights of their past life ; they dance like <unk> , they play like lords , they drink like sappers . What a pleasure to see these light women ... 
 The set for the ballet was an innovative and striking design by Henri Duponchel and Pierre @-@ Luc @-@ Charles Ciceri . Duponchel had also introduced technical innovations for the staging , including ' English traps ' for the sudden appearance and disappearance of the ghosts . ( Meyerbeer was led to complain that the spectacle was too much and was pushing his music into the background ) . Taglioni danced the Abbess only six times in Paris ; she was replaced by Louise Fitzjames , ( who danced the role 232 times ) . 
 At the invitation of Nourrit , Cornélie Falcon made her debut at the age of 18 at the Opéra in the role of Alice on 20 July 1832 . The cast included Nourrit . Although suffering from stage fright , Falcon managed to sing her first aria without error , and finished her role with " ease and competence . " Her tragic demeanor and dark looks were highly appropriate to the part , and she made a vivid impression on the public , which included on that night Auber , Berlioz , Halévy , Maria Malibran , Giulia Grisi , Honoré Daumier , Alexandre Dumas and Victor Hugo . On hearing her in the role , Meyerbeer himself declared his opera at last ' complete ' . 
 By April 1834 the opera had received over 100 performances in Paris . Nourrit sang the role of Robert until 1837 , when he was replaced as premier tenor at the Opéra by Gilbert <unk> , whom , however , Meyerbeer did not like in the role ; nor did he approve of an alternative , Lafont . However , he was impressed by the newcomer Mario ( Cavaliere Giovanni Matteo di Candia ) , and wrote for him a new aria for Robert which was performed at his debut in the revival of the opera on 30 November 1838 . Mario 's debut was the launch of his very successful career . Others singing in the 1838 revival included Julie Dorus @-@ Gras ( Alice ) , Prosper <unk> ( Bertram ) and François <unk> ( Raimbaut ) . By Meyerbeer 's death in 1864 the opera had been performed over 470 times in Paris alone . 
 = = = Early performances outside Paris = = = 
 A succession of representations throughout Europe and in the Americas launched Meyerbeer 's international fame . A version of the opera – under the title of The Fiend @-@ Father , by <unk> Lacy – was first presented in London at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane on 20 February 1832 ; the original version appeared at the Haymarket Theatre on 11 June of that year . Lacy 's version was given in New York on 7 April 1834 . In 1832 the opera reached Berlin , Strasbourg , Dublin and Liège ; in 1833 Brussels , Copenhagen , Vienna and Marseilles ; in 1834 Lyon , Budapest , The Hague , Amsterdam and Saint Petersburg ; in 1835 ( 12 May ) it obtained its first American performance in the original French at the Théâtre d 'Orléans in New Orleans . Italian versions were given in Lisbon in 1838 , and in Florence in 1840 . 
 Meyerbeer took particular care over the first London and Berlin productions . He travelled to London to check the singers and production for the original version , and requested that the German translation for Berlin be undertaken by the poet Ludwig Rellstab , strongly recommending that Taglioni and her father <unk> be re @-@ engaged , and that Ciceri 's sets should be reproduced . Although Taglioni danced and the sets were retained , the translation was eventually carried out by Meyerbeer 's friend Theodor Hell . Meyerbeer wrote additional ballet music for Taglioni for the Berlin production . 
 The Danish choreographer August <unk> saw Fitzjames 's performance as the Abbess in Paris in 1841 , and based his own choreography , which was used in Copenhagen between 1833 and 1863 , on this . This choreography , which has been fully preserved , represents the only record of Filippo Taglioni 's original . 
 In 1847 Felix Mendelssohn attended a London performance of Robert – an opera which musically he despised – in order to hear Jenny Lind 's British debut , in the role of Alice . The music critic Henry Chorley , who was with him , wrote " I see as I write the smile with which Mendelssohn , whose enjoyment of Mdlle . Lind 's talent was unlimited , turned round and looked at me , as if a load of anxiety had been taken off his mind . " 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 During the early twentieth century , Meyerbeer 's operas gradually disappeared from the stage , partly due to expense , partly due to their denigration by supporters of Wagnerian opera . In 1898 , George Bernard Shaw , in The Perfect Wagnerite , had already cast scorn on Robert and commented that " Nowadays young people cannot understand how anyone could have taken Meyerbeer 's influence seriously . " 
 Nevertheless , productions of Robert included those in New Orleans and Nice in 1901 , Paris ( at the <unk> Lyrique ) in 1911 , Barcelona in 1917 , at the Vienna Volksoper in 1921 and Bordeaux in 1928 . The first production after the Second World War was in Florence in 1968 , a shortened version with a cast including Renata Scotto and Boris Christoff . In 1984 the revival at the Paris Opéra with Rockwell Blake ( Robert ) , Samuel Ramey ( Bertram ) , Walter Donati ( Raimbaut ) , Michèle Lagrange ( Alice ) and June Anderson ( Isabelle ) was the first performance there since 1893 . In 1999 a new production was mounted at the Prague State Opera . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ first century = = = 
 A performance of a new critical edition of Robert le diable by Wolfgang <unk> was presented at the Berlin State Opera in March 2000 with <unk> Zhang ( Robert ) , Stephan <unk> ( Raimbaut ) , <unk> Youn ( Bertram ) , Marina <unk> ( Alice ) , and Nelly <unk> ( Isabelle ) , conducted by Marc Minkowski . 
 A new production of the opera , directed by Laurent Pelly , was premiered at the Royal Opera House London on 6 December 2012 , the first time it had been performed there since 1890 . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The plot of the opera has been often cut or rearranged in various productions . The outline given below follows the description given in The New Grove Dictionary of Opera ( 1992 ) . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 On the shore at Palermo 
 Robert and his mysterious friend Bertram are among a group of knights who are preparing to compete in a tournament for the hand of Princess Isabelle . They all praise wine , women and gambling ( <unk> à <unk> <unk> ) . Robert 's attendant Raimbaut sings a ballad about a beautiful princess from Normandy who married a devil ; the princess had a son , Robert , known as ' le diable ' . Robert indignantly reveals that he is the son in question and condemns Raimbaut to death . Raimbaut begs for pardon and tells Robert that he is engaged to marry . Robert relents and relishes the thought of the droit du seigneur . Raimbaut 's fianceé arrives ; Robert recognizes her as his foster @-@ sister Alice and pardons Raimbaut . Alice tells Robert that his mother has died and that her last words were a warning about a threatening dark force ( Va ! Va ! dit @-@ elle ) . She offers Robert his mother 's will . Robert is too overcome to read it and asks Alice to keep it for the present . Robert expresses his longing for his beloved Isabelle and Alice offers to take a letter to her . Alice warns Robert to beware of Bertram but he ignores her . With Bertram 's encouragement , Robert gambles with the knights and loses all of his money , as well as his armour . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 A room in the palace at Palermo 
 Isabelle is sad at Robert 's absence and expresses her unease that their marriage will never take place ( En vain j ’ <unk> ) . She is delighted when she receives Robert 's letter . Robert arrives and the pair express their pleasure at being together again . Isabelle provides him with new armour for the tournament . Robert is preparing for the tournament when Bertram suddenly appears and persuades Robert to go to a nearby forest , claiming that the Prince of Granada , his rival for Isabelle 's love , wants to fight with him . When Robert has left , the court gathers to celebrate the marriage of six couples with dancing . The Prince of Granada enters and asks Isabelle to present him with arms for the tournament . Isabelle expresses her sorrow at Robert 's disappearance but prepares to open the tournament , singing in praise of chivalry ( La <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 The countryside near Palermo 
 Bertram meets Raimbaut , who has arrived for an assignation with Alice . He gives him a bag of gold and advises him not to marry Alice as his new wealth will attract plenty of women ( Ah ! l ’ <unk> homme ) . Raimbaut leaves and Bertram gloats at having corrupted him . Bertram reveals that Robert , to whom he is truly devoted , is his son ; he then enters an adjoining cave to commune with the spirits of hell . Alice enters and expresses her love for Raimbaut ( Quand je <unk> la Normandie ) . She overhears strange chanting coming from the cave and decides to listen ; she learns that Bertram will lose Robert forever if he cannot persuade him to sign away his soul to the Devil by midnight . On emerging from the cave , Bertram realizes that Alice has heard everything ( Mais Alice , qu ’ as @-@ tu donc ? ) . He threatens her and she promises to keep silent . Robert arrives , mourning the loss of Isabelle , and Bertram tells him that to win her he should seize a magic branch from the tomb of Saint Rosalia in a nearby deserted cloister . Although to take it is sacrilege , the branch will give Robert magical powers . Robert declares that he will be bold and do as Bertram instructs . Bertram leads Robert to the cloister . The ghosts of nuns rise from their tombs , beckoned by Bertram , and dance , praising the pleasures of drinking , gambling and lust . Robert seizes the branch and fends off the demons who surround him . 
 = = = Act 4 = = = 
 A room in the palace 
 Isabelle is preparing for her marriage with the Prince of Granada . Alice rushes in to inform her of what she has learnt about Robert , but she is interrupted by envoys of the Prince who enter bearing gifts . Robert arrives and , using the power of the branch , freezes everyone except himself and Isabelle . 
 Unsettled by the power he 's wielding , he confesses to Isabelle that he is using witchcraft , but begs her not to reject him . She expresses her love for him and implores him to repent ( Robert , toi que j 'aime ) . Robert breaks the branch and the spell it has created , and is taken into custody by Isabelle 's attendants . 
 = = = Act 5 = = = 
 Outside Palermo Cathedral 
 A group of monks extol the power of the Church . Bertram has freed Robert from the guards and the two arrive to prevent the marriage of Isabelle to the Prince of Granada . Bertram attempts to get Robert to sign a document in which he promises to serve Bertram for all eternity . He reveals to Robert that he is his true father and Robert decides to sign the oath from filial devotion . Before he can do so , Alice appears with the news that the Prince has been prevented from marrying Isabelle . Alice prays for divine help ( Dieu puissant , ciel <unk> ) and hands Robert his mother 's will . Robert reads his mother 's message , in which she warns him to beware the man who seduced and ruined her . Robert is wracked by indecision . Midnight strikes and the time for Bertram 's coup is past . He is drawn down to hell . Robert is reunited with Isabelle in the cathedral , to great rejoicing . 
 = = Costume designs for the first production = = 
 The costumes were designed by François @-@ Gabriel <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A number of factors influenced the opera 's very favourable reception . The initial cast contained leading singers of the period and , as it changed , equally brilliant stars ( e.g. Falcon ) were introduced as replacements . The sensational plot and the notoriety of the Nuns ' ballet ensured that the opera was a hot topic in journals and reviews . This was assisted by the marketing skills of the director Véron and the publisher Schlesinger . The scenery was of exceptional quality : " This was as much an opera to see as to hear , and it has been argued that the real hero behind Robert le diable was <unk> , the designer . " Meyerbeer was keen to keep influential persons on his side . For example , he sent free tickets for ' a good box ' to Heinrich Heine . And of course the businessman Véron knew how to use ( and pay ) the claque and its leader Augustin Levasseur . 
 But undoubtedly the novelty and colour of the music of Meyerbeer deserves major credit . The alliance of his German musical training , along with his study of opera for many years in Italy , was highly attractive to a Parisian audience which ' asked only to be astonished and surprised . ' The critic <unk> wrote that Meyerbeer ' straight away [ took ] his position at the crossroads where Italian song and German orchestration have to meet . ' Meyerbeer paid close attention to unusual combinations and textures and original orchestration , examples being the use of low brass and woodwind playing chromatic passages associated with Bertram ; the use of a brass band and male choir to characterise the demons in Act 3 ; and so on . Hector Berlioz was particularly impressed ; he wrote an entire article in the Revue et gazette musicale , entitled ' On the Orchestration of Robert le diable ' , which concluded : 
 Robert le Diable provides the most astonishing example of the power of instrumentation when applied to dramatic music ; ... a power of recent introduction which has achieved its fullest development in the hands of M. Meyerbeer ; a conquest of modern art which even the Italians will have to acknowledge in order to prop up as best they can their miserable system which is collapsing in ruins . 
 The opera was perceived to have weaknesses of characterization . For example , Robert 's dithering behaviour led to one comment that " what is least diabolical in Robert le diable is Robert himself . " But the critic Fétis gave the consensus opinion : " Robert le diable is not only a masterpiece ; it is also a remarkable work within the history of music ... [ it ] seems to me to unite all the qualities needed to establish a composer 's reputation <unk> . " 
 The success of the opera led to Meyerbeer himself becoming a celebrity . King Frederick William III of Prussia , who attended the second performance of Robert , swiftly invited him to compose a German opera , and Meyerbeer was invited to stage Robert in Berlin . In January 1832 he was awarded membership of the Légion d 'honneur . This success – coupled with Meyerbeer 's known family wealth – inevitably also precipitated envy amongst his peers . Berlioz wrote " I can 't forget that Meyerbeer was only able to persuade [ the Opéra ] to put on Robert le diable ... by paying the administration sixty thousand francs of his own money " ; and Chopin lamented " Meyerbeer had to work for three years and pay his own expenses for his stay in Paris before Robert le diable could be staged ... Three years , that 's a lot – it 's too much . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 The success of Robert had profound consequences , for the institution of the Paris Opéra itself , for the music , staging and popularity of nineteenth century opera as a whole , and for ballet . 
 The fortuitous timing of the opera 's premiere , not long after the July Revolution , and its sensational and novel effects , meant that it was widely identified with the new , liberal , ideas of the July Monarchy . As Berlioz commented , Meyerbeer had " not only the luck to be talented , but the talent to be lucky . " Honoré de Balzac ( in his novella <unk> ) and Heinrich Heine ( in his poem Angélique ) are just two of the contemporary writers to express their fascination with the opera . Alexandre Dumas set a chapter of The Count of Monte Cristo between two acts of Robert ; and George Sand wrote about it at length in her Lettres d 'un <unk> . It is the only nineteenth @-@ century opera to have a rose named after it . 
 Also , the absence of starchy historical content in Robert doubtless played a part in attracting the bourgeoisie to the opera , until then regarded as primarily an aristocratic entertainment . The success of the opera also justified the government 's policy of ' privatization ' in selling the management to Véron , and this was a landmark in the dilution of state control and patronage in the fine arts . Although Véron had not commissioned it ( having taken control only after the Revolution ) , Robert was his first new production as manager of the Opéra , and its success underwrote his policy of commissioning similar works . These were to include Meyerbeer 's Les Huguenots , Fromental Halévy 's La Juive , and Daniel Auber 's Gustave III . However , while they used ' the same dazzling theatrical rhetoric ' as Robert , they led to ' uniformly horrific <unk> ' with ' gripping moral urgency ' , their more sophisticated plot @-@ lines reflecting the changes in taste of the new opera clientele . They established Paris as Europe 's opera capital , with the Opéra itself as its centre , in the period 1830 until 1850 . 
 The Act 3 ballet is regarded by some as the first of the ballets blancs ( whereby the principal ballerina and the corps de ballet are all clothed in white ) which became a favourite of the nineteenth @-@ century repertoire . Later examples include La Sylphide ( 1832 ) ( also choreographed by Filippo Taglioni and danced by his daughter ) , Giselle ( 1841 ) , Pas de Quatre ( 1845 ) and Les Sylphides ( 1909 ) . 
 Music from the opera became the subject of numerous virtuoso works of the time . The brilliant transcription of its themes ( Reminiscences de Robert le diable ) made by the composer and virtuoso Franz Liszt was so popular that it became his calling card : on more than one occasion he was forced to interrupt his programmed concerts to play it because of the demands of the audience . On the day of its publication by Maurice Schlesinger , the edition of 500 was completely sold out and it had to be immediately reprinted . Indeed , the success of Robert , whose score was also published by Schlesinger , was said to have saved him from bankruptcy . Frédéric Chopin and Auguste Franchomme jointly composed a Grand duo <unk> on themes from the opera , for cello and piano , in 1832 , and the Italian pianist and composer Adolfo Fumagalli composed an elaborate fantasy on the opera for left hand alone as his Op. 106 . 
 Other pieces based on the opera included works by Adolf von Henselt and Jean @-@ Amédée <unk> . 
 Edgar Degas painted the scene of the Nuns ' ballet twice . The earlier version ( 1871 ) is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York . In 1876 Degas painted a larger version for the singer Jean @-@ Baptiste Faure ( who had sung the part of Bertram ) ; this version is in the Victoria and Albert Museum , London . 
 The work 's popularity spawned many parodies and pastiches including one by W. S. Gilbert , Robert the Devil , which opened at the Gaiety Theatre , London in 1868 . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 = Doctor Who ( series 5 ) = 
 The fifth series of British science fiction television programme Doctor Who began on 3 April 2010 with " The Eleventh Hour " and ended with " The Big Bang " on 26 June 2010 . The series was led by head writer and executive producer Steven Moffat , who took over after Russell T Davies , who ended his involvement with the show after The End of Time . The series comprises 13 episodes , six of which Moffat wrote . Piers Wenger and Beth Willis served with Moffat as executive producers , while Tracie Simpson and Peter Bennett served as producers . Though it is the fifth series since the show 's revival in 2005 and the thirty @-@ first since it began in 1963 , the largely new production team led to the series production codes being reset . 
 This is the first series to feature Matt Smith as the eleventh incarnation of the Doctor , an alien Time Lord who travels through time and space in his TARDIS , which appears to be a British police box on the outside . It also introduces Karen Gillan as the Doctor 's new companion Amy Pond and Arthur Darvill as her fiancé Rory Williams , who is in seven episodes and travels with the Doctor and Amy . Alex Kingston returns as River Song , a mysterious woman from the Doctor 's future who summons the Doctor twice in this series . The main story arc concerns a pattern of cracks in the universe which appear over several episodes , sometimes going unnoticed by the characters . It is discovered that they have the power to erase things from existence , and this happens to Rory , causing Amy to forget him . In the series finale it is revealed that the cracks were caused by the TARDIS exploding and the Doctor is forced to reboot the universe to the state which it was in without the cracks . 
 The seven episodes of the series which were not written by Moffat were penned by guest writers . Mark Gatiss , Toby Whithouse , Simon Nye , Richard Curtis , Gareth Roberts each wrote one episode each , while Chris Chibnall wrote a two @-@ episode story . The series was meant to be fantastical to stand out among other science fiction and fantasy shows and the production team pushed a fairy @-@ tale quality because Moffat believed media aimed at children was some of the most popular among adults . The episodes were directed by directors who were all new to Doctor Who . Filming started in late July 2009 and lasted for approximately nine months and was filmed mostly in Wales with the exception of " The Vampires of Venice " and " Vincent and the Doctor " , which had scenes filmed abroad in Trogir , Croatia . There were design changes from the previous series including a new logo , title sequence , variation of the theme music , interior and exterior of the TARDIS , and version of the Doctor 's sonic screwdriver . 
 The series premiere was watched by 10 @.@ 085 million viewers , the highest watched premiere since " Rose " of the first series , and also broke records on BBC America in the United States and BBC 's online iPlayer . Though overnight ratings had declined compared to other series , one writer calculated that viewership had not changed significantly when time @-@ shifted ratings were taken into account . The series received generally positive reviews , with praise going to Moffat 's story arc as well as the acting of Smith , Gillan and Darvill . However , many reviewers noted that Amy lacked character development and the series did not contain as much heart and emotion as previously in the show . The series gained many awards and nominations ; " Vincent and the Doctor " and the two @-@ part finale were both nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) with the award going to the latter . Smith also became the first actor portraying the Doctor to be nominated for a BAFTA award , though he did not win . The series was accompanied with a soundtrack as well as tie @-@ in books and video games ; four of the latter were released episodically on the BBC 's website and advertised as additional episodes of the series . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 " The Eleventh Hour " , at 65 minutes , was the longest opening episode to date since the return of the series in 2005 . 
 The two part story " The Hungry Earth " / " Cold Blood " saw the return of the Silurians for the first time since Warriors of the Deep in 1984 . 
 = = = Supplemental episodes = = = 
 Two additional scenes were specially filmed for " The Complete Fifth Series " boxset which reveal what occurred between selected regular episodes . The first installment is set between " The Eleventh Hour " and " The Beast Below " , while the second is set between " Flesh and Stone " and " The Vampires of Venice " . 
 = = Casting = = 
 The series introduced a new incarnation of the Doctor , the Eleventh , played by Matt Smith . This followed the departure of David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor , who left the role to help ease the transition from Davies to Moffat 's <unk> . Smith 's agent had called him and suggested that he try out for the role . Moffat was looking to cast a middle @-@ aged actor , who was " young enough to run but old enough to look wise " . However , Smith , who was only 26 when cast , was the third person to audition and the production team knew " [ they ] had their man " . The producers were cautious about casting Smith because they felt that a 26 @-@ year @-@ old actor could not play the Doctor adequately ; BBC Head of Drama and executive producer Piers Wenger shared the sentiment , but noted that Smith was capable enough to play the role . Moffat also stated that Smith did not appear to be youthful at all . Smith 's casting in the role was revealed during an episode of Doctor Who 's companion show Doctor Who Confidential , during which he described the role as " a wonderful privilege and challenge that I hope I will thrive on " . 
 Karen Gillan was cast as Amy Pond , the Doctor 's companion . Andy Pryor , the casting director , suggested Gillan to Moffat after her performance in the fourth series episode " The Fires of Pompeii " , in which she played a soothsayer , but Moffat originally thought she was " short and dumpy " . Later , however , he stated that she was " exactly right for the role " though she portrayed the character differently from how he originally wrote . Gillan auditioned for the role in both her natural Scottish accent and an English one , and it was not until after she was cast that it was decided Amy would be Scottish . Gillan commented that she felt the Scottish accent better suited the character . For the first and last episodes , a young version of Amy , known as " Amelia " , was played by Gillan 's real @-@ life 10 @-@ year @-@ old cousin Caitlin Blackwood . Though the two actresses had not met until the set of the show , Gillan recommended Blackwood for the role , although Blackwood still had to undergo rigorous auditions first . Blackwood and Gillan did get to act together in " The Big Bang " , which Gillan initially found " weird " , though the two actresses became used to it quickly . 
 Alex Kingston , who played the character River Song in the fourth series episodes " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " , reprised her role in the two @-@ part stories " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " and " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " . Kingston did not expect the return , but Moffat always intended for River to return to the series . Arthur Darvill appeared in seven episodes as Rory Williams , Amy Pond 's fiancé , and was also a companion in six of those episodes . Darvill had previously worked with Smith on a play entitled Swimming with Sharks . For his audition , Darvill received two scenes from the first episode and one from the sixth , but beyond the fact Rory was Amy 's boyfriend he was not informed of details of the character . Moffat stated that what stood out about Darvill 's audition was " just how funny " he was . Darvill felt " privileged " to be part of the show , and was pleased with Rory 's storyline . 
 Notable guest stars included James Corden , Annette Crosbie , Tony Curran , Iain Glen , Daisy Haggard , Terrence Hardiman , Toby Jones , Helen McCrory , Neve McIntosh , Ian McNeice , Stephen Moore , Bill Nighy , Sophie Okonedo , Bill Paterson , Meera Syal , and Nina Wadia . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 During the first episode , the Eleventh Doctor still wears his previous incarnation 's costume , but costume designer Ray Holman stated that the costume was broken down and distressed . Over the course of the first episode , he would find his own identity and pick out his defining costume . Smith tried on a wide variety of things to find a look he would feel comfortable and confident in and would identify his Doctor . Smith brought in braces and a tweed jacket ; Holman believed that the tweed jacket was " a bit old for him " but showed that he was a " professor and student at the same time " and gave him " that quality that the Doctor 's still learning , but also has some authority " . Smith suggested a bow tie , which Holman and others did not approve of , but once he had put it on they decided they had the costume . Smith stated he was inspired by the Second Doctor 's costume after watching The Tomb of the Cybermen . Other influences included the " element of a professor " and " big , dusty boots like Indiana Jones " . The men 's clothing store Topman reported that their bow tie sales had risen 94 % for the month of April 2010 , connected to when the series began airing . 
 Gillan had substantial input into Amy 's costume , as well as her hair and make @-@ up . In the first episode , Holman stated that Amy 's identity was not clear and she wore her own clothes later on . Gillan thought that Amy had inner confidence to wear clothes that showed " a bit of skin from time to time " . She tried on many things , but when it came to short skirts she " just thought it was right " and showed that Amy was " comfortable and confident about her look " . She believed that the skirts reflected what young women typically wear at her age . Executive producer Piers Wenger also noted that Amy 's 1970s flying jacket , which she wears " quite a lot " , reflected Gillan was a " born adventurer " and Amy developed a love for travel and adventure . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew and series numbering = = = 
 Doctor Who was renewed for a fifth series in September 2007 . Russell T Davies was succeeded by Steven Moffat as executive producer and head writer , and Julie Gardner was replaced as executive producer by Piers Wenger , who had previously replaced Gardner as Head of Drama for BBC Wales . Beth Willis also serves as an executive producer , and the series is produced by Tracie Simpson and Peter Bennett . However , Murray Gold stayed on as composer for the new series . 
 When Doctor Who was relaunched in 2005 , the new series was marketed as series 1 , although it had been on BBC television for 26 years from 1963 to 1989 . When this series was confirmed by the BBC in September 2007 , it was referred to as " series 5 " , following on from series 4 in 2008 . In August 2009 Doctor Who Magazine announced that this series was to be produced and marketed as " Series One " . The January 2010 edition featured an interview with Moffat , in which he called Series One " exciting " , Series Thirty @-@ One " awe @-@ inspiring " and Series Five " boring and a lie " . In the same issue , he jokingly referred to the season as " series <unk> " , an ongoing joke in subsequent issues . The March edition , referring to it as Series Thirty @-@ One , confirmed production codes in the range 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 13 . However , BBC Programme listings , the BBC iPlayer and DVDs refer to it as " Series 5 " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 With the changes to the show , Moffat wanted to reassure the audience that " nothing has really been lost " and it was the same show and the same character of the Doctor . The story arc of the cracks in the universe was inspired by a crack in the wall of Moffat 's son 's bedroom . Moffat wanted to make sure the show appealed to even young children ; if they could not follow the plot , there would be " big pictures " to entertain them . Moffat believed that Doctor Who was fundamentally for children but it was something everybody loved , comparing it to Star Wars and Toy Story . He considered the " most popular form of entertainment " to be a children 's story . Of the series , he said they " pushed the fairytale side of it " as Doctor Who " now has to be the most fantastical of the fantasy shows " to be more vibrant and " bonkers " than any other fantastical show . 
 In an interview in 2013 , Moffat stated that he had worked out a rough idea for how his first series as the showrunner would work in the event that David Tennant had decided to stay in the show as the Tenth Doctor ; this would have entailed a similar premise to the beginning of " The Eleventh Hour " as broadcast ; 
 Moffat wrote six episodes for the series . The rest were penned by guest writers , as Moffat believed that Doctor Who benefited from different voices . However , he stated that the concepts of the episodes were mostly supplied by him , as he had a " pretty good idea " of what would happen in each episode slot . Moffat knew all of the guest writers " to some degree " and called meeting with them " quite joyous " . However , Matthew Graham , co @-@ creator of Life on Mars and writer of the second series episode " Fear Her " , was not able to write an episode as he was slated to because he did not believe he would have enough time . Moffat later contacted him and asked him to write a two @-@ part episode for the next series , which became " The Rebel Flesh " / " The Almost People " . 
 With the first episode , Moffat intended to introduce the Eleventh Doctor and have him establish his new identity while the second was intended to show the Doctor 's need for a companion and Amy 's importance to him . For the third episode , he asked Mark Gatiss to write an episode concerning " Churchill versus the Daleks " . Moffat wanted to incorporate the popular Daleks into the new series and was also considering redesigning them . Gatiss and Moffat as well as the production team worked together to create Daleks that were big and more colourful , similar to the Daleks found in the films of the 60s . 
 For the fourth and fifth episode , Moffat planned a two @-@ part sequel to his 2007 episode " Blink " , which featured the Weeping Angels . These two episodes , " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " , were intended to be a more action @-@ oriented than " Blink " , and also showed the Angels had a plan rather than scavenging . He also decided to flesh out the Angels as villains themselves and show more of what they can do . " Flesh and Stone " ends with Amy attempting to seduce the Doctor ; Moffat believed this was consistent with the character that had been built up from the first episode . 
 Toby Whithouse originally planned to write a different episode , but Moffat and Wenger thought it was too similar to other episodes in the series and Whithouse wrote " The Vampires of Venice " instead , while his original episode was pushed to the next series . Whithouse was asked to write " a big bold romantic episode " that would be a " good jumping off point " for new viewers to Doctor Who . Moffat figured that in the middle of the series a viewer could " start watching it again " and that it should be " something romantic and funny " . For the next episode , Moffat asked comedy writer Simon Nye to write a story that challenged the relationship between Amy and the Doctor . The episode , titled " Amy 's Choice " , was intended to be Amy 's decision between excitement with the Doctor or life with Rory . The scene in which Rory dies in the false reality was intended to be when Amy realised her feelings for him . Nye wanted to stress that Amy really did love Rory and he was not " just a cypher boyfriend or fiancé " . 
 Moffat contacted Chris Chibnall to write a two @-@ part episode involving the Silurians , villains who had not appeared in the show for over 25 years . As the Silurians were not as well known as other monsters , Moffat instructed Chibnall to reintroduce them . The Silurians featured were intended to be a different branch than those previously seen and bore a different design , which used expensive facial prosthetics and eliminated their third eye . Richard Curtis , who had previously worked with Moffat in the 1999 Comic Relief special Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death , was contacted by Moffat to return the favour and write an episode , which became " Vincent and the Doctor " . Curtis had the idea of an episode about van Gogh for " a long while " and was interested in the fact that van Gogh never knew he was famous . Gillan noted that there was a different approach and style to the episode , and it was more character @-@ driven . 
 Neil Gaiman had written an episode , but it was pushed to the next series due to budget constraints and was replaced with " The Lodger " instead . " The Lodger " was adapted from a comic strip of the same name writer Gareth Roberts had done for Doctor Who Magazine , although he said most of it started " from scratch " The story was inspired by wishing to see the Doctor in normal , every @-@ day human circumstances , as well as Roberts ' enjoyment of stories set on Earth rather than in space . Roberts was interested in doing a television version of the story , but he never mentioned it . However , Moffat was a fan of the comic story and immediately asked to adapt it into an episode when he became showrunner . 
 Aspects of the finale came to Moffat as he was planning the story arc for the series , though he left room to improvise as the story developed . " The Big Bang " ends with the wedding of Amy and Rory . Moffat stated that he had always intended for them to get married " from the off " . The finale also left many questions that would be answered with the next series , concerning the identity of River Song and " The Silence " which appeared to cause the TARDIS to explode . 
 = = = Design changes = = = 
 The series introduced a new logo , which was announced in October 2009 . According to the BBC , it is the eleventh version of the logo to front the show . Moffat stated that the insignia of " DW " in the shape of the TARDIS was " something really new " . The logo was incorporated in a new title sequence , which was not revealed to an audience outside of the BBC until first transmission of " The Eleventh Hour " ; prior press screenings and previews had used a variation of the previous sequence . Moffat wanted a new version of the theme tune , and composer Murray Gold wanted it to " sound a bit reckless " . The new variation , composed by Gold , incorporated a new melody played by electronic trumpets and a faster tempo . The new theme angered some fans , with the BBC receiving 70 complaints as of 18 April 2010 . In response , a Doctor Who spokesman stated , 
 " The arranger has made alterations to the music four times since 2005 , so change is nothing new . It is important for the regeneration of the show to keep revisiting the score while always retaining the haunting and ground @-@ breaking essence of the original . " 
 A new TARDIS prop was used , featuring the St John Ambulance logo that had been used in the early days of the show as well as in the Peter Cushing films of the early 60s , of which Moffat was a fan . Moffat said it was one thing he " really wanted to do " and it was for " no other reason than that [ he ] thought it was prettier " and he wanted the St. John Ambulance sticker on the front . It is also a brighter blue like Cushing 's TARDIS . 
 A new set of the interior of the TARDIS was also designed , which Moffat estimated was three times bigger than the previous set . Moffat did not decide to create the new interior specifically for the new Doctor , but the brief to the set designer was to create a design that would suit Smith 's Doctor . Though he loved the old set , Moffat thought it was time for a new one to " surprise people " , and believed that the spirit of a new era was to change everything . Piers Wenger said that it took " quite a long time to get the design right " and they were careful not to make it too futuristic @-@ looking , as " futuristic " meant nothing to the Doctor . The set was designed by Edward Thomas . The previous TARDIS interior was shown at the beginning of " The Eleventh Hour " ; the Time Rotor on console had to be rebuilt due to the explosion special effects that were used in The End of Time . In " The Eleventh Hour " , the sonic screwdriver is destroyed , and a new version , featuring a green light and metal claws , was created . Smith liked to keep the prop with him at all times " twirling it around and flicking it " which resulted in him breaking four of them . The noise made by the screwdriver was added in post @-@ production using a synthesizer . Moffat described the changes as starting with a " clean slate " which made sense after the previous cast and crew had left . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 All of the directors of the series were new to Doctor Who . Moffat commented that he wanted to " shake things up " and it was " never too early to get rid of the safety net . " Adam Smith directed the first episode as well as the fourth and fifth . Andrew Gunn , Ashley Way , Jonny Campbell , Toby Haynes , and Catherine Morshead each directed two episodes . 
 Filming of the series lasted approximately nine months . Production blocks were arranged as follows : 
 When rehearsing episodes four and five , the first episodes to be produced , director Adam Smith suggested that Smith and Gillan " have an adventure " where they could experience something exciting and laugh and scream . He took them to a " real white knuckle ride " on a boat in Cardiff Bay . Filming began on 20 July 2009 on Southerndown beach , Vale of Glamorgan in scenes for " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " . Moffat wrote that typically with television the first day of filming " will probably be something fairly inconsequential and involve a minor character getting shot , or a close up of a hand or something " which differed from the " iconic " scene involving the Doctor , Amy , River Song and the TARDIS . Forest scenes in " Flesh and Stone " were filmed at Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean over nine nights in July 2009 . 
 Episodes two and three made up the second production block . Scenes in " The Beast Below " were filmed in an orangery at Margam Country Park , Port Talbot during a night shoot on 22 September 2009 . Half of a scene in " The Pandorica Opens " featuring Liz 10 ( Sophie Okonedo ) from " The Beast Below " was filmed there as well . Scenes for Amy and Rory 's town of Leadworth in the first episode , " The Eleventh Hour " , were filmed in the village of Llandaff in Cardiff over various dates in the autumn of 2009 : 29 September , 5 – 7 October , and 20 November . 
 The fourth production block , consisting of " The Hungry Earth " and " Cold Blood " , was filmed in October and November 2009 with location filming done in Llanwynno , Wales . Scenes for " Cold Blood " were also filmed at the Plantasia botanical garden in Swansea on 13 November 2009 as well as in Cardiff 's Temple of Peace and other locations and unusual sets for the Silurian city . " The Vampires of Venice " and " Vincent and the Doctor " were filmed mainly in the town of Trogir in Croatia , which was used as Venice and Paris respectively . However , a small crew did go to Venice to take wide shots of coastal buildings ; the episode was not filmed there because it would take too long to cover up the modern shops in present @-@ day Venice . Scenes in " The Vampires of Venice " were also filmed at Atlantic College , Caerphilly Castle , Castell Coch , the Town Hall of Trogir , and <unk> Fawr Manor . 
 The grounds for the estate at Margam Country Park was then used for the placement of " <unk> " , a lightweight replica of Stonehenge for " The Pandorica Opens " . Several other scenes from " The Pandorica Opens " and " The Big Bang " were also filmed there during the first few days of February 2010 . The Pandorica chamber was filmed on set in the Upper Boat Studios , the largest set ever built there . Additional scenes in " The Big Bang " were filmed in Brangwyn Hall and Miskin Manor . " Amy 's Choice " was partially filmed in Skenfrith , Wales to represent " Upper Leadworth " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The first trailer for the fifth series was shown on television and released online shortly after the broadcast of the second part of The End of Time on 1 January 2010 . On 17 February , a new promotional image was released . A second teaser trailer was released on 20 February , a 3D version of which was shown in cinemas with Alice in Wonderland . Moffat officially confirmed the start date of 3 April on BBC Breakfast on 19 March . Also on 19 March , a trailer shown at the press screening of episode one was released online . BBC America , who would show the series in the United States , released an extended trailer on 21 March . Promotional touring for the series began on 29 March and ended the two days later , with Smith and Gillan presenting their first episode in Belfast , Inverness , Sunderland , Salford , and Northampton . Touring in New York City took place on 14 April , where the first episode was screened in the Paley Center for Media and the Village East Movie Theatre . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 The fifth series of Doctor Who debuted on BBC One on 3 April 2010 with " The Eleventh Hour " , an extended 65 @-@ minute episode . It concluded with " The Big Bang " on 26 June . The sixth episode , " The Vampires of Venice " , was broadcast at 6 : 00 p.m. ( BST ) , the earliest start time for an episode of Doctor Who since its return in 2005 . 
 = = = International broadcast = = = 
 The series was shown in Australia on the ABC 's <unk> service , launching at midnight on 16 April 2010 before airing on ABC1 on 18 April 2010 . It began airing in the United States on 17 April 2010 on BBC America and in Canada on the same date on Space . This was the first airing of a full series of Doctor Who on BBC America first , with the first four series premiering on the Sci Fi Channel , with only reruns on BBC America . The gap between UK and US airing was also shortened considerably . In New Zealand , the series began airing on Prime from 2 May 2010 . 
 = = = DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases = = = 
 On 7 June 2010 , the first volume of Series 5 was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray format in Region 2 , containing the episodes " The Eleventh Hour " , " The Beast Below " and " Victory of the Daleks " . The second volume of the series was released on 5 July on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , containing the episodes " The Time of Angels " , " Flesh and Stone " and " The Vampires of Venice " . " Amy 's Choice " , " The Hungry Earth " , and " Cold Blood " followed on the third volume , which was released in DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 2 August 2010 . The fourth and final volume , containing " Vincent and the Doctor " , " The Lodger " , " The Pandorica Opens " and " The Big Bang " was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 6 September . 
 A complete collection of the series ' episodes was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in Region 2 on 8 November 2010 . It was released in Region 1 the following day on 9 November . In Region 4 , the boxset was released on 2 December 2010 . The boxset contained the two " Meanwhile in the TARDIS " additional scenes , profiles of various enemies in " The Monster Files " , cut down versions of Doctor Who Confidential , out @-@ takes , in @-@ vision commentaries , video diaries , and trailers and promos for the series . The commentaries were a departure from the previous releases , as it only had six instead of a full thirteen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Final consolidated viewing figures showed that the premiere , " The Eleventh Hour " , was watched by 10 @.@ 085 million viewers , the highest @-@ watched premiere since " Rose " and the eighth highest figure for an episode of Doctor Who since it was revived in 2005 . In the US , the first episode set a record for BBC America , with an average of 1 @.@ 2 million viewers and 0 @.@ 9 million in the adults aged 25 – 54 demographic . Within one week of broadcast , " The Eleventh Hour " received 1 @.@ 27 million hits on BBC 's online iPlayer service , the record for most requests in a week . It went on to become the most requested episode of 2010 with 2 @.@ 2 million views ; Doctor Who was also named the most watched programme of the year on the service . 
 " The Hungry Earth " received the lowest overnight ratings since the series had returned in 2005 with 4 @.@ 4 million viewers but in terms of final consolidated ratings , " The Lodger " received the lowest of the series . The episodes were also given an Appreciation Index , a measure of how much the audience enjoyed the programme . The BBC considers a score 85 or above " excellent " ; " Victory of the Daleks " and " Amy 's Choice " were the only ones to come below that , with 84 . " The Time of Angels " and " The Lodger " both scored 87 , which was subsequently beaten by " The Pandorica Opens " ( 88 ) . The finale , " The Big Bang " , scored 89 , the highest for the series and for the four main channels on the day it was broadcast . 
 Based on overnight ratings , the series was reported as averaging six million viewers , a drop of 1 @.@ 2 million from the previous series . However , managers at the BBC claimed that overall viewing numbers had not declined as more people watched it online or after recording it . Stephen Bray of Den of Geek decided to " put things straight " and figured that , with final ratings taken into account of the first eleven episodes of the series ( the final two ratings not having been released when the article was published ) , the series averaged 7 @.@ 8 million viewers , beating the average of all the episodes of the second series ( 7 @.@ 5 million ) , the third series ( 7 @.@ 7 million ) and the first eleven episodes of the fourth series ( 7 @.@ 7 million ) . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Series 5 has received generally positive reviews from critics . Matt Wales of IGN gave the entire series a " great " rating of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , saying that it " <unk> 't have been perfect " but rebooted the show " with a burst of creative energy " and " got bold , exciting , witty , smart , home @-@ grown event television back on the small screen " . He praised Smith for " [ dazzling ] with a performance that painted the Doctor as thoroughly alien " and the " effortless " character development of the Doctor , but was more critical of the character of Amy Pond . He thought that she was " thoroughly watchable " with Gillan 's acting abilities and chemistry with Smith , but criticised the character for being " frequently painted in largely two @-@ dimensional strokes that made for a brash , sometimes irritating turn " and the series as a whole for lacking " heart to ground the elaborate sci @-@ fi trimmings " . Of the story , he praised Moffat 's " beautifully conceived " story arc and the complexities of the narrative . 
 Zap2it 's Sam McPherson gave the series an A and thought it was the show 's strongest series since its revival in 2005 . He praised Smith and Gillan , though he noted that Amy did not have much character development , and considered Darvill " might just be one of the best actors on television currently " . However , he noted that most of the episodes took place on Earth or spaceships , and wished to see the Doctor , Amy and Rory " branch out more in the future " . Dave Golder of SFX gave the series four out of five stars , noting that it looked " very promising " though " there was a tentative , slightly awkward feel to the series " , similar to the first series . He also labelled Smith as " magnificent " and Gillan as " lovely , although so far Amy 's character has been so dictated by the requirements of the arc plot that it 's difficult to feel that we 've really got to know her yet " . 
 In a review of the first six episodes , Dan Martin of The Guardian thought that they were strong and it was " generally funnier [ and ] appears to have rewritten the rule that said Doctor Who had to out @-@ epic itself every year " . However , he was critical of the lack of emotion that had previously inhibited the show , and did not yet empathise with Amy . When reviewing the first eleven episodes , Martin noted that the series had been put at a high expectation due to the quality of Moffat 's previous Doctor Who episodes , which may have caused disappointment to those who expected " dark , adult versions of Who every week " as Moffat took more of a fairy @-@ tale approach and his dialogue was " less soapy and more spiky " than that of Davies . Revisiting previous issues , he noted that there was less emotion but " when someone did die ... it ploughed heavy into the heart " and Amy was " a revelation " , though she sometimes " felt a little one @-@ note " . 
 Gem Wheeler of Den of Geek gave the series five out of five stars , particularly praising Smith 's Doctor . Wheeler noted that Amy " seemed a little underwritten at first , but the series finale helped to fill in the apparent gaps in her personality " and also praised Darvill . Slice of SciFi reviewer Michael Hickerson praised Moffat 's " fascinating " story arc which made the series seem more consistent , as it gave the audience answers as it went along and also explored its impact on the characters . He called it " the best season of the new series " though " there has yet to be a perfect season of the show . This one just comes closer than a lot of others " . However , Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph , while optimistic that it would " go from strength to strength next year " , called the series " something of a curate 's egg , and perhaps not quite as strong as previous years overall " . Radio Times 's Patrick Mulkern praised Moffat for " [ rebooting ] the series with an ambitious game @-@ plan , a delightful fairy @-@ tale vibe adults can enjoy too , and [ finding ] stars in Matt Smith , Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill " . However , while he praised Moffat 's other episodes , he considered " The Beast Below " a " turkey " . 
 The A.V. Club ranked Doctor Who the 25th best show of 2010 , saying that it " lacked a truly weak episode " and highlighting " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " , " Vincent and the Doctor " , and " The Lodger " as the best episodes . Digital Spy ranked the programme the third best of 2010 , commenting that it " gave us some terrific episodes — the beautifully tragic ' Vincent and the Doctor ' , the wonderfully @-@ paced opener and the well @-@ imagined finale ... but also the multi @-@ colored monstrosity ' Victory of the Daleks ' . Overall , a decent enough start for the new team , but with such a strong pedigree , we couldn 't help but feel a little underwhelmed . " 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 After the broadcast of " The Eleventh Hour " , which introduced Amy as a kissogram in a skimpy policewoman outfit who watched the Doctor undress and change into his new costume , it was reported that several viewers had criticised the character and her occupation online and that it was " not fitting for a family show " . Wenger defended the character , saying that , " The whole kissogram thing played into Steven 's desire for the companion to be feisty and outspoken and a bit of a number . Amy is probably the wildest companion that the Doctor has travelled with , but she isn 't promiscuous . " Gillan also defended her character , claiming that girls Amy 's age often wore short skirts and Amy was a " strong female " and a " normal girl with normal impulses " . The BBC received 43 complaints over the scene in " Flesh and Stone " in which Amy attempts to seduce the Doctor . A member of pressure group Mediawatch @-@ uk also commented that the scene seemed " slightly out of place in a children 's programme " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " Vincent and the Doctor " and " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " were nominated for the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , with the award going to the latter . This was the fifth Hugo Award for Doctor Who and the fourth for Moffat , after " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " , " The Girl in the Fireplace " , and " Blink " . " Vincent and the Doctor " was nominated for the Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation at the 2010 Nebula Awards , but it lost to the film Inception . The Mill , Doctor Who 's computer @-@ generated effects team , won a Royal Television Society Craft and Design Award for their work on " The Pandorica Opens " . 
 In Canada 's Constellation Awards , Doctor Who 's fifth series received six nominations . Smith and Tony Curran ( Vincent van Gogh ) were both nominated for Best Male Performance in a 2010 Science Fiction Television Episode , while Gillan was nominated for Best Female Performance for " Amy 's Choice " . Doctor Who was nominated for Best Science Fiction Television Series but lost to Stargate : Universe . Moffat and Curtis were both nominated for Best Overall 2010 Science Fiction Film or Television Script for " The Eleventh Hour " and " Vincent and the Doctor " respectively . Gold was the only winner , nominated for his music in the Best Technical Accomplishment in a 2010 Science Fiction Film or Television Production category . 
 Smith was nominated for Leading Actor in the television division of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards , becoming the first actor portraying the Doctor to gain a BAFTA nomination . He lost to Daniel Rigby for his work in the television film Eric and Ernie . At the BAFTA Cymru awards , Mark Hutchinson won the " Lighting " category for his work on " The Eleventh Hour " , while Barbara Southcott was nominated for " Make Up & Hair " for " Vampires of Venice " and William Oswald was nominated for the " Editing : Fiction " category for " The Time of Angels " . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 A two @-@ disc soundtrack containing 63 tracks of the score from this series ( from " The Eleventh Hour " to " The Big Bang " ) , as composed by Murray Gold , was released on 8 November 2010 by Silva Screen Records . It was the second " double album " following the previous release ; Gold stated that the previous " double album " had been popular and Silvia Screen allowed another one . The tracks are presented in episode order , which Gold said " should give a sense of roaming through this gigantic scope " . 
 = = Tie @-@ in media = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In the BBC Books Doctor Who New Series Adventures line , a range of spin @-@ off novels that began in 2005 with the Ninth Doctor and <unk> of the television series , six novels were released corresponding to the series . On 22 April 2010 the first three , Apollo 23 by Justin Richards , Night of the Humans by David Llewellyn , and The Forgotten Army by Brian Minchin were released , featuring the Eleventh Doctor and Amy . On 8 July 2010 three more novels were released , Nuclear Time by Oli Smith , The Glamour Chase by Gary Russell , and The King 's Dragon by Una McCormack , each featuring the Doctor and Amy with Rory . 
 Science fiction writer Michael Moorcock , who had watched Doctor Who since the beginning , also wrote a novel . Entitled The Coming of the <unk> , the novel was an extended 345 pages and was released 14 October 2010 . On 16 September 2010 , BBC Books released their first Doctor Who graphic novel , The Only Good Dalek , featuring the Doctor and Amy . They also released The Brilliant Book of Doctor Who 2011 , a guide to the series that featured behind @-@ the @-@ scenes information . The book was made available in the UK on 30 September 2010 . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 In March 2010 , it was reported that Nintendo had signed a £ 10 million contract for Doctor Who games for Wii and DS . The games were marketed to Nintendo as the brand was known for being family @-@ oriented and the Wii in particular was something families played together . The BBC also was certain to monitor the games and make sure they did not contain anything too violent . Doctor Who : Evacuation Earth was released for the DS and featured the Daleks , whereas Doctor Who : Return to Earth featured the Cybermen and was released for the Wii . Both games featured the Eleventh Doctor and Amy Pond , voiced by Smith and Gillan respectively . Evacuation Earth was released 12 November 2010 , while Return to Earth followed on 19 November . Additionally , Wii remotes and DS <unk> modeled after the sonic screwdriver were released to accompany the games . 
 In April 2010 , the BBC announced The Adventure Games , four interactive episodes available free @-@ to @-@ download on the BBC Doctor Who website featuring the Doctor and Amy voiced by Smith and Gillan . Piers Wenger referred to them as four extra episodes in the series and everything included was part of the Doctor Who universe . The game was developed by Charles Cecil and Sheffield @-@ based game company Sumo , while the games were written by Phil Ford and James Moran and overseen by Moffat and the producers of the show . Cecil was contacted by BBC Wales Editor of Interactive Iain <unk> , who asked him about developing a Doctor Who game . Smith and Gillan 's movements and actions were captured by rotoscoping . 
 As the Doctor is a pacifist and did not use the guns commonly found in video games , The Adventure Games <unk> a more strategy and puzzle @-@ based gameplay . Much of the first game was based around stealth , exploration , and puzzle @-@ solving . The Doctor was also equipped with his sonic screwdriver , but as this was often used as a skeleton key in the show the game employs the solving of puzzles to advance instead of simply using the screwdriver . 
 The first installment , " City of the Daleks " , was originally scheduled to be released 5 June 2010 , but was made available two days earlier . The BBC explained the early release as a testing procedure , and final tweaks were expected to be made prior to official release . Within the first twelve days of availability , the game was downloaded over 500 @,@ 000 times , and the traffic on the site had increased as a result . The second game , " Blood of the Cybermen " , was released on 26 June , after the airing of the series finale . This was followed by the third game , " TARDIS " , on 27 August and " Shadows of the <unk> <unk> " on 22 December . 
 Additionally , a mobile game app was developed by Tag Games for BBC Worldwide . Titled " Doctor Who : The Mazes of Time " , it allowed the gamer to play as both the Doctor and Amy and involved time travel , defeating enemies , and solving problems . It featured over 100 puzzles , seven locations to travel to , music from the show , and the enemies being the Daleks , Cybermen , and Silurians . The app was released for Apple IOS devices on 16 December 2010 and for Android on 17 August 2011 . 
 = Jean Augustin Ernouf = 
 Jean Augustin Ernouf ( Manuel Louis Jean Augustin or Auguste Ernouf ) ( 29 August 1753 – 12 September 1827 ) was a French general and colonial administrator of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars . He demonstrated moderate abilities as a combat commander ; his real strength lay in his organizational and logistical talents . He held several posts as chief @-@ of @-@ staff and in military administration . 
 He joined the military in 1791 , as a private in the French Revolutionary Army ; from September 1791 to September 1793 , he was promoted from lieutenant to brigadier general . He and his commanding officer were accused of being counter @-@ revolutionaries , disgraced , and then , in 1794 , restored to rank . In 1804 , Napoleon I appointed him as governor general of the French colony in Saint @-@ Domingue and Guadeloupe , following the suppression of a widespread slave insurrection . Although he was able to reestablish some semblance of order and agricultural production , the British overwhelmed the colony in 1810 and , after a brief engagement , forced him to capitulate . 
 He returned to France on a prisoner exchange , but was charged with treason by Napoleon I , enraged by the loss of the colony to the British . Before he could be exonerated by a court , the First Empire fell ; with the Bourbon Restoration , he retained his honors , and received command of the III Corps , in Marseille . After the second restoration , he held an administrative position in one of the occupation zones , and later he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies of France . 
 = = Military career = = 
 After completing school , Ernouf received entered military service as a private in the Revolutionary army . He was commissioned as a lieutenant of infantry in the 1st Battalion of Volunteers of the Orne on the 24 September 1791 , and as a captain on 22 March 1792 , and 5 May 1793 he became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp of General Barthel 's Army of the North . On 30 July 1793 , he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel . 
 = = = Initial successes in the Lowlands and the lower Rhine = = = 
 In 1793 , during the War of the First Coalition , Ernouf was sent to Cassel to strengthen the French position . The Duke of York laid siege to Dunkirk and blockaded the town of Bergues , on the Belgian border , which had insufficient garrison to fend off the British . Ernouf assembled a force of a thousand men and joined Jean Nicolas <unk> ; together they marched to the relief of Dunkirk . Once there , he led a column in attack on the British camp . On 5 <unk> an I ( 21 September 1793 ) , which would have been the last day of the first year of the new Republic , he was raised to the rank of Brigadier General and was appointed on 9 <unk> an II ( 30 September 1793 ) as chief of staff to the Army of the North . 
 It was also by his advice that the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , discovered Josias , Prince of Coburg 's unfortunate position behind the Wattignies forest , compelled him to retreat across the Sambre and subsequently lifted the siege of Maubeuge : Ernouf 's part in this action , the Battle of <unk> , earned him his promotion to Major General on 23 frimaire an II ( 13 December 1793 ) . When Jourdan did not order an aggressive pursuit , both he and Ernouf were recalled by the Committee of Public Safety in disgrace . He was suspended on suspicion of being a counter @-@ revolutionary , but reinstated upon the end of the Reign of Terror in 1795 . Upon his reinstatement , he was appointed Chief of Staff of the Army of the Moselle and the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse . He held several administrative posts , including a stint in which he helped to develop the topographical and geographical military maps . 
 = = = Action in Swabia and Switzerland = = = 
 In 1798 , Jourdan appointed him as chief of staff for the Army of Observation . Ernouf was with the Army of Observation when it crossed the Rhine river , in what British historians have called a violation of the Treaty of Campo Formio , resulting in the War of the Second Coalition . On 2 March , the Army was renamed Army of the Danube , and it marched to Upper Swabia , where it engaged Archduke Charles ' Habsburg force at Ostrach on 21 March , and again on 25 March at Stockach . In both battles , the Habsburg manpower , superior to the French numbers by three to one and two to one respectively , overwhelmed the French lines ; Jourdan , the commander of the Army , was unable to concentrate his forces sufficiently to counteract the Habsburg numbers , and withdrew to the Black Forest in late March . Ernouf took command of the Army of the Danube while Jourdan returned to Paris to request more troops . He was replaced as commander of the Army of the Danube by André Masséna , and served as Massena 's chief of staff in the Swiss campaign of 1799 , during which he saw action in Zurich and central Switzerland ; he was again at Zurich for the French victory over Alexander Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . 
 = = = Caribbean appointment = = = 
 In 1804 , Ernouf became a Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor . Shortly afterward , he was sent to Guadeloupe and Saint @-@ Domingue as Captain General of the colony , to restore order in the wake of the slave and mulatto rebellion and the Saint @-@ Domingue campaign of Charles Victor Emmanuel Leclerc . 
 Within a year , Ernouf had restored order and agricultural production . From his base on Guadeloupe , he dealt largely with many of the refugee planters who escaped the previous years ' carnage . He also mastered the Swedish island of St. Barts , where the rebels of St. Domingo had taken refuge , and from which they coordinated privateering against British and American shipping . In all , he confiscated 134 vessels , and proceeds from their sale amounted to 80 million francs . There is some evidence to suggest that he either actively encouraged , or at least permitted , the earlier practice of privateering against British and American shipping ; British officers later found open commissions , signed by Ernouf , which suggested he was granting commissions to pirates for " services " rendered . Four privateer ships sailing from Guadeloupe between 1805 and 1810 bore the name Général Ernouf , one of which was the captured sloop @-@ of @-@ war HMS Lilly ) , which underscores his encouragement of privateering . His task was further complicated by the failure of the Treaty of Amiens and the outbreak of war with Britain . To protect Guadeloupe , he raised coastal batteries . 
 The British capture of Martinique in 1809 marked a critical point for the French on Guadeloupe ; blockaded on all sides by the naval forces of the British , the French civilians and soldiers were reduced to near starvation . In January 1810 , the British initiated an invasion of Guadeloupe ; Sir Alexander Cochrane 's naval force landed 11 @,@ 000 British troops under the command of Lieutenant General George Beckwith at the so @-@ called <unk> , or the eastern side of the islands . Attacked on three sides at the end of January , <unk> 's force mounted a spirited , although short , defense and capitulated on 6 February 1810 , after which he was transported to Britain . He was repatriated to France in a prisoner exchange in 1811 . Irritated at the loss of Guadeloupe to the British , Napoleon accused him of abuse of power , embezzlement , and treason . Ernouf spent 23 months in captivity in France while the courts debated how to proceed . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 At the Bourbon Restoration , Louis XVIII suspended the proceedings against him for lack of evidence and Ernouf entered into Bourbon service . He was created Chevalier of Saint @-@ Louis , on 20 August of that year , and he was appointed Inspector General of Infantry . On 3 January 1815 , he went in that capacity in Marseille . In March 1815 , he received a command in the 1st Corps , under the general command of Charles , Duke of Angoulême . 
 = = = Napoleon 's return = = = 
 Ernouf was on an inspection away from this command when Napoleon landed at Cannes . Upon his landing , many of the soldiers of Angoulême 's army flocked to Bonaparte 's banner , beginning the Hundred Days . The mere news of Napoleon 's escape from Elba and the defection of some of the troops caused Charles , Duke of Angoulême , to panic and capitulate . Ernouf returned to Marseille , where he learned that André Masséna also had chosen the imperial cause , after which he left for Paris . Napoleon rescinded Ernouf 's honors and titles , and dismissed him from his post in the military on 15 April 1815 . After Napoleon 's final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo , the second restoration of the Bourbons that summer also restored Ernouf 's rights and property . 
 = = Later years = = 
 On 3 May 1816 , Louis XVIII granted him the title of Baron with the Commander 's Cross of the Order of Saint Louis , which entitled him to wear a red sash ( right shoulder to left hip ) ; he automatically received a pension , and hereditary nobility was granted to the son and grandson of knights . On 11 November 1816 , <unk> received command of the III Division , located at Metz , which was occupied by Allied troops as a condition of the Second Treaty of Paris ; his role was to maintain harmony between residents and the foreign soldiers . 
 Elected by the Moselle , in 1816 , he obtained in 1818 permission to sit in the Chamber of Deputies , and left the command of the III Division when he became eligible for retirement on 22 July 1822 . He died in Paris on 12 September 1827 . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Ernouf was married to Geneviève <unk> ( d . 22 November 1822 ) . Ernouf 's son , Gaspard Augustin ( 8 December 1777 – 25 October 1848 ) , was also a military commander during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars . Gaspard and his wife , <unk> <unk> , were the parents of the 19th century historian , Alfred Auguste Ernouf ( 1816 – 1889 ) . 
 = Slamet Rijadi = 
 Brigadier General Ignatius Slamet Rijadi ( Perfected Spelling : Ignatius Slamet Riyadi ; 26 July 1927 – 4 November 1950 ) was an Indonesian soldier . 
 Rijadi was born in Surakarta , Central Java , to a soldier and a fruit seller . " Sold " to his uncle and renamed as a toddler to cure his illnesses , Rijadi was raised at his parents ' home and studied at Dutch @-@ run schools . After the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies , Rijadi studied at a Japanese @-@ run sailor 's academy and worked for them upon graduation ; he abandoned the Japanese army towards the end of World War II and assisted resistance operations for the rest of the occupation . 
 After Indonesia 's independence on 17 August 1945 , Rijadi led Indonesian forces in the Surakarta area during the revolution against the returning Dutch . Starting with a guerrilla campaign , by 1947 , when he fought against Dutch offensives in Ambarawa and Semarang , he was in charge of the 26th Regiment . During a second Dutch offensive , Rijadi lost control of the city but soon retook it , later leading counter @-@ offensives in West Java . In 1950 , after the end of the revolution , Rijadi was sent to the Moluccas to put down a rebellion . After several months of planning and a month crossing Ambon Island , Rijadi was killed near the end of the operation by a rebounding bullet . 
 Since his death , Rijadi has received much recognition . The main street in Surakarta is named after him , as is a frigate in the Indonesian Navy , the <unk> Slamet Riyadi . Awarded several medals in 1961 posthumously , Rijadi was given the title of National Hero of Indonesia on 9 November 2007 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Rijadi was born with the name Soekamto in Surakarta , Central Java , Dutch East Indies , on 26 July 1927 ; he was the second son born to <unk> Raden <unk> <unk> , an officer in the sultan 's army , and <unk> , a fruit seller . When Soekamto was one year old , his mother dropped him ; he afterwards became frequently ill . To help cure his illness , his family " sold " him in a traditional Javanese ritual to his uncle , <unk> ; after the ceremony , Soekamto 's name was changed to Slamet . Although formally <unk> 's son after the ceremony , Slamet was raised at his parents ' house . The family was Roman Catholic , but Rijadi studied mysticism from a young age . 
 Rijadi 's primary education was done at Dutch @-@ run schools . His elementary school was taken at the <unk> @-@ Inlandsche School <unk> , a private school owned and run by a Dutch religious group . While at <unk> Middle School , where numerous students were named Slamet , he received an additional name , Rijadi ; it is also during middle school that his father bought him back . After middle school and the Japanese occupation in 1942 , he attended a sailor 's academy in Jakarta . After graduation , he worked as navigator on a wooden ship . 
 Rijadi , who when not at sea lived in a dormitory near Gambir Station in Central Jakarta , occasionally met with underground resistance . On 14 February 1945 , with Japan facing defeat in World War II , Rijadi and other sailors abandoned their dormitory and took up arms ; Rijadi moved back to Surakarta and supported resistance movements there . He was not captured by the Japanese military police or other units for the remainder of the occupation , which ended with Indonesia 's independence on 17 August 1945 . 
 = = = National revolution = = = 
 After the Japanese surrender , the Dutch attempted to re @-@ occupy the newly declared Republic of Indonesia ; unwilling to be colonised , the Indonesians fought back . Rijadi began a guerrilla campaign against Dutch posts and quickly rose through the ranks . He was in charge of the 26th Regiment in Surakarta . During Operation Product , a general offensive by Dutch forces in mid @-@ 1947 , Rijadi led Indonesian forces in several parts of Central Java , including Ambarawa and Semarang ; he also led a cleansing force between mounts Merapi and Merbabu . 
 In September 1948 Rijadi was promoted and given control of four battalions of soldiers and one of student soldiers . Two months later , the Dutch launched a second attack , this time on the nearby city of Yogyakarta ( then serving as the nation 's capital ) . Although Rijadi and his troops launched attacks on Dutch forces approaching Solo through Klaten , ultimately the Dutch soldiers entered the city . Applying a divide and conquer policy , Rijadi was able to drive the forces out in four days . 
 During the remainder of the war , Rijadi was sent to West Java to fight against Raymond Westerling 's Legion of Ratu Adil . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 Not long after the end of the war , the Republic of South Maluku ( RMS ) declared its independence from the nascent Indonesia . Rijadi was sent to the frontline on 10 July 1950 as part of Operation <unk> . To retake the island of Ambon , Rijadi took half his forces and invaded the eastern shores , while the other half was tasked with invading from the northern coast . Although the second group experienced heavy resistance , Rijadi 's group was able to take to the beach in native canoes unopposed ; they later landed more infantry and armour . 
 On 3 October , the troops , along with Colonel Alexander Evert <unk> , were tasked with capturing the rebel capital at New Victoria . Rijadi and <unk> led a three pronged assault , with forces approaching by land from the north and east , and naval forces pulling directly into Ambon harbour . Rijadi 's forces approached the city through mangrove swamps , a journey which took a month . During the trip , RMS snipers armed with Jungle Carbines and Owen Guns shot constantly at the troops , often pinning them down . 
 Upon arriving in New Victoria , Rijadi 's forces made short work of the RMS troops . However , he did not see the end of the battle . As Rijadi was riding atop a tank towards the final rebel stronghold on 4 November , a volley of machine gun fire erupted in his direction . A single bullet rebounded off the tank 's armour and into Rijadi 's abdomen . After being rushed to a hospital ship , Rijadi insisted on returning to the front ; instead , the doctors gave him much morphine and attempted unsuccessfully to treat the gun wound . Rijadi died that night ; the battle ended the same day . Rijadi was buried in Ambon . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Numerous things have been named after Rijadi . The 5 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 6 mi ) long main road of Surakarta is named after the brigadier general . The <unk> Slamet Riyadi , a frigate described as one of the most sophisticated in the Indonesian Navy , is named after him . 
 Rijadi has received numerous awards . He received several medals posthumously , including the Bintang Sakti in May 1961 , the Bintang Gerilya in July 1961 , and the Satya Lencana Bakti in November 1961 . On 9 November 2007 , President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono gave Rijadi the title National Hero of Indonesia ; Rijadi received the title along with Adnan Kapau Gani , Ida Anak Agung <unk> Agung , and <unk> based on Presidential Decree Number 66 / TK of 2007 . 
 = New York State Route 28 = 
 New York State Route 28 ( NY 28 ) is a state highway extending for 281 @.@ 69 miles ( 453 @.@ 34 km ) in the shape of a " C " between the Hudson Valley city of Kingston and southern Warren County in the U.S. state of New York . Along the way , it intersects several major routes , including Interstate 88 ( I @-@ 88 ) , U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) , and the New York State Thruway twice . The southern terminus of NY 28 is at NY 32 in Kingston and the northern terminus is at US 9 in Warrensburg . In Kingston , NY 28 is co @-@ designated as Interstate 587 from its southern terminus at NY 32 to the roundabout linking it to the Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) . 
 NY 28 was originally assigned in 1924 to an alignment extending from Colliersville in the south to Utica in the north via Ilion . From Colliersville to Cooperstown , the highway followed its current routing ( excluding minor realignments ) ; north of Cooperstown , NY 28 was routed along several state highways that now have other designations . The route was extended south to Kingston and north to Warrensburg as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . At the same time , NY 28 was realigned between Cooperstown and Mohawk to follow its modern routing . Other than minor realignments in Kingston , Oneonta , and Oneida County , NY 28 has remained the same to this day . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Ulster County = = = 
 NY 28 's southern terminus is with NY 32 ( Albany Avenue ) in the city of Kingston . The route heads north , then northwest on Colonel Chandler Drive , a four @-@ lane limited @-@ access highway . The roadway is also designated and signed as I @-@ 587 , which begins at NY 32 as well . Although Colonel Chandler Drive is built to Interstate Highway standards , it has no intermediary interchanges . After crossing over the Esopus Creek into Ulster , I @-@ 587 terminates at a roundabout linking I @-@ 587 and NY 28 to the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) at exit 19 . 
 West of I @-@ 87 , the route crosses the Blue Line of Catskill Park and becomes the <unk> Trail . Although still four lanes wide , the route is no longer a limited @-@ access highway as it has an at @-@ grade intersection with Modica Lane , a local dead @-@ end street , just west of where it passes over the Thruway . Not long afterward , the highway meets US 209 by way of a cloverleaf interchange . Past US 209 , the highway enters a rural area as it heads northwest into the center of the state park . 
 Near the eastern tip of the Ashokan Reservoir , in the town of Kingston , NY 28 intersects the eastern terminus of NY 28A . West of NY 28A , NY 28 continues towards the north and west along the northern edge of the reservoir . In West Hurley , the route intersects the southern terminus of NY 375 . It proceeds along the reservoir to its western end in the town of Olive community of Boiceville , where NY 28A reconnects to the route . Here the mountains begin to loom over the road , with Mount Tremper dominating the view to the north as the route continues along Esopus Creek into the town of Shandaken after passing the southern terminus of NY 212 at Mount Pleasant . At Phoenicia , the largest settlement since Kingston , NY 214 reaches its southern terminus at the highway . 
 Past Phoenicia , the surrounding slopes become steeper as the road and creek curve around Panther Mountain , one of the Catskill High Peaks , to the south . At <unk> , the Shandaken Tunnel crosses under the road , bringing water from Schoharie Reservoir into the creek . The road and creek start bending to the south to the hamlet of Shandaken , where the town hall on the south side of the road is followed by the southern terminus of NY 42 's northern segment . As NY 28 continues trending southwest , the valley becomes less developed . Balsam Mountain , another High Peak , looms ahead . 
 The northern terminus of NY 42 's southern segment marks the small hamlet of Big Indian , after which Esopus Creek crosses for the last time , turning south to its source at <unk> Lake . The road begins a sustained climb over the next two miles paralleling an Esopus tributary , Birch Creek , up to Pine Hill . At the road to <unk> Ski Center , in <unk> , the last junction before it leaves the Catskill Park and enters Delaware County , it is for the first time signed as a north – south route . 
 = = = Delaware and Otsego counties = = = 
 Across the county line in Middletown , the highway shifts towards the west . NY 28 begins a concurrency with NY 30 in Margaretville , with the routes paralleling the East Branch of the Delaware River . After crossing the Delaware River , the route ends its concurrency with NY 30 , and NY 28 continues northwest through Andes as Main Street and Delaware Avenue . In the village of Delhi , the highway becomes known as Andes Road and has a short concurrency with NY 10 in the village center . North of Delhi , it continues north towards the hamlet of Meredith , proceeding west past the hamlet . In Franklin , NY 28 makes a 90 @-@ degree turn to the north at the intersection with the eastern end of NY 357 . 
 Once in Otsego County , it traverses an s @-@ curve before veering to the east to follow the southern bank of the Susquehanna River through the town of Oneonta . The route initially connects to the city of Oneonta , which is located across the river from NY 28 , via Main Street . Shortly afterward , NY 28 meets NY 23 . The route turns north , overlapping NY 23 along the four @-@ lane James F. Lettis Highway . The two routes cross the River and enter the Oneonta city limits before separating at I @-@ 88 exit 15 . NY 23 continues north on the arterial , while NY 28 joins I @-@ 88 eastward out of the city . 
 Back in the town of Oneonta , the overlap between NY 28 and I @-@ 88 continues along the northern bank of the Susquehanna toward the hamlet of Emmons , where the expressway meets County Route 47 ( CR 47 ) at exit 16 . The overlap ends at exit 17 in Milford ; however , NY 28 remains in close proximity to the Susquehanna River , which turns northward at the interchange . Roughly 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) north of I @-@ 88 , the highway passes over NY 7 with no access between the two . After another 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) , the route meets D.K. Lifgren Drive ( unsigned NY <unk> ) , a connector providing access between Routes 7 and 28 . North of Goodyear Lake , a body of water situated 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Lifgren Drive , the highway parallels the Susquehanna to the village of Milford , where it intersects the southern terminus of NY 166 . 
 The highway continues northward along the banks of the Susquehanna to the village of Cooperstown , home to the National Baseball Hall of Fame . Inside the village , the route is initially known as Chestnut Street . Two blocks from the business district of the village , it intersects NY 80 , which occupies Chestnut Street north of this point . Both routes turn west , overlapping each other as the routes leave the village . The portion of the highway between the southern border of the village of Cooperstown and the northern intersection with Grove Street is maintained by the village , and is the only section of the route not maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . Routes 28 and 80 head towards the northwest , passing by the now @-@ abandoned Cooperstown Airport . In Otsego , the NY 28 / 80 concurrency ends . It continues northward as it passes <unk> Lake . In Richfield Springs , the highway has a concurrency with US 20 for 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) . North of US 20 , the highway exits Otsego County . 
 = = = Herkimer and Oneida counties = = = 
 In German Flatts , NY 28 becomes Columbia Street and intersects the northern terminus of NY 168 . In Mohawk , NY 28 intersects NY 5S . After crossing the Mohawk River , NY 28 becomes Mohawk Street and meets I @-@ 90 ( New York State Thruway ) at exit 30 . In the village of Herkimer , NY 28 has a concurrency with NY 5 . North of NY 5 , NY 28 begins to parallel the West Canada Creek . In Middleville , it intersects the western terminus of NY 29 and the northern terminus of NY 169 . The highway executes a 90 @-@ degree turn at the three @-@ route junction . NY 28 continues towards the north paralleling the West Canada Creek . In Poland , NY 28 begins a concurrency with NY 8 . 
 In Deerfield , Oneida County , NY 28 splits from NY 8 . NY 28 crosses the West Canada Creek and leaves Oneida County for about 3 miles ( 5 km ) , then re @-@ crosses the creek and enters Oneida County again . In Trenton , NY 28 joins NY 12 northward toward Barneveld . In Barneveld , NY 12 and NY 28 intersect NY 365 . NY 28 splits from NY 12 in Remsen and heads toward the northeast , passing through numerous lakes and reservoirs . In Forestport , it enters Adirondack Park as it parallels the Adirondack Mountains . 
 NY 28 briefly reenters Herkimer County , but does not have any major junctions . NY 28 passes the Fulton Chain Lakes , among several other large lakes , as it winds through the Adirondack Park . 
 = = = Hamilton and Warren counties = = = 
 The Fulton Chain Lakes which NY 28 has been following extend into Hamilton County . The highway soon reaches the settlement of Long Lake as it passes south of Raquette Lake . In the hamlet of Blue Mountain Lake , the route begins a wrong @-@ way concurrency with NY 30 ; the concurrency ends in the hamlet of Indian Lake . East of NY 30 , NY 28 begins to shift towards the south . 
 NY 28 enters Warren County paralleling the Hudson River . In North Creek , it intersects the eastern terminus of NY 28N . The highway continues towards the south opposite to its original course . In Wevertown , it intersects NY 8 . It continues towards the southeast paralleling the Hudson River and in Warrensburg , NY 28 comes to an end at a " Y " intersection with US 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ulster and Delaware Turnpike = = = 
 In 1802 , the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike was chartered by the New York State Legislature " for improving and making a road from the west line of the Town of Salisbury in the State of Connecticut to the Susquehanna River at or near the Town of Jericho ( now Bainbridge ) " . The portion of the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike east of the Hudson River was also commonly known as the Ulster and Salisbury Turnpike or the Salisbury Turnpike . West of the river , the turnpike connected Kingston to modern @-@ day Bainbridge . It then followed modern NY 28 west from Kingston up to the Delaware County hamlet of Andes . From Andes , the turnpike alignment left NY 28 to follow modern CR 2 to De Lancey , NY 10 to Walton , and NY 206 to the Village of Bainbridge . The turnpike crossed the river via the Kingston @-@ Rhinecliff Ferry and used modern Rhinecliff Road and West Market Street to the village center of Rhinecliff , then roughly followed modern @-@ day NY 308 to the hamlet of Eighmyville . It continued east from there using part of present @-@ day CR 52 to eventually connect with and follow the route of current NY 199 . The turnpike corporation operated through the late 19th century . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 NY 28 was designated in 1924 by the New York State Department of Transportation from Colliersville ( near Oneonta ) north to Utica . At the time , NY 28 began at then @-@ NY 9 in Colliersville and headed north on its current alignment to Cooperstown . NY 28 separated from its modern routing and continued to Springfield north of Cooperstown on what is now NY 80 . Between Springfield and Richfield Springs , the highway utilized what is now US 20 . At Richfield Springs , the highway turned north onto modern NY 167 and followed the current alignments of NY 167 and NY 168 to the village of Mohawk . Here , the highway turned westward , using a small portion of its current alignment and the present @-@ day NY 5S corridor to connect to Utica by way of Ilion . 
 In 1924 , what is now NY 28 was part of NY 19 from Kingston to Margaretville ( where NY 19 turned north to follow modern NY 30 to Grand Gorge ) , NY 9 from Oneonta to Colliersville , NY 28 from Colliersville to Cooperstown , NY 2 from Trenton to Forestport , and NY 10 from North Creek to Wevertown . The remaining portions of modern NY 28 were unnumbered . By 1926 , the portion of current NY 28 from Margaretville to Meredith was designated as part of NY 64 . Past Meredith , NY 64 continued north to NY 23 on Palmerville Road , McDougal Road , Rathbun Road , and Prosser Hollow Road . Additionally , the segment of modern NY 28 from Middleville to Trenton was designated as part of NY 29 . Between 1926 and 1930 , what is now NY 28 between Blue Mountain Lake and North Creek became part of NY 10A , a highway extending from Long Lake to North Creek via Blue Mountain Lake . 
 In the 1930 renumbering , NY 28 was extended south from Colliersville to Kingston largely by way of its current alignment along the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike . North of Cooperstown , the route was realigned to follow its modern routing between Cooperstown and Mohawk , then extended into the North Country through Wevertown to Warrensburg along its present alignment . Between Colliersville and Cooperstown , the route remained unchanged . The small portion of NY 10A that did not become part of NY 28 in the renumbering was incorporated into NY 10 . 
 = = = Realignments = = = 
 In Oneida County , NY 28 originally broke from its modern alignment southeast of Barneveld to follow modern CR 56 into the village . At Mappa Avenue , then carrying NY 12 , NY 28 turned north , overlapping NY 12 north along Mappa Avenue through the village . Outside of Barneveld , NY 12 and NY 28 were routed on Plank Road and what is now CR 82 before rejoining their modern alignment near the Remsen community of East Steuben . NY 28 was rerouted slightly c . 1940 to enter Barneveld via an extension of Trenton Falls Road and Mappa Avenue . Both NY 12 and NY 28 were realigned onto a new four @-@ lane roadway from Barneveld to East Steuben in the 1950s . 
 Within Kingston , NY 28 initially began at the intersection of Broadway and East Chester Street , which was part of US 9W at the time . From there , NY 28 followed Broadway , Albany and Clinton avenues , North Front Street , and Washington Avenue through the city to Ulster , where it joined its modern routing at what is now the roundabout leading to New York State Thruway exit 19 . When the initial plans for the Interstate Highway System were outlined by the Bureau of Public Roads in the 1955 Yellow Book , a highway was planned for the NY 28 corridor . This highway was included as part of the 1 @,@ 500 @-@ mile ( 2 @,@ 414 km ) expansion to the system in 1957 . Construction began on the roadway , which became Colonel Chandler Drive , in December 1958 . It was designated as I @-@ 587 and became part of a rerouted NY 28 upon its completion in July 1960 . NY 28 continued to extend eastward from Colonel Chandler Drive along Broadway to US 9W until its truncation to NY 32 in the early 1980s . Washington Avenue , bypassed by the new limited @-@ access highway , is now designated as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route 0 @.@ 41 miles ( 0 @.@ 66 km ) in length , from Hurley Avenue to NY 28 . 
 In the vicinity of Oneonta , NY 28 originally crossed the Susquehanna River by way of Main Street . The route followed Main Street through the city to Colliersville , where it turned north onto D.K. Lifgren Drive to rejoin its modern alignment . From downtown Oneonta to Colliersville , NY 28 overlapped NY 7 . NY 28 was rerouted to follow its current alignment between Main Street south of Oneonta and D.K. Lifgren Drive near Colliersville in the early 1980s following the completion of what is now NY 28 from I @-@ 88 exit 17 to D.K. Lifgren Drive . The portion of Main Street between NY 28 and NY 7 ( 0 @.@ 67 miles or 1 @.@ 08 kilometres long ) is now designated as NY <unk> while D.K. Lifgren Drive ( 0 @.@ 50 miles or 0 @.@ 80 kilometres in length ) is now NY <unk> . 
 = = = Memorial designation = = = 
 On June 14 , 2004 , Governor George E. Pataki announced that a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) portion of the highway in the Town of Hurley in Ulster County was to be designated as the " New York State Troopers T. Michael Kelly and Kenneth A. Poorman Memorial Highway " . During May 2000 , troopers Kelly and Poorman were killed on this stretch of NY 28 , when their police cruiser was struck by a tractor @-@ trailer . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 28A ( 19 @.@ 82 miles or 31 @.@ 90 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 28 along the southern edge of the Ashokan Reservoir in Ulster County . It was assigned c . 1933 . 
 NY 28B was a spur route connecting NY 28 in Remsen to Prospect in Oneida County . When the route was initially assigned c . 1936 , it began at NY 12 and NY 28 in Barneveld and overlapped with then @-@ NY 287 to Prospect , from where NY 28B continued northwest to NY 12 and NY 28 in Remsen by way of Prospect Road . NY 28B was truncated to Prospect in the early 1950s and removed in the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 NY 28N ( 50 @.@ 95 miles or 82 @.@ 00 kilometres ) is a northerly alternate to NY 28 between Long Lake and North Creek in Adirondack Park . It was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = George Formby Sr = 
 George Formby ( born James Lawler Booth ; 4 October 1875 – 8 February 1921 ) was an English comedian and singer in musical theatre , known as one of the greatest music hall performers of the early 20th century . His comedy played upon Lancashire stereotypes , and he was popular around Britain . His nickname , " The Wigan Nightingale " , was coined because of the way he would use his bronchial cough as a comedic device in his act . 
 Formby was born into poverty in the industrial north west of England ; his mother was an alcoholic and part @-@ time prostitute , and during much of his youth he was maltreated . To earn money he would sing for pennies on street corners , before he joined a singing duo in his teens . He began to develop his own act during the 1890s and built up a following in Lancashire . He also developed a series of stage characters , including that of " John Willie " , which is described by the cultural historian Jeffrey Richards as " the archetypal gormless Lancashire lad ... hen @-@ pecked , accident @-@ prone , but muddling through . " Formby also had a successful recording career and made the transition from music hall to revue in 1916 . 
 His health had always been poor , but a stage accident in 1916 weakened Formby 's lungs , and he suffered increasingly for the next few years , reducing his ability to perform . Tuberculosis and influenza — the latter contracted in the pandemic of 1918 — weakened his constitution further , and he died of pulmonary tuberculosis in 1921 at the age of 45 . Formby 's act , and one of his costumes and canes , inspired Charlie Chaplin in the formation of his character the Tramp . Formby 's son also used parts of his father 's act when starting his stage career and , once established , also changed his name to George Formby ; Formby Jnr went on to become the top British male star in box office takings between 1937 and 1943 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years : 1875 – 90 = = = 
 George Formby was born James Lawler Booth in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Lancashire , on 4 October 1875 . He was the illegitimate and only child of Sarah Jane Booth ( c . 1856 – 1912 ) , a poor , illiterate cotton weaver . His father , Francis Lawler , a coal miner , was not named on the birth certificate ; six months after the birth of their son , the couple married , both aged about 19 . Sarah worked as a prostitute ; she was small , around 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) tall , and sang in pubs in exchange for alcoholic drinks . She was convicted 140 times for offences that included theft , prostitution , drunkenness and brawling . The marriage was turbulent , and Formby was often neglected , mistreated and suffered malnourishment . Because Sarah was frequently absent from home , and often detained overnight at the local police station , Formby was regularly forced to sleep outside . As a result he developed asthma and became susceptible to bronchitis . In his later years he recalled that his " childhood was the most miserable as ever fell to the lot of a human creature " . 
 Formby left formal education at the age of eight or nine , and did not learn to read until well into his teenage years . To earn money for the household , he sang on street corners for coppers ; the family 's poverty worsened when , in October 1890 , Lawler died from pulmonary tuberculosis at the age of 33 . Formby secured a job at a cotton mill and spent two years as a loom builder . He supplemented his wages by singing in pubs , alehouses and free @-@ and @-@ <unk> , the last being places where informal arrangements were made for patrons to provide their own entertainment . Around this time he joined up with another boy to form an act , " the <unk> Brothers " ( also " the Glen Ray Brothers " ) , which was profitable enough to have a manager ; the act continued until Formby 's boy soprano voice broke , after which the pair separated . 
 = = = <unk> stage career : 1890 – 1902 = = = 
 Formby began to develop his own stage act during the 1890s , and built a large fan base in Lancashire . He devised several characters with their own costumes , and composed a series of comic songs . By 1896 his assignment book records that he was buying and collecting comic songs and securing the singing rights . He was billed as J.H. Booth until 1897 , when he changed his stage name to George Formby . Although rumoured to have picked his new surname after seeing it as a destination on a railway carriage , the main sources agree this story is likely to be apocryphal . The origin of the Formby name is more likely to have been a suggestion from Dennis Clarke , the manager of the Argyle Theatre in Birkenhead , while George was chosen in honour of the music hall star George Robey . Formby first used his new stage name in Birkenhead in 1897 . 
 One of the earliest characters Formby developed was " John Willie " . Baz Kershaw , the professor of theatre , described the character as Formby 's " onstage alter ego " , while the cultural historian Jeffrey Richards describes Willie as " the archetypal gormless Lancashire lad in baggy trousers , tight jacket , and bowler hat , slow @-@ talking , hen @-@ pecked , accident @-@ prone , but muddling through . " His costume included ill @-@ fitting clothes , large boots worn on the wrong feet , and a variety of hats ; he would often carry a cane . In 1908 he lent one of his costumes to a young Charlie Chaplin when the latter was touring with Fred Karno 's troupe ; Chaplin also incorporated Formby 's cane twirl and duck @-@ like walk into his act . 
 In 1897 Formby met Martha Maria Salter , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old music hall performer , and they married in her home town of Halifax in August . Little is known about Salter , although the 1901 census shows that she was still living with her parents . The marriage does not appear to have been successful , but according to Formby 's biographers , Sue Smart and Richard Bothway Howard , there is no evidence of a divorce between the couple and no information relating to when the couple separated . 
 In 1897 or 1898 Formby was signed to appear at the Lyceum Theatre , Blackburn , supporting the magician Walford Bodie ; a 40 @-@ week tour followed , with Formby earning 30 shillings a week . In 1898 , while performing at the Wigan Empire as part of the tour , Formby met Eliza Hoy , the daughter of the Empire 's cashier . The couple married in August the following year at Wigan Registry Office , although this marriage was bigamous because of his union two years previously with Salter . In the months after their marriage , Eliza persuaded Formby to join the Roman Catholic Church , which helped her parents overcome their initial distrust of him . Formby and Eliza had thirteen children , of whom seven survived : four daughters and three sons . The cultural historian David Bret states that Formby was " possessed of staggering consumptive virility " , as the comedian also had several children with other partners . Eliza became an important figure in Formby 's professional life , making his costumes and standing in the wings during his performances to help him . Eliza also continued working as a seamstress and would sell chips during lunchtimes to supplement the family 's income . 
 = = = London , and a growing reputation : 1902 – 16 = = = 
 In 1902 Formby performed for the first time in London , when he was booked by Ted Granville , the proprietor of the Royal Albert Music Hall in Canning Town , to appear for £ 3 a week ; Granville subsequently became Formby 's London agent . Eliza Formby later recounted that Belle Elmore , the wife ( and later victim ) of the murderer Dr Crippen , saw Formby perform , and was so impressed that she contacted Granville and told him to travel to Leeds to see the act . Formby soon transferred to the London Pavilion music hall , where he was immediately successful , and became " an idol of the town " , according to The Times . His popularity increased when Marie Lloyd , the influential music hall singer and actress , said that she would only watch two acts : his and Dan Leno 's . Lloyd recommended Formby to the proprietor of the Tivoli Music Hall , who gave the comedian a ten @-@ week run . Robey was also impressed , and in 1905 he recommended Formby as the lead in a pantomime in Newcastle at a salary of £ 35 a week . He was able to command £ 325 a week by 1920 . 
 After the Formbys had lost three daughters to early deaths , their first son , George Hoy Booth , was born in 1904 . Although the boy was born unable to see owing to an obstructive caul , he gained his sight during a violent coughing fit or sneeze when he was a few months old . Over the course of 1904 Formby purchased the singing rights to 57 songs , more than his normal annual number of between 10 and 20 ; the average cost of his songs was around a guinea . Two years later he made his first recordings , on phonograph cylinders , for the Louis Sterling Cylinder Company , and in 1907 he signed a recording contract with <unk> . He was one of the few performers who had no difficulties recording clearly with the primitive equipment , and he performed in a relaxed fashion for an invisible audience . He would sing his song and then talk to the listener using a variant of his normal stage patter . Some of those songs , such as " Playing the Game out West " and " Since I <unk> my Hair in the Middle " have been identified by Dave Russell , the social historian , as " clever depictions of a provincial innocent let lose [ sic ] in the capital " . 
 For much of January and February 1908 Formby appeared in various London music halls for which he received £ 20 a week . The following year , and staying in the capital , he played three halls a night in exchange for £ 45 a week . One such venue was the Tivoli with Lloyd and Little Tich as the headline acts . When not performing in London , Formby continued to tour the provincial music halls . In 1910 he again appeared at the Tivoli , and was reviewed in The Times , in which the reporter opined that Formby " becomes more of an artist the longer he sings " . Later that year Formby recorded what would become his most famous song , " Standing at the Corner of the Street " , which he also co @-@ wrote . By 1913 his record sales were strong enough for him to negotiate a new recording contract worth £ 300 a year . 
 Formby 's career received a further boost in July 1913 when he was one of seven acts to appear before George V and Queen Mary in a Royal Command Performance at Knowsley Hall , near Liverpool . The Times reported that Formby 's " broad humour succeeded with unexpected ease , and their Majesties praised him very highly after the performance . " Formby was embarrassed by his performance . His usual act partly consisted of a running patter with the orchestra conductor , which he again did on this occasion ; behind the conductor sat the royal party , and it looked to some that Formby was speaking disrespectfully to them . The king understood to whom Formby was talking , however , and afterwards presented him with a <unk> . In October Formby appeared in his second Royal Command Performance of the year , in a charity show organised by the French actress Sarah Bernhardt . He took part in two acts : a performance of " Ten Little Nigger Boys All in a Row " , alongside other music hall entertainers including Robey , Mark Sheridan , Cicely <unk> and George Graves , followed by a short solo piece . 
 In March 1914 Formby appeared in No Fool Like an Old Fool , a 20 @-@ minute long silent comedy film , which is thought to be lost ; it was his only film appearance , and little is known about the plot or his character . When the First World War broke out in August that year , he tried to enlist , but was turned down on medical grounds ; instead he , like many music hall stars , was active in the recruiting campaign for the army and spoke at rallies , particularly on behalf of the Derby Scheme . 
 Formby was always worried that his son George would watch him on stage , as he did not wish the boy to become a comic , saying " one fool in the family is enough " . Nevertheless , although he had sent George away to train as a jockey , in 1915 he allowed his son to appear on screen , taking the lead part of a stable boy in By the Shortest of Heads , a thriller directed by Bert Haldane . After the filming , Formby sent his son to Ireland , to continue his jockey training , and also sent the five horses Formby had purchased that year , which joined others he had previously bought . 
 = = = Worsening health , and death : 1916 – 21 = = = 
 Formby was injured in June 1916 during rehearsals for the revue Razzle @-@ Dazzle , after a stage collapsed onto him at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . He suffered lung damage and was treated for a pulmonary haemorrhage at Guy 's Hospital before recovering . Although he was the lead in the show , the premiere took place without him ; it was criticised by reviewers , and The Observer thought that " some of it seemed to have strayed in by mistake out of a second @-@ rate provincial pantomime " . Formby returned within a week and the reviews were more positive , with The Observer stating that it was " one of the successes of the season ... Razzle @-@ Dazzle is now one of the liveliest revues in London , and the most spectacular " . By August the production had transferred to the Empire Theatre , Leicester Square . 
 The damage to Formby 's lungs from the accident was exacerbated by tuberculosis , and he began to miss an increasing number of his appearances . In 1917 the Southport Palladium took court action against him for failing to fulfil a theatrical engagement as contracted , whereupon his lawyer said that Formby was dying of the lung disease and was working for the short time he had left for the benefit of his large family . Formby lost the case : his plea of ill @-@ health was compromised by his accepting an engagement elsewhere at the same time . 
 Formby 's health was further damaged in the influenza pandemic of 1918 , during which he contracted the disease while appearing at the Manchester Hippodrome and was unable to work for a month . He was taken ill during the runs of pantomimes in both 1918 and 1919 , was forced to rest for three months in 1919 , and collapsed on stage during a performance in Newcastle upon Tyne in the 1920 – 21 pantomime season . Formby was advised by doctors to emigrate to South Africa for the benefit of his health , but he preferred to stay in Britain , with his wife and children , and continued to work . During his performances his wife would wait in the wings with ice for him to suck to stop internal bleeding , and an oxygen tent was present in the stage wings ready for emergencies . 
 In early 1921 Formby was appearing at the Newcastle Empire in Jack and Jill when he collapsed after a show . He returned to his home near Warrington , where he died of pulmonary tuberculosis on 8 February , at the age of 45 . He was buried in a family plot in the Catholic section of Warrington Cemetery . He left over £ 25 @,@ 000 in his will , listing Eliza as executrix . As their marriage had been bigamous , he described her as " my reputed wife Eliza Ann Booth , otherwise Eliza Ann Hoy " . 
 The obituarist for The Manchester Guardian wrote that Formby was one of the " great drolls " of the music hall whose humour " always seemed to take its rise in a sympathetic perception of human vanities and weaknesses " . The Dundee Courier considered him a great comedian , made all the greater by his continuing to perform through his illness , while the drama critic J. T. Grein , writing in The Illustrated London News , thought that Formby , " along with [ Harry ] Lauder , Robey and [ Albert ] Chevalier , formed the leading quartette [ sic ] of the profession " . 
 = = Stage persona and technique = = 
 Formby was the first comic to use a delayed entrance as a joke to make the audience laugh before he arrived : his orchestra played his entrance music , and then he failed to appear on stage . His act included songs , described by Smart and Bothway Howard as " characteristically simple , some with tunes derived from Methodist hymns , and with catchy choruses " , and he would chat to the orchestra conductor and front rows , punctuating his stage patter — delivered in a deadpan style — with his cough . He used his health — particularly the coughing — as part of his act , and would say that he was " <unk> ' well tonight ! " He also created the phrase " It 's not the cough that carries you off – it 's the coffin they carries you off in ! " One of Formby 's nicknames , " The Wigan Nightingale " was coined because of the way he used his bronchial cough in his act . 
 The " John Willie " character , like much of Formby 's act , used pathos as one of the comedic drivers , " but it was not contrived and was never mawkish " , according to Alan Randall and Ray Seaton , two of Formby Jnr 's biographers . In his examination of British screen stars , Geoffrey Macnab agrees , and identifies that although Formby 's jokes were about himself , " there was grit in the routines , a resolute denial of self @-@ pity " . The Times examined the performer 's style of humour , and considered it " often crude , and always simple , but it was always true humour , and , what is more , it was invariably clean . " 
 Much of Formby 's humour was based in his north western roots , particularly Wigan , which he told people was where he was born , rather than Ashton . He would refer to taking his holidays at Wigan Pier , which was a small wooden platform on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal for loading coal , rather than a pleasure pier . The Manchester Guardian called him " Lancashire 's accredited representative on the London variety stage ... clown @-@ satirist of genius " . 
 When he performed in London , Formby would change his act , introducing himself as " Good evening , I 'm Formby fra ' Wigan ... I 've not been in England long " ; he slightly modified his stage persona , and he played " the naïve boy trying to fit in with the sophisticated south " . Smart and Boothroyd consider that " the contrast between his northern accent and metropolitan bravado was humorous , and the more urbane and sophisticated his audience the more George exaggerated his provincial <unk> " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Six weeks after Formby 's death , his son George first appeared on stage in a copy of his father 's act ; he initially appeared under the name George Hoy — using his mother 's maiden name — but soon took his father 's stage name . Formby Jnr went on to become the top British male star in box office takings between 1937 and 1943 , and the highest @-@ paid entertainer in Britain . 
 Chaplin , who derived some of his stage persona from Formby 's , sailed in 1908 with Karno 's troupe to the United States , where he developed the character of the Tramp , the image of which became universally familiar by 1915 . George Orwell later used Formby 's humorous concept of " Wigan Pier " in the title of his 1937 study of depression and unemployment in the area , The Road to Wigan Pier . 
 Formby also left over 190 recordings , and after his death The Times commented , " There cannot be many people who have not heard at some time in their lives either the words or the refrain of ' John Willie – Come On ' , ' One of the Boys ' , ' I was Standing on the Corner of the Street ' , or ' Playing the Game in the West ' " , songs described by Fisher as " <unk> with gaiety and champagne " . 
 In October 1922 a large marble memorial was unveiled at the site of Formby 's grave , in the presence of Formby Jnr , Eliza and a large crowd . The memorial later became the resting place for both Formby Jnr and Eliza . In June 2012 a blue plaque was unveiled at Hodgson Street , Ashton , Formby 's birthplace . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Hiryū = 
 Hiryū ( <unk> , " Flying Dragon " ) was an aircraft carrier built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the 1930s . The only ship of her class , she was built to a modified Sōryū design . Her aircraft supported the Japanese invasion of French Indochina in mid @-@ 1940 . During the first month of the Pacific War , she took part in the attack on Pearl Harbor and the Battle of Wake Island . The ship supported the conquest of the Dutch East Indies in January 1942 . The following month , her aircraft bombed Darwin , Australia , and continued to assist in the Dutch East Indies campaign . In April , Hiryū 's aircraft helped sink two British heavy cruisers and several merchant ships during the Indian Ocean raid . 
 After a brief refit , Hiryū and three other fleet carriers of the First Air Fleet ( Kido Butai ) participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After bombarding American forces on the atoll , the carriers were attacked by aircraft from Midway and the carriers USS Enterprise , Hornet , and Yorktown . Dive bombers from Yorktown and Enterprise crippled Hiryū and set her afire . She was scuttled the following day after it became clear that she could not be salvaged . The loss of Hiryū and three other IJN carriers at Midway was a crucial strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to the Allies ' ultimate victory in the Pacific . 
 = = Design = = 
 Hiryū was one of two large carriers approved for construction under the 1931 – 32 Supplementary Program . Originally designed as the sister ship of Sōryū , her design was enlarged and modified in light of the Tomozuru and Fourth Fleet Incidents in 1934 – 35 that revealed many IJN ships were top @-@ heavy , unstable and structurally weak . Her forecastle was raised and her hull strengthened . Other changes involved increasing her beam , displacement , and armor protection . 
 The ship had a length of 227 @.@ 4 meters ( 746 ft 1 in ) overall , a beam of 22 @.@ 3 meters ( 73 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 8 meters ( 25 ft 7 in ) . She displaced 17 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 17 @,@ 300 long tons ) at standard load and 20 @,@ 570 metric tons ( 20 @,@ 250 long tons ) at normal load . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Hiryū was fitted with four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 153 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 114 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by eight Kampon water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines and boilers were the same as those used in the Mogami @-@ class cruisers . The ship 's power and slim , cruiser @-@ type hull with a length @-@ to @-@ beam ratio of 10 : 1 gave her a speed of 34 @.@ 3 knots ( 63 @.@ 5 km / h ; 39 @.@ 5 mph ) and made her the fastest carrier in the world at the time of her commissioning . Hiryū carried 4 @,@ 500 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 400 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 10 @,@ 330 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 130 km ; 11 @,@ 890 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boiler uptakes were trunked to the ship 's starboard side amidships and exhausted just below flight deck level through two funnels curved downward . 
 = = = Flight deck and hangars = = = 
 The carrier 's 216 @.@ 9 @-@ meter ( 711 ft 7 in ) flight deck was 27 @.@ 0 meters ( 88 ft 6 in ) wide and overhung her superstructure at both ends , supported by pairs of pillars . Hiryū was one of only two carriers ever built whose island was on the port side of the ship ( Akagi was the other ) . It was also positioned further to the rear and encroached on the width of the flight deck , unlike Sōryū . Nine transverse arrestor wires were installed on the flight deck that could stop a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @,@ 000 lb ) aircraft . One group of three wires was positioned further forward to allow the ship to land aircraft over the bow , although this was never done in practice . The flight deck was only 12 @.@ 8 meters ( 42 ft ) above the waterline and the ship 's designers kept this figure low by reducing the height of the hangars . The upper hangar was 171 @.@ 3 by 18 @.@ 3 meters ( 562 by 60 ft ) and had an approximate height of 4 @.@ 6 meters ( 15 ft ) ; the lower was 142 @.@ 3 by 18 @.@ 3 meters ( 467 by 60 ft ) and had an approximate height of 4 @.@ 3 meters ( 14 ft ) . Together they had an approximate total area of 5 @,@ 736 square meters ( 61 @,@ 740 sq ft ) . This caused problems in handling aircraft because the wings of a Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bomber could neither be spread nor folded in the upper hangar . 
 Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by three elevators , the forward one abreast the island on the centerline and the other two offset to starboard . The forward platform measured 16 @.@ 0 by 13 @.@ 0 meters ( 52 @.@ 5 ft × 42 @.@ 75 ft ) , the middle one 13 @.@ 0 by 12 @.@ 0 meters ( 42 @.@ 75 ft × 39 @.@ 3 ft ) , and the rear 11 @.@ 8 by 13 @.@ 0 meters ( 38 @.@ 7 ft × 42 @.@ 8 ft ) . They were capable of transferring aircraft weighing up to 5 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) . Hiryū had a designed aircraft capacity of 64 , plus nine spares . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Hiryū 's primary anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of six twin @-@ gun mounts equipped with 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns mounted on projecting sponsons , three on either side of the carrier 's hull . When firing at surface targets , the guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) ; they had a maximum ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at their maximum elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was 14 rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was approximately eight rounds per minute . The ship was equipped with two Type 94 fire @-@ control directors to control the 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) guns , one for each side of the ship ; the starboard @-@ side director was on top of the island and the other director was positioned below flight deck level on the port side . 
 The ship 's light AA armament consisted of seven triple and five twin @-@ gun mounts for license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 mm Type 96 AA guns . Two of the triple mounts were sited on a platform just below the forward end of the flight deck . The gun was the standard Japanese light AA gun during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high @-@ speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high @-@ speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast , and its magazines were too small to maintain high rates of fire " . These 25 @-@ millimeter ( 1 in ) guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the fifteen @-@ round magazines . The Type 96 guns were controlled by five Type 95 directors , two on each side and one in the bow . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Hiryū had a waterline belt with a maximum thickness of 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) over the magazines that reduced to 90 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) over the machinery spaces and the avgas storage tanks . It was backed by an internal anti @-@ splinter bulkhead . The ship 's deck was 25 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick over the machinery spaces and 55 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick over the magazines and avgas storage tanks . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions for aircraft carriers , Hiryū was named " Flying Dragon " . The ship was laid down at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 8 July 1936 , launched on 16 November 1937 and commissioned on 5 July 1939 . She was assigned to the Second Carrier Division on 15 November . In September 1940 , the ship 's air group was transferred to Hainan Island to support the Japanese invasion of French Indochina . In February 1941 , Hiryū supported the blockade of Southern China . Two months later , the 2nd Carrier Division , commanded by Rear Admiral Tamon Yamaguchi , was assigned to the First Air Fleet , or Kido Butai , on 10 April . Hiryū returned to Japan on 7 August and began a short refit that was completed on 15 September . She became flagship of the Second Division from 22 September to 26 October while Sōryū was refitting . 
 = = = Pearl Harbor and subsequent operations = = = 
 In November 1941 , the IJN 's Combined Fleet , commanded by Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , prepared to participate in Japan 's initiation of a formal war with the United States by conducting a preemptive strike against the United States Navy 's Pacific Fleet base at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . On 22 November , Hiryū , commanded by Captain <unk> Kaku , and the rest of the Kido Butai , under Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo and including six fleet carriers from the First , Second , and Fifth Carrier Divisions , assembled in Hitokappu Bay at Etorofu Island . The fleet departed Etorofu on 26 November and followed a course across the north @-@ central Pacific to avoid commercial shipping lanes . Now the flagship of the Second Carrier Division , the ship embarked 21 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , 18 Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers , and 18 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers . From a position 230 nmi ( 430 km ; 260 mi ) north of Oahu , Hiryū and the other five carriers launched two waves of aircraft on the morning of 7 December 1941 Hawaiian time . 
 In the first wave , 8 B5N torpedo bombers were supposed to attack the aircraft carriers that normally berthed on the northwest side of Ford Island , but none were in Pearl Harbor that day ; 4 of the B5N pilots diverted to their secondary target , ships berthed alongside " 1010 Pier " where the fleet flagship was usually moored . That ship , the battleship Pennsylvania , was in drydock and its position was occupied by the light cruiser Helena and the minelayer Oglala ; all four torpedoes missed . The other four pilots attacked the battleships West Virginia and Oklahoma . The remaining 10 B5Ns were tasked to drop 800 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 800 lb ) armor @-@ piercing bombs on the battleships berthed on the southeast side of Ford Island ( " Battleship Row " ) and may have scored one or two hits on them , in addition to causing a magazine explosion aboard the battleship Arizona that sank her with heavy loss of life . The 6 A6M Zeros strafed parked aircraft at Marine Corps Air Station Ewa ( MCAS Ewa ) , claiming 22 aircraft destroyed . 
 The second wave consisted of 9 Zeros and 18 D3As , one of each aborting with mechanical problems . The former strafed Naval Air Station Kaneohe Bay before moving on to attack Bellows Army Airfield . They strafed the airfield , and shot down two Curtiss P @-@ 40 fighters attempting to take off when the Zeros arrived and a Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress heavy bomber that had earlier diverted from Hickam Army Airfield , and also destroyed a Stinson O @-@ 49 observation aircraft on the ground for the loss of one of their own . The fighters with remaining ammunition expended it strafing MCAS Ewa , the rendezvous point for the second @-@ wave fighters . The D3As attacked various ships in Pearl Harbor , but it is not possible to identify which aircraft attacked which ship . Two D3As from Hiryū were lost during the attack , one shot down by Second Lieutenant George Welch . 
 While returning to Japan after the attack , Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo , commander of the First Air Fleet , ordered that Sōryū and Hiryū be detached on 16 December to attack the defenders of Wake Island who had already defeated the first Japanese attack on the island . The two carriers reached the vicinity of the island on 21 December and launched 29 D3As and 2 B5Ns , escorted by 18 Zeros , to attack ground targets . They encountered no aerial opposition and launched 35 B5Ns and 6 A6M Zeros the following day . They were intercepted by the 2 surviving Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters of Marine Fighter Squadron VMF @-@ 211 . The Wildcats shot down 2 B5Ns before they were shot down by <unk> Isao <unk> . The garrison surrendered the next day after Japanese troops were landed . 
 The carriers arrived at Kure on 29 December . They were assigned to the Southern Force on 8 January 1942 and departed four days later for the Dutch East Indies . The ships supported the invasion of the Palau Islands and the Battle of Ambon , attacking Allied positions on the island on 23 January with 54 aircraft . Four days later the carriers detached 18 Zeros and 9 D3As to operate from land bases in support of Japanese operations in the Battle of Borneo . Hiryū and Sōryū arrived at Palau on 28 January and waited for the arrival of the carriers Kaga and Akagi . All four carriers departed Palau on 15 February and launched air strikes against Darwin , Australia , four days later . Hiryū contributed 18 B5Ns , 18 D3As , and 9 Zeros to the attack . Her aircraft attacked the ships in port and its facilities , sinking or setting on fire three ships and damaging two others . The Zeros destroyed 1 P @-@ 40E as it was taking off , 2 Consolidated PBY Catalina seaplanes on the water , and a Zero was forced to crash land after being damaged by a P @-@ 40E of the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) 33rd Pursuit Squadron . 
 Hiryū and the other carriers arrived at Staring Bay on Celebes Island on 21 February to resupply and rest before departing four days later to support the invasion of Java . On 1 March 1942 , the ship 's D3As damaged the destroyer USS Edsall badly enough for her to be caught and sunk by Japanese cruisers . Later that day the dive bombers sank the oil tanker USS Pecos . The four carriers launched an airstrike of 180 aircraft against <unk> on 5 March and set the town on fire , sinking five small ships , and damaging nine others that later had to be scuttled . Two days later , they attacked Christmas Island and Hiryū 's aircraft sank the Dutch freighter <unk> Bras before returning to Staring Bay on 11 March to resupply and train for the impending Indian Ocean raid . This raid was intended to secure newly conquered Burma , Malaya , and the Dutch East Indies against any Allied attack by destroying base facilities and forces in the eastern Indian Ocean . 
 = = = Indian Ocean raid = = = 
 On 26 March , the five carriers of the First Air Fleet departed from Staring Bay ; they were spotted by a Catalina about 350 nautical miles ( 650 km ; 400 mi ) southeast of Ceylon on the morning of 4 April . Six of Hiryū 's Zeros were on Combat Air Patrol ( CAP ) and helped to shoot it down . Nagumo closed to within 120 nautical miles ( 220 km ; 140 mi ) of Colombo before launching an airstrike the next morning . Hiryū contributed 18 <unk> and 9 Zeros to the force ; the latter encountered a flight of 6 Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers from 788 Naval Air Squadron en route and shot them all down without loss . The Japanese aircraft encountered defending Hawker Hurricane fighters from Nos. 30 and 258 Squadrons RAF over Ratmalana airfield and Hiryū 's fighters claimed to have shot down 11 with 3 Zeros damaged , although the fighters from the other carriers also made claims . British losses were 21 Hurricanes shot down and 2 more forced to crash land . The D3As and <unk> inflicted some damage to the port facilities , but a day 's warning had allowed much of the shipping in the harbor to be evacuated . The British were attempting to find Nagumo 's ships all morning and Hiryū 's Zeros on CAP over the fleet helped to shoot down an RAF Catalina , shot down a Fairey Albacore torpedo bomber and drove off another from the carrier Indomitable . Later that morning the British heavy cruisers Cornwall and Dorsetshire were spotted and Hiryū launched 18 D3As . They sank both ships in combination with the dive bombers from the other carriers . 
 On the morning of 9 April , Hiryū 's CAP shot down another Catalina attempting to locate the fleet and , later that morning , contributed 18 B5Ns , escorted by 6 Zeros , to the attack on Trincomalee . The fighters engaged 261 Squadron RAF , claiming to have shot down two with two more shared with fighters from the other carriers . British losses were only eight fighters , but the Japanese pilots claimed a total of 49 aircraft shot down when the RAF only had 16 Hurricanes in the fight . The British pilots shot down one of Hiryū 's B5Ns and forced another to crash land while they were bombing the port . Meanwhile , a floatplane from the battleship Haruna spotted the small aircraft carrier Hermes , escorted by the destroyer HMAS Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships , escorted by nine Zeros . Hiryū contributed 18 dive bombers and 3 fighters , but they arrived too late to assist in sinking them and found two other ships further north . They sank the freighter RFA Athelstone and her escorting corvette , Hollyhock . While this was going on , Akagi narrowly escaped damage when 9 British Bristol Blenheim bombers from Ceylon penetrated the CAP and dropped their bombs from 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) . Hiryū had eight Zeros aloft , along with 12 more from the other carriers , and collectively they accounted for 5 of the British bombers for the loss of 1 of Hiryū 's Zeros . The Blenheims ran into the D3As from Shōkaku , escorted by Hiryū 's Zeros , on their way back home and lost one more bomber to the Japanese aircraft . The dive bombers claimed to have shot down two Blenheims in conjunction with the Zeros , which claimed one on their own , for the loss of one Zero shot down by the bombers ' gunners and one D3A damaged . After launching the dive bombers that sank Hermes and the other ships , the First Air Fleet reversed course and headed southeast for the Malacca Strait and Japan . 
 On 19 April , while transiting the Bashi Straits between Taiwan and Luzon en route to Japan , Hiryū , Sōryū , and Akagi were sent in pursuit of the American carriers Hornet and Enterprise , which had launched the Doolittle Raid against Tokyo . They found only empty ocean , as the American carriers had immediately departed the area to return to Hawaii . The carriers quickly abandoned the chase and dropped anchor at Hashirajima anchorage on 22 April . Having been engaged in constant operations for four and a half months , the ship , along with the other three carriers of the First and Second Carrier Divisions , was hurriedly refitted and replenished in preparation for the Combined Fleet 's next major operation , scheduled to begin one month hence . While at Hashirajima , Hiryū 's air group was based ashore at <unk> Airfield , near Saiki , Ōita , and conducted flight and weapons training with the other First Air Fleet carrier units . 
 = = = Midway = = = 
 Concerned by the US carrier strikes in the Marshall Islands , Lae @-@ Salamaua , and the Doolittle raids , Yamamoto was determined to force the US Navy into a showdown to eliminate the American carrier threat . He decided to invade and occupy Midway Atoll , which he was sure would draw out the American carriers to defend it . The Japanese codenamed the Midway invasion Operation MI . Unknown to the Japanese , the US Navy had divined the Japanese plan by breaking its JN @-@ 25 code and had prepared an ambush using its three available carriers , positioned northeast of Midway . 
 On 25 May 1942 , Hiryū set out with the Combined Fleet 's carrier striking force in the company of Kaga , Akagi , and Sōryū , which constituted the First and Second Carrier Divisions , for the attack on Midway . Her aircraft complement consisted of 18 Zeros , 18 D3As , and 18 B5Ns . Also aboard were 3 A6Ms of the 6th <unk> intended as the aerial garrison for Midway . With the fleet positioned 250 nmi ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) northwest of Midway at dawn ( 04 : 45 local time ) on 4 June 1942 , Hiryū 's portion of the 108 @-@ plane airstrike was an attack on the facilities on Sand Island with 18 torpedo bombers , 1 of which aborted with mechanical problems , escorted by nine Zeros . The air group suffered heavily during the attack : 2 B5Ns were shot down en route to the island , another was shot down by AA fire , 1 was forced to ditch on the trip back , another disappeared on the return trip and 5 were damaged beyond repair . 
 The carrier also contributed 3 Zeros to the total of 11 assigned to the initial CAP over the four carriers . By 07 : 05 , the carrier had 6 fighters with the CAP which helped to defend the Kido Butai from the first US attackers from Midway Island at 07 : 10 . At this time , Nagumo 's carriers were attacked by 6 US Navy Grumman TBF Avengers from Torpedo Squadron 8 ( VT @-@ 8 ) and 4 USAAC Martin B @-@ 26 Marauders , all carrying torpedoes . The Avengers went after Hiryū while the Marauders attacked Akagi . The 30 CAP Zeros in the air at this time , including the 6 from Hiryū , immediately attacked the American airplanes , shooting down 5 of the Avengers and 2 of the B @-@ 26s . The Avengers shot down 1 of Hiryū 's Zeros . The surviving aircraft dropped their torpedoes , but all missed . 
 At 07 : 15 , Nagumo ordered the B5Ns on Kaga and Akagi rearmed with bombs for another attack on Midway itself . This process was slowed by the number of ordnance carts used to handle the bombs and torpedoes and the limited number of ordnance elevators . This meant that the torpedoes could not be struck below until after all the bombs were moved up from their magazine , assembled and mounted on the aircraft . This process normally took about an hour and a half ; more time would be required to bring the aircraft up to the flight deck , and to warm up and launch the strike group . Around 07 : 40 , he reversed his order when he received a message from one of his scout aircraft that American warships had been spotted . Depleted of ammunition , two of Hiryū 's CAP Zeros landed aboard the carrier at 07 : 40 . 
 At 07 : 55 , the next American strike from Midway arrived in the form of 16 Marine Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers of Marine Scout Bomber Squadron ( VMSB @-@ 241 ) under Major Lofton R. Henderson . Hiryū 's 3 CAP fighters were among the 9 still aloft that attacked Henderson 's planes , shooting down 6 of them as they executed a fruitless glide bombing attack on Hiryū . In return , the gunner of one the Dauntlesses shot down one of Hiryū 's Zeros . At roughly the same time , the Japanese carriers were attacked by 12 USAAC B @-@ 17s , bombing from 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . The high altitude of the B @-@ 17s gave the Japanese captains enough time to anticipate where the bombs would land , and they successfully maneuvered out of the impact area . Four B @-@ 17s attacked Hiryū , but missed with all their bombs . 
 Hiryū reinforced the CAP with launches of 3 more Zeros at 08 : 25 . These fresh Zeros helped defeat the next American air strike from Midway , 11 Vought SB2U Vindicator dive bombers from VMSB @-@ 241 , which attacked the battleship Haruna starting around 08 : 30 . Haruna escaped damage and 3 of the Vindicators were shot down . Although all the American air strikes had thus far caused negligible damage , they kept the Japanese carrier forces off @-@ balance as Nagumo endeavored to prepare a response to news , received at 08 : 20 , of the sighting of American carrier forces to his northeast . 
 Hiryū began recovering her Midway strike force at around 09 : 00 and finished shortly by 09 : 10 . The landed aircraft were quickly struck below , while the carriers ' crews began preparations to spot aircraft for the strike against the American carrier forces . The preparations were interrupted at 09 : 18 , when the first attacking American carrier aircraft were sighted . These consisted of 15 Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo bombers of VT @-@ 8 , led by Lieutenant Commander John C. Waldron from the Hornet . They attempted a torpedo attack on Soryū , but all of the American planes were shot down by the 18 CAP fighters , leaving one surviving aviator treading water . 
 Shortly afterwards , 14 Devastators from Torpedo Squadron 6 ( VT @-@ 6 ) from Enterprise , led by Lieutenant Commander Eugene E. Lindsey , attacked . Lindsey 's aircraft tried to sandwich Kaga , but the CAP , reinforced by 4 additional Zeros launched by Hiryū at 09 : 37 , shot down all but 4 of the Devastators , and Kaga dodged the torpedoes . Hiryū launched another trio of CAP Zeros at 10 : 13 after Torpedo Squadron 3 ( VT @-@ 3 ) from Yorktown was spotted . Two of her Zeros were shot down by Wildcats escorting VT @-@ 3 and another was forced to ditch . 
 While VT @-@ 3 was still attacking Hiryū , American dive bombers arrived over the Japanese carriers almost undetected and began their dives . It was at this time , around 10 : 20 , that in the words of Jonathan Parshall and Anthony Tully , the " Japanese air defenses would finally and catastrophically fail . " Three American dive bomber squadrons now attacked the three other carriers and set each of them on fire . Hiryū was untouched and proceeded to launch 18 D3As , escorted by 6 Zeros , at 10 : 54 and a second wave of 10 B5Ns , escorted by 6 Zeros , at 13 : 30 against the American carrier Yorktown . En route , the Zeros engaged a group of Enterprise 's Dauntlesses that they had spotted . They failed to shoot down any of the dive bombers , but two of the Zero were shot up by the bombers ' rear gunners , with one Zero forced to ditch near a destroyer . American radar detected the incoming Japanese dive bombers at 11 : 52 and vectored Yorktown 's CAP of 20 Wildcats against them . The Wildcats shot down three of the remaining Zeros for the loss of one of their own and engaged the D3As . Only seven of the dive bombers survived long enough to make their attack on Yorktown and two of those were shot down by flak during their dive , but they made three direct hits and two near misses that badly damaged the carrier and set her on fire . 
 The Americans had managed to extinguish her fires by 14 : 00 and Yorktown was making 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) by 14 : 30 when the second group of Japanese aircraft launched from the Hiryū was approaching , low level torpedo bombers this time . They had been detected by the ship 's radar at 13 : 55 , but the CAP was held back until they got closer . Six Wildcats were on CAP duty and four were vectored toward the attacking aircraft while the other two were retained to cover the takeoff of the 10 Wildcats fueling on deck . The Japanese were jumped at 14 : 38 by two Wildcats which shot down one torpedo bomber before they were both shot down by the escorting Zeros . Two Zeros were shot down later for the loss of one Wildcat . Two more B5Ns were shot down before they could drop their torpedoes and three afterwards , but none of these aircraft hit the carrier . The last four torpedo bombers scored two hits ( one B5N had its torpedo @-@ release gear fail ) on Yorktown that damaged three boilers and knocked out all electrical power so that she could not pump fuel oil to starboard to counteract her six degree list to port . Seventeen minutes later , after the list increased to 23 degrees , the crew was ordered to abandon ship . Of the four Zeros and five B5Ns that returned to Hiryū , only one Zero and three dive bombers were still flight @-@ worthy . 
 Yamaguchi radioed his intention to Nagumo at 16 : 30 to launch a third strike against the American carriers at dusk ( approximately 18 : 00 ) , but Nagumo ordered the fleet to withdraw to the west . Unbeknownst to the Japanese , Enterprise and Hornet had already launched airstrikes well before then . Enterprise launched a total of 26 Dauntlesses at 15 : 25 using her own aircraft plus those from Yorktown that had been forced to recover aboard her after Yorktown was damaged , and Hornet launched 16 more of her own Dauntlesses at 16 : 00 . At this point in the battle , Hiryū had only 4 air @-@ worthy dive @-@ bombers and 5 torpedo @-@ planes left . She also retained 19 of her own fighters on board as well as a further 13 Zeros on CAP ( a composite force of survivors from the other carriers ) . At 16 : 45 , Enterprise 's dive bombers spotted the Japanese carrier and began to maneuver for good attacking position while reducing altitude . At 16 : 56 , just as the first Dauntlesses were beginning their dives , Nagumo ordered a change in course to 120 degrees , possibly to prepare to recover his reconnaissance floatplanes , that threw off the aim of the leading SBDs . The Japanese did not even spot the Americans until 17 : 01 . The CAP shot down two of the American aircraft in their dives and another after it was forced to abort its dive when some of Yorktown 's SBDs passed in front of it starting their own dives . Hiryū was struck by four 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bombs , three on the forward flight deck and one on the forward elevator . The explosions started fires among the aircraft on the hangar deck . The forward half of the flight deck collapsed into the hangar while part of the elevator was hurled against the ship 's bridge . The fires were severe enough that the remaining American aircraft attacked the other ships escorting Hiryū , albeit without effect , deeming further attacks on the carrier as a waste of time because she was aflame from stem to stern . Beginning at 17 : 42 , two groups of B @-@ 17s attempted to attack the Japanese ships without success , although one bomber strafed Hiryū 's flight deck , killing several anti @-@ aircraft gunners . 
 Although Hiryū 's propulsion was not affected , the fires could not be brought under control . At 21 : 23 , her engines stopped , and at 23 : 58 a major explosion rocked the ship . The order to abandon ship was given at 03 : 15 , and the survivors were taken off by the destroyers <unk> and Makigumo . Yamaguchi and Kaku decided to remain on board as Hiryū was torpedoed at 05 : 10 by Makigumo as the ship could not be salvaged . One torpedo missed and the other struck near the bow without the typical plume of water , although the detonation was quite visible . Around 07 : 00 , one of Hōshō 's Yokosuka B4Y aircraft discovered Hiryū still afloat and not in any visible danger of sinking . The aviators could also see crewmen aboard the carrier , men who had not received word to abandon ship . They finally launched some of the carrier 's boats and abandoned ship themselves around 09 : 00 . Thirty @-@ nine men made it into the ship 's cutter only moments before Hiryū sank around 09 : 12 , taking the bodies of 389 men with her . The cutter drifted for 14 days before being discovered by a Catalina and rescued by the seaplane tender USS Ballard . Four men died of their wounds or exposure before being picked up and a fifth died that night . 
 The loss of Hiryū and the three other IJN carriers at Midway , comprising two thirds of Japan 's total number of fleet carriers and the experienced core of the First Air Fleet , was a strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to Japan 's ultimate defeat in the war . In an effort to conceal the defeat , the ship was not immediately removed from the Navy 's registry of ships , instead being listed as " unmanned " before finally being struck from the registry on 25 September 1942 . 
 The IJN selected a modified version of the Hiryū design for mass production to replace the carriers lost at the Battle of Midway . Of a planned program of 16 ships of the Unryū class , only six were laid down and three were commissioned before the end of the war . 
 = Pipe Dream ( musical ) = 
 Pipe Dream is the seventh musical by the team of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II ; it premiered on Broadway on November 30 , 1955 . The work is based on John Steinbeck 's short novel Sweet Thursday — Steinbeck wrote the novel , a sequel to Cannery Row , in the hope of having it adapted into a musical . Set in Monterey , California , the musical tells the story of the romance between Doc , a marine biologist , and Suzy , who in the novel is a prostitute ; her profession is only alluded to in the stage work . Pipe Dream was a flop and a financial disaster for Rodgers and Hammerstein . 
 Broadway producers Cy Feuer and Ernie Martin held the rights to Sweet Thursday and wanted Frank Loesser to compose a musical based on it . When Loesser proved unavailable , Feuer and Martin succeeded in interesting Rodgers and Hammerstein in the project . As Hammerstein adapted Sweet Thursday , he and Rodgers had concerns about featuring a prostitute as female lead and setting part of the musical in a bordello . They signed operatic diva Helen Traubel to play Fauna , the house madam . 
 As the show progressed through tryouts , Hammerstein repeatedly revised it , obscuring Suzy 's profession and the nature of Fauna 's house . Pipe Dream met with poor reviews , and rapidly closed once it exhausted its advance sale . It had no national tour or London production , and has rarely been presented since . No movie version of the show was made ; the Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization ( which licenses their works ) once hoped for a film version featuring the Muppets with Fauna played by Miss Piggy . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Following World War II , Cy Feuer and Ernie Martin started producing musicals together . Feuer was the former head of the music department at low @-@ budget Republic Pictures ; Martin was a television executive . Having secured the rights to the farce Charley 's Aunt , they produced it as the musical comedy Where 's Charley ? , with a score by Frank Loesser . Among the backers of Where 's Charley ? were Rodgers and Hammerstein , which helped secure additional investment . The show was a hit and helped establish Feuer and Martin on Broadway — they would go on to produce Guys and Dolls . 
 In the aftermath of Guys and Dolls 's success , Feuer and Martin were interested in adapting John Steinbeck 's 1945 novel Cannery Row into a musical . They felt that some of the characters , such as marine biologist Doc , would work well in a musical , but that many of the other characters would not . Steinbeck suggested that he write a sequel to Cannery Row that would feature the characters attractive to Feuer and Martin . Based on suggestions for the story line by Feuer and Martin , Steinbeck began to write Sweet Thursday . 
 Cannery Row is set in Monterey , California , before World War II . In Sweet Thursday , Doc returns from the war to find Cannery Row almost deserted and many of his colorful friends gone . Even his close friend Dora , who ran the Bear Flag Restaurant , a whorehouse , has died , and her sister Fauna has taken her place as madam . A former social worker , Fauna teaches the girls how to set a table properly , hopeful they will marry wealthy men . Doc 's friends Mack ( Mac in Pipe Dream ) and Hazel ( both men ) are still around . They decide Doc 's discontent is due to loneliness , and try to get him together with Suzy , a prostitute who has just arrived in Monterey . The two have a brief romance ; disgusted by her life as a hooker , Suzy leaves the bawdy house and moves into an abandoned boiler . She decides she cannot stay with Doc , but tells her friends that if Doc fell ill , she would care for him . The accommodating Hazel promptly breaks Doc 's arm as he sleeps , bringing the two lovers back together . At the end , Doc and Suzy go off to La Jolla to collect marine specimens together . 
 Originally , Feuer , Martin and Steinbeck intended the work to be composed by Loesser , but he was busy with a project which eventually became The Most Happy Fella . With Loesser 's refusal , Feuer and Martin approached Rodgers and Hammerstein with their project , then titled The Bear Flag Café . From the beginning , the prudish Hammerstein was uncomfortable with the setting , telling Feuer " We do family shows . " However , Hammerstein found himself attracted to the characters . Doc and Suzy were culturally mismatched but drawn to each other , with Doc rather moody and Suzy somewhat intense . Similar pairings had led to success , not only in the pair 's Carousel and South Pacific , but in Hammerstein 's work before his collaboration with Rodgers , such as The Desert Song and Rose @-@ Marie . During early 1953 , Steinbeck sent Hammerstein early drafts of the novel . Rodgers was also concerned about the idea of having a prostitute be the female lead , but eventually gave in . The two agreed to write and produce the adaptation . 
 As they worked with Steinbeck , Rodgers and Hammerstein , though renowned for such hits as Oklahoma ! , Carousel , and South Pacific , suffered a relative failure with the 1953 musical Me and Juliet , a tale of romance among the cast and stagehands backstage at a musical . Before agreeing to do the Sweet Thursday project , the duo had considered other projects for their next work together , such as an adaptation of the film Saratoga Trunk . A proposal made by attorney David Merrick to adapt a series of works by Marcel Pagnol to which Merrick held the stage rights fell through when the duo were not willing to have Merrick be an associate producer ; Merrick took the project elsewhere , and it was developed into the hit Fanny . Afterwards , Hammerstein stated , " Why the hell did we give up Fanny ? What on earth were we trying to prove ? My God , that 's a great story and look at some of the junk we 've done ! " 
 = = Writing and casting = = 
 Steinbeck continued to write in late 1953 while Hammerstein and Rodgers went to London to produce the West End production of The King and I. As Hammerstein received new material from Steinbeck , he and Rodgers began to map out the musical , conceiving scenes and deciding where songs should be placed . On January 1 , 1954 , following the completion of Steinbeck 's novel , Hammerstein began to write dialogue and lyrics . Sweet Thursday was published in early 1954 to mixed reviews . Steinbeck later commented , " Some of the critics are so concerned for my literary position that they can 't read a book of mine without worrying where it will fit in my place in history . Who gives a damn ? " By that time , Rodgers and Hammerstein were busy producing the film version of Oklahoma ! 
 For the part of bordello @-@ keeper Fauna , the duo fixed on the famous diva , Helen Traubel . There was precedent for such casting — former opera star Ezio Pinza had starred as suave Frenchman Emile de Becque in South Pacific , and had received rave reviews for his performance . Traubel , in addition to being well known for her Wagnerian roles , was also noted for her nightclub singing . In 1953 , the new Metropolitan Opera impresario , Rudolf Bing , feeling that she was lowering the tone of the house , declined to renew her contract . Hammerstein had seen Traubel at her first appearance at the Copacabana nightclub in New York , and afterwards had gone backstage to predict to Traubel that she would be coming straight to Broadway . He saw her show again in Las Vegas several months later , and offered her the part . When offered the role , Traubel eagerly accepted , though she later noted that she had never represented herself as much of an actress . 
 From the beginning of the project , Feuer and Martin wanted Henry Fonda to play Doc . The actor put in months of lessons in an attempt to bring his voice up to standard . Fonda later stated that at the end of six months of singing lessons , he " still couldn 't sing for shit " . Following his first audition for Rodgers , Fonda asked the composer for his honest view , and Rodgers stated , " I 'm sorry , it would be a mistake . " 
 Cy Feuer remembered : 
 So finally , after we go through all this , we turn [ Fonda ] over to Rodgers and Hammerstein and he 's out . Oscar didn 't want Fonda because Fonda was his son @-@ in @-@ law and besides Dick said , " I have to have singers , " and he hires Helen Traubel to play the madam and she turns out to get top billing and Doc is now the second lead ! 
 The duo eventually settled for William Johnson , who had played the male lead in a touring company of Annie Get Your Gun , which they had produced , to play the role of Doc . 
 There are conflicting accounts of who was the first choice for the role of the itinerant prostitute , Suzy . By some accounts , Rodgers and Hammerstein attempted to get Julie Andrews , only to find that she had just signed a two @-@ year contract to appear in a musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe , tentatively titled My Lady Liza . Andrews 's role , as Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady , would launch her to stardom . Another candidate was Janet Leigh , whom Rodgers admired greatly , but the actress proved to be unavailable . The producers settled on Judy Tyler , auditioned after Rodgers spotted her on television while watching The Howdy Doody Show , in which she appeared as Princess <unk> <unk> . 
 To direct the play , the duo engaged Harold <unk> , noted for his work in drama and one of the founders of the Group Theatre . Jo Mielziner , veteran of several Rodgers and Hammerstein productions , was the stage designer . In contrast to the complex staging of Me and Juliet , Mielziner 's sets were uncomplicated , a system of house @-@ frame outlines in front of backdrops representing Monterey . Boris <unk> was the choreographer , Robert Russell Bennett provided orchestrations , and Salvatore Dell 'Isola conducted . The two producers had hoped to hire the prestigious Majestic Theatre , where South Pacific had run , but the writing process took too long , and the Majestic was lost to Fanny . Instead , they booked the Shubert Theatre , in the top rank of Broadway theatres , but not as prestigious as the Majestic . Uniquely for their joint work , they solicited no backers , but underwrote the entire cost themselves . Feuer later said of the bargain he and Martin had made with Rodgers and Hammerstein , " And the deal was pretty good : 50 percent of the producers ' end . And we thought , We 're rich ! And we turned it over to them and they destroyed it . " 
 = = Rehearsals and tryouts = = 
 When rehearsals opened in September 1955 , Rodgers assembled the cast and told them that he was going into the hospital for a minor operation . In fact , Rodgers had been diagnosed with cancer of the jawbone . He spent the weekend before the operation writing one final song for Pipe Dream . The surgery required removal of part of the jawbone and tongue , and some of the lymph nodes . The operation took place on September 21 , 1955 ; within ten days of the operation he was back in the theatre watching rehearsals , though for some time only as a spectator . 
 After rehearsals began , Steinbeck wrote to Hammerstein to express his delight at the adaptation . He became more dismayed as the play was slowly revised in rehearsal and during the tryouts . According to Traubel , the play was being " cleaned up ... as scene after scene became emasculated " . The revisions made Suzy 's profession less clear , and also fudged the nature of Fauna 's house . One revision removed Suzy 's police record for " vagrancy " . These changes were sparked by the fact that audience members at the tryouts in New Haven and Boston were uncomfortable with the setting and Suzy 's role ; by the time the revisions were completed , the script could be read to say that Suzy was merely boarding at Fauna 's . 
 Steinbeck noted this tendency on a page of dialogue changes : 
 " One of the most serious criticisms is the uncertainty of Suzy 's position in the Bear Flag . It 's either a whore house , or it isn 't . Suzy either took a job there , or she didn 't . The play doesn 't give satisfaction here and it leaves an audience wondering . My position is that she took the job all right but she wasn 't any good at it . In the book , Fauna explains that Suzy 's no good as a hustler because she 's got a streak of lady in her . I wish we could keep this thought because it explains a lot in a short time . " 
 In another memo , Steinbeck noted that the pathos of Suzy being a prostitute had given much of the dramatic tension to the scene in which Doc rejects Suzy , and later , her rejection of him . " I think if you will finally bring the theme of this play into the open , but wide open , you will have solved its great weakness and have raised it to a high level ... If this is not done , I can neither believe nor take Pipe Dream seriously . " 
 In the end , Suzy 's activities at the Bear Flag were glossed over , as Hammerstein concentrated on her relationship with Doc . Alluding to Hammerstein 's emphasis on the scene in which Suzy makes Doc soup after Hazel breaks his arm , Steinbeck stated , " You 've turned my prostitute into a visiting nurse ! " 
 = = Plot = = 
 The action of the play is in the mid @-@ 1950s , and takes place on Cannery Row in Monterey , California . In the Steinbeck book which forms the basis for the musical , the Bear Flag is a bordello and Suzy a prostitute . This is alluded to in the musical , but never expressed outright . 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 In the early morning hours , marine biologist Doc is already at work in his one @-@ man Western Biological Laboratory , getting an order of starfish ready to be shipped to a university . His unintelligent friend Hazel ( a man ) comes in to chat with him ( " All Kinds of People " ) . Millicent , a wealthy young lady , enters from the next room , where she has been spending ( part of ) the night with Doc . Mac , another friend of Doc , brings in Suzy , who has injured her hand breaking a window to steal some donuts . Doc , whose lack of a medical degree does not stop the denizens of Cannery Row from seeking him out for treatment , bandages her hand , as the irritated Millicent leaves . Suzy , new in town , is curious about Doc 's work ( " The Tide Pool " ) and tells about her journey from San Francisco ( " Everybody 's Got a Home but Me " ) . Fauna , who runs the nearby Bear Flag Café — an establishment open even at this hour — had heard that a new girl in town had injured herself , and has come to talk to Suzy . Fauna is initially reluctant to invite Suzy into the Bear Flag , but when Jim , the local plainclothes cop gives Suzy a hard time , Fauna takes Suzy in . Suzy is fully aware of what kind of a place it is . 
 The Palace Flophouse , where Mac , Hazel , and other locals reside , is a storage shed behind the Chinese store now owned by Joe the Mexican , and the Flophouse residents muse on their awkward path through life ( " A <unk> Bus " ) . Fauna comes by briefly to tell Hazel that she has run his " horror scope " and that he will one day be President . The Flophouse boys have a problem : Joe the Mexican acts unaware that he owns the shed ; he has not appeared to either demand rent or to kick them out . They would like to know whether Joe is aware of his ownership , without tipping him off . The boys come up with the idea of <unk> off their shed , with the raffle rigged so that Doc , who would not kick them out , will be the winner . The prize money will allow Doc to buy the microscope he needs for his scientific work . They sound out Joe about the scheme ; he offers to sell tickets in his store and displays no awareness that he owns the shed . 
 Suzy and Doc are attracted to each other ; she has in fact been quietly tidying his rooms while he is down at the tide pool catching specimens ( " The Man I Used to Be " ) . Fauna tries to persuade Doc , who is very successful with the ladies , to woo Suzy . When Doc is dismissive , Fauna explains that she wants to get Suzy out of the Bear Flag when it is taken over for the night by a private party . Doc agrees to take Suzy out and treat her like a lady . Fauna goes back to the Bear Flag ( " Sweet Thursday " ) , and works to give Suzy confidence ( " Suzy is a Good Thing " ) . Doc and Suzy 's date is the source of great interest to the people of Cannery Row . Both are nervous ; Doc wears an unaccustomed necktie , while Suzy tries to act like a lady , but her polish wears thin at times . ( " All At Once You Love Her " ) . At the end of the meal , they decide to continue the evening on a secluded sand dune . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 The next morning , the girls of the Bear Flag are exhausted ; the members of the private party wore them out . They wonder how Suzy 's date with Doc went . Although it is only July , Fauna is busy ordering the Bear Flag 's Christmas cards ( " The Happiest House on the Block " ) . Suzy comes in and tells Fauna of the date ; that Doc made no pass at her , and that Doc confided how lonely he is . She is convinced Doc " don 't need nobody like me " ; he needs a wife . Fauna is encouraging , but Suzy believes that Doc , knowing what he does of her history and work , will not want her . The Flophouse is to host a fancy dress party the following night , at which the raffle is to take place — Fauna proposes that at the party , Suzy sing " Will You Marry Me ? " to Doc . Suzy is still nervous ; Fauna reminds her that the previous night , Doc did not treat her like a tramp , and she did not act like one . As word spreads of the celebration , the community becomes enthusiastic about the get @-@ together ( " The Party That We 're Gonna Have Tomorrow Night " ) 
 At the Flophouse , a wild celebration takes place . Fauna , at first in the costume of a witch , seems to transform her costume into that of a Fairy Godmother . After some sleight of hand with the tickets , Doc wins the raffle , to the surprise of some . When Suzy comes out in a white bride 's dress and sings her lines , Doc is unimpressed , and Suzy is humiliated . As both stalk off in opposite directions , the party disintegrates into a brawl . 
 Suzy gets a job at a burger joint , and moves into an abandoned boiler , with entry through the attached pipe . Doc is unhappy , and Hazel decides something has to be done ( " Thinkin ' " ) . He is unable to come up with an answer , and eventually forgets the question . Some weeks pass , and Joe the Mexican woos Suzy . He has no success , and his attempts irritate Doc . The next day , Doc himself approaches the pipe with flowers in hand ( " How Long ? " ) , still uncertain as to why he is seeking a girl like Suzy . Suzy lets him in the boiler , which she has fitted up in a homelike manner . She is doing well at the burger joint , but is grateful to Fauna for giving her confidence . She is confident enough , indeed , to reject Doc , who is unhappy , but philosophical ( " The Next Time It Happens " ) . 
 Hazel sees Doc even more dispirited than before , and asks Suzy for an explanation . Suzy says that she is not willing to go over and be with Doc , but " if he was sick or if he bust his leg or an arm or something " , she would go to him and bring him soup . The wheels in Hazel 's head begin unaccustomed turnings , and sometime later when Mac passes Hazel on the street , Mac is surprised to see his friend carrying a baseball bat . When the scene returns to Doc 's lab , he is receiving treatment from a real doctor and trying to puzzle out how he broke his arm . Suzy comes in , and makes soup for him as Hazel and Mac take turns watching at the keyhole . Doc admits that he needs and loves Suzy , and they embrace . As Fauna and the girls arrive , so do the other Flophouse boys , and Mac gives Doc what was bought with the raffle money — the largest ( tele ) scope in the catalog . ( " Finale " ) 
 = = Musical numbers = = 
 = = Productions = = 
 Pipe Dream premiered on Broadway on November 30 , 1955 , at the Shubert Theatre , with Helen Traubel as Fauna , William Johnson as Doc , Judy Tyler as Suzy , George D. Wallace as Mac and Mike Kellin as Hazel . The show had received the largest advance ticket sale in Broadway history to that point , $ 1 @.@ 2 million . Some of Steinbeck 's ill @-@ feeling was removed on the second night , which he attended and then went backstage to greet the cast . After a celebratory dinner at Sardi 's during which the manager sent champagne to his table , he said to his wife Elaine , " Isn 't the theatre marvelous ? " The author held no grudge ; he later told Hammerstein that he accepted that Rodgers and Hammerstein were ultimately responsible for the show and had the right to make changes . 
 Rodgers and Hammerstein had not permitted group sales , so @-@ called " theatre parties " for their shows . They lifted the ban for Pipe Dream , and pre @-@ sold theatre party sales helped keep the show going , as there were few sales after opening night given the dismal reviews . More than 70 performances were entirely sold to groups . In March 1956 , in a final attempt to save the show , Rodgers and Hammerstein revised it somewhat , moving several musical numbers . Traubel missed a number of performances due to illness , and left when her contract expired a few weeks before the show closed in June 1956 — she was replaced by Nancy Andrews . Traubel 's understudy , Ruth <unk> , played 42 of the show 's 245 performances . 
 Pipe Dream was nominated for nine Tony Awards ; it lost for best musical to the only other nominee , Damn Yankees . Alvin Colt was the sole winner , for Best Costume Design . Johnson died of a heart attack within a year of Pipe Dream 's closing ; Tyler died in an automobile accident during the same timespan . These tragedies convinced Traubel that there was a curse attached to Pipe Dream , and she began carrying good @-@ luck charms when she performed . 
 The poor reviews of Pipe Dream made a national tour or London run impractical . Subsequent productions have been extremely rare . In 1981 , a community theatre production of Pipe Dream was presented by the Conejo Players Theatre in Thousand Oaks , California . Los Angeles Times critic Dan Sullivan admired the small @-@ scale staging , but called the show " the emptiest musical that two geniuses ever wrote " and said of it , " imagine a song [ ' The Happiest House on the Block ' ] about a <unk> which describes the goings @-@ on there after midnight as ' friendly , foolish and gay ' " . In 1995 and 2002 , 42nd Street Moon presented it as a staged concert . It was presented in March – April 2012 by New York City Center Encores ! , also as a staged concert ; the cast featured Will Chase ( Doc ) , Laura Osnes ( Suzy ) , Leslie Uggams ( Fauna ) , and Tom <unk> ( Mac ) . In July and August 2013 it was presented by London 's small Union Theatre , directed by Sasha Regan . No film version was contemplated in the authors ' lifetimes . The Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization , which licenses the pair 's works , proposed a film version with the Muppets . Humans would play Doc and Suzy ; Muppets would play the other roles — with Miss Piggy as Fauna . 
 = = Music and recordings = = 
 Despite the poor reviews of the musical , Rodgers was given credit for an imaginative score . " Sweet Thursday " is a cakewalk , unusual for Rodgers who rarely wrote them . However , Rodgers biographer William Hyland suggests that " Sweet Thursday " was out of character for Traubel 's voice . Hyland also speculates that " The Next Time It Happens " , a duet for Suzy and Doc as they decide their love will not work , needed to be more melancholy , and Doc 's " The Man I Used To Be " more of a lament rather than having a lively melody . According to Broadway writer Ken Mandelbaum , " Pipe Dream contains a generally fascinating score . " He terms Suzy 's " Everybody 's Got a Home but Me " , a " gorgeous ballad of yearning " . 
 During rehearsals and even during the run of the show , the music was repeatedly revised by Rodgers in an attempt to gear the songs to Traubel 's voice . According to Bruce Pomahac of the Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization , " as she began to get cold feet about what her New York fans would think about her as a belter , the keys of each of her numbers edged upward . " One of Traubel 's numbers saw three different versions before being scrapped in favor of , according to Pomahac , " something that sounded like an excerpt from Traubel ’ s Vegas act . " " All At Once You Love Her " saw some popularity when recorded , during the run of the show , by Perry Como ; in what Pomahac speculates was an attempt to appease Traubel , a reprise of the song was added for her , and provided " one of the loveliest moments in all of Pipe Dream " . The Organization announced that a new vocal score would be published in 2012 , though it has not appeared — the existing score reflects revisions made when Nancy Andrews took over the part . 
 Pipe Dream 's songs have been reused in other works . " The Man I Used to Be " and " The Next Time It Happens " were included in the 1996 stage version of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's 1945 film musical , State Fair . " The Next Time It Happens " was inserted in David Henry Hwang 's revised version of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's later work , Flower Drum Song . Used during the show 's 2001 Los Angeles run , it was cut before the show reached Broadway in 2002 . According to David Lewis in his history of the Broadway musical , " The Rodgers and Hammerstein office has , it would appear , given up on Pipe Dream and [ Me and ] Juliet ever finding an audience ... so these songs are up for grabs . " 
 Thomas Hischak , in his The Rodgers and Hammerstein Encyclopedia , stated that the original cast album is well @-@ produced , but many of the songs came across better when other artists recorded them . The New York Times suggested that the music had echoes of the duo 's earlier works , giving it " a disappointing air of familiarity " . The Times praised both Tyler and Johnson for their singing on the album , and while acknowledging that Traubel had difficulty making the transition from opera singer to Broadway belter , wrote that " for the most part , she makes the transfer amiably and effectively " . The original cast recording was released on compact disc by RCA Victor Broadway in 1993 . 
 A live album from the Encores ! production starring Osnes and Chase was released on September 18 , 2012 . Suskin reviewed it highly favorably , calling the show " a fascinating musical on several counts , and one which displays the rich , vibrant sound of pure Rodgers & Hammerstein . The experience is carried over — perfectly so — to the cast album " . 
 = = Reception and aftermath = = 
 The musical received moderate to poor reviews . Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times termed it " a pleasant , lazy romance ... Mr. Rodgers and Mr. Hammerstein in a minor key " . John Chapman of the Daily News stated , " Perhaps Hammerstein and Rodgers are too gentlemanly to be dealing with Steinbeck 's sleazy and raffish denizens . " Walter Kerr of the Herald Tribune suggested , " Someone seems to have forgotten to bring along that gallon of good , red wine . " John McClain of the Journal @-@ American stated , " This is a far cry from the exalted talents of the team that produced South Pacific . They must be human , after all . " Steven Suskin , in his book chronicling Broadway opening night reviews , stated that Pipe Dream received one favorable review from the seven major New York critics , two mixed , and four unfavorable . Louis <unk> , in Time magazine , summed it up as " [ p ] <unk> , professional , and disappointing . " Billy Rose said of Pipe Dream , " You know why Oscar shouldn 't have written that ? The guy has never been in a whorehouse in his life . " 
 Publicly , Hammerstein accepted blame for himself and Rodgers , and stated that had the musical been produced by anyone else , " we 'd say that these are producers we wouldn 't like to work with again " . According to Cy Feuer , Hammerstein privately blamed him and Martin , telling them , " We believed your pitch and we went and did something we were never cut out to do and we should never have done it . 
 According to author Frederick Nolan , who chronicled the works of Rodgers and Hammerstein , Pipe Dream " cost them a fortune " . Rodgers later stated it was the only one of their works he truly disliked ; that if you start with a bad idea , everything is marred by that : " We shouldn 't have been dealing with prostitutes and tramps . " Rodgers also blamed the casting of Traubel , whom he considered wrong for the part . Hammerstein 's grandson , Oscar A. Hammerstein , in his book about his family , agreed with Rodgers 's view of Traubel — " too much <unk> , [ sic ] not enough Miss Kitty [ the barkeeper on Gunsmoke ] " . The elder Hammerstein 's biographer , Hugh Fordin , tied the failure of the play to the lyricist 's prudery : 
 South Pacific , Carousel and [ Hammerstein work ] Carmen Jones have stories that rest on the power of sexual attraction . As long as the sexuality was implicit , Oscar could treat it with the same understanding that he brought to other aspects of human behavior ... His problem was with dealing openly with sexual material ; because of this reticence , Pipe Dream was not what it might have been . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Compulsory Miseducation = 
 Compulsory Miseducation is a critique of American public schools written by Paul Goodman and published by Horizon Press in 1964 . Already established as a social critic of American society and the role of its youth in his previous book Growing Up Absurd ( 1960 ) , Goodman argues in Compulsory Miseducation against the necessity of schools for the socialization of youth and recommends their abolition . He suggests that formal education lasts too long , teaches the wrong social class values , and increasingly damages students over time . Goodman writes that the school reflects the misguided and insincere values of its society and thus school reformers should focus on these values before schools . He proposes a variety of alternatives to school including no school , the city or farm as school , apprenticeships , guided travel , and youth organizations . Reviewers complimented Goodman 's style and noted his deliberate <unk> , but were split on the feasibility of his proposals . Goodman 's book was a precursor to the work of deschooling advocate Ivan Illich . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paul Goodman was an American intellectual and cultural critic who rose to prominence after publishing Growing Up Absurd ( 1960 ) . In the book , Goodman asserts that the structure of American society was not conducive to the needs of youth . Goodman 's subsequent book , The Community of Scholars ( 1962 ) , and his experience in the classroom , informed his criticism of American schooling and the development of Compulsory Miseducation . The book was initially published in 1964 by Horizon Press , and was later republished by Random House in 1966 and by Penguin Books in 1971 . 
 = = Summary = = 
 Compulsory Miseducation is a critique of the American public school system . Goodman argues against its social necessity and mandatory attendance requirements . He contends that the only " right education " is " growing up into a worthwhile world " , and that adult concern over schooling is indicative of an opposite such world . Goodman thinks education should strengthen children 's preexisting drive towards refining their own abilities for usefulness in society while developing community spirit . He claims that school , of which there is too much , instead encourages conformity for the good of private , corporate needs at a cost to the public . Goodman writes that America 's schools reflect its misguided and insincere societal values , which need to change before schools can . 
 Goodman criticizes the structure of academic curriculum , and connects it with " programmed instruction " and schooling that <unk> the mind proportional with time . He regards the " academic establishment " as self @-@ aggrandizing and constituting " an invested intellectual class worse than anything since the time of Henry the Eighth . " Accordingly , the scholastically inclined , knowing only lockstep , march unquestioningly into " top management and expert adviser " roles while the rest have little self @-@ worth in their societal roles , pursuing " worthless " degrees that make their schooling appear as " a cruel hoax " . 
 Goodman sees schools as mechanisms for adjusting youth to an automated society increasingly absent " any human values " . Goodman disagrees with those who say public schools teach middle class values , as he sees schools as more petit bourgeois than bourgeois , favoring " bureaucratic , time @-@ serving , grade @-@ grind @-@ practical , timid , and nouveau riche climbing " over " independence , initiative , scrupulous honesty , earnestness , utility , [ and ] respect for thorough scholarship " . In this way , schooling is not a good use of student time , and students are right to quit and avoid the psychological and professional damage . More important is the disintegration of social class segregation . Goodman then asserts that <unk> and middle @-@ class kids would be better off without public or any schooling altogether . He proposes several alternatives to formal schooling , such as <unk> up the high school 's public funds directly amongst its students , and advocates for a variety of experimental school alternatives : " no school at all , the real city as school , farm schools , practical apprenticeships , guided travel , work camps , little theaters and local newspapers , [ and ] community service " . Other proposals include making class non @-@ compulsory ( such that attendance will reflect student interest without " trapping " children ) , requiring students to wait two years before applying to the most elite colleges , eliminating grades so the burden of testing for required skills falls on companies , and letting students quit and resume freely . He proposes Danish folk school @-@ style education for those uninterested in academics . Goodman 's foremost intention was to stimulate new educational paradigms . He acknowledges that his specific proposals may be unpopular or ignored . 
 = = Reception = = 
 John Keats ( The New York Times Book Review ) described Compulsory Miseducation as " passionate " and " eloquent " . He called Goodman 's propositions in the absence of formal schooling " startling " and characterized Goodman as " a lonely humanist crying in a Philistine marketplace , where the largest single share of public wealth is devoted to the strategies of overkill , and where another enormous amount is dedicated to putting blinders on the probable victims . " Keats recommended the book for parents who put their children 's welfare before their own . Eli M. Oboler ( Library Journal ) , meanwhile , only recommended Goodman 's " polemic onslaught " for those who like " contentious [ and ] disagreeable " material . He wrote that Goodman 's approach was unreasonable and contrarian : for instance , his stances in favor of sexual expression and against the importance of literacy in schools . 
 Edgar Z. Friedenberg ( The New York Review of Books ) explained the book as a poem by Marianne Moore 's definition : " an imaginary garden with real toads in it " . By this metaphor , he found Goodman to be a gardener who lacked imagination and forethought but understood growth ( the most important trait ) . Friedenberg compared Goodman with prominent educationist James Conant , whom Friedenberg considered less competent in understanding the conditions of learning . Friedenberg felt that Conant 's Shaping Educational Policy complemented Goodman 's Compulsory Miseducation , as both shared a common though disparate interest in the distribution of power within schooling structures . While Friedenberg agreed with Goodman 's conclusions , he considered them sermon @-@ like in their predetermination , permitting no counter @-@ interpretation . He added that Goodman 's " empirical inductive and ... theoretical @-@ deductive " logic was complete and that the work provided little apart from a neat interpretation of the reality within schools and its affect on students ' human attributes . Friedenberg wrote that Goodman 's proposals are " pertinent , concrete , modest , and inexpensive " , practical in their aims , and already implemented on a smaller scale . Furthermore , he concluded that Goodman 's argument on how education squandered what it intended to promote was " strong [ and ] circumstantial " . 
 Nat Hentoff ( The Reporter ) struggled to disagree with Goodman 's claim that schools provided little room for " spontaneity " and free spiritedness . However , he felt that Goodman inadequately explained how primary schools could be improved in content and staffing . Hentoff said that the book 's key flaw was its position in a " political vacuum " , offering no means for society to acknowledge Goodman 's expressed <unk> of their schooling model . Donald Barr ( New York Herald Tribune Book Week ) wrote that Goodman seemed like " an itinerant peddler of sedition " who spoke of virtuous " dissonance " . Barr considered Goodman " extraordinarily sensitive to children and adolescents " and complimented his " brilliant authenticity " when describing how children learn " defiance and embarrassment " . However , Barr found Goodman 's " purblind resentment of all authority " to obstruct his points and to leave his readers skeptical . Children , Barr wrote , are lost if they cannot find the limits they serve to test , and " partisan " Goodman was unable to parse the wickedness of continually " yielding , ... tolerating , understanding " children who must feel resistance against their transgressions to develop the respect they seek . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nigel Melville ( Fortnight ) placed Goodman alongside Herb Kohl , Neil Postman , Jules Henry , and Everett Reimer as part of an education anti @-@ orthodoxy , or new orthodoxy under Ivan Illich and Paulo Freire . Bill Prescott ( Instructional Science ) said the book was " among the most influential " in education circles in the early 1970s . He wrote that Goodman pioneered advocation for deschooling and the disestablishment of schools , which was later popularized by Illich and Reimer ( though Goodman 's thoughts were less articulate in comparison ) . In a 2006 retrospective of Goodman 's work for Teachers College Record , James S. Kaminsky said that Goodman 's four book @-@ length critiques of American education together made Goodman a prominent intellectual and educationist . 
 = Pholiota flammans = 
 Pholiota flammans , commonly known as the yellow <unk> , the flaming Pholiota , or the flame <unk> , is a basidiomycete agaric mushroom of the genus Pholiota . Its fruit body is golden @-@ yellow in color throughout , while its cap and stem are covered in sharp scales . As it is a saprobic fungus , the fruit bodies typically appear in clusters on the stumps of dead coniferous trees . P. flammans is distributed throughout Europe , North America , and Asia in boreal and temperate regions . Its edibility has not been clarified . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first recognised in 1783 by the German , August Batsch , as Agaricus flammans , and later sanctioned by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in his Systema Mycologicum . The specific epithet flammans is a Latin adjective meaning flaming . In 1871 , with the recognition of Pholiota as an independent genus with type species Pholiota squarrosa , another German , Paul Kummer renamed the fungus Pholiota flammans . Lucien Quélet , a French mycologist , proposed another synonym , <unk> flammans in 1886 . American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill called the species <unk> flammans in his 1912 study of Pacific Coast mushrooms , although he did not explain his rationale for transferring the species to <unk> . 
 In the organization of Rolf Singer , the species is placed in subgenus Pholiota , section <unk> , stirps <unk> — a grouping of closely related species that also includes P. <unk> and P. <unk> . The species in stirps <unk> are characterised by having conspicuous erect tufts or scales on the cap surface that are easily sloughed off by rain and age in lieu of the gelatinous nature of the underlying cap cuticle . It is commonly known as the yellow Pholiota , the flaming Pholiota , or the flame <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pholiota flammans often has a striking appearance . The cap is initially round , then convex and finally flattening with age . Its surface is bright yellow to orange , and covered with triangular scales ( squamules ) arranged in concentric rings . 
 The cap surface is dry , matt and felt @-@ like , and in wet conditions may lose scales . The cap margin remain curved slightly inwards . The yellow gills are crowded together , attached to the stem , and have a notch where the gill attaches to the stem . A bright yellow partial veil extending from the cap edge to the edge is present in immature species . As the cap expands and flattens with age , the partial veil tears , leaving a faint ring around the stem . The cylindrical straight or curved stem is itself covered in yellow squamules below the ring . The base of the stem , typically more orange in color than the upper portion , is firmly attached to the dead wood from which the fungus arises . The section of stem above the ring bears little or no protuberances . The flesh is firm , full , yellow and does not change color when bruised or injured . 
 The dimensions of the fruit body are as follows : cap diameter up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) , stem up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) tall and between 0 @.@ 4 to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) cm thick . As the fruit body matures , the gills darken to cinnamon brown following spore release . The spore mass is colored brown to rust . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 Under a light microscope , the spores are seen to be smooth , elliptical to oblong in shape , with dimensions of 3 – 5 by 2 – 3 µm . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 4 @-@ spored , and have a narrow club @-@ shape with dimension of 18 – 22 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 µm . The gill cystidia are seen to stain blue when cotton blue dye and lactate are applied . The cap cuticle is made of an approximately 100 µm thick layer of gelatinous hyphae that are about 2 – 4 µm thick . The gelatinous hyphae are only present on the cap surface , not the surface of the stem ; these local differences in cell structure explain the ease with which the scales are sloughed off the cap , but not the stems of the fruit bodies . The macroscopic and microscopic characteristics of the mycelia of this species grown in culture have been described in detail . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Pholiota flammans fruit bodies bear no distinctive smell and taste mild to slightly bitter . Opinions are divided as to its edibility , however , as some authors regard the mushroom as inedible , while others consider it edible or of unknown edibility . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Other members of the genus Pholiota may be mistaken for Pholiota flammans , especially Pholiota squarrosa which commonly forms large tufts at the base of deciduous as well as coniferous trees . P. squarrosa tends to be a less intense yellow color than P. flammans . P. <unk> is also similar , but prefers to grow on dead hardwoods ; unlike P. flammans , it has gelatinous scales on the stem as well as the cap . 
 The North American species once described by Alexander H. Smith , P. kauffmaniana , is closely related to P. flammans , but differs in having a more distinctly viscid cap . Smith was later to revise his opinion on the existence of P. kauffmaniana as a unique species — he believed that environmental variations in humidity were the cause of differences in the cap cuticle gelatinization observed in <unk> collected from different North American locales . P. kauffmaniana is now considered synonymous with P. flammans . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Being saprobic , P. flammans is found exclusively on dead and decaying stumps and trunks of coniferous trees , with fruit bodies appearing in tufts or singly , from summer to autumn . It is a fungus with a wide geographical distribution in boreal and temperate regions , and may be considered common to rare depending upon the region in which it occurs . It is found throughout Europe ( from the British Isles to Russia ) and North America ( southern Canada and the USA ) . The species has also been collected in Asia , including India and China . 
 = Liverpool F.C. 4 – 3 Newcastle United F.C. ( 1996 ) = 
 On 3 April 1996 , Liverpool faced Newcastle United in a Premier League fixture at Anfield , during the 1995 – 96 season . Liverpool won the match , scoring four goals to Newcastle 's three . The winning goal was scored by striker Stan Collymore in the second minute of stoppage time . Before the match , both clubs had lost their previous fixtures but still had a chance of winning the league and wanted to close the gap between themselves and leaders Manchester United . Newcastle United , who were 12 points ahead in January , had suffered from poor performance throughout March , winning one match out of four that month . Liverpool had won six of their last nine league games during February and March , scored the most goals and conceded the fewest until this match . 
 Liverpool started the match as the more promising team and striker Robbie Fowler scored the first goal . Newcastle striker Les Ferdinand scored the equaliser in the tenth minute and winger David Ginola added a second for Newcastle four minutes later . Fowler scored early in the second half to reduce Newcastle 's lead but Faustino Asprilla restored their goal advantage in the 57th minute . Stan Collymore , who set up the opening goal for Liverpool , equalised for Liverpool in the 68th minute . In stoppage time , Collymore scored his second goal of the match involving a one @-@ two with Ian Rush and John Barnes in the buildup . The winner sparked jubilant scenes for Liverpool supporters at Anfield and consigned Newcastle to their second consecutive defeat in the league , reducing their chances of winning the league . 
 The match is considered to be the best Premier League game in the history of the competition . Newcastle 's manager Kevin Keegan described it as a " classic " , while Liverpool manager Roy Evans said " the entertainment value was up there with the best " . In 2003 , the game was awarded the Match of the Decade award on behalf of the Premier League , which was celebrating its tenth anniversary . The result influenced the league championship ; the leaders Manchester United lost only one more match that season and retained the title . 
 = = Background = = 
 Liverpool and Newcastle United are two of the biggest clubs in English football . Despite not having won a major honour since 1969 , the Tyneside club is recognised for its passionate and loyal fanbase — over the course of 53 out of 63 seasons between 1946 – 47 and 2009 – 10 , more people attended Newcastle home matches , on average , than home games played by the league champions . During the 1970s and 1980s , Liverpool became the most successful club in England , amassing 11 league championships in a 17 @-@ year period . Both clubs had previously faced each other five times in the Premier League , following Newcastle 's promotion for the 1993 – 94 season ; Newcastle had won three times and Liverpool once , with the remaining match ending in a draw . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Both clubs went into the match having lost their previous matches . Liverpool lost 1 – 0 to Nottingham Forest at the City Ground on 23 March 1996 , where the winning goal was scored by midfielder Steve Stone . The defeat was Liverpool 's first in 21 matches in all competitions . On the same day , Newcastle were beaten 2 – 0 by Arsenal — their third defeat in five league matches . Newcastle 's loss allowed Manchester United to move three points ahead at the top of the league the following day after striker Eric Cantona scored the winning goal against Tottenham Hotspur . 
 Although Newcastle had two games in hand over Manchester United going into April , their advantage was slim in comparison that at the end of January when Newcastle had a 12 @-@ point lead over Manchester United . When both teams met in March at St James ' Park , Cantona scored the winning goal for Manchester United and goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel produced a number of outstanding saves which prevented midfielder Peter Beardsley and striker Les Ferdinand from scoring . The win was Manchester United 's ninth successive victory in the league , who also beat Newcastle 2 – 0 in the corresponding fixture at Old Trafford in December 1995 . 
 It was considered unlikely that Liverpool would win the league . Despite scoring the most goals and conceding the fewest in the top three , they drew four matches more than second place Newcastle . However , Liverpool advanced through the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup , beating Aston Villa 3 – 0 to set up a final against Manchester United and the possibility that they would achieve a league and cup double . 
 = = Match = = 
 Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan made one change to the team after their previous match , which they had lost to Arsenal . Keegan replaced defender Warren Barton with Steve Watson . They lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with Faustino Asprilla and Les Ferdinand serving as the two upfront and David Ginola and Peter Beardsley as the wide men providing width and service . Liverpool replaced Michael Thomas with Jamie Redknapp and Dominic Matteo with Rob Jones . Roy Evans deployed a 3 – 4 – 1 – 2 formation , which he trialled throughout the season . Steve McManaman acted as the link between the midfield and final third . The match was originally arranged for 30 March 1996 but was rescheduled to 3 April by the Premier League and broadcaster Sky Sports . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Liverpool began the match brightly and scored the first goal in the second minute . Stan Collymore , who received the ball from the left wing by Jamie Redknapp , produced a cross inside the penalty box for Robbie Fowler to head in at the far post and convert his 27th goal of the league season . Newcastle began to exert pressure on Liverpool and responded with an equaliser eight minutes later . Striker Faustino Asprilla swept past Neil Ruddock inside the right channel of the Liverpool box to pull the ball back and find Ferdinand . With one touch he gave himself room to swing his right foot and take a shot past goalkeeper David James . In the 14th minute , Newcastle were ahead . Ferdinand was involved in the buildup once again , releasing David Ginola on the left , who surged forward and scored his fifth goal of the league campaign . Liverpool threatened to score a second goal ; Fowler missed close @-@ by , Redknapp went close from long range and Steve McManaman mis @-@ timed a header . Beardsley and David Batty were booked and Batty was shown a yellow card for a foul on McManaman . At the other end , Asprilla and Beardsley came close to scoring through a counterattack . 
 At the interval , Liverpool defender Mark Wright was replaced by Steve Harkness . Nine minutes into the second @-@ half , Liverpool scored their goal ; Jason McAteer played the ball towards McManaman , running at the Newcastle defence in their penalty box and picking out a pass to Fowler , who scored his second goal of the match . Liverpool 's advantage only lasted for two minutes ; Asprilla , put through by Robert Lee , scored with the outside of his right boot . Newcastle began to dominate territorially and missed a chance to increase their lead shortly after Asprilla 's goal : Ginola 's misplaced final ball failed to reach an incoming Ferdinand . Liverpool continued to press forward and in the 65th minute levelled the score again ; McAteer 's curling cross confused the Newcastle defence and reached Collymore , who took a shot past goalkeeper Pavel Srníček . 
 Both teams ' responses to Liverpool 's third goal were to make substitutions in the final quarter of the game . Liverpool defender Rob Jones was swapped for striker Ian Rush and Newcastle 's Darren Peacock was changed for Steve Howey in order to tighten up the Newcastle defence . As the match looked likely to end in a draw , in stoppage time Rush and John Barnes began to play a series of one @-@ twos towards the Newcastle end . Barnes passed the ball to Collymore in a space on the left flank ; Collymore kicked it past Srníček to score his second goal of the game , which prompted jubilant scenes in the Liverpool Kop . In contrast , Keegan slumped over the advertising hoardings in distress . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 After the game , Kevin Keegan said that there was " a long way to go " in the title race , despite the consequences of the result . He praised both teams and the nature of the match but refused to compromise Newcastle 's expansive style of football . Liverpool 's manager Roy Evans observed that no team could " win the championship playing like that " and admitted his team had got away with " playing two against two , one against one , at the back " . 
 Stan Collymore , who scored the fourth Liverpool goal , believed the result left the title race wide open . Steve McManaman added that it completed a " big week " for the team , which had reached the final of the FA Cup . He also commended Newcastle 's performance , labelling them a " great team " who possessed the " quality to reproduce their best again " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Newcastle United 's aspirations of winning the league suffered as a result of the match . Although they beat Queens Park Rangers three days later , they lost to Blackburn Rovers , conceding two goals in the final ten minutes of the game . The defeat left Manchester United six points ahead with five matches remaining . After witnessing Newcastle beat Leeds United on 30 April 1996 , Keegan , in a televised outburst , accused Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson of trying to provoke the Leeds players , adding that he " will love it if we beat them " to the championship . Ferguson , who accused Leeds of " cheating " their manager in their performance at Old Trafford two weeks earlier , was perceived by the press as playing a mind game against his opposition . Newcastle finished second in the league that season , five points behind Manchester United , which prompted Keegan to offer his resignation , which was rejected , in the summer . In January 1997 , Keegan quit as manager , and said that he felt he had " taken the club as far as I can " . 
 Liverpool struggled in their next game away to Coventry City , losing 1 – 0 . Two wins and three draws in their final five matches of the season allowed Liverpool to finish the season third in the league – their highest finish since the formation of the Premier League . In the FA Cup final , Liverpool were beaten by Manchester United ; Eric Cantona scored the winning goal in the 85th minute . 
 The match is often cited as the best Premier League game ever to have been played . FIFA general secretary Sepp Blatter praised Kevin Keegan for his attacking football philosophy and personally sent him a faxed letter commending " the positive attitude you bring to our game " . Reflecting on the match in 2003 , midfielder David Ginola believed that if Newcastle had kept the scoreline at 3 – 2 , they " would have won the league – definitely " . As part of the Premier League 's " 10 Seasons Awards " to commemorate the first ten years of the competition , the 3 April 1996 Liverpool – Newcastle United match was voted by the public and a panel consisting of 10 football experts , as the Match of the Decade . In 2011 , Sky Sports celebrated its 20th anniversary with a rundown of the top 20 live Premier League games broadcast on the network ; the match was placed at number one , ahead of the Manchester derby played at Old Trafford on 20 September 2009 . In May 2012 , the match came second to the 2009 Manchester derby in the Premier League 20 Seasons Awards for best match . 
 When Liverpool and Newcastle met each other at Anfield on 11 March 1997 during the 1996 – 97 season , the scoreline was identical to that of the 3 April 1996 match . Liverpool , however , were 3 – 0 up before the half @-@ time interval , with goals scored by McManaman , Fowler and Patrick Berger . Newcastle scored three goals in 17 minutes before Fowler scored his second goal of the match in stoppage time . 
 In October 2011 , in order to raise funds for several charities , including the NSPCC and Sir Bobby Robson Foundation , both clubs staged an re @-@ enactment of the 3 April 1996 match . The match was staged at Kingston Park , the home of Newcastle Falcons ; many ex @-@ Liverpool and Newcastle United players , such as Jason McAteer , Alan Shearer , Philippe Albert and Bruce Grobbelaar , participated . 
 = Battle of Musa Qala = 
 The Battle of Musa Qala ( also Qaleh or Qal <unk> ) was a British led military action in Helmand Province , southern Afghanistan , launched by the Afghan National Army and the International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) against the Taliban on 7 December 2007 . After three days of intense fighting , the Taliban retreated into the mountains on 10 December . Musa Qala was officially reported captured on 12 December , with Afghan Army troops pushing into the town centre . 
 The operation was codenamed <unk> ( Pashto : Mar <unk> ) . Senior ISAF officers , including U.S. general Dan K. McNeill , the overall ISAF commander , agreed to the assault on 17 November 2007 . It followed more than nine months of Taliban occupation of the town , the largest the insurgents controlled at the time of the battle . ISAF forces had previously occupied the town , until a controversial withdrawal in late 2006 . 
 It was the first battle in the War in Afghanistan in which Afghan army units were the principal fighting force . Statements from the British Ministry of Defence ( MOD ) emphasised that the operation was Afghan @-@ led , although the ability of Afghan units to function without NATO control was questioned during the battle . Military engagement over Musa Qala is part of a wider conflict between coalition forces and the Taliban in Helmand . Both before and after the battle , related fighting was reported across a larger area , particularly in Sangin district to the south of Musa Qala . 
 = = Background = = 
 Musa Qala is a town of around 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 people , with another 25 @,@ 000 in the surrounding area . ISAF forces were first deployed in the town in mid @-@ June 2006 , as part of the " platoon house " strategy . This consisted of protecting the district centres of Northern Helmand with small detachments of British ISAF troops , at the request of the provincial governor Mohammed Daoud . This move met with an unexpectedly fierce resistance from the Taliban and local tribesmen , who used conventional , rather than asymmetric tactics , to drive the coalition from their positions . The isolated British garrison found itself under siege and constant attack for long periods , and their replacements could only be brought in after a full battle group operation , codenamed Snakebite , broke through Taliban lines in early August . 
 The fighting ended in October 2006 when , in a controversial move , control was ceded to local tribal elders . The deal was intended to see neither British nor Taliban forces in the town in an effort to reduce conflict and civilian casualties . At the time , a British officer commented : " There is an obvious danger that the Taliban could make the deal and then renege on it . " The Taliban did renege on the agreement , quickly over @-@ running the town with 200 to 300 troops in February 2007 . The Taliban seizure followed a US airstrike that incensed militants ; a Taliban commander 's brother and 20 followers were killed in the attack . A confluence of tribal politics , religion , and money from the opium trade helped ensure the uneasy truce would not hold . At the time , the government claimed they could retake the town within 24 hours , but that plan had been postponed to avoid causing civilian casualties . 
 Musa Qala was the only significant town held by the Taliban at the time of the assault , and they had imposed a strict rule on its inhabitants . Special tribunals were set up , pronouncing sentences of stoning , amputation , or death by hanging against those who were considered enemies , or who contravened a strict interpretation of the Sharia . Four men are known to have been hanged as spies during this period . The Taliban also levied heavy taxes , closed down schools , and drafted local men into their ranks by force . Other deprivations were reminiscent of previous Taliban rule : men attacked for not wearing beards ; music banned and recordings smashed ; women punished for not wearing the burqa . The town is situated in a major opium poppy growing area and a BBC correspondent has reported it to be the centre of the heroin trade in Afghanistan . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Immediate prelude = = = 
 Coalition military manoeuvres and a build @-@ up of troops and supplies continued for weeks before the assault . On 1 November , British forces started reconnaissance patrols in preparation for the attack . In the middle of that month , the MOD reported that troops from 40 Commando Royal Marines and the Right Flank Company of the Scots Guards were patrolling outside the town to confuse the Taliban insurgents and disrupt their supply routes . 
 In the days before the assault , reconnaissance patrols penetrated as close as a 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the Musa Qala town centre . Hundreds of families were reported to have fled from the pending assault , after the coalition dropped leaflets in warning . Furthermore , the coalition secured the defection of a critical tribal leader , Mullah Abdul Salaam , who had been governor of Uruzgan province under Taliban rule . A leader of the <unk> tribe , Salaam was reported to be in negotiation with the coalition as early as October 2007 , causing a rift within the Taliban . His defection was personally sought by Afghan president Hamid Karzai and he brought as many as one third of the Taliban forces defending Musa Qala to the coalition side . However , it is unclear if they fought on the side of the ISAF or simply stayed out of the fight . 
 Prior to the battle , two thousand militants were reported to be holding the town . A similar claim of 2 @,@ 050 " fully armed fighters " was made in late November by Enqiadi , a <unk> commander . At the time , Enqiadi seemed confident that the whole of Helmand province would fall to the Taliban in the winter of 2007 – 08 . Subsequent estimates reduced numbers of Taliban fighters , with an ISAF officer suggesting that the maximum strength was closer to two to three hundred . 
 = = = Main assault = = = 
 The main assault on Musa Qala began at 4 pm on 7 December . Several Taliban were reportedly killed in US airstrikes as the attack began . That evening some 600 American soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division were airlifted to the north of the town in 19 helicopters . Chinook and Blackhawk troop carriers escorted by Apache attack helicopters were involved in the assault . During the night the paratroopers broke through Taliban trenches to clear the way for further ground troops and then dug defensive positions . During the attack , an Apache was hit by ground fire and had one engine knocked out but the pilot , <unk> Thomas O. Malone , managed to land safely despite being injured . More than 2 @,@ 000 British troops of the Helmand Task Force ( then under the direction of 52nd Infantry Brigade ) , including Scots Guards , Household Cavalry , and Royal Marines from 40 Commando , became involved in the operation . British troops set up a cordon around the town to aid the US attack and also began an advance with Afghan troops from the south , west , and east , exchanging gunfire with the Taliban . At least on the first day of the battle these advances may have served as a feint to divert attention from the main US air assault . Danish and Estonian troops were also involved in the initial assault . 
 Fighting continued on 8 December . As British and Afghan soldiers continued their ground advance , US air forces repeatedly attacked the Taliban , including numerous anti @-@ aircraft positions surrounding the town . The Taliban defended positions surrounded by minefields , a principal danger to coalition forces . The assault made progress nonetheless , with the Afghan Ministry of Defence reporting that day : " In this operation so far , 12 terrorists were killed , one captured and a number of weapons and ammunitions were seized . " A British soldier , Sergeant Lee Johnson of the 2nd Battalion ( Green Howards ) Yorkshire Regiment , was killed shortly after 10 am on the eighth , when his vehicle drove over a mine ; another soldier was seriously injured in the blast . 
 Taliban forces took up new positions to defend the town on 9 December . Taliban sources suggested at the time that militants from nearby areas were entering the town to reinforce its defence . Fighting was on @-@ going through the day and bombs planted by insurgents continued to take a toll on ISAF forces : an American soldier , Corporal Tanner J O 'Leary of the 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment , was killed by the detonation of an improvised explosive device . 
 = = = Taliban retreat = = = 
 By 10 December , news outlets reported that the Taliban insurgents had withdrawn north from the area and that Afghan Army and ISAF forces were in control of the town . The British MOD was more cautious at the time , advising that " steady progress " had been made but that coalition forces remained on the outskirts of Musa Qala . Nevertheless , the Afghan government suggested that the coalition had " completely captured " the town . NATO announced the town 's capture on the 11th , however at the time the MOD suggested forces were still proceeding cautiously " compound to compound " , only officially confirmed the capture of Musa Qala the next day . Afghan troops were called forward for the final push and by midday on the twelfth were reported to be in the town centre , in a gesture symbolising their ability to fight and defeat the Taliban on their own . Lieutenant Colonel Richard Eaton , spokesman for Task Force Helmand , described the retaking of the town : 
 The current situation in Musa Qaleh is that it is underneath the Afghan flag ... <unk> today [ 12 December 2007 ] our operations to relieve and recapture Musa Qaleh were concluded with the final phase being an assault into Musa Qaleh by the Afghan Army .... The cooperation with the Afghan troops has been very good indeed . General <unk> was crucially involved in the planning . He moved his planning team to <unk> with Headquarters 52 Brigade in Lashkar Gar . 
 Brigadier Andrew Mackay , commander of the Helmand Task Force , emphasised that the coalition 's plan encouraged the less committed local fighters — the so @-@ called " tier two " Taliban — to break away from the more ideologically driven militants . This strategy may have been successful ; Afghan president Hamid Karzai declared that he had been approached by Taliban members wanting to swap sides after a string of insurgent exactions against civilians . He said : " They hanged a boy of 15 from a ceiling and lit two gas canisters under him . " Precise Taliban casualties were not reported although the Afghan Defence Ministry suggested hundreds killed , detained , or captured . The insurgents claimed 17 Afghan army and ISAF killed , and blamed the British for at least 40 civilians deaths , but their claims may not be reliable . 
 Although fierce in the first days , the battle did not produce the house @-@ to @-@ house combat that had been feared ; the Taliban largely retreated without protracted resistance . Poor weather conditions , including fog , may have allowed them to retreat more easily . Taliban spokesmen suggested the retreat was designed to avoid continued airstrikes and civilian casualties within the town . By the time the town centre was reached , fighting proved " unremarkable " and according to one senior US officer : " The urban center of Musa Qala was not significantly opposed , it was not significantly barricaded " . The final advance into the town 's main bazaar by the Afghan Army was physically led by an Advanced Search Team of the Royal Engineers of the British Army followed by EOD and the main Afghan force who raised their flag for the world 's press . 
 = = Relevance to larger campaign = = 
 Musa Qala is just one flashpoint in the wider Helmand province campaign , a coalition effort to dislodge the Taliban from the volatile province , largely led by British forces . The battle to retake the town sparked conflict in adjoining areas . In November 2007 , when reconnaissance patrols began , " vicious " Taliban attacks were launched in Sangin Valley , Helmand province , to the south , including one which saw Royal Marine Commandos endure two days of rocket and mortar fire . Just three days before the main assault , on 4 December , British forces suffered a fatality to the north of the village of Sangin , when Trooper Jack Sadler was killed by a roadside bomb . The week prior to the assault saw a variety of other engagements in Helmand : the British confronted sustained attack near the <unk> Dam , northeast of Sangin ; further west , Estonian , British and American troops were engaged near the town of <unk> at the center of <unk> District . Danish forces under British command were attacked in the town of Gereshk . 
 In the days after the main battle was launched , Lieutenant Colonel Eaton confirmed that the Taliban were attempting to create pressure in other areas but that attacks on British bases had been repulsed . One Taliban commander noted : " We have launched attacks in Sangin and in Sarwan Kala ( <unk> Qaleh ) ... We have orders to attack the British everywhere . " When the principal Taliban retreat from Musa Qala occurred fighting continued elsewhere : on the eleventh and twelfth , retreating Taliban militants attacked a government centre in Sangin . They were repulsed with 50 killed , according to the Afghan Defence Ministry . American , British , and other NATO special forces were specifically deployed to prevent the Taliban from withdrawing north into <unk> District , and east into <unk> Province , their traditional refuge . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 British officers expressed satisfaction that Musa Qala had been recaptured without any artillery shells or bombs hitting the town itself . However , they acknowledged that the Taliban had not been definitively defeated and would probably " have another go " in the area . Taliban fighters were believed to have merged back into the local rural population after the defeat , their traditional dress providing simple cover . In the days after the battle , counter @-@ attacks on the town were considered likely and coalition officials suggested sustained defence would be necessary ; British forces plan to reinforce Musa Qala but have emphasised that future defence of the village will be largely Afghan controlled . The optimistic picture of Afghan capability presented by ISAF command has been challenged . A reporter on the ground , writing for The Times , notes that the Afghan forces " could barely function without NATO 's protection and NATO had to cajole them to move forward " . 
 British Prime Minister Gordon Brown was in Helmand at the time of the assault , visiting troops at Camp Bastion . He suggested success at Musa Qala would provide a step toward Afghan peace and promised continued reconstruction relief . Coalition and Afghan government plans include the construction of a local mosque , the rebuilding of a district centre , police buildings , schools , and the repair of the electricity infrastructure . The governor of Helmand , Assadullah Wafa , said a delegation would visit Musa Qala to distribute 5 @,@ 000 tons of aid to returning civilians in the immediate aftermath of the battle . On 26 December , engineers from 69 Gurkha Field Squadron , 36 Engineer Regiment moved into Musa Qala and started rebuilding the district centre . Their task includes the construction of a perimeter fence made of <unk> bastions , and <unk> ( watchtowers ) made of sandbags . 
 Various Taliban supplies were seized by coalition forces following the battle . On 13 December , British and Afghan army units located bomb factories and weapons caches as they moved further into the outskirts of Musa Qala and searched Taliban positions . At the same time , the first civilians started to return to the area , some with reports of Taliban punishments and claims of active Pakistani and Arab <unk> . A new orientation of British strategy in Helmand is to use military force to curb the influence of local drug barons , whose trade supports the insurgents . On 16 December , British troops burned an estimated £ 150 to £ 200 million worth of heroin that had been found in a drug factory and other buildings in Musa Qala . 
 The strategic purpose of controlling Musa Qala is both to squeeze Taliban operations in south @-@ western Afghanistan and to serve as a symbol of Afghan National Army and ISAF strength ; the town had taken on iconic proportions , according to British officials . The Taliban , however , continue to enjoy significant civilian support despite their atrocities and the broader campaign to win over the region remains difficult . Troop shortages have made it difficult for NATO to hold areas seized from the Taliban in southern Afghanistan . 
 Civilian return to the town was slow , with shops still shuttered on 16 December . Civilian casualty reports were conflicting : one resident claimed 15 dead bodies lay in a single street and another that his family were dead under rubble . The coalition rejected such claims , admitting only that two children had been injured , and possibly killed , when a car driving at high speeds towards ISAF troops during the battle overturned when the driver was shot dead . 
 Coalition and Afghan authorities continued their efforts to win over Taliban sympathizers . However a " miscommunication between authorities " created some tension . In late December , two western diplomats were expelled from Afghanistan . Governor Assadullah Wafa accused them of holding secret talks with the Taliban and proposing bribes to them ; the secret talks were denied as a misunderstanding by a UN spokesperson . In January 2008 , Mullah Abdul Salaam was appointed governor of Musa Qala district by the Afghan government , a gesture that was intended to encourage other Taliban commanders to change sides . 
 = = Taliban commanders = = 
 News reports mentioned numerous Taliban commanders having participated in the Battle of Musa Qala , many reported killed or captured : 
 Enqiadi , reported to be a Taliban commander prior to the battle . 
 Mullah <unk> , Taliban commander who spoke with the Associated Press during the battle . 
 Mullah Abdul Salaam , key tribal leader of the <unk> who defected to the coalition side ( see above ) . 
 Mullah <unk> , deputy Taliban shadow governor of Helmand province , killed in an airstrike . 
 Mullah Tor Jan , Musa Qala area commander , supposedly killed in an airstrike . His actual whereabouts remain unknown , as he was again reported killed in an engagement with Afghan and Coalition forces on March 13 , 2008 . 
 Mullah Matin <unk> ( also known as Abdul Matin ) , Taliban district chief of Musa Qala , mistakenly reported captured . 
 Mullah Rahim <unk> , Taliban governor of Helmand province , mistakenly reported captured . 
 = HMS Formidable ( 67 ) = 
 HMS Formidable was an Illustrious @-@ class aircraft carrier ordered for the Royal Navy before World War II . After being completed in late 1940 , she was briefly assigned to the Home Fleet before being transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet as a replacement for her crippled sister ship Illustrious . Formidable 's aircraft played a key role in the Battle of Cape Matapan in early 1941 , and they subsequently provided cover for Allied ships and attacked Axis forces until their carrier was badly damaged by German dive bombers in May . 
 Assigned to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean in early 1942 , Formidable covered the invasion of Diego Suarez in Vichy Madagascar in mid @-@ 1942 against the possibility of a sortie by the Japanese into the Indian Ocean . Formidable returned home for a brief refit before participating in Operation Torch , the invasion of French North Africa in November . She remained in the Mediterranean and covered the invasions of Sicily and mainland Italy in 1943 before beginning a lengthy refit . 
 Formidable made several attacks on the German battleship Tirpitz in Norway in mid @-@ 1944 as part of the Home Fleet . She was subsequently assigned to the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) in 1945 where she played a supporting role during the Battle of Okinawa and later attacked targets in the Japanese Home Islands . The ship was used to repatriate liberated Allied prisoners of war and soldiers after the Japanese surrender and then ferried British personnel across the globe through 1946 . She was placed in reserve the following year and sold for scrap in 1953 . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The Royal Navy 's 1936 Naval Programme authorised the construction of two aircraft carriers . Admiral Sir Reginald Henderson , Third Sea Lord and Controller of the Navy , was determined not to simply modify the previous unarmoured Ark Royal design . He believed that carriers could not be successfully defended by their own aircraft without some form of early @-@ warning system . Lacking that , there was nothing to prevent land @-@ based aircraft from attacking them , especially in confined waters like the North and Mediterranean Seas . This meant that the ship had to be capable of remaining in action after sustaining damage , and that her fragile aircraft had to be protected entirely from damage . The only way to do this was to completely armour the hangar in which the aircraft would shelter , but putting that much weight so high in the ship allowed only a single @-@ storey hangar due to stability concerns . This halved the aircraft capacity of the Illustrious class compared with the older unarmoured carriers , trading offensive potential for defensive survivability . 
 Formidable was 740 feet ( 225 @.@ 6 m ) in length overall and 710 feet ( 216 @.@ 4 m ) at the waterline . Her beam was 95 feet 9 inches ( 29 @.@ 2 m ) at the waterline and she had a draught of 28 feet 10 inches ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) at deep load . She displaced 23 @,@ 000 long tons ( 23 @,@ 369 t ) at standard load as completed . Her complement was approximately 1 @,@ 299 officers and enlisted men upon completion in 1940 . The ship had three Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one shaft , using steam supplied by six Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 111 @,@ 000 shp ( 83 @,@ 000 kW ) , enough to give a maximum speed of 30 @.@ 5 knots ( 56 @.@ 5 km / h ; 35 @.@ 1 mph ) . On sea trials , Formidable reached speeds of 30 @.@ 6 knots ( 56 @.@ 7 km / h ; 35 @.@ 2 mph ) with 112 @,@ 018 shp ( 83 @,@ 532 kW ) . She carried a maximum of 4 @,@ 850 long tons ( 4 @,@ 930 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 10 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 800 km ; 12 @,@ 300 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The 753 @-@ foot ( 229 @.@ 5 m ) armoured flight deck had a usable length of 670 feet ( 204 @.@ 2 m ) , due to prominent " round @-@ downs " at bow and stern to reduce air turbulence , and a maximum width of 95 feet ( 29 @.@ 0 m ) . A single hydraulic aircraft catapult was fitted on the forward part of the flight deck . The ship was equipped with two unarmoured lifts on the centreline , each of which measured 45 by 22 feet ( 13 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) . The hangar was 456 feet ( 139 @.@ 0 m ) long and had a maximum width of 62 feet ( 18 @.@ 9 m ) . It had a height of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) which allowed storage of Lend @-@ Lease Vought F4U Corsair fighters once their wingtips were clipped . The ship could accommodate up to 54 aircraft rather than the intended 36 after the adoption of " outriggers " on the flight deck during the war and the flattening of the " round @-@ downs " that increased the usable length of the flight deck to 740 feet ( 225 @.@ 6 m ) to facilitate the use of a permanent deck park . The additional crewmen , maintenance personnel and facilities needed to support the extra aircraft severely crowded the ship . She was provided with 50 @,@ 650 imperial gallons ( 230 @,@ 300 l ; 60 @,@ 830 US gal ) of aviation gasoline . 
 = = = Armament , electronics and protection = = = 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of sixteen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) dual @-@ purpose guns in eight twin @-@ gun turrets that were mounted in sponsons on the side of the hull . The roofs of the gun turrets protruded above the level of the flight deck to allow them to fire across the deck at high elevations . The gun had a maximum range of 20 @,@ 760 yards ( 18 @,@ 980 m ) . Her light anti @-@ aircraft defences included six octuple mounts for QF two @-@ pounder ( " pom @-@ pom " ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , two each fore and aft of the island and two in sponsons on the port side of the hull . The two @-@ pounder gun had a maximum range of 6 @,@ 800 yards ( 6 @,@ 200 m ) . 
 While under repair in late 1941 , Formidable 's light AA armament was augmented by the addition of 10 Oerlikon 20 mm autocannon in single mounts with a maximum range of 4 @,@ 800 yards ( 4 @,@ 400 m ) . By the time of her last recorded refit in March 1944 , she had exchanged one octuple " pom @-@ pom " mount for a quadruple mount and had a total of 20 twin and 14 single 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) mounts . Before seeing combat against the Japanese some were replaced by 40 mm Bofors AA guns as the 20 mm shell was unlikely to destroy a kamikaze before it hit the ship . The Bofors gun had a maximum range of 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) . By the war 's end the ship had all six of her original octuple " pom @-@ pom " mounts , five single power @-@ operated 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) mounts , seven single 40 mm " <unk> " mounts and 11 twin and 12 single 20 mm mounts . 
 Formidable was completed with a Type 79 early @-@ warning radar . The specifics of the additional radars fitted during the war are not readily available , but she probably had , by the end of the war , a Type 277 surface @-@ search / height @-@ finding radar on top of the bridge and a Type 293 target @-@ indicator radar on the foremast . She also probably mounted Type 279 and Type 281B early @-@ warning radars , based on those fitted aboard her sister ship Victorious . In addition , Type 282 and Type 285 gunnery radars were mounted on the fire @-@ control directors . 
 The Illustrious @-@ class ships had a flight deck protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour and the internal sides and ends of the hangars were 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick . The hangar deck itself was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick and extended the full width of the ship to meet the top of the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch waterline armour belt . The belt was closed by 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The underwater defence system was a layered system of liquid- and air @-@ filled compartments backed by a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) splinter bulkhead . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Formidable was ordered as part of the 1937 Naval Programme from Harland & Wolff . She was laid down at their Belfast shipyard on 17 June 1937 as yard number 1007 and launched on 17 August 1939 . Just before the launch ceremony was to begin , the wooden cradle supporting the ship collapsed , and the ship slid down the slipway while workmen were still underneath and around the ship . One spectator was killed by flying debris and at least 20 others were injured ; Formidable , however , was not damaged . Because of the incident , the carrier was referred to as " The Ship That Launched Herself " . She was commissioned on 24 November 1940 . 
 After a very brief work up , the Fairey Albacore torpedo bombers of 826 and 829 Squadrons and the Fairey Fulmar fighters of 803 Squadron flew aboard and she joined the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow on 12 December . Her stay there was brief as she , escorted by the heavy cruisers Dorsetshire and Norfolk , sailed on 18 December to protect convoys and search for the German cruiser Admiral Scheer which had recently attacked Convoy HX 84 in the North Atlantic . They failed to find the commerce raider and escorted a convoy to Cape Town , South Africa , arriving on 22 January 1941 . Four days later the ship was ordered north to replace her sister Illustrious with the Mediterranean Fleet after she had been badly damaged by German dive bombers . En route , she took the opportunity to attack Italian forces in Italian Somaliland and Eritrea . They sank the 5 @,@ 723 @-@ gross register ton ( GRT ) steamer SS Moncalieri on 12 February for the loss of two Albacores . 
 = = = Battle of Cape Matapan = = = 
 Several weeks later , she made a cautious transit of the recently mined Suez Canal and reached Alexandria on 10 March . 829 Squadron was issued Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers to replace its losses around this time . On 20 March Formidable escorted a convoy to Malta and flew off five aircraft for Crete while returning to Alexandria . On the morning of 27 March , major elements of the Italian Fleet were spotted en route to the sea lanes between Egypt and Greece and the carrier sailed later that afternoon to intercept them . Reinforced by three Fulmars from 806 Squadron , her air group only numbered 13 Fulmars , 10 Albacores and 4 Swordfish . An Albacore spotted the leading Italian ships the next morning ; a strike force of six Albacores was loaded with torpedoes and began to attack the Italian battleship Vittorio Veneto . Two German Junkers Ju 88 bombers intervened , but they were driven off by the escorting pair of Fulmars . The attack was unsuccessful and another strike force of three Albacores and two Swordfish was prepared . Shortly after launching them at 12 : 22 , Formidable was unsuccessfully attacked by a pair of torpedo @-@ carrying Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.79 bombers . Around 14 : 50 , one Albacore succeeded in torpedoing the Italian battleship , although the other aircraft missed . The hit briefly knocked out her engines and caused heavy flooding . Another air strike of six Albacores and two Swordfish was launched at 17 : 30 to finish off the crippled battleship , but they mistook the Italian cruiser Pola for the battleship in the fading light . The cruiser was struck by a single torpedo from one of the aircraft , possibly from one of two Swordfish from 815 Squadron from Maleme , Crete , that linked up with Formidable 's aircraft before the attack . The mistake allowed the battleship to reach port . One Albacore was shot down by Vittorio Veneto and two others were forced to ditch after running out of fuel during the day 's operations . 
 On 18 April the Mediterranean Fleet sortied to bombard the primary Axis supply port of Tripoli and was attacked by a pair of torpedo @-@ carrying SM.79s from Rhodes . They were intercepted by a pair of Fulmars that damaged one bomber badly enough that it crash @-@ landed back at its base , although one Fulmar was also forced to crash @-@ land aboard Formidable . The next day Fulmars from 806 Squadron shot down one CANT Z.1007 bomber flying from Cyrenica to Sicily and a pair of Junkers Ju 52 transports flying fuel to North Africa . On the morning of 21 April , the carrier 's aircraft dropped flares to illuminate the port so it could be shelled by three battleships and a light cruiser . On the way home , a pair of Fulmars shot down a Dornier Do 24 flying boat . 
 During the Evacuation of Greece , Formidable provided air cover for Convoy GA @-@ 15 on 29 April . A Fulmar from 803 Squadron was forced to ditch on 2 May before the carrier returned to Alexandria the next day . She put to sea on 6 May to provide air cover for the convoys involved in Operation Tiger . On the morning of 8 May , a pair of Fulmars claimed to have shot down a pair of <unk> searching for the fleet ; one Fulmar failed to return . Later that afternoon , the fighters shot down four German Heinkel He 111 bombers at the cost of one Fulmar forced to crash @-@ land . Two Albacores and a Fulmar crashed due to non @-@ combat causes during the day . The next day a pair of Fulmars from 806 Squadron badly damaged a Ju 88 reconnaissance bomber that crash @-@ landed at its base in Sicily . As the fleet and the Tiger convoy approached Alexandria on 11 May , a pair of Fulmars attacked a formation of Ju 88s , damaging one bomber ; one Fulmar and another Ju 88 were seen falling together towards the sea . Many of the Fulmars had been rendered unserviceable during the operation and Formidable was unable to provide air cover until they were repaired . 
 On 26 May the fleet sortied for a dawn raid on the base at Scarpanto the next day ; the carrier could only muster a total of 12 Fulmars and 15 Albacores and Swordfish . Six Albacores and four Fulmars attacked the airbase , destroying one Ju 88 and damaging two others . Also damaged were an Italian Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.81 transport and six Fiat CR.42 fighters . Later that morning , as the fleet was returning to Egypt , the Fulmars shot down a He 111 and two Ju 88s for the loss of one Fulmar forced to land aboard the carrier and another forced to ditch . At 13 : 10 a formation of Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers was spotted from I. / StG 2 ; based in Cyrenica , they were searching for supply ships bound for Tobruk and not involved in the Battle of Crete . They hit Formidable with two 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bombs and blew the bow off her escorting destroyer Nubian . The bombs killed 12 men and wounded 10 ; one bomb passed completely through the outer part of the starboard forward flight deck and detonated before it hit the water , riddling the side of the hull with holes . A near miss also blew a large hole in the ship 's starboard side underwater . The pair of Fulmars on Combat Air Patrol ( CAP ) shot down one of the Stukas after it had dropped its bomb and were able to land aboard shortly afterwards , although takeoffs could not be made until 18 : 00 . 
 Formidable arrived at Alexandria the following day and disembarked her air group . She received emergency repairs before departing on 24 July for permanent repairs at Norfolk Naval Shipyard in the United States , 829 Squadron flying aboard with its Albacores to provide anti @-@ submarine patrols during the voyage . She arrived on 25 August and the repairs were completed in early December . After several days of sea trials , she sailed for Britain in company with Illustrious on 12 December . During the night of 15 / 16 December , Illustrious collided with Formidable 's stern , but neither ship was seriously damaged . She was repaired at Belfast from 21 December 1941 to 3 February 1942 and embarked the Albacores of 818 and 820 Squadrons and the Grumman Martlet fighters of 888 Squadron . 
 = = = Indian Ocean Raid = = = 
 Formidable sailed on 17 February to join the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean , escorting a convoy to Freetown , Sierra Leone , en route . One of her passengers on the voyage was Admiral Sir James Somerville , about to take up his appointment as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Eastern Fleet . The ship arrived at Colombo , Ceylon , on 24 March and Somerville hoisted his flag aboard the battleship Warspite that same day . Two days after Formidable 's arrival , the Japanese First Air Fleet departed from Celebes ( Sulawesi ) in the Dutch East Indies to attack British forces in the Indian Ocean . Somerville was notified that the Japanese were planning on attacking Ceylon on 28 March and ordered his fleet to assemble southeast of the island on 30 March to intercept them . Force A , consisting of Formidable , her sister Indomitable and Warspite , was ordered to Addu Atoll to refuel on 3 April after the Japanese failed to attack as the British expected . A Royal Air Force Consolidated Catalina flying boat spotted them within range of Ceylon just three and a half hours after Force A arrived at the atoll on 4 April . Too far away to intercept them before they could attack Ceylon , Force A departed about eleven hours after arrival on a course that Somerville thought would allow him to attack by night while avoiding detection during the day . One of Indomitable 's Albacores spotted some of the Japanese carriers just before nightfall on 5 April , after the Japanese attacked Colombo , but further searches failed to locate them until 8 April when the Japanese were one day away from their intended target , Trincomalee , and still too far away to intercept . Force A refuelled at Addu Atoll on 9 April and was then ordered to Bombay to calm fears of a Japanese attack on India 's west coast . 
 Somerville was still uneasy about the possibility of another attack on Ceylon and ordered Force A to Kilindini Harbour , Mombasa , Kenya on 24 April . En route ( 5 – 7 May ) , she helped protect the invasion of Vichy Diego Suarez , Madagascar against a Japanese attack . Formidable arrived at Kilindini on 10 May and remained there until she departed on 29 May bound for Colombo . The ship alternated between Colombo and Kilindini for the rest of her time with the Eastern Fleet . Rear @-@ Admiral Denis Boyd hoisted his flag over the ship on 24 August and she departed six days later to return home for a refit . She arrived at Rosyth on 21 September and her refit lasted until 18 October . She sailed that day for Scapa Flow where she embarked 24 Martlets of 888 and 893 Squadrons , 12 Albacores of 820 Squadron and 6 Supermarine Seafire fighters of 885 Squadron in preparation for the invasion of French North Africa . 
 = = = Operation Torch = = = 
 Assigned to Force H for Operation Torch , Formidable sailed on 30 October and provided cover in the Western Mediterranean against any attempt to interfere with the landings by Axis forces in Italy or France . Her Martlets shot down a pair of Ju 88s on 6 November and her Albacores laid a smoke screen in support of the landings at Algiers on 8 November . Two of her Albacores torpedoed and sank the German submarine U @-@ 331 on 17 November after it had surrendered to a Supermarine Walrus amphibian once the Walrus had departed to find a ship to accept the surrender . She remained off the Algerian coast providing air support for Allied forces for the rest of the month , and one of her Seafires shot down a Ju 88 on 28 November . 
 Formidable was the only carrier in the Mediterranean after Torch until she was joined by Indomitable in mid @-@ June 1943 as part of the buildup for the Allied invasion of Sicily ( Operation Husky ) . The two carriers were east of the island in a position to intercept any attempt by the Italian fleet to attack the landings . After Sicily was secured , Formidable became the first carrier to enter Grand Harbour , Malta , since Illustrious in January 1941 . The latter ship joined Formidable as a replacement for the torpedoed Indomitable in Force H for the landings at Salerno ( Operation Avalanche ) on 9 September . As in Husky , their role was to protect the invasion fleet from interference by the Italian Navy . The fighters aboard the smaller carriers protecting the forces ashore suffered heavy attrition during the early days of the operation and Formidable transferred 2 Seafires and 15 Martlets to Unicorn as replacements for their losses . 
 = = = Norwegian operations = = = 
 In October , the carrier was transferred to the Home Fleet and departed Gibraltar for Greenock on 13 October together with the battleship King George V. Six days later she was in Scapa Flow to begin patrols to Iceland in company with the battleships Howe and Anson and the American carrier Ranger that lasted for the next three weeks . On 13 November she flew off her air group and sailed for Belfast to begin a lengthy refit , arriving on 19 November . The refit was completed in early June and the ship spent the rest of the month working up . The 18 Corsairs of 1841 Squadron and the 24 Fairey Barracuda torpedo bombers of 827 and 830 Squadrons flew aboard on 29 June and Formidable sailed for Scapa Flow to train with the carriers Furious and Indefatigable before launching an attack on the Tirpitz in Kaafjord on 17 July ( Operation Mascot ) . Her Corsairs escorted the strike aircraft from the other carriers to the target ; one was shot down by German flak . A smoke screen prevented most of the Barracudas from seeing their target and they failed to hit the Tirpitz . Upon the ship 's return to Scapa Flow , 827 and 830 Squadrons were replaced by 826 and 828 Squadrons , also flying Barracudas . 
 Formidable 's air group was reinforced by a dozen Corsairs of 1842 Squadron on 7 August in preparation for further attacks on Tirpitz ( Operation Goodwood ) . The two Corsair squadrons were assigned to No. 6 Naval Fighter Wing aboard the carrier on 14 August . The first attack was on the morning of 22 August when Formidable launched 24 Corsairs and 12 Barracudas against the German battleship and nearby targets , all of which returned . A smoke screen again protected the Tirpitz and no damage was inflicted . Another attack scheduled for the afternoon had to be cancelled because of low clouds . A further attack could not be mounted until 24 August because of bad weather . The carrier contributed 23 Corsairs and 16 Barracudas , and 3 of the fighters were shot down over the target . The Tirpitz was lightly damaged by two bomb hits during this attack . A final attack was made five days later , again without effect . 
 The carrier arrived at Scapa Flow on 2 September where both Barracuda squadrons disembarked . She later sailed to Gibraltar , arriving on 21 September to begin a refit that , among other things , augmented her anti @-@ aircraft outfit in preparation for operations in the Pacific . The Corsairs of No. 6 Naval Fighter Wing flew aboard on 1 January 1945 , as did 18 Grumman TBF Avengers of 848 Squadron . After several weeks of working up , Formidable departed Gibraltar on 14 January to join the British Pacific Fleet ( BPF ) . She arrived in Sydney , the BPF 's main base , on 10 March after several stops en route to refuel and embark stores and ammunition . On 20 March , Admiral Sir Bruce Fraser , commander of the BPF , inspected the ship and her crew . 
 = = = Pacific operations = = = 
 By this time Formidable 's air group had a strength of 36 Corsairs and 18 Avengers . She arrived in San Pedro Bay in the Philippines on 4 April to await the return of the BPF from their efforts to neutralise airfields on the Sakishima Islands , between Okinawa and Formosa , as part of the preparations for the landings on Okinawa . Formidable was called forward six days later to join the 1st Aircraft Carrier Squadron ( 1st ACS ) of the BPF on operations as a replacement for Illustrious which was in poor mechanical shape . She arrived on 14 April and contributed aircraft when the attacks recommenced two days later . The commander of 1842 Squadron was killed on the first day of operations while strafing buildings at Nobara airfield . After refuelling and two more days ' attacks , the BPF sailed on 20 April for San Pedro Bay to replenish its ships for further operations . 
 The fleet returned to waters off Okinawa on 4 May and renewed its attacks on the airfields on the Sakishima Islands . Vice @-@ Admiral Bernard Rawlings , second in command of the BPF , and his staff had determined that bombardment of Japanese gun positions by the heavy guns of battleships and cruisers might be a more effective method of destroying them than aerial attack . They detached King George V and Howe , as well as five cruisers , that morning to bombard Nobara and <unk> airfields while fighters flew a protective CAP over them and spotted the fall of their shells . The loss of the most effective anti @-@ aircraft ships was more important than anticipated and the Japanese were able to take advantage of the opportunity . The carrier had just launched two Corsairs for bombardment @-@ spotting duties and the deck park of eleven Avengers was being moved forward to allow aircraft to land when an undetected Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter attacked at 11 : 31 . The Zero first strafed the flight deck before any of Formidable 's guns could open fire and then turned sharply to dive into the forward flight deck despite the ship 's hard turn to starboard . The fighter released a bomb shortly before it would have impacted the deck and was destroyed by the bomb 's blast , although the remnants of the Zero struck Formidable . 
 The detonation of the bomb blew a 2 @-@ by @-@ 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 6 by 0 @.@ 6 m ) hole in the flight deck . It killed 2 officers and 6 enlisted men , wounding 55 other crewmen . A fragment from the flight deck armour penetrated the hangar deck armour and passed through the centre boiler uptakes , the centre boiler room itself , and an oil tank before it came to rest in the inner bottom . The fragment severed the steam pipes in the centre boiler room and forced its evacuation , cutting the ship 's speed to 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The blast on the flight deck blew the Avenger closest to it over the side and set another one on fire . Shrapnel from the blast peppered the island , causing the bulk of the casualties , and severed many electrical cables , including those for most of the ship 's radars . The fires on the flight deck and in the hangar were extinguished by 11 : 55 , and seven Avengers and a Corsair which were damaged beyond repair were dumped over the side . The bomb struck at the intersection of three armour plates and dented the plates over an area 20 by 24 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 by 7 @.@ 3 m ) . The dent was filled by wood and concrete and covered by thin steel plates tack @-@ welded to the deck so that she was able to operate aircraft by 17 : 00 and steam at a speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . Thirteen of her Corsairs had been airborne at the time of the attack and they operated from the other carriers for a time . The damage to the boiler room and its steam pipes was repaired so that the centre boilers could be reconnected to the engines at 02 : 00 the next day . 
 The bombardment significantly reduced Japanese aerial activity on 5 May , although several of Formidable 's Corsairs , temporarily operating from her sister Victorious , shot down a Japanese reconnaissance aircraft at an altitude of 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . That evening the fleet withdrew to refuel and was back on station on 8 May although heavy rains forced the cancellation of the planned air strikes . Another kamikaze penetrated the CAP at low altitude and struck Formidable 's flight deck and deck park at 17 : 05 on 9 May . The impact did little damage to the ship , but caused an explosion and large fire that destroyed 18 of her aircraft . Casualties were light with only one man killed and four wounded . The carrier was able to resume operations fifty minutes later , but with only four Avengers and eleven Corsairs still serviceable . Rawlings decided to immediately withdraw to give Victorious and Formidable more time to make repairs and to replenish their depleted air groups . He also revised the deployment of the BPF to counter the new low @-@ level tactics of the Japanese by stationing the battleships and cruisers more closely to the carriers , keeping the carriers closer together and positioning radar picket cruisers in the most likely directions of attack . 
 The BPF returned to action on 12 May and no Japanese aircraft were seen or detected that day or the next . One of Formidable 's Avengers made a successful landing aboard Indomitable with only one landing gear leg extended and no flaps on 13 May . The BPF continued its routine of two days of operations alternating with one or two days to replenish its ships for the next several days with minimal interference by the Japanese . On the morning of 18 May , armourers were loading ammunition into aircraft when a Corsair 's guns were accidentally fired into an Avenger which caught fire . The overhead fire sprinklers were immediately turned on , but the fire could not be extinguished for nearly an hour , not least because the electric motors driving the steel fire curtains had been damaged in the first kamikaze attack and could only be repaired by a dockyard . Twenty @-@ one Corsairs and seven Avengers were either damaged or destroyed in the incident . Rawlings decided to detach Formidable early to give her extra time for repairs in Sydney and she was ordered to depart on 22 May . 
 = = = = Operations off the Japanese coast = = = = 
 The ship arrived on 31 May and was taken into the Captain Cook Dock at the Garden Island Dockyard for repairs , with the dock 's labour force being augmented with workers from the Cockatoo Island Dockyard . Two of the three armour plates damaged on 4 May were repaired , but the third had to be replaced by two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch high @-@ quality steel plates as there were not any armour plates of the required thickness available in Australia . Repairs were also made to the ship 's machinery , boilers and electrical systems . The island was enlarged with an admiral 's staff cabin and a radar workshop . Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Philip Vian , commander of the 1st ACS , transferred his flag to Formidable when her repairs were complete . 
 Together with Victorious and King George V , Formidable departed Sydney on 28 June , bound for the BPF 's advance base at Manus Island , in the Admiralty Islands . Her air group now consisted of 36 Corsairs , 12 Avengers and 6 Grumman F6F Hellcats of 1844 Squadron . Two of the latter aircraft were photoreconnaissance versions . No. 6 Naval Fighter Wing was absorbed into the 2nd Carrier Air Group that controlled all of the aircraft on the carrier . The ships arrived on 4 July , refuelled , and departed two days later to join the American Third Fleet , already operating off the Japanese Home Islands . The BPF rendezvoused with the Americans on 16 July and commenced operations the next morning . Formidable flew off 28 Corsairs bound north of Tokyo on 17 July , but some of them were unable to locate their targets because of bad weather . Twenty @-@ four Corsairs attacked targets near Tokyo the next day , before more bad weather halted flying operations until 24 – 25 July , when the BPF 's aircraft attacked targets near Osaka and the Inland Sea , crippling the escort carrier Kaiyo . After replenishing , airstrikes resumed on 28 and 30 July , sinking the escort Okinawa near Maizuru . A combination of bad weather , refuelling requirements and the atomic bombing of Hiroshima delayed the resumption of air operations until 9 August . 
 During the morning , Formidable flew off a fighter sweep of a dozen Corsairs followed an hour later by Avengers that attacked Matsushima Air Field . A second fighter sweep , led by Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray , RCNVR , senior pilot of 1841 Squadron , was diverted to attack Japanese warships located in <unk> Wan , Miyagi Prefecture , with his eight Corsairs . Gray spotted two escort ships and led his aircraft into the attack . Intense flak set his engine on fire , but Gray continued his attack , skip bombing a 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bomb into the Etorofu @-@ class escort Amakusa . The ship sank within five minutes with the loss of 157 lives . Gray 's aircraft rolled inverted shortly after releasing the bomb and crashed into the sea ; he did not survive . Gray was later posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross ( VC ) . 
 The attacks were repeated the next day , sinking two warships and numerous small merchantmen and destroying numerous railroad locomotives and parked aircraft . The BPF had been scheduled to withdraw after 10 August to prepare for Operation Olympic , the invasion of Kyushu scheduled for November , and the bulk of the force , including Formidable , departed for Manus on 12 August . The Japanese surrender a few days later ended the war . 
 = = = Post @-@ war actions = = = 
 Formidable arrived at Sydney on 24 August , and had her hangar refitted to accommodate Allied ex @-@ prisoners of war and soldiers for repatriation . Having left her air group behind to maximise the numbers of passengers she could carry , the ship arrived at Manila on 30 September , where she loaded over 1 @,@ 000 Australian former prisoners of war on 4 October and unloaded them at Circular Quay in Sydney on 21 October . She departed three days later , bound for Karavia Bay , New Britain where she loaded 1 @,@ 254 men of the Indian Army and continued on to Singapore where she loaded Indian ex @-@ PoWs before delivering them to Bombay . There Formidable loaded an Indian Army infantry battalion for transport to Batavia in the Dutch East Indies to maintain law and order until Dutch colonial troops could take over . The ship then loaded elements of the 7th Australian Division and their equipment at Tarakan Island , Borneo and picked up more Australians at Morotai ; she arrived at Sydney on 6 December . 
 Vice @-@ Admiral Vian addressed the ship 's crew on 27 December before she departed the following day with 800 naval personnel embarked for passage home . She arrived at Portsmouth on 5 February 1946 . The dockyard there fitted her with more permanent accommodations in the hangar for more trooping duties and she loaded 480 personnel before departing for Sydney on 2 March . Formidable arrived there a month later and loaded 1 @,@ 336 naval personnel as well as some Wrens and VAD nurses . She sailed on 12 April , stopping in Colombo to refuel and drop off 576 naval personnel , before arriving in Devonport on 9 May . She made her next voyage to Bombay and Colombo between 15 June and 25 July . The ship loaded 114 officers , 958 enlisted men and 11 VAD nurses in Singapore in August and another 319 enlisted men in Trincomalee before stopping in Malta to load 41 men of the Merchant Navy . Formidable made her last trooping voyage between Portsmouth and Singapore , delivering 1 @,@ 000 Royal Marine Commandos to the latter , between 3 December and 3 February 1947 . 
 = = = Decommissioning and disposal = = = 
 In early March 1947 , Formidable steamed north to Rosyth for a brief refit before being reduced to reserve . She was paid off on 12 August and a later survey revealed that her wartime damage and poor material shape meant the ship was beyond economical repair at a time when money was very tight . She was towed to Spithead in mid @-@ 1949 and then to Portsmouth Royal Dockyard in November 1952 . Formidable was sold for scrap in January 1953 and towed to Inverkeithing where she was broken up . 
 = = Squadrons embarked = = 
 = The Natural Order = 
 " The Natural Order " is the twentieth episode of the third season of the American television comedy show 30 Rock . It was written by series creator Tina Fey with co @-@ executive producer John Riggi and directed by Scott Ellis . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on April 30 , 2009 . Guest stars in " The Natural Order " include actors Elaine Stritch and Steve Buscemi . 
 The plot of the episode centers around a conflict between Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and Liz Lemon ( Fey ) over favorable treatment . Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) adopts a gibbon and treats it like her child . Finally , Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) mother Colleen ( Stritch ) visits him on the 35th anniversary of the day that Jack 's father left the family . 
 " The Natural Order " received mixed reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 6 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz ( Tina Fey ) , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) , and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) all attempt to trick Tracy into arriving at a rehearsal on time . Tracy arrives not knowing what time it is and announces that Liz is racist and treating him like a child . Liz challenges Tracy to behave better so he can be treated as an adult , but he responds by sending a gibbon to replace himself at rehearsal . Liz tells Tracy to arrive on time with his lines memorized the next day if he wants to be treated equally . Tracy retaliates by acting professionally but convincing everyone to treat Liz equally too , by making her lift heavy water jugs , passing gas near her , and inviting her to a strip club along with the other writers . Liz in turn stops Tracy from going to the strip club , noting that because he is acting so professionally he has to write notes for the upcoming script . Liz is uncomfortable at the strip club and Tracy hates writing all night so they agree to return to the " natural order " of things with both receiving preferential treatment . 
 Meanwhile , Jenna adopts the gibbon Tracy sends to rehearsal and treats it as her child . She dresses it in several costumes including a mariachi outfit , a tuxedo , and a sailor suit . In addition she buys the gibbon a baby doll , referring to herself as a " grandmother . " At the end of the episode Jenna accidentally shakes the head off of the baby doll and the gibbon attacks her . 
 Jack is concerned for his mother , Colleen ( Elaine Stritch ) . He tells Liz that the anniversary of his father , Jimmy Donaghy , abandoning their family is coming up and he is afraid of the effect it will have on Colleen . When Jack arrives at Colleen 's hotel room to take her to dinner , however , he discovers she is staying with a man , Paul . Jack , worried she has been taken in by a con man in her time of grief , asks his private investigator Lenny Wosniak ( Steve Buscemi ) to look into Paul . Wosniak cannot find anything distasteful in Paul 's background , but tells Jack that he is married . Jack reveals this to his mother , but she says she knew and did not care . Colleen is also surprised that Jack thought the anniversary of Jimmy leaving would hurt her , noting that he had once left from the spring of 1957 until he came back and invited her to see Some Like It Hot . Jack talks this over with Liz and comes to realize that as Some Like It Hot was released in 1959 , Jimmy Donaghy cannot have been his biological father because Jack was conceived in 1958 , during the period Jimmy had been absent . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Natural Order " was written by series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , and co @-@ executive producer John Riggi . The director of this episode was Scott Ellis . This was Fey and Riggi 's second script collaboration , having co @-@ written season one episode " The Head and the Hair " that aired on January 18 , 2007 . " The Natural Order " originally aired on April 30 , 2009 , on NBC in the United States as the twentieth episode of the show 's third season . 
 This episode was actress Elaine Stritch 's fifth appearance on 30 Rock as Collen Donaghy , the mother of Jack Donaghy , played by Alec Baldwin . Actor Steve Buscemi reprised his role as private investigator Lenny Wosniak . Buscemi first appeared in the October 18 , 2007 , episode " The Collection " , and went on to direct the third season episode " Retreat to Move Forward " , broadcast on January 22 , 2009 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " The Natural Order " is one of several 30 Rock episodes to deal with race . In this episode , when Tracy leaves the first rehearsal accusing Liz of racism he shouts " race card ! " and hands Liz a card with " race card " written on it ( " playing the race card " is an expression that means introducing the issue of race into an argument in order to gain the upper hand ) . During their disagreement Tracy also says that " we have a black president now " , referring to Barack Obama , but Liz says that he voted for Ralph Nader . According to J. Jeremy <unk> in " Race At The Rock : Race Cards , White Myths , And <unk> America " , this plotline is an example of people " want [ ing ] to have race and do away with it too . " Tracy wants to be treated equally but also wants to continue behaving the way he is used to . <unk> says that by the end of the episode , Liz and Tracy , in reverting to " the natural order " , have come to understand the concept of equality ; rather than forcing people " to be equivalent to one another ... considering the different interests of people equally . " 
 Jack tells Liz that by protecting his mother this time , as opposed to when his father left , he can " put right what once went wrong " which Liz notes is part of the introduction to the television series Quantum Leap . Jack had written a speech to confront Jimmy Donaghy decades ago and attempts to update it for his confrontation with Paul . He asks Liz who is " today 's Nikita Khrushchev " and she suggests Simon Cowell , which Jack agrees with . Jack is also suspicious of Paul because he met his mother in Florida , which Jack calls " America 's Australia , " referring to Australia 's history as a penal colony . Kenneth also shows an NBC tour the spot where " Gracie Allen took Jack Paar 's virginity " and Jack reveals that he once slept with Kathy Hilton . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Natural Order " was watched by 6 million viewers , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It also earned a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 share amongst 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , meaning it was seen by 2 @.@ 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds and 7 % of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was the tenth highest @-@ rated show on NBC that week . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " The Ones " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 3 million American viewers . 
 Aly Semigran for Entertainment Weekly said the episode " was nowhere near as good " as other recent episodes as it was " too dependent on obvious physical comedy . " IGN writer Robert Canning took no strong position on the episode , saying it had " jokes enough to make it funny , but nothing over the top to make it classic , " rating the episode 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin was more clearly positive about the episode , calling it a " glorious return to form " and grading the episode an A- . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad opined he was not thrilled with Jenna 's plot , observing that it was " kinda ridiculous ( and unfunny , which is the worse sin ) . " Sassone , however , said that Liz and Tracy feuding and Jack and his mother battling " are plots that are always good for some laughs . " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that while " The Natural Order " was not a " classic episode " it was still " solid enough , in the end . " Sepinwall enjoyed Jack and his mother 's story , but commented that the Liz and Tracy rivalry was a " hit @-@ or @-@ miss . " TV Guide 's Bruce Fretts said this episode " is easily the show 's most grounded episode ever , even if it does feature a gibbon in a mariachi suit . The script [ ... ] dares to deal with issues of race and gender from a typically irreverent perspective . " Fretts noted that Elaine Stritch and Alec Baldwin " share a surprisingly tender scene as Colleen tells her son , ' You 're my good boy [ ... ] I just love you to death . ' " 
 = Codex Vaticanus = 
 The Codex Vaticanus ( The Vatican , <unk> . Vat . , <unk> gr . 1209 ; no . B or 03 Gregory @-@ Aland , δ 1 von Soden ) , is one of the oldest extant manuscripts of the Greek Bible ( Old and New Testament ) , one of the four great uncial codices . The Codex is named after its place of conservation in the Vatican Library , where it has been kept since at least the 15th century . It is written on 759 leaves of vellum in uncial letters and has been dated palaeographically to the 4th century . 
 The manuscript became known to Western scholars as a result of correspondence between Erasmus and the prefects of the Vatican Library . Portions of the codex were collated by several scholars , but numerous errors were made during this process . The Codex 's relationship to the Latin Vulgate was unclear and scholars were initially unaware of the Codex 's value . This changed in the 19th century when transcriptions of the full codex were completed . It was at that point that scholars realised the text differed significantly from the Textus Receptus . 
 Most current scholars consider the Codex Vaticanus to be one of the best Greek texts of the New Testament , with the Codex Sinaiticus as its only competitor . Until the discovery by Tischendorf of the Sinaiticus text , the Codex was unrivaled . It was extensively used by Westcott and Hort in their edition of The New Testament in the Original Greek in 1881 . The most widely sold editions of the Greek New Testament are largely based on the text of the Codex Vaticanus . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Codex Vaticanus originally contained a virtually complete copy of the Septuagint ( " LXX " ) , lacking only 1 @-@ 4 Maccabees and the Prayer of Manasseh . The original 20 leaves containing Genesis 1 : 1 – 46 : <unk> ( 31 leaves ) and Psalm 105 : 27 – 137 : 6b have been lost and were replaced by pages transcribed by a later hand in the 15th century . 2 Kings 2 : 5 – 7 , 10 @-@ 13 are also lost because of a tear to one of the pages . The order of the Old Testament books in the Codex is as follows : Genesis to 2 Chronicles as normal ; 1 Esdras ; 2 Esdras ( Ezra @-@ Nehemiah ) ; the Psalms ; Proverbs ; Ecclesiastes ; Song of Songs ; Job ; Wisdom ; Ecclesiasticus ; Esther ; Judith ; Tobit ; the minor prophets from Hosea to Malachi ; Isaiah ; Jeremiah ; Baruch ; Lamentations and the Epistle of Jeremiah ; Ezekiel and Daniel . This order differs from that followed in Codex Alexandrinus . 
 The extant New Testament of the Vaticanus contains the Gospels , Acts , the General Epistles , the Pauline Epistles , and the Epistle to the Hebrews ( up to Hebrews 9 : 14 , <unk> [ <unk> ) ; it is lacking 1 and 2 Timothy , Titus , Philemon , and Revelation . These missing leaves were supplemented by a 15th @-@ century minuscule hand ( folios 760 – 768 ) and are catalogued separately as the minuscule Codex 1957 . Possibly some apocryphal books from the New Testament were included at the end ( as in codices Sinaiticus and Alexandrinus ) , as it is also possible that Revelation was not included . 
 = = = Verses not in Vaticanus but in later manuscripts = = = 
 The text of the New Testament lacks several passages : 
 Matthew 12 : 47 ; 16 : 2b @-@ 3 ; 17 : 21 ; 18 : 11 ; 23 : 14 ; 
 Mark 7 : 16 ; 9 : 44 @.@ 46 ; 11 : 26 ; 15 : 28 ; 
 Mark 16 : 9 – 20 ; — The Book of Mark ends with verse 16 : 8 , consistent with the Alexandrian text @-@ type . 
 Luke 17 : 36 , 22 : 43 – 44 ; 
 John 5 : 4 , Pericope Adulterae ( John 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 ) ; 
 Acts 8 : 37 ; 15 : 34 , 24 : 7 ; 28 : 29 ; 
 Romans 16 : 24 . 
 1 Peter 5 : 3 . 
 Phrases not in Vaticanus but in later manuscripts include 
 Matthew 5 : 44 – <unk> τοὺς <unk> ὑμᾶς , <unk> <unk> τοῖς <unk> ὑμᾶς ( bless those who curse you , do good to those who hate you ) ; 
 Matthew 10 : <unk> – καὶ ὁ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> οὐκ <unk> μου <unk> ( and he who loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me ) as Codex Bezae ; 
 Matthew 15 : 6 – <unk> τὴν <unk> ( αὐτοῦ ) ( or ( his ) mother ) ; 
 Matthew 20 : 23 – καὶ τὸ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( and be baptised with the baptism that I am baptised with ) , as in codices Sinaiticus , D , L , Z , Θ , 085 , f1 , f13 , it , Syriac Sinaiticus ( syrs ) , syrc , copsa . 
 Mark 10 : 7 – καὶ <unk> πρὸς τὴν <unk> αὐτοῦ ( and be joined to his wife ) , as in codices Sinaiticus , Codex Athous Lavrensis , 892 , ℓ 48 , Sinaitic Palimpsest ( syrs ) , Gothic Codex <unk> . 
 Mark 10 : 19 – μη <unk> omitted ( as in codices K , W , Ψ , f1 , f13 , 28 , 700 , 1010 , 1079 , 1242 , 1546 , <unk> , ℓ 10 , ℓ 950 , ℓ 1642 , ℓ 1761 , syrs , arm , geo ) but added by a later corrector ( B2 ) . 
 Luke 9 : 55 – 56 – και ειπεν , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; ο <unk> υιος του <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> αλλα <unk> ( and He said : " You do not know what manner of spirit you are of ; for the Son of man came not to destroy men 's lives but to save them ) — omitted as in codices Sinaiticus , C , L , Θ , Ξ , 33 , 700 , 892 , 1241 , Old Syriac version ( syr ) , copbo ; 
 Luke 11 : 4 – αλλα <unk> ημας απο του <unk> ( but deliver us from evil ) omitted . Omission is supported by the manuscripts : <formula> 75 , Sinaiticus , L , f1 700 vg syrs copsa , bo , arm geo . 
 Luke 23 : 34 – " And Jesus said : Father forgive them , they know not what they do . " This omission is supported by the manuscripts <formula> 75 , <unk> , D * , W , Θ , <unk> , 1241 , a , d , syrs , copsa , copbo . 
 = = = Additions = = = 
 In Matt . 27 : 49 the Codex contains added text : ἄλλος δὲ λαβὼν λόγχην <unk> αὐτοῦ τὴν πλευράν , καὶ ἐξῆλθεν <unk> καὶ <unk> ( and another took a spear , piercing His side , and out came water and blood ) . This reading was derived from John 19 : 34 and occurs in other manuscripts of the Alexandrian text @-@ type ( א , C , L , Γ , 1010 , 1293 , pc , <unk> ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The manuscript is in quarto volume , arranged in quires of five sheets or ten leaves each , similar to the Codex <unk> or Codex <unk> ; but unlike the Codex Sinaiticus which has an arrangement of four or three sheets . The number of the quires is often found in the margin . Originally it must have been composed of 830 parchment leaves , but it appears that 71 leaves have been lost . Currently , the Old Testament consists of 617 sheets and the New Testament of 142 sheets . The parchment is fine and thin . The actual size of the pages is 27 cm by 27 cm ; although the original was bigger . The codex is written in three columns per page , with 40 – 44 lines per page , and 16 – 18 letters per line . In the poetical books of the Old Testament ( OT ) there are only two columns to a page . In Pentateuch , Joshua , Judges , Ruth , and 1 Kings 1 : 1 – 19 : 11 there are 44 lines in a column ; in 2 Chronicles 10 : 16 – 26 : 13 there are 40 lines in a column ; and in the New Testament always 42 . The manuscript is one of the very few New Testament manuscripts to be written with three columns per page . The other two Greek codices written in that way are Uncial 048 and Uncial 053 . Codex Vaticanus comprises a single quarto volume containing 759 thin and delicate vellum leaves . 
 The lettering in the Codex is small and neat , without ornamentation or capitals . The Greek is written continuously in small neat writing ; all the letters are equidistant from each other ; no word is separated from the other ; each line appears to be one long word . Punctuation is rare ( accents and breathings have been added by a later hand ) except for some blank spaces , diaeresis on initial <unk> and <unk> , abbreviations of the nomina sacra and markings of OT citations . The OT citations were marked by an inverted comma ( > ) , as was done in Alexandrinus . There are no enlarged initials ; no stops or accents ; no divisions into chapters or sections such as are found in later manuscripts . 
 The text of the Gospels is not divided according to the Ammonian Sections with a references to the Eusebian Canons , but divided into peculiar numbered sections : Matthew has 170 , Mark 61 , Luke 152 , and John 80 . This system is found only in two other manuscripts , in Codex Zacynthius and in codex 579 . There are two system divisions in the Acts and the Catholic Epistles that differ from the Euthalian Apparatus . In the Acts these sections are 36 ( the same system as Codex Sinaiticus , Codex Amiatinus , and Codex <unk> ) and according to the other system 69 sections . 2 Peter has no numeration , leading to the conclusion that the system of divisions dates prior to the time the Epistle came to be commonly regarded as canonical . The chapters in the Pauline epistles are numbered continuously as the Epistles were regarded as comprising one book . 
 = = = Text @-@ type = = = 
 In the Old Testament , the type of text varies , with a received text in Ezekiel and a rejected one in Book of Isaiah . In Judges , the text differs substantially from that of the majority of manuscripts , but agrees with the Old Latin and Sahidic version and Cyril of Alexandria . In Job , it has the additional 400 half @-@ verses from <unk> , which are not in the Old Latin and Sahidic versions . The text of the Old Testament was considered by critics , such as Hort and <unk> , to be substantially that which underlies Origen 's Hexapla edition , completed by him at Caesarea and issued as an independent work ( apart from the other versions with which Origen associated it ) by Eusebius and Pamphilus . 
 In the New Testament , the Greek text of the codex is a representative of the Alexandrian text @-@ type . Aland placed it in Category I. In the Gospels of Luke and John , it has been found to agree very closely with the text of Bodmer <formula> 75 , which has been dated to the beginning of the 3rd century and hence is at least 100 years older than the Codex Vaticanus itself . This is purported to demonstrate ( by recourse to a postulated earlier exemplar from which both P75 and B descend ) that the Codex Vaticanus accurately reproduces an earlier text from these two biblical books reinforces the reputation the codex held amongst Biblical scholars . It also strongly suggests that it may have been copied in Egypt . In the Pauline epistles there is a distinctly Western element . 
 = = = Notable readings = = = 
 Judges 18 : 30 it reads <unk> <unk> ( son of <unk> ) , Alexandrinus reads <unk> <unk> ( son of Mose ) ; 
 Ezra 10 : 22 ( 9 : 22 LXX ) it reads <unk> ( Alexandrinus – <unk> ) for <unk> ; 
 Matthew 5 : 22 — it lacks the word <unk> ( without cause ) , a reading supported by <formula> 67 , Sinaiticus , <unk> , manuscripts of Vulgate , and Ethiopian version ; 
 Matthew 17 : 23 — τη <unk> ( the third day ) for τη <unk> <unk> ( the third day ) , it is singular reading ; 
 Matthew 21 : 31 — ὁ <unk> ( the last ) for ὁ πρῶτος ( the first ) , ὁ <unk> ( the last ) , or ὁ <unk> ( the second ) ; ὁ <unk> is a singular reading ; 
 Matthew 23 : 38 — word <unk> ( desert ) is omitted , as in manuscripts Codex Regius , <unk> II , Syriac Sinaiticus , copsa , bo ; 
 Luke 4 : 17 — it has textual variant καὶ ἀνοίξας τὸ βιβλίον ( and opened the book ) together with the manuscripts A , L , W , Ξ , 33 , 892 , 1195 , 1241 , ℓ 547 , syrs , h , pal , copsa , bo , against variant καὶ ἀναπτύξας τὸ βιβλίον ( and unrolled the book ) supported by א , Dc , K , Δ , Θ , Π , Ψ , f1 , f13 , 28 , 565 , 700 , 1009 , 1010 and many other manuscripts . 
 Luke 6 : 2 — οὐκ <unk> ( not lawful ) for οὐκ <unk> <unk> ( not lawful to do ) ; the reading is supported only by <formula> 4 , ( Codex Bezae ) , Codex <unk> , 700 , lat , copsa , copbo , arm , geo ; 
 Luke 10 : 42 — <unk> δε <unk> εστιν η <unk> ( few things are <unk> , or only one ) for <unk> δε εστιν <unk> ( one thing is <unk> ) ; 
 John 12 : 28 — it contains the unique textual variant δοξασον μου το <unk> . This variant is not supported by any other manuscript . The majority of the manuscripts have in this place : δοξασον <unk> το <unk> ; some manuscripts have : δοξασον <unk> τον <unk> ( L , X , f1 , f13 , 33 , 1241 , pc , vg , <unk> mg , copbo ) . 
 John 16 : 27 — it has πατρος ( the Father ) instead of θεου ( God ) ; 
 Acts 27 : 16 — καυδα ( name of island ) , this reading is supported only by <formula> 74 , 1175 , Old @-@ Latin version , Vulgate , and Peshitta . 
 Romans 15 : 31 — <unk> for <unk> ; the reading is supported by D and <unk> . 
 Ephesians 2 : 1 — <unk> ] <unk> . 
 Hebrews 1 : 3 — it has singular readings <unk> τε τα παντα τω <unk> της <unk> αυτου ( revealed the universe by his word of power ) ; all of the rest manuscripts have <unk> τε τα παντα τω <unk> της <unk> αυτου ( upholding the universe by his word of power ) . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 The provenance and early history of the codex is uncertain ; Rome ( Hort ) , southern Italy , Alexandria ( Kenyon , Burkitt ) , and Caesarea ( T. C. Skeat ) have been suggested as the origin . Hort 's argument for Rome rests mainly on certain spellings of proper names , such as <unk> and <unk> , which show a Western or Latin influence . A second argument is that the chapter division of Acts , similar to that of Sinaiticus and Vaticanus , is not found in any other Greek manuscript , but is present in several manuscripts of the Latin Vulgate . Robinson counters the argument by suggesting that this system of chapter divisions was introduced into the Vulgate by Jerome himself , as a result of his studies at Caesarea . According to Hort , it was copied from a manuscript whose line length was 12 – 14 letters per line , because where the Codex Vaticanus 's scribe made large omissions , they were typically 12 – 14 letters long . 
 Kenyon suggested that the manuscript originated in Alexandria : " It is noteworthy that the section numeration of the Pauline Epistles in B shows that it was copied from a manuscript in which the Epistle to the Hebrews was placed between Galatians and Ephesians — an arrangement which elsewhere occurs only in the Sahidic version . " A connection with Egypt is also indicated , according to Kenyon , by the order of the Pauline epistles and by the fact that , as in the Codex Alexandrinus , the titles of some of the books contain letters of a distinctively Coptic character , particularly the Coptic mu , used not only in titles but frequently at the ends of lines where space has to be economized . According to Metzger , " the similarity of its text in significant portions of both Testaments with the Coptic versions and with Greek papyri , and the style of writing ( notably the Coptic forms used in some of the titles ) point rather to Egypt and Alexandria " . 
 It has been postulated that at one time the manuscript was in the possession of Cardinal Bessarion , because the minuscule supplement has a text similar to one of Bessarion 's manuscripts . T. C. Skeat believes that Bessarion 's mentor , the patriarchal notary in Constantinople John <unk> , had the book brought to Rome from Constantinople around the time of the fall of the Byzantine Empire . According to Paul Canart , the decorative initials added to the manuscript in the Middle Ages are reminiscent of Constantinopolitan decoration of the 10th century , but the poor execution gives the impression they were added in the 11th or 12th century , and likely not before the 12th century in light of the way they appear in connection with notes in a minuscule hand at the beginning of the book of Daniel . T. C. Skeat , a <unk> at the British Museum , first argued that Codex Vaticanus was among the 50 Bibles that the Emperor Constantine I ordered Eusebius of Caesarea to produce . The similarity of the text with the papyri and Coptic version ( including some letter formation ) , parallels with Athanasius ' canon of 367 suggest an Egyptian or Alexandrian origin . 
 The manuscript is dated to the first half of the 4th century and is likely slightly older than Codex Sinaiticus , which was also transcribed in the 4th century . One argument to support this , is that Sinaiticus already has the , at that time , very new Eusebian Canon tables , but Vaticanus does not . Another is the slightly more archaic style of Vaticanus , and the complete absence of ornamentation . 
 = = Scribes and correctors = = 
 According to Tischendorf the manuscript was written by three scribes ( A , B , C ) , two of whom appear to have written the Old Testament and one the entire New Testament . Tischendorf 's view was accepted by Frederic G. Kenyon , but contested by T. C. Skeat , who examined the codex more thoroughly . Skeat and other <unk> contested Tischendorf 's theory of a third ( C ) scribe , instead asserting that two scribes worked on the Old Testament ( A and B ) and one of them ( B ) wrote the New Testament . Scribe A wrote : 
 Genesis – 1 Kings ( pages 41 – 334 ) 
 Psalms – Tobias ( pages 625 – 944 ) 
 Scribe B wrote : 
 1 Kings – 2 <unk> ( pages 335 – 624 ) 
 Hosea – Daniel ( pages 945 – 1234 ) 
 New Testament . 
 Two correctors worked on the manuscript , one ( B2 ) contemporary with the scribes , the other ( B3 ) in about the 10th or 11th century , although the theory of a first corrector , B1 , proposed by Tischendorf was rejected by later scholars . According to Tischendorf , one of the scribes is identical to ( and may have been ) one of the scribes of the Codex Sinaiticus ( scribe D ) , but there is insufficient evidence for his assertion . Skeat agreed that the writing style is very similar to that of Sinaiticus , but there is not enough evidence to accept identity of scribes ; " the identity of the scribal tradition stands beyond dispute " . 
 The original writing was retraced by a later scribe ( usually dated to the 10th or 11th century ) , and the beauty of the original script was spoiled . Accents and breathing marks , as well as punctuation , have been added by a later hand . There are no enlarged initials , no divisions into chapters or sections such as are found in later manuscripts , but a different system of division peculiar to this manuscript . There are plenty of the <unk> faults , especially the exchange of ει for ι and αι for ε . The exchange of ει and ο for ω is less frequent . 
 The manuscript contains unusual small horizontally aligned double dots ( so called " distigmai , " formerly called " umlauts " ) in the margin of the columns and are scattered throughout the New Testament . There are 795 of these to be clearly found in the text , and perhaps another 40 that are undetermined . The date of these markings are disputed among scholars and are discussed in a link below . Two such distigmai can be seen in the left margin of the first column ( top image ) . Tischendorf reflected upon their meaning , but without any resolution . He pointed on several places where these distigmai were used : at the ending of the Gospel of Mark , 1 <unk> 2 : 14 ; 5 : 28 ; Heb 4 : 16 ; 8 : 1 . The meaning of these distigmai was recognized in 1995 by Philip Payne . Payne discovered the first <unk> while studying the section 1 Cor 14 @.@ 34 – 35 of the codex . He suggested that distigmai indicate lines where another textual variant was known to the person who wrote the umlauts . Therefore , the distigmai mark places of textual uncertainty . The same distigmai were observed in Codex <unk> , especially in the section containing 1 Cor 14 : 34 – 35 . The <unk> of two codices indicate a variant of the Western manuscripts , which placed 1 Cor 14 : 34 – 35 after 1 Cor 14 : 40 ( manuscripts : <unk> , <unk> , Boernerianus , 88 , <unk> , g , and some manuscripts of Vulgate ) . 
 On page 1512 , next to Hebrews 1 : 3 , the text contains an interesting marginal note , " Fool and knave , leave the old reading and do not change it ! " – " <unk> καὶ <unk> , <unk> τὸν <unk> , <unk> <unk> " which may suggest that unauthorised correcting was a recognized problem in <unk> . 
 = = In the Vatican Library = = 
 The manuscript is believed to have been housed in Caesarea in the 6th century , together with the Codex Sinaiticus , as they have the same unique divisions of chapters in the Acts . It came to Italy – probably from Constantinople – after the Council of Florence ( 1438 – 1445 ) . 
 [ under discussion ] 
 The manuscript has been housed in the Vatican Library ( founded by Pope Nicholas V in 1448 ) for as long as it has been known , appearing in the library 's earliest catalog of 1475 ( with shelf number 1209 ) , and in the 1481 catalog . In a catalog from 1481 it was described as a " Biblia in tribus <unk> ex <unk> in <unk> " ( three @-@ column vellum Bible ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the 16th century Western scholars became aware of the manuscript as a consequence of the correspondence between Erasmus and the prefects of the Vatican Library , successively Paulus Bombasius , and Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda . In 1521 , Bombasius was consulted by Erasmus as to whether the Codex Vaticanus contained the Comma Johanneum , and Bombasius supplied a transcript of 1 John 4 : 1 – 3 and 1 John 5 : 7 – 11 to show that it did not . Sepúlveda in 1533 cross @-@ checked all places where Erasmus 's New Testament ( the Textus Receptus ) differed from the Vulgate , and supplied Erasmus with 365 readings where the Codex Vaticanus supported the latter , although the list of these 365 readings has been lost . Consequently , the Codex Vaticanus acquired the reputation of being an old Greek manuscript that agreed with the Vulgate rather than with the Textus Receptus . Not until much later would scholars realise it conformed to a text that differed from both the Vulgate and the Textus Receptus – a text that could also be found in other known early Greek manuscripts , such as the Codex Regius ( L ) , housed in the French Royal Library ( now Bibliothèque nationale de France ) . 
 In 1669 a collation was made by Giulio <unk> , librarian of the Vatican , which was not published , and never used until Scholz in 1819 found a copy of it in the Royal Library at Paris . This collation was imperfect and revised in 1862 . Another collation was made in 1720 for Bentley by Mico , revised by <unk> , although not published until 1799 . Bentley was stirred by Mill 's claim of 30 @,@ 000 variants in the New Testament and he wanted to reconstruct the text of the New Testament in its early form . He felt that among the manuscripts of the New Testament , Codex Alexandrinus was " the oldest and best in the world " . Bentley understood the necessity to use manuscripts if he were to reconstruct an older form than that apparent in Codex Alexandrinus . He assumed , that by supplementing this manuscript with readings from other Greek manuscripts , and from the Latin Vulgate , he could triangulate back to the single recension which he presumed existed at the time of the First Council of Nicaea . Therefore , he required a collation from Vaticanus . Unfortunately , the text of the collation was irreconcilable with Codex Alexandrinus and he abandoned the project . 
 A further collation was made by Andrew Birch , who in 1798 in Copenhagen edited some textual variants of the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles , in 1800 for the Book of Revelation , in 1801 for the Gospels . They were incomplete and included together with the textual variants from the other manuscripts . Many of them were false . Andrew Birch reproached Mill and Wettstein , that they <unk> <unk> Vaticanus ( cite Vaticanus incorrectly ) , and gave as an example Luke 2 : 38 – <unk> [ Israel ] instead of <unk> [ Jerusalem ] . The reading <unk> could be found in the codex 130 , housed at the Vatican Library , under shelf number <unk> gr . 359 . 
 Before the 19th century , no scholar was allowed to study or edit the Codex Vaticanus , and scholars did not ascribe any value to it ; in fact it was suspected to have been interpolated by the Latin textual tradition . John Mill wrote in his Prolegomena ( 1707 ) : " in <unk> <unk> a Latino <unk> <unk> " ( written by a Latin scribe for the western world ) . He did not believe there was value to having a collation for the manuscript . Wettstein would have liked to know the readings of the codex , but not because he thought that they could have been of any help to him for difficult textual decisions . According to him , this codex had no authority whatsoever ( sed ut vel hoc <unk> , <unk> <unk> esse <unk> ) . In 1751 Wettstein produced the first list of the New Testament manuscripts , Codex Vaticanus received symbol B ( because of its age ) and took second position on this list ( Alexandrinus received A , Ephraemi – C , Bezae – D , etc . ) until the discovery of Codex Sinaiticus ( designated by <unk> ) . 
 Griesbach produced a list of nine manuscripts which were to be assigned to the Alexandrian text : C , L , K , 1 , 13 , 33 , 69 , 106 , and 118 . Codex Vaticanus was not in this list . In the second ( 1796 ) edition of his Greek NT , Griesbach added Codex Vaticanus as a witness to the Alexandrian text in Mark , Luke , and John . He still believed the first half of Matthew represented the Western text @-@ type . 
 = = = Editions of text of the codex = = = 
 In 1809 Napoleon brought the manuscript as a victory trophy to Paris , but in 1815 it was returned to the Vatican Library . During that time , in Paris , German scholar Johann Leonhard Hug ( 1765 – 1846 ) saw it . Hug examined it , together with other worthy treasures of the Vatican , but he did not perceive the need of a new and full collation . 
 Cardinal Angelo Mai prepared the first typographical facsimile edition between 1828 and 1838 , which did not appear until 1857 , three years after his death , and which was considered unsatisfactory . It was issued in 5 volumes ( 1 – 4 volumes for the Old Testament , 5 volume for the New Testament ) . All lacunae of the Codex were supplemented . Lacunae in the Acts and Pauline epistles were supplemented from the codex Vaticanus 1761 , the whole text of Revelation from Vaticanus <unk> , text of Mark 16 : 8 – 20 from Vaticanus <unk> 220 . Verses not included by codex as Matthew 12 : 47 ; Mark 15 : 28 ; Luke 22 : 43 – 44 ; 23 : 17 @.@ 34 ; John 5 : 3 @.@ 4 ; 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 ; 1 Peter 5 : 3 ; 1 John 5 : 7 were supplemented from popular Greek printed editions . The number of errors was extraordinarily high , and also no attention was paid to distinguish readings of the first hand versus correctors . There was no detailed examination of the manuscript 's characteristics . As a consequence , this edition was deemed inadequate for critical purposes . An improved edition was published in 1859 , which became the source of Bultmann 's 1860 NT . 
 In 1843 Tischendorf was permitted to make a facsimile of a few verses , in 1844 Eduard de <unk> saw it , and in 1845 S. P. Tregelles was allowed to observe several points which <unk> had overlooked . He often saw the Codex , but " it was under such restrictions that it was impossible to do more than examine particular readings . " 
 " They would not let me open it without searching my pockets , and depriving me of pen , ink , and paper ; and at the same time two <unk> kept me in constant conversation in Latin , and if I looked at a passage too long , they would snatch the book out of my hand " . 
 Tregelles left Rome after five months without accomplishing his object . During a large part of the 19th century , the authorities of the Vatican Library obstructed scholars who wished to study the codex in detail . Henry Alford in 1849 wrote : “ It has never been published in facsimile ( ! ) nor even thoroughly collated ( ! ! ) . ” Scrivener in 1861 commented : 
 " Codex Vaticanus 1209 is probably the oldest large vellum manuscript in existence , and is the glory of the great Vatican Library in Rome . To these legitimate sources of deep interest must be added the almost romantic curiosity which has been excited by the jealous watchfulness of its official guardians , with whom an honest zeal for its safe preservation seems to have now degenerated into a species of capricious <unk> , and who have shewn a strange incapacity for making themselves the proper use of a treasure they scarcely permit others more than to gaze upon " . It ( ... ) " is so jealously guarded by the Papal authorities that ordinary visitors see nothing of it but the red Morocco binding " . 
 Thomas Law Montefiore ( 1862 ) : 
 " The history of the Codex Vaticanus B , No. 1209 , is the history in miniature of <unk> jealousy and exclusiveness . ” 
 Burgon was permitted to examine the codex for an hour and a half in 1860 , consulting 16 different passages . Burgon was a defender of the Traditional Text and for him Codex Vaticanus , as well as codices Sinaiticus and Codex Bezae , were the most corrupt documents extant . He felt that each of these three codices " clearly exhibits a fabricated text – is the result of arbitrary and reckless recension . " The two most widely respected of these three codices , א and B , he likens to the " two false witnesses " of Matthew 26 : 60 . 
 In 1861 , Henry Alford collated and verified doubtful passages ( in several imperfect <unk> ) , which he published in facsimile editions complete with errors . Until he began his work he met unexpected hindrances . He received a special order from Cardinal Antonelli " per <unk> " , to verify passages , but this license was interpreted by the librarian to mean that he was to see the book , but not to use it . In 1862 , secretary of Alford , Mr. Cure , continued Alford 's work . For some reason which does not clearly appear , the authorities of the Vatican Library put continual obstacles in the way of all who wished to study it in detail . In 1867 Tischendorf published the text of the New Testament of the codex on the basis of Mai 's edition . It was the " most perfect edition of the manuscript which had yet appeared " . 
 In 1868 – 1881 C. <unk> , Giuseppe Cozza @-@ Luzi , and G. Sergio published an edition of the entire codex in 6 volumes ( New Testament in volume V ; Prolegomena in volume VI ) . A typographical facsimile appeared between 1868 and 1872 . In 1889 – 1890 a photographic facsimile of the entire manuscript was made and published by Cozza @-@ Luzi , in three volumes . Another facsimile of the New Testament text was published in 1904 – 1907 in Milan . As a result , the Codex became widely available . 
 In 1999 , the Istituto <unk> e Zecca <unk> , exact scale facsimile of Codex Vaticanus . The facsimile reproduces the very form of the pages of the original manuscript , complete with the distinctive individual shape of each page , including holes in the vellum . It has an additional Prolegomena volume with gold and silver impressions of 74 pages . 
 As of 2015 , a digitised copy of the codex is available online from the Vatican Library . 
 = = Importance = = 
 Codex Vaticanus is one of the most important manuscripts for the text of the Septuagint and Greek New Testament . It is a leading example of the Alexandrian text @-@ type . It was used by Westcott and Hort in their edition , The New Testament in the Original Greek ( 1881 ) , and it was the basis for their text . All critical editions of the New Testament published after Westcott and Hort were closer in the Gospels to the Codex Vaticanus text than to the Sinaiticus , with only the exception of Hermann von Soden 's editions which are closer to Sinaiticus . All editions of Nestle @-@ Aland remain close in textual character to the text of Westcott @-@ Hort , which means Vaticanus was the basis for the translation . 
 According to the commonly accepted opinion of the textual critics , it is the most important witness of the text of the Gospels , in the Acts and Catholic epistles , with a stature equal to Codex Sinaiticus , although in the Pauline epistles it includes Western readings and the value of the text is somewhat less than the Codex Sinaiticus . Unfortunately the manuscript is not complete . Aland notes : " B is by far the most significant of the uncials " . 
 = = = Facsimile editions of the codex = = = 
 Tischendorf , Constantin von ( 1867 ) . Novum Testamentum <unk> . <unk> : Giesecke & Devrient . 
 <unk> , Carlo & Giuseppe Cozza @-@ Luzi ( 1868 ) . Bibliorum <unk> Graecus Codex Vaticanus . Roma . 
 Bibliorum <unk> Graecorum Codex Vaticanus 1209 . Milan . 1904 – 1907 . 
 Bibliorum <unk> Graecorum Codex Vaticanus B. Roma : Istituto <unk> e Zecca dello Stato . 1999 . 
 = = = Textual character of the codex = = = 
 <unk> , Herman C. ( 1914 ) . Codex B and Its Allies , a Study and an Indictment . London , 1 – 2 volumes . 
 Kubo , S. ( 1965 ) . <unk> and the Codex Vaticanus . S & D XXVII . Salt Lake City . 
 Martini , C. M. ( 1966 ) . Il <unk> della <unk> del <unk> B alla luce del <unk> Bodmer XIV ( P75 ) . Analecta <unk> . Roma . 
 <unk> , James W. ( 2005 ) . The Greek of Codex Vaticanus in the Second Gospel and Marcan Greek . Novum Testamentum 47 , 3 , pp. 209 – 249 . 
 = = = " Umlauts " = = = 
 Miller , J. Edward ( 2003 ) . Some Observations on the Text @-@ Critical Function of the Umlauts in Vaticanus , with Special Attention to 1 . Corinthians 14 @.@ 34 – 35 . <unk> 26 , pp. 217 – 236 [ Miller disagrees with Payne on several points . He notes and uses this website . ] 
 Payne , Philip B. and Paul Canart ( 2000 ) . The Originality of Text @-@ Critical Symbols in Codex Vaticanus ( PDF ) . Novum Testamentum Vol . 42 , <unk> . 2 , pp. 105 – 113 . 
 Payne , Philip B. and Paul Canart ( 2004 ) . The Text @-@ Critical Function of the Umlauts in Vaticanus , with Special Attention to 1 Corinthians 14 @.@ 34 – 35 : A Response to J. Edward Miller . <unk> 27 , pp. 105 – 112 [ The combination of a bar plus umlaut has a special meaning ] . 
 <unk> , Christian – B. ( 2007 ) . Codex Vaticanus B : Les points <unk> des <unk> de Marc ( PDF ) . Journal of Theological Studies vol . 58 ( 2007 ) , pp. 440 – 466 . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Streeter , Burnett Hillman ( 1924 ) . The Four Gospels . A Study of Origins the Manuscripts Tradition , Sources , Authorship & Dates . Oxford : MacMillan and Co Limited . 
 Metzger , Bruce M. ( 1991 ) . Manuscripts of the Greek Bible : An Introduction to Greek Palaeography . New York – Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
 Sagi , Janko ( 1872 ) . Problema <unk> <unk> B. <unk> Thomas . 
 For more bibliographies see : J. K. Elliott , A Bibliography of Greek New Testament Manuscripts ( Cambridge University Press : 1989 ) , pp. 34 – 36 . 
 = Khmer language = 
 Khmer / <unk> / or Cambodian ( natively <unk> ្ <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] , or more formally <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is the language of the Khmer people and the official language of Cambodia . With approximately 16 million speakers , it is the second most widely spoken Austroasiatic language ( after Vietnamese ) . Khmer has been influenced considerably by Sanskrit and Pali , especially in the royal and religious registers , through Hinduism and Buddhism . The more colloquial registers have influenced , and have been influenced by , Thai , Lao , Vietnamese , and Cham , all of which , due to geographical proximity and long @-@ term cultural contact , form a sprachbund in peninsular Southeast Asia . It is also the earliest recorded and earliest written language of the Mon – Khmer family , predating Mon and by a significant margin Vietnamese , due to Old Khmer being the language of the historical empires of Chenla , Angkor and , presumably , their earlier predecessor state , <unk> . 
 The vast majority of Khmer speakers speak Central Khmer , the dialect of the central plain where the Khmer are most heavily concentrated . Within Cambodia , regional accents exist in remote areas but these are regarded varieties of Central Khmer . Two exceptions are the speech of the capital , Phnom Penh , and that of the Khmer Khe in Stung Treng province , both of which differ sufficiently enough from Central Khmer to be considered separate dialects of Khmer . Outside of Cambodia , three distinct dialects are spoken by ethnic Khmers native to areas that were historically part of the Khmer Empire . The Northern Khmer dialect is spoken by over a million Khmers in the southern regions of Northeast Thailand and is treated by some linguists as a separate language . Khmer Krom , or Southern Khmer , is the first language of the Khmer of Vietnam while the Khmer living in the remote Cardamom mountains speak a very conservative dialect that still displays features of the Middle Khmer language . 
 Khmer is primarily an analytic , isolating language . There are no inflections , conjugations or case endings . Instead , particles and auxiliary words are used to indicate grammatical relationships . General word order is subject – verb – object , and modifiers follow the word they modify . Classifiers appear after numbers when used to count nouns , though not always so consistently as in languages like Chinese . In spoken Khmer , topic @-@ comment structure is common and the perceived social relation between participants determines which sets of vocabulary , such as pronouns and honorifics , are proper . 
