 = = Legacy = = 
 The uniform of the Calgary Tigers served as the inspiration for the " vintage " uniform of the Calgary Flames which was worn in the Heritage Classic game in February 2011 . While the Calgary Flames do not trace their ancestry back to the Tigers ( the Atlanta Flames club was purchased by Calgary businessmen in the 1980s ) , the organization had wanted to recognize the first professional hockey club in Calgary history for this event and selected the colourful uniforms of the Tigers . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Sandor , Steven ( 2005 ) , The Battle of Alberta : A Century of Hockey 's Greatest Rivalry , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 01 @-@ 8 
 Zeman , Gary ( 1986 ) , Alberta on Ice , ISBN <unk> 
 = Go , Cubs , Go = 
 " Go Cubs Go " , " Go , Cubs , Go " or " Go , Cubs , Go ! " is a song written by Steve Goodman in 1984 . At various times the Goodman version of the song has been the official Chicago Cubs team song and the official Cubs victory song . The Goodman version of the song is now referred to as the official Chicago Cubs victory song . The Goodman version has been included in both a 1994 Steve Goodman anthology album and a 2008 Cubs songs and sounds album . An alternate 2008 version by Manic Sewing Circle has also been released . 
 = = History = = 
 Goodman was a lifelong Cubs fan . The song was written by Goodman at the request of WGN / 720 , which was the Cubs ' radio broadcast partner . Goodman had in 1981 recorded " A Dying Cub Fan 's Last Request " , a song about the historic failures of the Cubs franchise , but had been banned from playing it at Wrigley Field . That song described the team as " doormat of the National League " and referred to Wrigley Field as an " ivy @-@ covered burial ground . " 
 At the time that WGN Program Director Dan Fabian requested the new song , " It ’ s a Beautiful Day for a Ball Game " by The Harry Simeone <unk> was the theme song . He had been motivated by Cubs manager Dallas Green 's effort to change the team spirit . Goodman happened to be in town for a WGN radio talk show and was receptive to the idea of writing the team a new song . 
 " Go , Cubs , Go " first became popular during 1984 when the Cubs won the 1984 National League East Division Championship and subsequently lost in the 1984 National League Championship Series . That season ( and for several afterwards ) it was the official team song . It was first aired on WGN on Opening Day and played every gameday for the rest of the season . During that season , Goodman lost his sixteen @-@ year battle with leukemia four days before the Cubs clinched the division title . In the next three years , 60 @,@ 000 copies of the song were sold with proceeds going to charity . Some 1984 Cubs players can be heard performing the refrain . 
 In 1987 , the song gave way to The Beach Boys ' " Here Come the Cubs " . Later team songs included songs such as Kool & the Gang 's " Celebration " and KC and the Sunshine Band 's " Get Down Tonight " . The song was eventually included on Goodman 's album No Big Surprise : Anthology , which was released on September 15 , 1994 . 
 = = Modern resurgence = = 
 The song has had a resurgence in tandem with the success of the 2007 and 2008 Chicago Cubs , who won consecutive National League Central Division regular season championships , and the May 2007 release of the biography of Steve Goodman , Steve Goodman : Facing the Music ( ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 732 @-@ 7 ) . In recent years , broadcasts on WGN @-@ TV and CSN Chicago have begun delaying postgame commentary to enables viewers to hear Goodman 's song and to watch fans at Wrigley listening and singing along . Cubs management decided to incorporate the song into the stadium experience following the team 's annual winter conference ( not to be confused with baseball 's winter meetings ) in which attendees dropped everything they were doing to sing along . 
 More recently , in the 2012 season , Chicago band The Fold used the lyric " Go Cubs Go " in their winning track for WGN Radio 's 2012 Season , " Let 's Go <unk> " . 
 In the first week of October 2007 , it was the most popular folk music digital download on iTunes . With the Cubs in playoff contention for the first time in three years , the Cubs ' victory tune , Go Cubs Go ! became more popular among the fans . Due to the song 's growing popularity , after wins at home , Cubs TV broadcasters Len Kasper and Bob Brenly would have their microphones shut off , while the camera pans around the stadium to view the jubilant fans singing Go Cubs Go ! playing in the background . During that season , it was known as the unofficial Chicago Cubs victory song and it was played at Wrigley Field after each Cubs victory . There were 44 such victories during the 2007 regular season . On October 5 , 2007 , Illinois Lieutenant Governor Pat Quinn declared the day " Steve Goodman Day " throughout the state . 
 On August 1 , 2008 , WGN Radio and Vibes Media released a ringtone version of the song for purchase by text message for a cost of US $ 2 @.@ 99 . At that time it was described as the official Cubs victory song . Also in 2008 , the song was included on the album Take Me Out To A Cubs Game which was subtitled " Music For The Cubs Fan " . The album is a 17 @-@ song album with a total run time of 55 minutes and 35 seconds that includes the September 21 , 1997 Harry Caray performance of " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " , which was his last . The album was produced in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Cubs 1908 World Series victory and contains sounds and songs of the Cubs and Wrigley Field . The album is an officially licensed Major League Baseball music CD . Neither of Goodman 's other notable songs about the Cubs ( " A Dying Cub Fan 's Last Request " or " When the Cubs Go Marching In " ) was included on the album . 
 Also in 2008 , the song was released by Manic Sewing Circle . It was performed for the first time live on WGN @-@ TV at the <unk> on Sheffield , located directly across from Wrigley Field on opening day 2008 . Their cover version of the song was released with proceeds going to official charities of the Chicago Cubs and WGN @-@ Radio : Cubs Care and <unk> Kids Fund . The Manic Sewing Circle version of the song is also available on iTunes by digital download , and they publicized this version throughout Chicago . Although the original Goodman version of the song is 2 : 51 , the new Manic Sewing Circle version is only 2 : 23 long . 
 In September 2008 , prompted by the Cubs ' 2008 season and a piece by Mike Leonard on the NBC Today Show about Steve Goodman , Red Pajamas Records issued a 4 @-@ cut EP titled The Baseball Singles with Goodman 's performances of " Go Cubs Go " , " A Dying Cub Fan 's Last Request " , " When The Cubs Go Marching In " , and " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " . 
 Several of the Cubs ' minor league affiliates also use the song , including the Tennessee Smokies . The Daytona Cubs also used the song before changing affiliations . 
 = = Thematic issues = = 
 The song is perceived as an upbeat one that leaves listeners with a happy feeling . It is described as having catchy riffs and exuberant vocals that characterized the essence of Cubs fandom while , noting in the lyrics , " You can catch it all on WGN . " The new Manic Sewing Circle cover is a ska @-@ punk version instead of the original folk music . 
 = Typhoon Tip = 
 Typhoon Tip , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Warling , was the largest and most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded . The nineteenth storm and twelfth typhoon of the 1979 Pacific typhoon season , Tip developed out of a disturbance from the monsoon trough on October 4 near Pohnpei . Initially , a tropical storm to the northwest hindered the development and motion of Tip , though after it tracked farther north Tip was able to intensify . After passing Guam , Tip rapidly intensified and reached peak winds of 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) and a worldwide record @-@ low sea @-@ level pressure of 870 mbar ( 870 @.@ 0 hPa ; 25 @.@ 69 inHg ) on October 12 . At its peak strength , it was also the largest tropical cyclone on record with a wind diameter of 2 @,@ 220 km ( 1 @,@ 380 mi ) . Tip slowly weakened as it continued west @-@ northwestward and later turned to the northeast in response to an approaching trough . The typhoon made landfall in southern Japan on October 19 , and became an extratropical cyclone shortly thereafter . 
 U.S. Air Force aircraft flew 60 weather reconnaissance missions into the typhoon , making Tip one of the most closely observed tropical cyclones . Rainfall from Tip indirectly led to a fire that killed 13 Marines and injured 68 at Combined Arms Training Center , Camp Fuji in the Shizuoka Prefecture of Japan . Elsewhere in the country , the typhoon caused widespread flooding and 42 deaths ; offshore shipwrecks left 44 people killed or missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Three circulations developed within the monsoon trough that extended from the Philippines to the Marshall Islands in October 1979 . A disturbance to the southwest of Guam developed into Tropical Storm Roger on October 3 , and later on the same day the tropical disturbance which would later become Typhoon Tip formed south of Pohnpei . Strong flow from across the equator was drawn into the Roger 's wind circulation , initially preventing significant development of the precursor disturbance to Tip . Despite the unfavorable air pattern , the disturbance gradually organized as it moved westward . Due to the large @-@ scale circulation pattern into Tropical Storm Roger , it moved erratically and slowly executed a cyclonic loop to the southeast of Chuuk . A reconnaissance aircraft flight into the system late on October 4 confirmed the existence of a closed low @-@ level circulation , and early on October 5 the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued its first warning on Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Three . 
 While executing a loop near Chuuk , the tropical depression intensified into Tropical Storm Tip , though the storm failed to organize significantly due to the influence of Tropical Storm Roger . Reconnaissance aircraft provided the track of the surface circulation , since satellite imagery estimated the center was located about 60 km ( 37 mi ) from its true position . After drifting erratically for several days , Tip began a steady northwest motion on October 8 . By that time , Tropical Storm Roger had become an extratropical cyclone , resulting in the southerly flow to be entrained into Tip . An area of a tropical upper tropospheric trough moved to the north of Guam at the time , providing an excellent outflow channel north of Tip . Initially , the storm was predicted to continue northwestward and make landfall on Guam , though it turned to the west early on October 9 , passing about 45 km ( 28 mi ) south of the island . Later that day , Tip intensified to attain typhoon status . 
 Owing to very favorable conditions for development , Typhoon Tip rapidly intensified over the open waters of the western Pacific Ocean . Late on October 10 , the typhoon attained wind speeds equal to Category 4 strength on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , and it became a super typhoon the next day . The central pressure dropped by 92 mbar ( 92 @.@ 0 hPa ; 2 @.@ 72 inHg ) from October 9 to 11 , during which the circulation pattern of Typhoon Tip expanded to a record diameter of 2 @,@ 220 km ( 1 @,@ 380 mi ) . The typhoon continued to intensify further , and early on October 12 reconnaissance aircraft recorded a worldwide record @-@ low pressure of 870 mbar ( 870 @.@ 0 hPa ; 25 @.@ 69 inHg ) with winds of 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) , when Tip was located about 840 km ( 520 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Guam . In its best track , the Japan Meteorological Agency listed Tip as peaking with 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . At the time of its peak strength , its eye was 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) wide . Tip crossed the 135th meridian east on the afternoon of October 13 , prompting the Philippine Weather Bureau to issue warnings on Typhoon Tip , assigning it the local name Warling . 
 After peaking intensity , Tip weakened to 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) and remained at that intensity for several days as it continued west @-@ northwestward . For five days after its peak strength , the average radius of winds stronger than 55 km / h ( 34 mph ) extended over 1 @,@ 100 km ( 684 mi ) . On October 17 , Tip began to weaken steadily and decrease in size , recurving northeastward under the influence of a mid @-@ level trough the next day . After passing about 65 km ( 40 mi ) east of Okinawa , the typhoon accelerated to 75 km / h ( 47 mph ) . Tip made landfall on the Japanese island of Honshū with winds of about 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) on October 19 . It continued rapidly northeastward through the country and became an extratropical cyclone over northern Honshū a few hours after moving ashore . The extratropical remnant of Tip proceeded northeastward and gradually weakened , crossing the International Date Line on October 22 . It was last observed near the Aleutian Islands of Alaska . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The typhoon produced heavy rainfall early in its lifetime while passing near Guam , including a total of 23 @.@ 1 cm ( 9 @.@ 09 in ) at Andersen Air Force Base . The outer rainbands of the large circulation of Tip produced moderate rainfall in the mountainous regions of the Philippine island of Luzon . 
 Heavy rainfall from the typhoon breached a flood @-@ retaining wall at Camp Fuji , a training facility for the United States Marine Corps near Yokosuka . Marines inside the camp weathered the storm inside huts situated at the base of a hill which housed a fuel farm . The breach led to hoses being dislodged from two rubber storage bladders , releasing large quantities of fuel . The fuel flowed down the hill and was ignited by a heater used to warm one of the huts . The resultant fire killed 13 Marines , injured 68 , and caused moderate damage to the facility . The facility 's barracks were destroyed , along with fifteen huts and several other structures . The barracks were rebuilt , and a memorial was established for those who lost their lives in the fire . 
 During recurvature , Typhoon Tip passed about 65 km ( 40 mi ) east of Okinawa . Sustained winds reached 72 km / h ( 44 mph ) , with gusts to 112 km / h ( 69 mph ) . Sustained wind velocities in Japan are not known , though they were estimated at minimal typhoon strength . The passage of the typhoon through the region resulted in millions of dollars in damage to the agricultural and fishing industries of the country . Eight ships were grounded or sunk by Tip , leaving 44 fishermen dead or unaccounted for . A Chinese freighter broke in half as a result of the typhoon , though its crew of 46 were rescued . The rainfall led to over 600 mudslides throughout the mountainous regions of Japan and flooded more than 22 @,@ 000 homes ; 42 people died throughout the country , with another 71 missing and 283 injured . River embankments broke in 70 places , destroying 27 bridges , while about 105 dikes were destroyed . Following the storm , at least 11 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Tip destroyed apple , rice , peach and other crops . Five ships sank in heavy seas off the coast and 50 @-@ story buildings swayed in the capital , Tokyo . Transportation in the country was disrupted ; 200 trains and 160 domestic flights were canceled . Tip was described as the most severe storm to strike Japan in 13 years . 
 = = Records and meteorological statistics = = 
 Typhoon Tip was the largest tropical cyclone on record , with a diameter of 1 @,@ 380 mi ( 2 @,@ 220 km ) — almost double the previous record of 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 130 km ) set by Typhoon Marge in August 1951 . At its largest , Tip was nearly half the size of the contiguous United States . The temperature inside the eye of Typhoon Tip at peak intensity was 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) and described as exceptionally high . With 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , Typhoon Tip is the strongest cyclone in the complete tropical cyclone listing by the Japan Meteorological Agency . 
 The typhoon was also the most intense tropical cyclone on record , with a pressure of 870 mbar ( 25 @.@ 69 inHg ) , 6 mbar ( 0 @.@ 18 inHg ) lower than the previous record set by Super Typhoon June in 1975 . The records set by Tip still technically stand , though with the end of routine reconnaissance aircraft flights in the western Pacific Ocean in August 1987 , modern researchers have questioned whether Tip indeed remains the strongest . After a detailed study , three researchers determined that two typhoons , Angela in 1995 and Gay in 1992 , registered higher Dvorak numbers than Tip , and concluded that one or both of the two may have therefore been more intense . Other recent storms may have also been deeper than Tip at its peak ; for instance , satellite @-@ derived intensity estimates for Typhoon Haiyan of 2013 indicated that its core pressure may have been as low as 858 mbar ( 25 @.@ 34 inHg ) . Due to the dearth of direct observations into these cyclones , conclusive data are lacking . Also , the peak intensity of Hurricane Patricia in 2015 was estimated to be a pressure of 872 mbar ( 25 @.@ 75 inHg ) and winds of 215 mph ( 345 km / h ) , officially making it the second most intense tropical cyclone in world history , and the strongest by wind speed . However , in the NHC 's report on Patricia , it was noted that Patricia may have , in fact , reached a lower pressure than Tip for a brief period of time . If confirmed , this would make Patricia the most intense tropical cyclone on record . 
 Despite the typhoon 's intensity and damage , the name Tip was not retired and was reused in 1983 , 1986 , and 1989 . 
 = Irving Kane Pond = 
 Irving Kane Pond ( May 1 , 1857 – September 29 , 1939 ) was an American architect , college athlete , and author . Born in Ann Arbor , Michigan , Pond attended the University of Michigan and received a degree in civil engineering in 1879 . He was a member of the first University of Michigan football team and scored the first touchdown in the school 's history in May 1879 . 
 After graduating from Michigan , Pond moved to Chicago where he worked as an architect from 1879 to 1939 . He began his architectural career as a draftsman in the offices of William LeBaron Jenney and worked as the head draftsman in the office of Solon Spencer Beman during the construction of the planned Pullman community . In 1886 , Pond formed the Chicago architectural firm Pond and Pond in partnership with his brother Allen Bartlitt Pond . The Pond brothers worked together for more than 40 years , and their buildings are considered to be among the best examples of Arts and Crafts architecture in Chicago . The Ponds gained acclaim as the architects of Jane Addams ' Hull House , and three of their buildings have been declared National Historic Landmarks — the Hull House dining hall , the Lorado Taft Midway Studios , and the Frank R. Lillie House . Pond became a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects in 1900 and served as president of the American Institute of Architects from 1910 to 1911 . 
 Pond was also a leader in the Chicago arts community in the late 19th and early 20th century . He was one of the founders of the Eagle 's Nest Art Colony and a member of the Chicago Literary Club from 1888 to 1939 . Pond was also a published author of fiction , poetry , and essays on art and architecture . He was also a frequent contributor to architectural journals and wrote for The Dial and Gustav Stickley 's The Craftsman . In 1918 , he published the book The Meaning of Architecture summarizing his views on the role of architecture in the broader spectrum of the arts . 
 = = Early years and education = = 
 Pond was born in Ann Arbor , Michigan in 1857 . He was the son of Elihu Pond and Mary Barlow ( Allen ) Pond . His father was a member of the Michigan State Senate , warden of the Michigan state prison for two years , the first president of the Michigan Press Association and the editor and publisher of the weekly newspaper , the Argus of Ann Arbor . Growing up in Ann Arbor , Pond lived in a house on the current site of the Michigan Union , a building he later designed . His next door neighbor as a child was the noted legal scholar , Thomas M. Cooley . Cooley encouraged the young Pond , who aspired to be an artist , by presenting him with his first art book and by commissioning Pond to draw a set of cartoons of the Cooley family . Pond attended the public schools in Ann Arbor before enrolling at the University of Michigan . 
 Pond was an engineering student at the University of Michigan from 1875 to 1879 and took architecture classes taught by Chicago architect William LeBaron Jenney . Six years later , Jenney gained fame for designing Chicago 's metal @-@ framed Home Insurance Building . In 1934 , Pond wrote an article challenging the popular assertion that the Home Insurance Building was the first steel @-@ framed skyscraper . 
 While attending the University of Michigan , Pond was a member of the first Michigan Wolverines football team . On May 30 , 1879 , the team played its first intercollegiate football game against Racine College at White Stocking Park in Chicago . The Chicago Tribune called it " the first rugby @-@ football game to be played west of the Alleghenies . " Pond scored the first touchdown in University of Michigan history in the match . He scored the touchdown midway through " the first ' inning ' . " According to Will Perry 's history of Michigan football , the crowd responded to Pond 's plays with cheers of " Pond Forever . " Pond graduated from Michigan in 1879 with a degree in civil engineering . 
 = = Architect = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1879 , Pond moved to Chicago to pursue a career as an architect . He worked as a draftsman in the offices of his former teacher , William LeBaron Jenney , and worked as the head draftsman in the office of Solon Spencer Beman during the construction of the planned Pullman community . While working with Beman , Pond was an ardent supporter of the Pullman planned community , he later acknowledged the resentment of Pullman residents that the town was anachronistic and represented some form of medieval barony . 
 Some of Pond 's earliest works as an independent architect were for clients in his home town of Ann Arbor and nearby Detroit . As early as 1882 , he designed " a modest but commodious home of stone and brick " on South State Street for Dr. Victor C. Vaughan . Pond later pointed to the designs of the old mantels in the Vaughan house which " foreshadowed his future works . " He also designed Ann Arbor 's Ladies Library Association Building ( 1885 ) and the West Physics Building for the University of Michigan , built in 1887 and destroyed by fire in 1967 . In 1887 , he renovated the Detroit Opera House , increasing the seating capacity to 2 @,@ 100 and relocating the auditorium to the main floor . 
 In 1886 , Pond and his brother Allen Bartlitt Pond ( 1858 – 1929 ) formed their own architectural firm in Chicago under the name Pond and Pond . The brothers continued to operate the firm for more than 40 years , and their buildings are considered to be among the best examples of Arts and Crafts architecture in Chicago . 
 = = = Hull House and settlement house movement = = = 
 The Pond brothers gained their greatest acclaim as the architects for Jane Addams 's Hull House . Their father 's work as warden of the state prison had sparked an interest in social reform and the settlement house movement . Allen Bartlitt Pond was the assistant superintendent of the Armour Mission , an educational and healthcare center , when Jane Addams came to Chicago in January 1889 looking for a building in which to open a new settlement house . The two became friends and were riding in a carriage when Addams saw an old two @-@ story brick house on Halsted Street . Addams took a lease on the house , which she named Hull House after its original owner , and hired the Ponds to put the old house into shape . 
 Between 1890 and 1907 , the Ponds were the architects for the Hull House as the project expanded rapidly . The first building they designed for Hull House was the Butler Art Gallery . Built in 1891 , the Butler Gallery was situated on the same lot as Hull House . It consisted of a reading room , an exhibition hall that was " the last word in design and lighting for those days , " and a studio above . Numerous other building projects followed , including the original coffee house and gymnasium in 1893 , the Children 's Building in 1895 , remodels and additions to the original building in 1895 and 1899 , the Jane Club in 1898 , a new Coffee House and Hull House Theater in 1899 , the Hull House Apartments and Men 's Club in 1901 and 1902 , the Woman 's Club ( Bowen Hall ) in 1904 , the Boys ' Club in 1906 and the Mary Crane Nursery in 1907 . The Pond brothers were affectionately known by residents of the Hull House complex as Allen the " deep Pond " and Irving the " wide pond . " 
 One of Addams ' biographers wrote that the " Pond brothers did it all , harmonized everything , " and described the scene when Irving Pond attended Addams ' memorial service in 1935 : 
 " Irving K. , at Jane Addams memorial services in the Hull House Court , when Doctor Gilkey said , ' if you seek her monument look around you , ' looked round also with tears in his eyes but pride in his heart ; the visible memorial to Jane Addams was also a visible memorial to the Ponds . " 
 The only surviving building from the Ponds ' Hull House complex is the 1905 dining hall , a simple Craftsman style building that was designated as a National Historic Landmark in the 1960s . 
 The Ponds also designed club houses and settlement houses for other social reform organizations , including the Chicago Commons settlement house building ( 1901 ) , the Northwestern University Settlement House ( 1901 ) , and the City Club of Chicago building ( 1910 ) . The City Club building , noted for its " gently curving limestone arch that ties together the windows of the second floor , " is today operated as the John Marshall Law School . When the City Club building opened in 1910 , it was considered a symbol of the reform movement : 
 " The new building embodied the soaring expectations of the reform movement , as well as providing the material comforts of a middle @-@ class social club . Its two @-@ story dining @-@ lecture hall , complete with balcony and private eating chambers , accommodated over two hundred for the weekly luncheon talks on social and political issues of the day . ... Architect and club member Irving K. Pond declared that ' every line of the building illustrated some phase of the uplift movement . ' " 
 = = = Eagle 's Nest and related activities = = = 
 Pond was also a leading member of the Chicago arts community in the late 19th and early 20th Century . In 1898 , Pond was one of the founders of the Eagle 's Nest Art Colony near Oregon , Illinois . Pond and eleven others , including his brother Allen Pond , Lorado Taft , Hamlin Garland , Ralph Clarkson , Horace Spencer Fiske , leased a plot of land on a steep ridge with " craggy rocks " and gnarled cedars overlooking the Rock River . The Pond brothers designed the home that was built for the colony , and the group spent their summers at the colony with other sculptors , painters , writers , architects , naturalists and kindred spirits . 
 The artists colony became integrated with the Oregon community , and the Pond brothers undertook several significant architectural projects in the Oregon area : 
 Oregon Public Library . In 1908 , the city of Oregon built a new public library based on a design by Pond and Pond and with funding from Andrew Carnegie . The Ponds ' design has been described as having a " commodious and pleasing " interior with an exterior of white brick and Elizabethan @-@ Gothic architecture . One of the unusual features of the design was a two @-@ story art room in which artists from Eagle 's Nest displayed their works and offered instruction to local residents . 
 The Soldier 's Monument . In 1916 , the city commissioned a monument that included sculpture by Lorado Taft and an elaborate marble exedra by Pond and Pond . 
 Lowden Residence . The residence of Frank Lowden , Governor of Illinois from 1917 – 1921 , was another Pond and Pond design . The house is located several miles south of Oregon on the <unk> Farm . 
 In 1907 , Pond was also one of the founders with Hamlin Garland of the Cliff Dwellers Club ( originally known as the Attic Club and later the Little Room ) , a private club in Chicago for professionals engaged in the fine arts and performing arts . In its early years as the Little Room , the group was described as " an exclusive organization consisting of creative individuals of like temperament joined together for relaxation . " Pond served as president of the Cliff Dwellers from 1934 to 1935 . 
 = = = Professional organizations = = = 
 In recognition of his contributions to architecture , Pond became a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects in 1900 and served as president of the American Institute of Architects from 1910 to 1911 . He also represented the U.S. government and the AIA at the International Congress of Architects at Rome and Venice in 1911 , delivering addresses at both . He was also a founder of the Chicago Architectural Club and served as president of the Illinois Society of Architects . 
 = = = Notable commissions = = = 
 Unless otherwise mentioned all were designed by Pond and Pond 
 Pond 's best known buildings include three National Historic Landmark structures located in Chicago — the Hull House dining hall the Lorado Taft Midway Studios , Alice <unk> ( 2004 ) . AIA Guide to Chicago . Houghton Mifflin <unk> p . 452 . ISBN 0 @-@ 15 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @.@ and the Frank R. Lillie House ( 1904 ) . Other notable Pond designs include the Freer House ( 1898 ) in Ann Arbor , the American School of Correspondence building ( 1906 – 1907 ) in Chicago , the federal building in Kankakee , Illinois , the Michigan Union ( 1919 ) built on the site of Pond 's boyhood home in Ann Arbor , the Purdue Memorial Union ( 1924 ) at Purdue University , the MSU Union in East Lansing , Michigan , the Kansas Memorial Union at Kansas University , the Park Ridge Public Library , the Michigan League in Ann Arbor , the Omaha Apartments in Chicago , the Kent Building in Chicago ( 1902 ) , and the Toll Building in Chicago ( 1908 ) . 
 = = = Architectural style and philosophy = = = 
 As early as 1892 , Pond became known as one of the " earliest modernizers in architecture . " The Art Institute of Chicago , where Pond 's papers are housed , said of the firm : " While Pond and Pond were best known through their work for social service organizations , they designed a wide range of buildings — social , religious , educational / academic , residential , governmental , and civic — mainly in the Chicago area and the Midwest . They were known for detailed brickwork , asymmetrical massing , and distinctive decorative detail , producing fine examples of Arts and Crafts and early modern architecture . " 
 In 1905 a 15 @-@ page article in the Architectural Record by Pond and illustrated by his designs was published . Pond described his views in it about architecture as an art : 
 " Architecture is an art , and as an art , it does not consist simply in piling up forms , old or new , but is a means of expression . ... If architecture is an art and art consists in the expression of life , then that is neither architecture nor art which merely reproduces , even in new combinations , the old forms because they were once the accepted forms . That is a phase of archaeology and is unworthy of living architecture . ... However , the old ideas are not to be spurned and the old forms are not altogether to be cast aside when they contain the spark of life ... " 
 Pond 's article was viewed by some as a criticism of those in the Prairie School who overemphasized the horizontal over the vertical . In this regard , Pond wrote : 
 " In architectural composition , as in music , order is comprehended in rhythm . Rhythm is expressed in the flow of part into part , of mass into mass , in the appearance and reappearance of certain proportions which are made to exist between the subordinate masses and between these masses and the dominant mass ; between all the parts of the perfect whole . Without order there is no architecture ; without rhythmic composition no vital architecture can be . That is the highest architecture in which rhythmic action of the structural forces becomes apparent . Vertical forces in action , by the law of gravity , tend to work in right lines ; horizontal forces , acted upon by this same law tend to work in curves . ... It is not enough that the rhythmic movement be in horizontal direction only , but there must be a rhythmic flow vertically as well . The result of these combined movements should be that of unity -- simple in its effect though complex in its harmonies . " 
 = = = Role in the Chicago school = = = 
 In the AIA Guide to Chicago , the Ponds are identified as part of the " circle of young architects " , including Frank Lloyd Wright , that was responsible for " transforming the concepts of the Arts & Crafts movement into the indigenous Prairie School . " Alice <unk> ( 2004 ) . AIA Guide to Chicago . Houghton Mifflin <unk> p . 272 . ISBN 0 @-@ 15 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . Pond was a contemporary , and in some ways rival , of Wright in the Chicago architectural scene of the late 19th and early 20th Centuries . Both were members of the Chicago Architectural Club and served as judges and participants in the Club 's annual competitions . One biographer of Wright noted that Wright was insulted when the American Institute of Architects in 1912 commissioned a study of midwestern " progressive architecture " and instructed the investigators to examine the work of Louis Sullivan and Pond , but not including Wright . In a letter to Lewis Mumford , Wright expressed his dislike for the " truly @-@ old " Pond : 
 " Yesterday someone told me that truly @-@ old <unk> Pond took exception to your ' Sticks and Stones ' because you weren 't a ' practicing architect . ' What ' practicing architects ' know anything at all of architecture anyway , -- even if they could write about it ? Certainly not he . He 's a dried herring , hanging beneath the eaves or Architecture . " 
 While progressive in his approach to architecture , Pond was not as revolutionary as others in the Chicago school of his day . Architect Stuart Cohen , <unk> , noted that , while the Pond brothers ' architecture departs from traditional architectural styles , they " did not break radically from such stylistic forms " but sought instead " to create a modern American architecture without rejecting architectural stylistic traditions , but simplifying them through the emphasis of geometry and the inherent quality of building materials and construction . " 
 In 2009 , Pond 's autobiography , written in the two years before his death , was published by <unk> Press through the efforts of Chicago architect David Swan . At the time of the autobiography 's release , architecture historian Robert Bruegmann opined that the Pond brothers " have remained relatively obscure because they didn 't fit in with narratives that wished to see Chicago architecture of the late 19th and early 20th centuries as a prelude to European modernism of the 1920s . " Nevertheless , Bruegmann noted that " Chicago architecture was always a great deal more than that " and expressed his satisfaction that the publication of Pond 's autobiography " should go a long way toward bringing back into focus one of America 's most interesting and important architectural practices . " 
 = = Author = = 
 Pond was a noted author and member of the Chicago Literary Club from 1888 to 1939 . He was the club 's president from 1922 to 1923 . Many of his works of fiction , poems and papers on art and architecture were published by the club , including " A Strange Fellow : A Story with an Immoral " ( 1889 ) , " The Mystery of the Light " ( 1891 ) , " The Pleasures of Travel ( 1894 ) , " Can Architecture Become Again a Living Art ? " ( 1895 ) , " The Whale - A Study : The Historic School of Jonah " ( 1897 ) , " The Poetry of Motion : and Other Matters " ( 1899 ) , " A Few <unk> Reflections and Lively Anticipations of <unk> to Come " ( 1905 ) , " A Side Light on Architecture " ( 1906 ) , " Art and the Expression of Individuality " ( 1911 ) , " Architecture : Its Origins and Illusions " ( 1914 ) , " Poems " ( 1917 ) , " Here Lies the Way " ( 1918 ) , " Such Stuff as Dreams Are Made On . " " The Stones of Venice " ( 1919 ) , " A Day Under the Big Top : A Study in Life and Art " ( 1924 ) , " On Believing and Leaving " ( 1928 ) , " Toward an American Architecture " ( 1930 ) , " Hold Your Horses : The Elephants Are Coming ! " ( 1931 ) , " What Is Modern Architecture ? " ( 1933 ) , " Just One Thing After Another " ( 1934 ) , and " Do Children Think ? " ( 1938 ) . 
 Pond was also a frequent contributor to architectural journals and wrote for The Dial . In 1910 , he published an essay in Gustav Stickley 's The Craftsman , advocating an architectural style embodying the American spirit and idealism . In 1918 , he published the book The Meaning of Architecture . 
 In 1908 , Pond 's 13 @-@ page article on the architecture of telephone exchange buildings , illustrated by the designs of Pond and Louis Sullivan , also appeared in Architectural Record . 
 Books by Pond 
 The Meaning Of Architecture : An Essay In Constructive Criticism ( 1918 ) 
 The College Union ( 1931 ) 
 Big Top Rhythms : A Study in Art and Life , written and illustrated by Pond ( 1937 ) 
 A Strange Fellow , and other Club Papers , written and illustrated by Pond ( 1938 ) 
 The Autobiography of Irving K. Pond , written in the 1930s and published posthumously ( 2009 ) 
 = = Later years = = 
 Pond was a bachelor until age 72 . Through most of his life , his closest friend was his brother Allen Pond . In 1918 , he wrote the following in the dedication to his book , The Meaning of Architecture : 
 " This book is dedicated to my brother -- my lifelong companion and partner Allen <unk> Pond . Through his sympathy and understanding , in the light of his clear thought , and under his inspiration I have been better able to follow those paths of individual , professional and civic endeavor in which a rare ancestry bade us walk . " 
 After his brother died in 1929 , Pond married Katherine N. de <unk> , who was 47 years old , at a ceremony in Ann Arbor . Pond said at the time , " It 's the first time I ever did it , and I thought I ought to be pardoned because of my youth . " Pond was also an amateur acrobat and remained a physical fitness buff all of his life . At the time of his wedding in 1929 , the Associated Press reported that he is " almost as well known for his present athletic agility as for his architectural accomplishments . A part of his daily routine is to turn handsprings and <unk> and do other strenuous exercises . " He drew applause when , on his 80th birthday , he grabbed his bare knees with both hands and performed a backflip . A photograph of Pond 's feat was published in Life magazine in June 1937 . 
 Though he was some 25 years older than his wife , Pond outlived her . She died in 1935 , and Pond died four years later in September 1939 while traveling in Washington , D.C .. The cause of death was reported as a stomach ulcer . He was age 82 when he died , and he asked that his remains be cremated and sent to the University of Michigan . 
 = = Gallery of buildings designed by Pond and Pond = = 
 = Margate F.C. = 
 Margate Football Club , originally called Margate Town , is an English football team based in the seaside resort of Margate , Kent , currently playing in the National League South . The club was known for a number of years during the 1980s as Thanet United . 
 The club was founded in 1896 and joined the Southern Football League in 1933 . After a spell in the Kent League after World War II the team returned to the Southern League in 1959 and remained there until 2001 when they gained promotion to the Football Conference , the highest level of English non @-@ league football . Their stay at this level saw the team forced to groundshare with other clubs due to drawn @-@ out and problematic redevelopment work at their Hartsdown Park stadium , and during the three years spent away from their own ground they were expelled from the Conference National and subsequently relegated to the Isthmian League . 
 The team , nicknamed " The Gate " , have to date reached the third round proper of England 's premier cup competition , the FA Cup , on two occasions . On the second of these occasions they played Tottenham Hotspur , a First Division team and the reigning UEFA Cup holders . 
 = = History = = 
 For a statistical breakdown by season , see List of Margate F.C. seasons 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Margate Football Club was founded in 1896 as an amateur club and was originally called Margate Town , playing friendly matches on local school grounds . In the years before the First World War the club played in several different amateur leagues , with little success , and played at various grounds in the Margate area , before settling on a pitch at what would later become the Dreamland amusement park in 1912 . This ground became known as the Hall @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea Ground , taking its name from a local dance hall . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 After the First World War , Margate joined the Kent League , but in 1923 the league suspended the team due to financial irregularities and the club promptly folded . A year later the club reformed , initially under the name Margate Town , and returned to the Kent League , still playing at Dreamland , but folded again due to heavy debts . In 1929 the club reformed again and moved to its present home at Hartsdown Park , leasing part of the park from the local council for conversion into a football stadium . Around this time Margate signed a Dutch player , a highly unusual move in an era when it was almost unknown for Continental players to move to English clubs . Goalkeeper Gerrit " Gerard " Keizer , who joined the Kent club from Ajax Amsterdam , later went on to play for Arsenal . 
 From 1934 until 1938 Margate , by now playing in the Southern League , served as the official nursery side for Arsenal . Under this arrangement the London club regularly loaned promising young players to Margate in order for them to gain match experience . Star players such as Eddie Hapgood also turned out for Margate whilst regaining match fitness after injuries . In the second season of this arrangement , 1935 – 36 , Margate reached the third round proper of the FA Cup for the first time , losing 3 – 1 to Blackpool after defeating Queens Park Rangers and Crystal Palace in the earlier rounds , but shortly after this the club had to step back down to the Kent League for financial reasons . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 After the Second World War the Gate continued to play in the Kent League under new manager Charlie Walker , who led the team to two Kent League championships but was then controversially sacked . The team slumped during a succession of rapid managerial changes which only ended in 1950 when Almer Hall was appointed manager , a post he was to hold for the next twenty years . Under Hall the team won a host of local cup honours and reached the rounds proper of the FA Cup on a number of occasions , but never managed to match this success in league competition . 
 In 1959 – 60 Margate returned to the Southern League after the Kent League folded , and in 1962 – 63 won the Division One championship and with it promotion to the Premier Division . Two years later the club turned full @-@ time professional but this policy proved financially untenable when the team were relegated back to Division One in 1965 – 66 . Nonetheless , they won promotion at the first attempt and returned to the Premier Division in 1967 . 
 During the 1970s Margate endured severe financial problems and a series of mediocre league seasons , but took part in two famous FA Cup ties . In 1971 the Gate lost 11 – 0 to Bournemouth , with Ted MacDougall scoring a cup record nine goals . Then , a year later , Margate beat Swansea City and Walton & Hersham to set up a third round tie against First Division Tottenham Hotspur , then UEFA Cup holders . A record crowd of around 14 @,@ 500 packed into Hartsdown Park for a match which Margate lost 6 – 0 . 
 = = = Thanet United era = = = 
 On several occasions in the 1970s Margate had discussed a merger with neighbours Ramsgate to form a new team representing the whole Isle of Thanet , which was seen as the solution to the financial problems being experienced by both clubs . The negotiations floundered , however , and Ramsgate ultimately had no involvement in the formation of Thanet United F.C. in 1981 , which turned out to be purely a name change for Margate . When Thanet District Council announced that it would not be prepared to put any funding into Thanet United , the two clubs finally abandoned the idea of a merger . 
 The Thanet United era saw a run of generally mediocre seasons in the Southern League Southern Division , with financial problems continuing unabated and a series of managers coming and going . In January 1989 the club came close to relegation to the Kent League and possible total collapse , but in March a new board took over , who reverted the club 's name to Margate Football Club for the 1989 – 90 season and appointed Trevor Ford as manager . Success still eluded the club on the pitch , however , even after the signing of former Football League players such as Mike Flanagan and Mark Weatherly , who later took over as co @-@ manager and led the club to a Kent Senior Cup win , a rare triumph in this era . 
 = = = Chris Kinnear era = = = 
 In 1996 , the club 's centenary year , the club appointed Chris Kinnear as manager . In 1997 – 98 he took the team to the first round proper of the FA Cup where they played Fulham in a home tie that drew a crowd of 5 @,@ 100 . Although the Gate took the lead , the Cottagers eventually won 2 – 1 . The following season saw the club finally win promotion to the Southern League Premier Division , albeit only after an appeal was lodged against the league 's initial refusal to allow the team promotion due to the club failing to carry out necessary ground improvements in time . The Premier Division championship followed in the 2000 – 01 season , and with it promotion to the Football Conference . 
 The 2001 – 02 season was Gate 's first ever season of Conference football and they finished the season in eighth place . In the 2002 – 03 season the team began groundsharing at Dover Athletic 's Crabble Athletic Ground while redevelopment work took place at Hartsdown Park , but various problems stalled the planned redevelopment . On the pitch , Margate enjoyed more success in the FA Cup when , after defeating Leyton Orient in the first round , they were drawn at home to Cardiff City in the second round , but lost 3 – 0 at Crabble . The following season , despite finishing sixteenth , the Gate were forcibly relegated one division due to the ongoing delays and problems with the redevelopment plans for Hartsdown Park . 
 Margate spent the 2004 – 05 season in the Conference South , now groundsharing at Ashford Town . Amid ongoing issues with the redevelopment work , which at one point made it seem very likely that the club would fold completely , Margate were again relegated to the Isthmian League Premier Division . 
 = = = Return to Hartsdown Park = = = 
 In August 2005 , Margate returned to Hartsdown Park after three years in the wilderness . During an indifferent season manager Kinnear was controversially suspended . Robin Trott was placed in temporary charge as player @-@ manager in April 2006 and , after an unbeaten five game run , was given a one @-@ year contract at the end of the season . After Margate narrowly missed out on the play @-@ offs in 2006 – 07 the club announced that Trott was to be given a new contract for the 2007 – 08 season . Shortly before the end of the season , however , Trott was sacked . His replacement , Barry Ashby , was himself sacked two months into the 2008 – 09 season . Shortly afterwards , the club narrowly avoided being subject to High Court action over unpaid debts to HM Revenue and Customs . The club finished the season in 19th position in the table and was expected to be relegated to Division One South , but was reprieved due to other clubs folding . The following season , Margate again finished in the bottom four but the club again received a reprieve from relegation . 
 Chris Kinnear returned for a second spell to manage the team at the start of the 2011 – 12 season . The following season Margate were sitting at top of the table in January , however , after much speculation Kinnear accepted the vacant manager 's position at Dover Athletic . Goalkeeper Craig Holloway was placed in temporary charge of the side , and brought in Simon Osborn as joint manager . The club dropped from the top of the table and finished outside the play @-@ offs . After a poor start to the 2013 – 14 season , Holloway resigned his role as joint manager , leaving Osborn in sole charge . Results failed to improve and Osborn was sacked at the beginning of December 2013 . 
 In the 2014 – 15 season , the first full season under manager Terry Brown , Margate finished in 3rd place in the Isthmian League Premier Division , ensuring the team 's qualification for the play @-@ offs for promotion to the National League South ( formerly Conference South ) . The play @-@ offs were delayed by a lengthy appeal against a points deduction applied to fifth @-@ placed Enfield Town , but when they eventually began , Margate defeated Dulwich Hamlet in the semi @-@ finals . In the final Margate played Hendon , who had finished one place above them in the league , but a single goal from Ryan Moss gave them victory and promotion to the National League South . Following a poor start to the 2015 – 16 season , Terry Brown was <unk> and replaced by Margate goalkeeper Nikki Bull and defender Jamie Stuart until the end of that season . In April 2016 Bull was appointed first team manager until the end of the 2017 – 18 season . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Margate 's traditional colours are blue and white , but the team have worn a number of other colour combinations . The club 's earliest known colours were black and white stripes . By the 1920s the club had adopted plain white shirts ( with the team having the appropriate nickname of " The Lilywhites " ) but in 1929 changed its colours to amber and black . In 1949 the colours changed again to blue and white . During the Thanet United era , the team wore plain white shirts , but when the club 's name changed back to Margate in 1989 , the blue kit was re @-@ adopted . The 2015 @-@ 16 kit was criticised for having a " slight purple tint " and the club reverted to blue the following season . 
 The club 's current crest is a simplified version of the coat of arms of the town of Margate , incorporating a lion conjoined to a ship 's hull ( a reference to the arms of the Cinque Ports ) and the white horse emblem of Kent . Previous crests have included the full town arms , the letters " <unk> " above a lighthouse , and the letters " <unk> " superimposed on a football . 
 Margate 's shirts have borne various sponsors ' logos but the most notable was that of the pop group Bad Manners , whose name appeared on the team 's kit as part of a sponsorship deal with their record label in the late 1990s . Lead singer Buster <unk> was running a hotel in Margate at the time and actually joined the football club 's board of directors . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 The stadium in Hartsdown Park has been Margate 's home since 1929 , the same year the park itself opened to the public . Little development of the stadium took place until 2002 , when the club launched an ambitious scheme to completely redevelop the site . The club moved out and the old stadium , which was constructed mainly from timber and corrugated iron , was demolished in early 2003 , but the local council disputed the plans submitted . Although planned to be completed by August 2003 , the redevelopment dragged on for three years , mired in issues regarding planning permission for the commercial facilities the club wanted to build in addition to the stadium itself . The team spent three years ground @-@ sharing with other Kent clubs , but club officials ' failure to confirm a return date to Hartsdown led to Margate 's expulsion from the Conference National in 2004 . In 2005 the club was finally able to return to the ground , albeit with pre @-@ fabricated stands and temporary buildings in place . In 2014 , the club applied to the local council for permission to erect six new temporary stands . 
 The club 's ultimate plan involves a stadium with a capacity of 5 @,@ 000 forming part of a complex incorporating a hotel , fitness centre , conference centre , all @-@ weather pitch and ten 5 @-@ a @-@ side pitches . Although it was announced that work on the 5 @-@ a @-@ side pitch complex was to begin in May 2007 , ground was not in fact broken for a further four months . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 In the 2008 – 09 season Margate 's average attendance was 523 , the fifth highest in the Isthmian League Premier Division . During their three seasons in the Conference National , from 2001 – 02 to 2003 – 04 , the club 's average home attendances were 1 @,@ 233 , 684 , and 562 . For the last two of these three seasons the team were playing in Dover . 
 The club has an active independent supporters ' association and the fans took an active part in getting the stadium ready for the club 's return in 2005 . The supporters ' association began production of a fanzine called Blues News in 2008 . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Margate 's best ever league finish since the establishment of the Alliance Premier League in 1979 was an 8th place finish in Conference National ( level 5 of the overall English football league system ) in 2001 – 02 . The team have twice progressed as far as the third round proper of the FA Cup , in 1935 – 36 and 1972 – 73 , and reached the quarter @-@ finals of the FA Trophy in 2001 – 02 . 
 The club 's biggest ever winning margin in a single match was 12 – 1 , a score they have achieved twice , firstly against Deal Cinque Ports in an FA Cup First Qualifying Round match in 1919 – 20 and again against Erith & Belvedere in the Kent League in 1927 – 28 . 
 The highest recorded attendance at Hartsdown Park was 14 @,@ 169 for the visit of Tottenham Hotspur in the FA Cup in 1972 – 73 . This figure is unlikely to be broken in the foreseeable future , as even after its planned redevelopment is completed , the ground will hold less than half this number of fans . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 30 June 2016 : 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 The club also fields a Ladies team , Under 21s and U18s teams . There is also a youth section running teams in every age range from under 8 to under 21 . 
 = = Notable former players = = 
 Margate 's all @-@ time appearance record holder is Bob Harrop , who played 564 times . The club 's all @-@ time top goalscorer is Martin <unk> , who scored 158 goals during the 1990s . Three other players have reached the 100 @-@ goal mark for the club , namely Alan Blackburn ( 121 ) , Peter <unk> ( 119 ) and Phil Amato ( 107 ) . The only player ever to gain full international caps whilst on Margate 's books is John <unk> , who played for Sierra Leone during his original five @-@ year stint with the club . 
 = = Managers = = 
 Margate 's first known manager was Arthur Graves , who was installed as manager when Margate Town was reformed in 1929 . By far the club 's longest @-@ serving manager was Almer Hall , who was manager for twenty years from 1950 until 1970 . 
 = = Current staff = = 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Officials = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Margate 's main rivalry is with Thanet neighbours Ramsgate , with whom Margate contest the Thanet derby . After many years playing in different leagues the two clubs were able to renew their rivalry when Ramsgate joined Margate in the Isthmian League Premier Division in the 2006 – 07 season . The attendance of 1 @,@ 676 when the two sides met at Hartsdown Park was more than double Margate 's average home crowd for the season . 
 Another of Margate 's rivals is Dover Athletic . Despite meeting rarely in competitive games over recent years , both teams were in the Conference in the 2001 – 02 season . In that season , the last season the two teams were in the same division , the two games between Margate and Dover were watched by a combined total of over 6 @,@ 000 spectators . The game played at Margate 's Hartsdown Park stadium drew a crowd of 3 @,@ 676 , and 2 @,@ 325 were in attendance for the game at Dover 's Crabble stadium . 
 = Hard Candy ( film ) = 
 Hard Candy is an American 2005 crime thriller film focusing on the torture of a male sexual predator by a 14 @-@ year @-@ old female vigilante . The film was directed by David Slade , written by Brian Nelson , and starred Ellen Page and Patrick Wilson . It was the first feature film for Slade , who had previously mainly directed music videos . 
 The film premiered at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival , and was screened at the Florida Film Festival in April 2006 . It had limited release in two theaters in the US . The film made over $ 7 million at the box office , including almost $ 6 million from outside the US , on a budget of under $ 1 million . 
 Hard Candy won three awards at the 2005 Sitges Film Festival , four awards at the Málaga Film Festival , and was also awarded Overlooked Film of the Year at the 2006 Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards . Page won Best Actress at the 2006 Austin Film Critics Association Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with a sexually charged , flirtatious online chat between 14 @-@ year @-@ old Hayley Stark and Jeff <unk> , a photographer in his mid @-@ 30s . Jeff and Hayley meet at a coffeehouse , and he takes her back to her apartment . Hayley makes them both screwdrivers and asks him to take photographs . Before he can , Jeff gets dizzy , his vision blurs , and he falls to the floor unconscious . 
 When Jeff wakes , he is bound to a chair . Hayley explains she has been tracking him and drugged him because she knows he is a pedophile , child rapist , and murderer . Jeff denies these allegations , claiming he had innocent intentions . Hayley searches Jeff 's house and finds his gun and safe . In the safe , Hayley finds " sick " pictures and a photo of Donna Mauer , a local girl who had been kidnapped and remains missing . Jeff denies involvement in Mauer 's disappearance and succeeds in reaching his gun , but when he ( still bound to the chair ) attacks Hayley , she renders him unconscious by asphyxiating him with plastic wrap . 
 When Jeff wakes , he finds himself bound to a steel table with a bag of ice on his genitals . Hayley explains she will castrate Jeff . <unk> threatens , bribes and sweet @-@ talks Hayley to dissuade her ; when that doesn 't work , he tries to get her sympathy by telling her he was abused as a child . Following the operation , Hayley leaves the kitchen , claiming to take a shower . Jeff struggles and frees himself . When he reluctantly checks the site of the operation , he realizes he is actually unharmed , and Hayley has elaborately faked his castration . He storms off in a rage to get Hayley in the bathroom , where the shower is running . <unk> in hand , he attacks , only to find the shower empty . Hayley attacks him from behind , and as they struggle , Hayley incapacitates him with a stun gun . 
 Hayley poses as a police officer and asks Jeff 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Janelle , to come immediately to Jeff 's house . Jeff regains consciousness to find that Hayley has bound his wrists and hoisted him to stand on a chair in his kitchen with a noose around his neck . Hayley makes Jeff an offer : if he commits suicide , she promises to erase the evidence of his crimes , but if he refuses , she promises to expose his secrets . The conversation is interrupted when a neighbor knocks on the front door , selling Girl Scout cookies . Hayley tells the neighbor that she is Jeff 's niece ; the neighbor leaves shortly afterwards . When Hayley returns , Jeff breaks free from his bindings and pursues her , eventually finding her on the roof of his house , where she has lured him . Hayley has brought her rope from the kitchen and fashioned it into a noose secured to the chimney . Hayley keeps Jeff at bay with his own gun . 
 Jeff finally confesses that he watched while another man raped and murdered Donna Mauer . Jeff promises Hayley that , if she spares his life , he will tell her the other man 's name so she can exact her revenge . Hayley confesses that she knows his name and says , " Aaron told me you did it before he killed himself . " Janelle arrives , and Hayley once again urges Jeff to hang himself , promising that she will destroy the evidence . Defeated , Jeff lets Hayley slide the noose around his neck , and takes the last fatal step off the roof . At the moment Jeff dies , Hayley says , " Or not . " She then gathers her belongings and escapes through the woods . The film ends as Hayley walks down the road in her red hoodie . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ellen Page as Hayley Stark 
 Patrick Wilson as Jeff <unk> 
 Sandra Oh as Judy <unk> , the neighbor 
 Odessa Rae ( credited as Jennifer Holmes ) as Janelle Rogers 
 Erin Kraft as Donna Mauer in photos 
 Gabe Kerr as Nighthawks Clerk 
 Cori Bright as girl in Nighthawks 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for Hard Candy came from a news story producer David W. Higgins saw on 20 / 20 about young Japanese girls who would lure older businessmen to a location with the promise of meaningful conversation , only to assault and mug the men with a gang of other girls . This led him to wonder , " What if the person you expect to be the predator is not who you expect it to be ? What if it 's the other person ? " He then hired writer Brian Nelson to flesh out the idea . Due to the controversial nature of the work , the budget was kept under $ 1 million so that the production company would not ask to change anything . 
 Very little dubbing was used in the film , with only a couple of lines modified in post @-@ production . Only nine minutes of music are present in the film , with ambient sounds , such as heavy breathing , making up most of the soundtrack . The film was shot in 18 days , largely in sequence , and mostly on a soundstage . Hayley wears a red hooded sweatshirt that is often seen as an allusion to Little Red Riding Hood . However , this was a serendipitous wardrobe choice by the creative team that was not realized until later on . Foreign marketing for the film made use of this allusion . For example , a tagline on the Japanese site for the film reads : " Red Hood traps the Wolf in his own game . " 
 Jean @-@ Clement <unk> was the digital colorist for the film , this being one of the few instances in which a colorist received a spot in the opening credits . The film contains many coloring effects and " density shifts " of lighting to reflect the moods of the characters . For example , when Hayley gets angry , the colors would be edited to be of lower frequency . One effect used which , as far as the director is aware , had not been done in cinema before , was to brighten the lighting in filming and correct everything down in post @-@ production . This allowed for facial details to be visible even while having a darkened atmosphere . According to the DVD extras , the process required a custom @-@ built digital intermediate to be made and proved to be extremely difficult , with corrections having to be made frame @-@ by @-@ frame in some instances . This technique , known as <unk> , is a standard procedure in digital photography and cinematography to minimize the amount of noise in shadows and <unk> . Early working titles of the script were Vendetta and Snip Snip . The producer wanted a title with a " sugar and spice combination and a mixture of harsh roughness , innocence , and vulnerability " , and settled on the title Hard Candy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film premiered at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival with a midnight screening . The Dolby Surround System failed before the screening and the audience was kept out until it was fixed . Hard Candy was also screened at the Florida Film Festival on April 1 , 2006 . 
 Hard Candy opened in two theaters in Los Angeles and New York City on April 14 , 2006 in a limited release . During its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 58 @,@ 049 averaging $ 29 @,@ 704 per theater , the highest per @-@ screen average in the top 50 . It ended its run with $ 1 @,@ 024 @,@ 640 at the North American box office , and a further $ 5 @,@ 997 @,@ 569 internationally for a total of $ 7 @,@ 022 @,@ 209 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , the film has a score of 68 % based on 138 reviews and an average rating of 6 @.@ 4 out of 10 . The critical consensus states : " Disturbing , controversial , but entirely engrossing , Hard Candy is well written with strong lead performances , especially that of newcomer Ellen Page . A movie that stays with the viewer long after leaving the theater . " The film also has a score of 58 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 30 critics indicating " mixed or average reviews . " 
 Roger Ebert gave the film 3 and a half stars out of four and wrote that " There is undeniable fascination in the situation as it unfolds ... Seen as a film , seen as acting and direction , seen as just exactly how it unfolds on the screen , Hard Candy is impressive and effective . " Steve Persall wrote in the Tampa Bay Times he saw the movie in a crowded bar , yet " until the shocking end , there 's nothing less than rapt attention to this sordid thriller about an online predator ( Wilson ) and his not @-@ so @-@ innocent prey ( Ellen Page ) . On a party night in New Orleans ? That 's how creepy @-@ good this movie is . " Steve Schneider , writing in the Orlando Weekly , praised the films " grabber of a <unk> setup ... It 's a memorably tense pas de deux , and if the movie doesn 't pay off on it properly , fault a script that ventures further and further into psychological @-@ thriller claptrap , leaving the two stars to rely on their hefty talents to keep it at all believable . " 
 Caroline Westbrook at Empire magazine called it a " cracking little thriller " . David Edwards at the Daily Mirror praised it as a " smart , challenging and timely look at the world of internet grooming " . Todd McCarthy at Variety praised the " spectacular performance by teenage <unk> Ellen Page " . On the other hand , Jonathan Rosenbaum referred to it as torture and mutilation and wrote : " I 'd rather have this movie obliterated from my memory . " The New York Times film critic Manohla Dargis recognized the film 's debt to " Ariel Dorfman and Neil LaBute , among others " , but did not care for the torture theme " in the age of Abu Ghraib " . 
 Page 's performance was received well by critics ; Lynn Hirschberg of The New York Times Magazine said " a star was born , but almost no one noticed " , describing Hard Candy as Page 's initial artistic breakthrough performance , and her role in the 2007 film Juno as her mainstream popularity breakthrough performance . Claudia Puig from USA Today praised her for " remain [ ing ] consistently convincing " to her role which is both " powerful and chilling ... She manages to be both cruelly callous and likable , and hers is one of the most complex , disturbing and haunting performances of the year . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The film won three awards at the 2005 Sitges Film Festival and four awards at the 2006 Málaga Film Festival . The film also won Overlooked Film of the Year at the 2006 Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards . Page won the Best Actress award from the Austin Film Critics Association . Page was nominated for the Breakthrough Performer award at the 2006 Online Film Critics Society Awards , and Best Female Newcomer at the 12th Empire Awards . The film was nominated for Best Foreign Independent film at the 2006 British Independent Film Awards , and the film 's trailer was nominated for Best Thriller and Best Titles in a Trailer at the 7th Golden Trailer Awards . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The American DVD was released on September 19 , 2006 with two commentary tracks , a 52 @-@ minute making @-@ of featurette , six deleted and extended scenes , the script and director 's notebook , and trailers for Hard Candy and other Lionsgate films . Francis Rizzo III from DVD Talk gave a positive review , praising the DVD 's quality and extras . The Blu @-@ ray was released by Lionsgate Home Entertainment on October 5 , 2010 , and contained the same special features as the DVD . Aaron Peck from High @-@ Def Digest and Jeffrey Kauffman from Blu @-@ ray.com both awarded the Blu @-@ ray four out of five stars . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The German Neue Deutsche <unk> band <unk> ! based the video for their song " <unk> ersten Mal tut 's immer weh " ( the first time always hurts ) on the film , as did American metalcore band Beneath the Sky for their song " Terror Starts at Home " . 
 = Otis Blue / Otis Redding Sings Soul = 
 Otis Blue / Otis Redding Sings Soul , or simply Otis Blue , released September 15 , 1965 on Stax Records , is the third studio album by soul singer Otis Redding . The album mainly consists of cover songs by popular R & B and soul artists , and , bar one track , was recorded in a 24 @-@ hour period over July 9 / 10 1965 at the Stax Recording Studios in Memphis , Tennessee . Otis Blue was critically acclaimed upon release and became one of Redding 's most successful albums ; it reached number 6 on the UK Albums Chart , and was his first to reach the top spot of the Billboard R & B chart . Furthermore , it produced three popular singles , all charting at least in the top 50 on both the Billboard R & B and the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It is considered by many critics to be Redding 's first fully realized album . 
 Three of the eleven songs were written by Redding : " Ole Man Trouble " , " Respect " , and " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " . Three songs were written by Sam Cooke , a soul musician who had died a few months earlier . As was the case in the previous albums , Redding was backed by house band Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , a horn section of members of The Mar @-@ Keys and The Memphis Horns , and pianist Isaac Hayes . 
 Otis Blue is included in a number of " best album " lists , including Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , Time magazine 's list of the All @-@ Time 100 Greatest Albums , and Robert Dimery 's " 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die " . Rhino Records released a two @-@ disc Collectors Edition of Otis Blue in 2008 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Stax Records president Jim Stewart had released Otis Redding 's " These Arms of Mine " after hearing him sing it at an audition in 1962 ; and when it charted , he signed Redding to Stax . Following the moderately successful Pain in My Heart and The Great Otis Redding Sings Soul Ballads , both of which performed well in the newly established Billboard R & B LP chart but not in the Billboard 200 , preparations for the third studio album followed soon after . The album would be Redding 's third studio album and second on Stax 's sister label Volt . 
 Redding recorded the album with the Stax 's house band Booker T. & the M.G. ' s ( guitarist Steve Cropper , bassist Donald " Duck " Dunn , drummer Al Jackson Jr . ) , Isaac Hayes on piano , and a horn section consisting of members of the Mar @-@ Keys and the Memphis Horns . The album was recorded in a 24 @-@ hour session between 10am July 9 ( a Saturday ) and July 10 2pm , with a break from 8pm Saturday to 2am on Sunday to allow the house band to play local gigs . As was the case with the previous album , engineer Tom Dowd came to the studios to assist the recording , dubbing Redding as a " genius " next to Bobby Darin and Ray Charles . The album opens with " Ole Man Trouble " , which was finished on the sessions earlier than other songs , and was later released as a B @-@ side of " Respect " . 
 According to the drummer , Jackson , Redding wrote " Respect " , after a conversation they had during a break in the recording session , in which he told Redding : " You 're on the road all the time . All you can look for is a little respect when you come home . " An alternative story is told by Redding 's friend and road manager , Earl " Speedo " Sims , who states that the song " came from a group I was singing with " , and that even though Redding rewrote it , " a lot of the lyric was still there " ; Sims adds : " He told me I would get a credit , but I never did " . Sims also states that he sang the backing chorus of " Hey hey hey " . The song used for the fifth track , " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " , had been previously recorded in mono with Booker T. Jones on piano and released as a single in April 1965 , becoming a number @-@ two hit on Billboard 's R & B chart ; it was rerecorded in stereo for the album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The majority of the tracks on Otis Blue are cover versions , including three by Sam Cooke who had been shot dead the previous December . The album opens with the " mournfully harried " " Ole Man Trouble " . For <unk> N. Harold of PopMatters , the song is one of his most <unk> tunes . The lyrics deal with a man , who is " unable to escape the brutal realities of the blues " , and has been compared with Paul Robeson 's " Ole Man River " . " Respect " was inspired by a quote of drummer Al Jackson , Jr . , who allegedly said to Redding after a tour , " What are you griping about ? You 're on the road all the time . All you can look for is a little respect when you come home . " 
 Essentially a ballad , " Respect " is an uptempo and energetic song , which took " a day to write , 20 minutes to arrange , and one take to record " , according to Redding . Aretha Franklin covered this song in 1967 and with it topped the Billboard R & B and Pop charts . Redding shouted to a woman for more respect , while Franklin ironically countered the song and transformed it into a " feminist hymn " . The next song is an energetic version of Sam Cooke 's ballad , " Change Gonna Come " ; a protest against racial segregation and disrespect for black people . " Down in the Valley " is a funky cover of Solomon Burke 's original , with whom Redding toured before the recording . Nate <unk> of Pitchfork felt that the song " ratchets up both the gospel <unk> and the secular lust " . 
 The love song " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " was co @-@ written by Redding and The Impressions ' lead singer Jerry Butler in a hotel near the Atlanta airport . Redding 's rendition of Cooke 's " Shake " is again more funky . The song is about the club dancing in the so @-@ called discothèques , which debuted in the early 1960s . The song was described as " a hard @-@ swinging , full @-@ throated 2 : 40 of precision ferocity with a force that would flat @-@ out explode during his live sets . " The last five songs are all covers by popular artists : The Temptations ' " My Girl " , written by Smokey Robinson and Ronald White ; Cooke 's " Wonderful World " ; B.B. King 's " Rock Me Baby " ; The Rolling Stones ' " Satisfaction " , on which Redding sings " fashion " instead of " faction " ; and William Bell 's " You Don 't Miss Your Water " , which was characterized as " sorrowful country blues " , and has " one of the most devastating pleading @-@ man lead vocals in the entire Stax catalog . " " Satisfaction " sounded so plausible that a journalist even accused the Stones of stealing the song from Redding , and that they performed it after Redding . Music writer Robert Christgau describes it as an " anarchic reading " of the Stones ' original . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album 's commercial performance helped Redding cross over into the pop market . Although it only reached number 75 on the Billboard 200 in 1966 , three of its singles charted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " charted for 11 weeks and peaked at number 21 , " Respect " spent 11 weeks and reached number 35 , and " Shake " spent six weeks and reached number 47 . Both stereo and mono pressing of Otis Blue charted in the United Kingdom ; the former spent 21 weeks and reached number six in 1966 , and the latter spent 54 weeks and reached number seven in 1967 . Two different pressings of the song " My Girl " also charted in the UK ; a 7 @-@ inch single peaked at number 11 and charted for 16 weeks in 1965 , and a reissued single in 1968 reached number 36 and charted for nine weeks . " Satisfaction " peaked at number 33 and " Shake " peaked at number 28 in the UK . On November 18 , 2004 , Otis Blue was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry , for shipments of 60 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Otis Blue has been regarded by music critics as Redding 's best work . Bruce Eder from AllMusic wrote that " Redding 's powerful , remarkable singing throughout makes Otis Blue gritty , rich , and achingly alive , and an essential listening experience . " He also felt the album " presents his talent unfettered , his direction clear , and his confidence emboldened " . Angus Taylor of BBC Music commented that it stands " at the crossroads of pop , rock , gospel , blues and soul " , and asserted that the album contains " a set of short , punchy covers and originals , flawlessly ordered to ebb and flow between stirring balladry and foot stomping exuberance " . He dubbed the album Redding 's " definitive statement " . Blender music critic Robert Christgau called Otis Blue , " the first great album by one of soul 's few reliable long @-@ form artists " and gave its 2004 collector 's edition four out of five stars , which he said " comes with many useless alternate takes , but also with live tracks that preserve for history Redding 's country @-@ goes @-@ uptown style of fun " . 
 Nate <unk> of Pitchfork Media cited the album as the 1960s ' " greatest studio @-@ recorded soul LP " , and further stated that it is " a hell of a record , the crowning achievement of a man who could sound pained and celebratory and tender and gritty and proud all at once , with a voice that everyone from John Fogerty to Swamp Dogg to Cee @-@ lo owes a debt to " . <unk> N. Harold of PopMatters also praised the diverse sound , which , according to her , is a mixture of " Motown pop , the blues , British rock , and Southern Soul " , although she cited Complete & Unbelievable : The Otis Redding Dictionary of Soul as Redding 's best album . Rolling Stone described the album as " Redding 's true dictionary of soul , a stunning journey through the past and future vocabulary of R & B ... documenting a masterful artist rising to ... the immense challenge of his times . " In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Rolling Stone journalist Paul Evans gave Otis Blue five out of five stars and cited the album as Redding 's " first masterwork " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Otis Blue is included in a number of " best album " lists . NME ranked it 35 on their list from 1993 of the " Greatest Albums of All Time " . Then , NME ranked it 405 on their 2013 edition . The album was also ranked 74 on the Rolling Stone magazine 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list , 92 on Time magazine 's list of the All @-@ Time 100 Greatest Albums , and included in Q magazine 's Best Soul Albums of All Time list . The album appeared in " 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Collector 's Edition 2008 = = 
 An expanded double disc set edition of Otis Blue was released in 2008 by Rhino Records , which includes both the stereo and mono versions of the album with bonus tracks that include B @-@ sides , live tracks , and previously unreleased alternate mixes . 
 Disc 1 track listing 
 Disc 2 track listing 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certification = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Otis Redding – vocals 
 Isaac Hayes – keyboards , piano 
 Steve Cropper – guitar 
 Donald Dunn – bass 
 Al Jackson , Jr . – drums 
 Wayne Jackson – trumpet 
 Gene Miller – trumpet 
 Andrew Love – tenor saxophone 
 Floyd Newman – baritone saxophone 
 William Bell – backing vocals ( track 2 ) 
 Earl Sims – backing vocals ( track 2 ) 
 Additional personnel 
 Isaac Hayes – producer 
 Steve Cropper – producer 
 Tom Dowd – engineer 
 Jim Stewart – supervision 
 Yves Beauvais – reissue producer 
 Bill Inglot , Dan Hersch – remastering 
 Pete <unk> – cover photo 
 Haig <unk> – cover design 
 Bob <unk> – liner notes 
 = Society for Human Rights = 
 The Society for Human Rights was an American LGBT Rights organization established in Chicago in 1924 . Society founder Henry Gerber was inspired to create it by German Doctor Magnus Hirschfeld and his work with the Scientific @-@ Humanitarian Committee . It was the first recognized gay rights organization in the United States , having received a charter from the state of Illinois , and produced the first American publication for homosexuals , Friendship and Freedom . A few months after being chartered , the group ceased to exist in the wake of the arrest of several of the Society 's members . Despite its short existence and small size , the Society has been recognized as a precursor to the modern gay liberation movement . 
 = = Henry Gerber = = 
 Henry Gerber emigrated from Germany in 1913 , settling with his family in Chicago because of its large German @-@ speaking population . Within a few years of his arrival he experienced discrimination based on his sexual orientation when he was temporarily committed to a mental institution in 1917 for being homosexual . 
 With the United States 's entry into World War I , Gerber enlisted in the United States Army . After the war , he served as a printer and proofreader with the Allied Army of Occupation in Coblenz , Germany , from 1920 to 1923 . 
 During his time in Germany , Gerber learned about Magnus Hirschfeld and the work he and his Scientific @-@ Humanitarian Committee were doing to reform anti @-@ homosexual German law , especially Paragraph 175 , which criminalized sex between men . Gerber traveled to Berlin , which supported a thriving gay subculture , on several occasions and subscribed to at least one homophile magazine . Gerber marveled at the development of the gay community in Berlin and later wrote " I had always bitterly felt the injustice with which my own American society accused the homosexual of ' immoral acts . ' What could be done about it , I thought . Unlike Germany , where the homosexual was partially organized and where sex legislation was uniform for the whole country , the United States was in a condition of chaos and misunderstanding concerning its sex laws , and no one was trying to unravel the tangle and bring relief to the abused . " He was particularly impressed with the work of a group called Bund für <unk> ( Association for Human Rights ) and absorbed a number of Hirschfeld 's ideas , including the notion that homosexual men were naturally effeminate . Following his military service , Gerber returned to the United States and went to work for the post office in Chicago . 
 = = Founding the Society = = 
 Inspired by Hirschfeld 's work with the Scientific @-@ Humanitarian Committee , Gerber resolved to found a similar organization in the United States . He called his group the Society for Human Rights ( the English translation of Bund für <unk> ) and took on the role of secretary . Gerber filed an application for a charter as a non @-@ profit organization with the state of Illinois on December 10 , 1924 . The application outlined the goals and purposes of the Society : 
 [ T ] o promote and protect the interests of people who by reasons of mental and physical abnormalities are abused and hindered in the legal pursuit of happiness which is guaranteed them by the Declaration of Independence and to combat the public prejudices against them by dissemination of factors according to modern science among intellectuals of mature age . The Society stands only for law and order ; it is in harmony with any and all general laws insofar as they protect the rights of others , and does in no manner recommend any acts in violation of present laws nor advocate any manner inimical to the public welfare . 
 An African American clergyman named John T. Graves signed on as president of the new organization and Gerber , Graves and five others were listed as directors . The state granted the charter on December 24 , 1924 , making the Society the oldest documented homosexual organization in the nation . Despite deliberately keeping the goals of the Society vague and excluding any mention of homosexuality from its mission statement , Society members were still surprised that no one with the state investigated any further before issuing the charter . 
 The society 's newsletter , Friendship and Freedom , was the first gay @-@ interest publication in the United States . However , few Society members were willing to receive mailings of the newsletter , fearing that postal inspectors would deem the publication obscene under the Comstock Act . Indeed , all gay @-@ interest publications were deemed obscene until 1958 , when the Supreme Court ruled in One , Inc. v. <unk> that publishing homosexual content did not mean the content was automatically obscene . Two issues of Friendship and Freedom were written and produced , entirely by Gerber . No copies of the newsletter are known to exist . 
 Gerber formulated a three @-@ point strategy for winning what he referred to as " homosexual emancipation " : 
 " ... engage in a series of lectures pointing out the attitude of society in relation to their own behavior and especially urging against the seduction of adolescents . 
 " Through a publication ... we would keep the homophile world in touch with the progress of our efforts .... 
 " Through self @-@ discipline , <unk> would win the confidence and assistance of legal authorities and legislators in understanding the problem : that these authorities should be educated on the futility and folly of long prison terms for those committing homosexual acts . " 
 Gerber set out to expand the Society 's membership beyond the original seven but had difficulty interesting anyone other than poorer gays in joining ; he was also unable to gain any financial support from the more affluent members of Chicago 's gay community . Gerber sought out the support of people in the medical professions and sex education advocates and was frustrated when he was unable to secure it , because of their fear of ruining their reputations through the association with homosexuality . Contemplating this failure in 1962 , Gerber stated , 
 The first difficulty was in rounding up enough members and contributors so the work could go forward . The average homosexual , I found , was ignorant concerning himself . Others were fearful . Still others were frantic or depraved . Some were blasé . Many homosexuals told me that their search for forbidden fruit was the real spice of life . With this argument , they rejected our aims . We wondered how we could accomplish anything with such resistance from our own people . 
 Gerber shouldered all of the labor and financial obligations for the Society and for production of Friendship and Freedom , something he was willing to do in service of the cause , believing it possible he would be remembered as the gay Abraham Lincoln for his effort . The Society sought affiliation with the British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology but the British Society declined , afraid of being linked with any organization that was specifically for homosexuals . 
 = = Demise = = 
 Gerber and Graves decided to limit Society membership to gay men and exclude bisexuals . Unknown to them , the Society 's vice @-@ president Al Weininger , a man Gerber described as " an indigent laundry queen " , was married with two children . Weininger 's wife reported the Society to a social worker in the summer of 1925 , calling them " degenerates " and making claims of " strange doings " in front of her children . 
 The police broke in on Gerber in the middle of the night with a reporter from the Chicago Examiner in tow , interrogated him , seized his personal papers and arrested him . The next morning , Gerber arrived in court to learn that Graves , Weininger and Weininger 's male companion had also been arrested . The Examiner reported the story under the headline " Strange Sex Cult Exposed " . The paper erroneously reported that Weininger and other members of the Society had performed sex acts in front of Weininger 's children and that Society literature encouraged men to abandon their wives and children . This latter statement was in direct contradiction to the Society 's policy of only admitting men who were exclusively homosexual . Gerber was put through three separate trials , before charges against him were finally dismissed because he was arrested without a warrant . 
 Gerber 's defense cost him his life savings , some of which may have been in the form of bribes paid through his lawyer . The police never returned Gerber 's personal papers , his typewriter or his remaining copies of Friendship and Freedom despite a court order compelling their return . The only concrete record of the newsletter 's existence is a photograph of one issue in a German homophile magazine and a review of the issue in a French homophile publication . 
 Although Gerber avoided prosecution for obscenity under the Comstock Act , he lost his post office job for " conduct unbecoming a postal worker " . Weininger paid a $ 10 fine ( $ 133 in 2013 dollars ) for " disorderly conduct " . With Gerber feeling he had hit a " solid wall of ignorance , hypocrisy , meanness and corruption " and unable to continue his financial support , the Society dismantled , and Gerber was left embittered that none of the wealthier gays of Chicago had come to his aid for a cause he believed was designed to advance the common good . He left Chicago for New York City , where he re @-@ enlisted in the Army , serving for 17 years before being honorably discharged . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Henry Gerber and the Society for Human Rights serve as direct links between the LGBT @-@ related activism of the Weimar Republic and the American homophile movement of the 1950s . In 1929 , a young man named Harry Hay was living in Los Angeles . He soon discovered the cruising scene in Pershing Square , where he met Champ Simmons , a man who had been a lover of one of Gerber 's Society compatriots . This man told Hay about the Society 's brief history , warning Hay of the futility of trying to organize gay men . Although Hay would later deny that he had any knowledge of previous LGBT activism , he was inspired by this knowledge to conceive in 1948 a proposal for a gay men 's political and social group . In 1950 Hay 's idea reached fruition when he and several other men founded the Mattachine Society , the first enduring LGBT rights organization in the United States . 
 Gerber was posthumously inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame in 1992 . The Henry Gerber House , located at 1701 N. Crilly Court , Chicago , contains the apartment in which Gerber lived when he founded the Society . It was designated a Chicago Landmark on June 1 , 2001 . In June 2015 it was named a National Historic Landmark . The Gerber / Hart Library at 6500 N. Clark St in Chicago is named in honor of Gerber and early civil rights defender Pearl M. Hart . 
 = William de Braose , 2nd Baron Braose = 
 William de Braose , ( sometimes William de Briouze , William de <unk> , William de <unk> or William de <unk> ; c . 1260 – 1326 ) was the second Baron Braose , as well as Lord of Gower and Lord of Bramber . He was held as a hostage after being captured in 1264 during the Second Barons ' War and records of some of his childhood expenses survive from his time as a hostage . He first entered royal service in 1286 and , in 1291 , he succeeded his father as baron . He continued in royal military service , serving in Scotland as well as in Wales . Protracted disputes over his lands embroiled him throughout his life and at the end of his life helped spark a revolt against King Edward II of England 's favourites , the Despensers . He married twice , and his heirs were his daughter Aline and his grandson John de Bohun . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Braose was the son of William de Braose , 1st Baron Braose and his first wife , Aline , daughter of Thomas de Multon . He was likely born around 1260 , as his age was given as about 46 in 1307 . Other events prove that he was born prior to 1264 , as he was captured in that year . This came about during the Second Barons ' War ( 1264 – 1267 ) during the reign of King Henry III of England , as the elder Braose had sided with the king during Simon de Montfort 's rebellion . The younger Braose was a hostage in the custody of Montfort 's wife , Eleanor . Her household accounts include expenses related to the younger William 's care . 
 Sometime around 1285 , Braose confirmed grants of land by his ancestors to the religious house of Sele Priory . In 1286 Braose was in the king 's service , for unspecified duties overseas . It is possible that these included accompanying the king , Edward I , to Paris where Edward performed homage to the new French king , Philip IV , for Edward 's French lands . Braose played a significant role in King Edward 's Welsh wars . In the winter of 1287 – 8 he commanded the force blockading Emlyn castle . His men also provided the escort for the transport of a huge siege engine from <unk> to Emlyn . The arrival of the engine , with 480 great stones as ammunition , persuaded the defenders of the castle to surrender peaceably . 
 = = Marcher Baron = = 
 The younger Braose succeeded his father before 1 March 1291 , when he did homage for his father 's lands . He received custody of his father 's lands on 2 March 1291 , which had been placed into the custody of Robert de <unk> on 12 January 1291 . He was summoned a number of times to Parliament from 1291 until 1322 as Baron Braose . He was the second Baron Braose , as well as Lord of Gower and Lord of Bramber . 
 After his father 's death , Braose continued to serve Edward . He contributed both money and personal military service in Edward 's wars in Wales , Scotland , and France . He saw service in Gascony in 1294 . In 1297 he took part in a military campaign in Flanders . As a reward for his service in Flanders , he received the wardship of John de Mowbray , who Braose eventually married to his daughter Aline . From 1298 to 1306 he was involved in the Scottish wars , and was at the Battle of Falkirk on 22 July 1298 . Besides the military service , he served the king in 1301 by signing a letter from the leading barons of England to Pope Boniface VIII in which the barons decried papal interference in the royal rights of England . 
 Braose captured the Welsh rebel William Cragh in 1290 , whose miraculous resurrection after being hanged was attributed to Thomas de Cantilupe . This led in 1307 to Braose giving testimony to papal commissioners inquiring into the events surrounding Cragh 's hanging and whether or not it would support the canonisation of Cantilupe . 
 It was most likely Braose who commissioned a condensed copy of Domesday Book , now Public Record Office manuscript <unk> / 1 . This copy has a marginal notation of " Br " next to the estates owned by Braose 's ancestor , the first William de Braose . 
 Braose was embroiled in a dispute over his lordship of Gower in 1299 when the Bishop of Llandaff , John de Monmouth , brought a case against Braose to the king . Although the case was adjudicated in 1302 , the resulting decision was overturned . In 1304 Braose secured King Edward 's confirmation of earlier grants and charters granting Braose special rights and liberties in Gower . He managed this because he was serving the king in Scotland at the time , and thus had easy access to the king . In 1305 , however , Braose miscalculated and insulted a royal judge , using " gross and <unk> words " to describe the royal official . This episode caused the case of Gower to be reopened in 1306 , and Braose was only able to settle the issue again by the grant of rights to his men in Swansea and Gower . 
 In 1320 King Edward II of England confiscated the lordship of Gower on the grounds that Braose had given it to his son @-@ in @-@ law Mowbray without royal permission . Over the preceding years Braose had promised Gower to a number of persons , including Humphrey de Bohun , the Earl of Hereford , Hugh Despenser the Younger , and Roger Mortimer of Wigmore . Mowbray then in late 1319 took custody of Gower to protect his rights . Despenser persuaded the king in 1320 to take Gower into royal hands in October , and was appointed keeper of the honour in November . The other lords in the Welsh Marches resented this seizure , feeling that the king 's excuse for it was not applicable . The seizure was one of the precipitating causes of the baronial rebellion that led to the exile of the Despensers in 1321 . In 1322 Gower was given to the younger Despenser again , who then traded it for the honours of Usk and Caerleon . Braose was then induced to sue the new holder of Gower for the return of the barony in April 1324 , which action succeeded in June 1324 . Braose then promptly gave Gower to the elder Despenser , returning the property to the Despenser family once more . The lordship of Gower eventually ended up in the hands of the Beauchamp family , but it was not until the 1350s that the issue was decided . 
 = = Marriage , death , and legacy = = 
 The name of Braose 's first wife was Agnes , but her family is not known . His second wife was Elizabeth , the daughter and heiress of Raymund de Sully . He had two daughters with his first wife , but no children with his second wife , who outlived him . It appears that there was a son named William , who was the subject of a military summons from King Edward in 1311 , but nothing further is mentioned of him after 1315 . In 1316 a settlement of William the father 's estates made no mention of this son making it likely that the son died before this date . 
 Braose died not long before 1 May 1326 and his heirs were his daughter Aline and his grandson John de Bohun . Aline , the elder daughter , married John de Mowbray and Richard de <unk> . The second daughter , Joan , married James de Bohun and Richard Foliot , son of Jordan Foliot . Mowbray received the lands of Gower and Bramber before Braose 's death . 
 Braose was known as a man often in debt and as being unable to manage his cash flow well . Thomas Walsingham stated in his chronicle that Braose was " very rich by descent but a <unk> of the property left to him " . 
 = Cologne Central Mosque = 
 The Cologne Central Mosque ( German : DITIB @-@ <unk> Köln , Turkish : <unk> @-@ Camii ) is a building commissioned by German Muslims of the Organization DITIB for a large , representative <unk> ( central mosque ) in Cologne , Germany . After some controversy , the project won the approval of Cologne 's city council . 
 The mosque is designed in Ottoman architectural style , with glass walls , two minarets and a dome . The mosque is proposed to have a bazaar as well as other secular areas intended for interfaith interactions . As the mosque will be one of Europe 's biggest , it has been criticized for its size , particularly the height of the minarets . 
 = = Design = = 
 The 48 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 500 m2 ) mosque will cost £ 15 – 20 million to build , aiming to house 2 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 worshippers . The proposed mosque will be funded by <unk> <unk> Türk <unk> <unk> ( DITIB ) , a branch of the Turkish government 's religious affairs authority , bank loans , and donations from 884 Muslim associations . Cologne 's St. Theodore Catholic Church has also decided to fundraise for the mosque . The architect of the mosque is Paul Böhm , who specializes in building churches . 
 The planned mosque will be in the Ottoman architecture style . It will have a concrete and glass dome , and two 55 meter high minarets . The mosque will have the bazaar and entrance on the ground floor , lecture halls in the basement , the prayer area on the upper floor and include a Muslim library . A well is intended to be placed in the center to connect the two levels and to create a pleasant atmosphere . The mosque consists of flat @-@ like wall screens which form a dome in the center . 
 It will also have glass walls , which according to DITIB spokesman <unk> will give visitors a feeling of openness . According to the architect , openness is further enhanced by an inviting staircase from the street . The developers have required that the secular areas of the mosque ( e.g. the restaurant , event halls and stores ) be open to people of all religions . 
 A plan welcomed by then mayor of Cologne Fritz <unk> to build shorter <unk> was dropped after the architects said the plan would leave the minarets out of proportion with the rest of the building and surrounding structures . Construction of the opposed higher <unk> will continue . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The project has been opposed by author Ralph Giordano , right @-@ wing groups , and neo @-@ Nazis . Jörg Uckermann , then local district 's deputy mayor , has criticized the project saying that " We don 't want to build a Turkish ghetto in <unk> . I know about <unk> and I don 't want that here . " 
 Markus Wiener of local activist group Pro Cologne , expressed his fear that the Cologne mosque will empower the Muslim population too much . 
 On June 16 , 2007 , 200 people gathered in a protest organized by Pro Cologne against the mosque including representatives from the Austrian Freedom Party and the Belgian Vlaams Belang . Then district deputy mayor Uckermann seconded that he thinks many residents reject the mosque because they believe that Cologne is a “ Christian city ” . The prominent author Ralph Giordano stated that he opposed the project as the mosque would be “ an expression of the creeping Islamization of our land ” , a “ declaration of war ” , and that he wouldn 't want to see women wearing <unk> on German streets , likening their appearance to “ human penguins ” . Henryk M. Broder , a journalist , disagrees with Giordano 's metaphor but said that “ A mosque is more than a church or a synagogue . It is a political statement . ” Giordano 's remarks have turned the local dispute into a national debate about the place of Islam in <unk> and other prominent Germans criticized the project as well . District mayor Uckermann stated that Giordano 's comments “ broke down the wall . Before if you criticised this monstrous mosque you were a Nazi . But we have a problem with the integration of Muslims . It 's a question of language and culture . ” Uckermann left the conservative CDU for right @-@ wing Pro Cologne in 2008 after being voted out of office as the district 's deputy mayor and reportedly facing party exclusion . 
 The city 's official for integration <unk> <unk> stated that " it is important that the Muslims here get dignified houses of prayer " and added that " two hundred years ago , the Protestants had to pray secretively in Catholic Cologne [ ... ] that is something we can 't imagine anymore today . " The city 's mayor , Fritz <unk> , who supports the project said that “ For me , it is self @-@ evident that the Muslims need to have a prestigious place of worship , but it bothers me when people have lived here for 35 years and they don ’ t speak a single word of German . ” Christian leaders have taken similarly ambivalent stances : the Catholic Church has long supported the project , though recently Cardinal Joachim Meisner , Archbishop of Cologne , has been more cautious : when asked if he was afraid of the mosque , he said , “ I don 't want to say I 'm afraid , but I have an uneasy feeling . ” He also stated that Turkey should allow its Christian minorities equivalent rights . He said the mosque would change the skyline of Cologne . Wolfgang Huber , Germany 's top Protestant bishop , criticized the “ male domination ” he saw in Islam and said Muslims should be able to convert to Christianity without fearing reprisals and the penalty of death . 
 Public opinion seems “ <unk> supportive , with a majority of residents saying they favor it ” . A poll taken by a local newspaper among 500 Cologne residents showed that the project is supported by 63 % , of whom 27 % want its size to be reduced . 
 A protest planned by Pro Cologne for September 20 , 2008 was canceled by police at the last minute in the interest of public safety , after clashes between police and protestors . 
 On August 28 , 2008 , the Cologne City Council voted to approve the construction of the <unk> this position was taken by all parties except the Christian democrats ( CDU ) . Outside the hall , a group of 30 protesters demonstrated against the approval , while 100 demonstrated in favor of it . 
 The Cologne mosque project has been contrasted with a less controversial project in Duisburg , Germany : in Duisburg , there was co @-@ operation and good communication from an early stage between German politicians , church and community leaders and the developers of the mosque , . 
 = Malliswari ( 1951 film ) = 
 Malliswari is a 1951 Indian Telugu @-@ language historical romance film produced and directed by Bommireddy Narasimha Reddy under his banner Vauhini Studios . N. T. Rama Rao and Bhanumathi Ramakrishna star as a couple – Nagaraju and Malliswari – who are separated by Malliswari 's greedy mother . Malliswari is sent to the king 's palace according to the custom of " Rani Vasam " , a tradition during the Vijayanagara Empire wherein young women were fetched to the palace with an offering gold and jewellery to their parents . The rest of the film focuses on the consequences faced by Nagaraju when he , against all rules , surreptitiously enters the palace to meet Malliswari . 
 Narasimha Reddy wanted to make a film based on Krishnadevaraya 's character ever since his visit to Hampi for the filming of his debut <unk> ( 1939 ) . He employed Devulapalli Krishnasastri to write the film 's script and took inspiration from Buchibabu 's play " Rayalavari Karunakruthyamu " and Devan Sharar 's short story " The Emperor and the Slave Girl " . He also incorporated into the script a few incidents from his childhood for the pranks between Nagaraju and Malliswari . S. Rajeswara Rao composed the film 's music , Adi M. Irani and B. N. Konda Reddy provided the cinematography , H. R. Narayana and Vasu edited the film , and A. K. Shekhar was the film 's production designer . 
 The production phase of Malliswari lasted for two years and the film was released on 20 December 1951 . It opened to a tepid response at the box office , but soon saw a growth in ticket sales due to favourable word of mouth . It grossed over ₹ 0 @.@ 8 million and was commercially successful . Malliswari was later screened at the 9th International Film Festival of India and the 1952 Peking film festival , making it the first Telugu film to be screened in an international film festival . Narasimha Reddy planned to dub the film into English , but backed out due to budget considerations . 
 Malliswari achieved cult status in Telugu cinema and is considered one of the best works of Narasimha Reddy as a filmmaker . It became the first film script to be serialised in the Vijayachitra magazine , and a few universities in the United States wished to have the film 's script as a part of their textual studies . On the centenary of Indian cinema in April 2013 , CNN @-@ IBN included Malliswari in its list , " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During the reign of the Vijayanagara Empire , " Rani Vasam " was a common tradition that was considered a " boon " for young women . According to the tradition , young women were made the official residents of the palace when palanquins were sent to fetch them from their homes , offering large quantities of gold and jewellery to the parents in exchange . While the families of these women continue to cherish their daughters , these women were prohibited from having any contact with any male or letting any male visit them without permission . The ones who violated the rule were beheaded . 
 Nagaraju and Malliswari of Veerapuram are maternal cousins who became close friends in childhood . This angers Malliswari 's mother Nagamma , who criticises Nagaraju and his mother Govindamma , mainly for their economic status . Malliswari 's father Narappa , also the village head , is a silent spectator , and her uncle <unk> is a minister in the court of Krishnadevaraya , the king of the Vijayanagara Empire . Once , Nagaraju and Malliswari visit the nearby village and take shelter in a mandapa at night during a rainfall . Krishnadevaraya and Allasani Peddana , along with a few soldiers , enter the same mandapa where there are impressed with Malliswari 's talent as a singer and dancer . Nagaraju and Malliswari , unaware of their true identity , converse with them , and Nagaraju asks them to recommend the Malliswari to Krishnadevaraya for Rani Vasam . 
 Malliswari is against this and sees this as a prank by Nagaraju . While Nagamma is keen to send her to Rani Vasam , Narappa wants his daughter to marry Nagaraju . Nagamma voices her opinion which insults Govindamma and Nagaraju , who then decides to leave Veerapuram and earn money to convince Nagamma to approve his marriage to Malliswari . Nagaraju becomes a successful sculptor in Vijayanagara and decides to return to Veerapuram . However , before he can do so , Krishnadevaraya and his wife Tirumaladevi appoint Malliswari as the official resident of the palace , thereby granting her " Rani Vasam " . 
 Due to her insatiable desire for wealth , Nagamma forcibly sends Malliswari to the palace , and , when Nagaraju returns on the same night and learns what has happened , he becomes depressed . Govindamma become unstable after Nagaraju begins to lead the life of a recluse , mulling over his memories of Malliswari . A group of sculptors meet Nagaraju and ask him to accompany them to Vijayanagara to build a special mandapa for dancers , and he agrees . There , he meets Malliswari . They are separated by her maid Jalaja , who is afraid that they will be beheaded , as stipulated in the Rani Vasam tradition . Knowing about her past , Jalaja arranges a meeting of Malliswari with Nagaraju on the banks of the Tungabhadra river at midnight . 
 Krishnadevaraya and his ministry attend the newly constructed dance hall , where they learn that Nagaraju is one of the sculptors . That night , Malliswari wants to meet Nagaraju again but is held back after receiving a message that Krishnadevaraya and Tirumaladevi , along with other official residents of the palace , will be attending the play " Usha Parinayam " at the dance hall and that Malliswari is expected to participate in it . Nagaraju , who is waiting for her near the Tungabhadra river , enters the palace and is chased by the soldiers . Malliswari sees Nagaraju running and calls out to him . To prevent Malliswari from being beheaded , Nagaraju acts as if he does not know her , but they are soon jailed for violating the rules of Rani Vasam . 
 Jalaja reveals the love story of Malliswari and Nagaraju to Tirumaladevi . She also reveals that Malliswari denied any help from her and instead chose to die along with Nagaraju . The next morning , the hanging nooses are kept ready and the duo meet Krishnadevaraya before killing them . When Nagaraju blames Krishnadevaraya for sending a palanquin to her house for Rani Vasam , Krishnadevaraya defends his action and reminds Nagaraju that it was he who had asked him to send Malliswari to Rani Vasam . Krishnadevaraya forgives both Nagaraju and Malliswari , and their marriage is conducted in a grand manner at the palace . 
 = = Cast = = 
 N. T. Rama Rao as Nagaraju 
 Bhanumathi Ramakrishna as Malliswari 
 <unk> as Krishnadevaraya 
 Kumari as Tirumaladevi 
 T. G. Kamala Devi as Jalaja 
 <unk> Raghava Rao as Allasani Peddana 
 Rushyendramani as Nagamma 
 <unk> as Narappa 
 Surabhi Kamalabai as Govindamma 
 <unk> Venkata Subbaiah as <unk> 
 Revathi in a cameo appearance in the song " <unk> <unk> " 
 Baby Mallika as Young Malliswari 
 Master Venkata Ramana as Young Nagaraju 
 = = Production = = 
 During the filming of his directorial debut <unk> ( 1939 ) at Hampi , Bommireddy Narasimha Reddy visited the Virupaksha Temple to capture the beauty of the monuments , which reflected the taste and artistic outlook of Krishnadevaraya , king of the Vijayanagara Empire . At the heart of the temple , Narasimha Reddy felt that he was standing exactly at a place where Krishnadevaraya had once stood and offered prayers to the deity . From that moment , Reddy decided to make a film in which Krishnadevaraya would be the main character , and he began working on the script . 
 Narasimha Reddy chose the concept of Rayalavari Karunakruthyamu , a popular play written by Telugu novelist Buchibabu that was published in the literary journal Bharathi ( 1944 ) and later broadcast by All India Radio , Madras . He approached Telugu poet and playwright Devulapalli Krishnasastri to write the film 's script and lyrics after being impressed with his previous works . Narasimha Reddy made a few changes to Buchibabu 's play and reworked Krishnadevaraya 's character . 
 Apart from Rayalavari Karunakruthyamu , Krishnasastri 's script also took inspiration from Devan Sharar 's short story , The Emperor and the Slave Girl , which was published in the now defunct magazine , The Illustrated Weekly of India . It was Narasimha Reddy 's practice to credit the authors of works from which he borrowed the basic premise for a film , but in this film , that was not the case . <unk> revealed the fact in an interview with Vijayachitra magazine after Narasimha Reddy 's death in 1977 . However , in the film 's opening credits , Buchibabu was listed as the film 's writer along with Krishnasastri . Adi M. Irani and B. N. Konda Reddy were the film 's cinematographers ; S. Rajeswara Rao and <unk> Ramarao composed the film 's music ; H. R. Narayana and Vasu edited the film . A. K. Shekhar was the film 's production designer and Thota Tharani 's father Thota Venkateswara Rao assisted him . 
 N. T. Rama Rao was chosen to play Nagaraju , a sculptor during the period of Krishnadevaraya 's rule . Narasimha Reddy wanted to cast a fresh face for the role of Malliswari and screen @-@ tested Kannada actress Revathi . He later finalised Bhanumathi Ramakrishna , who played a negative role in his previous film <unk> Seema ( 1945 ) , as the film 's female lead , as he felt an experienced actress with a good voice would do better justice to the role . Revathi made a cameo appearance in the song " <unk> <unk> " . Differences arose between Narasimha Reddy and Bhanumathi due to the latter 's lack of punctuality . Due to the delay in production of Malliswari , Bhanumathi had begun working in Prema ( 1952 ) , which was produced by her husband P. S. Ramakrishna Rao . As she sported a curly hairdo , a body double was used for a few sequences as it was in contrast to the simple and soft tresses she sported in this film . Regarding the same , Bhanumathi criticised Narasimha Reddy , stating that he wanted his actresses to concentrate on his films and avoid getting married . 
 Despite this , Narasimha Reddy said that Rama Rao and Bhanumathi " made a cute on @-@ screen pair " , adding that one cannot imagine anyone else as Nagaraju and Malleswari . T. G. Kamala Devi , who played the role of Malliswari in Buchibabu 's radio play , was cast as Jalaja , Malliswari 's maid in the film . Pasumarthi Krishnamurthy choreographed the songs . Narasimha Reddy incorporated a few of his childhood incidents in the film , and according to Bhanumathi , the pranks between Malliswari and Nagaraju and the sequence before the song " Kothi <unk> Pellanta " were inspired by his childhood experiences . Apart from designing the sets , Shekhar took care of the artists ' hair and costumes . He also recreated the shores of the Tungabhadra River on a floor a Vauhini Studios building in Madras for the song " Manasuna Mallela " . The production phase of Malliswari lasted two years . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtrack of Malliswari composed by S. Rajeswara Rao consists of 19 songs whose lyrics were penned by Devulapalli Krishnasastri . The sound mixing process was supervised by A. Krishnan and P. V. <unk> Rao . It was processed by N. C. Sen Gupta and orchestrated by <unk> Ramarao , who was , however , credited as one of the film 's music directors in the opening credits . The song " Manasuna Mallela " was composed using the Kalyani raga . Purandara Dasa 's composition " Sri <unk> " was used in the film 's opening credits . Being a playback singer , Bhanumathi provided vocals for all the songs featuring her character Malliswari . Composing the soundtrack took six months and Rajeswara Rao held rehearsals for both Ghantasala and Bhanumathi along with others . The soundtrack , marketed by Saregama , was released on 31 December 1951 . 
 The soundtrack was a critical and commercial success . In his review for Telugu Swatantra magazine , writer <unk> praised the film 's sound designing by Krishnan and <unk> Rao stating , " Heavy rain with winds lashed outside as [ Malliswari ] ' s mother converses with her husband <unk> . Their conversation is clearly audible along with the sound of the rain and the wind . Even the flutter of the towel on <unk> 's shoulder is heard clearly " . In The Hans India , Aruna Ravikumar surmised that , for the song " Akasha <unk> " , Krishnasastri had borrowed the image of a cloud as messenger between lovers from the poem " <unk> " by Indian Sanskrit poet Kālidāsa . Rajeswara Rao considered Malliswari to be his best work after S. S. Vasan 's Chandralekha ( 1948 ) . He especially liked " Akasha <unk> " and performed it numerous times at events he attended . 
 After Bhanumathi 's death in December 2005 , K. V. S. Madhav of The Hindu recalled , " Even at the ripe age of 70 @-@ something , when she rendered her immortal number from Malleswari , ' Manasuna Mallela <unk> ... ' in that honey @-@ dipped voice , there was no eye that did not turn moist at Ravindra Bharathi almost a decade ago . " 
 Track listing 
 All lyrics written by Devulapalli Krishnasastri . 
 = = Release , reception and legacy = = 
 Malliswari was released on 20 December 1951 . Initially , it received a tepid response at the box office . However , ticket sales picked up due to positive word of mouth and the film became commercially successful . Narasimha Reddy re @-@ released the film after a gap , and it again achieved similar success . It was screened at the 9th International Film Festival of India under the " Indian Panorama " section . Malliswari was screened at the 1952 Peking film festival , making it the first Telugu film to be screened at an international film festival . 
 Malliswari grossed over ₹ 0 @.@ 8 million , which according to Narasimha Reddy , was a huge amount in those days . Vasan advised <unk> Reddy to dub the film into Hindi . A 16 mm print was sent to the United States . After being screened in various countries , Narasimha Reddy wanted to dub Malliswari into English . However , the plans were dropped due to budget considerations . Delhi Telugu <unk> screened the film at Azad Bhawan , New Delhi , on 21 February 2004 . The 60th anniversary of Malliswari was celebrated with an event at the Sri Thyagaraja Gana Sabha , <unk> , on 20 December 2011 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In his review for <unk> magazine , <unk> Patel called Malliswari an " inspiring motion picture " which would " save us the blush when compared with the best of motion pictures of the world " . Film historian Randor Guy called Malliswari a " poem in celluloid , told with rare artistic finesse , which lingers long in the memory " . M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu wrote , " No wonder , the film took two years to complete , but what ultimately mattered was the quality of the product , an all @-@ time classic of which the Telugu film industry is proud . It is a simple story , well told and represented by excellence in all sectors of film <unk> [ sic ] " . Regarding Bhanumathi 's performance , Narasimham stated that she " breathed life " into Malliswari 's character with her " natural acting and mellifluous renditions " . 
 In his book " <unk> Chalana Chitram " , K. N. T. Sastry wrote that Bhanumathi 's expressions were " heavenly " and called Shekhar 's production design " commendable " . The directorate of the International Film Festival of India called Malliswari a " nostalgic film of kings and proud queens , baroque @-@ style palaces and dancers , and ordinary mortals who dared to fall in love " . 
 = = = <unk> plans = = = 
 In November 2007 , a Hyderabad @-@ based company named Goldstone Technologies acquired the film negative rights of fourteen Telugu films produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios , including Mayabazar ( 1957 ) and Malliswari , to release their digitally remastered versions in colour . Though the digitally remastered and colourised version of Mayabazar , released in January 2010 , was commercially successful , Goldstone Technologies decided not to remaster the remaining fourteen films including Malliswari , saying that most of the producers who sold the rights of the negatives to TV channels lost control over them . Goldstone said furthermore that there were a number of legal issues over ownership and copyright issues whenever other producers try to do something on their own . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 When people talk of good movies , of clean films , of purposeful cinema , BN is remembered , and his films like <unk> , Malleswari , Bangaru Papa , Devata are screened , some go nostalgic ... some give out deep sighs ... some shed silent tears . Sentimental folks long for the bygone days of glory that was Telugu cinema and that was BN Reddi . 
 Malliswari is regarded as one of the cult classic films of Telugu cinema . It is one of the earliest Telugu films making use of Indian art and architecture and was followed by films such as Sankarabharanam ( 1980 ) , <unk> ( 1982 ) , Ananda Bhairavi ( 1983 ) , Sagara Sangamam ( 1983 ) , and <unk> ( 1988 ) . It was also the first film script to be serialised in Vijayachitra magazine . During the film 's screening in the United States , a few universities requested the film 's script as a part of their film study curriculum . Narasimha Reddy considered Malliswari his best work as a filmmaker , and the film was recognised as such . Malliswari 's success led to Rama Rao 's resurgence from a career slump . A 2004 Telugu film directed by K. Vijaya Bhaskar was also titled Malliswari and marked the debut of the British @-@ Indian film actress Katrina Kaif in Telugu cinema . 
 In January 2007 , M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu included Malliswari on a list of films that have had an impact on society and Telugu cinema along with Mala Pilla ( 1938 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1939 ) , Vara <unk> ( 1939 ) , Bhakta Potana ( 1942 ) , Shavukaru ( 1950 ) , <unk> ( 1954 ) , Mayabazar ( 1957 ) and Lava Kusa ( 1963 ) . In May 2012 , Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com mentioned Malliswari for the letter M in her list , " The A to Z of Telugu Cinema " . Commenting on <unk> ( 2012 ) , actor and writer Gollapudi Maruti Rao stated , " Some movies might make money but a Malleswari , a Sankarabharanam , a <unk> and movies like them cannot be forgotten " . On the centenary of Indian cinema in April 2013 , CNN @-@ IBN included Malliswari in its list , " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . 
 = Tropical Storm Earl ( 2004 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Earl caused minor damage in the Windward Islands in mid @-@ August 2004 . The sixth tropical cyclone and named storm of the annual hurricane season , Earl developed on August 13 from a tropical wave centered well east of the Lesser Antilles . The depression gradually organized as it tracked west @-@ northwestward and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Earl roughly a day after genesis . As the system approached the Windward Islands it continued to slowly strengthen , peaking as a 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) tropical storm early on August 15 . However , the system unexpectedly degenerated into a tropical wave that afternoon , likely due to its fast forward motion . The remnants of Earl continued across the Caribbean Sea and eventually re @-@ developed into Hurricane Frank in the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 23 . 
 Gusty winds in Grenada damaged at least 34 roofs and knocked down twelve trees and six electrical poles . Additionally , a nursing home on the island was evacuated due to significant structural damage . Two houses lost their roofs in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , while moderate crop damage was reported on the island . Downed trees and power lines in Tobago left 90 % of the island without electricity . Overall , Earl was responsible for one fatality , nineteen missing , and an unknown amount of damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The formation of Tropical Storm Earl is attributed to a low @-@ latitude , vigorous tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean on August 10 . As the disturbance moved towards the west , satellite imagery revealed a much better structure with much @-@ improved banding features and fair upper @-@ level outflow , leading to the formation of Tropical Depression Five at 1800 UTC on August 13 , situated roughly 1000 mi ( 1610 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . The depression progressed rapidly towards the west @-@ northwest the following day , embedded and under the influence of a deep easterly flow around the southern periphery of a subtropical ridge to the cyclone 's north . A combination of improved banding features and satellite intensity estimates by the afternoon of August 14 led to the subsequent upgrade of the system to Tropical Storm Earl . At this time , the cyclone was situated about 325 mi ( 525 km / h ) east of Barbados . 
 Within an environment characterized by low wind shear , high atmospheric humidity , and warm sea surface temperatures , Earl intensified , reaching a peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) by 0600 UTC on August 15 . Initial forecasts from the National Hurricane Center depicted gradual intensification into a powerful hurricane as the system entered the central Caribbean Sea , but these forecasts were lowered in later advisories . Despite an impressive satellite presentation associated with Earl as it passed through the southern Leeward Islands , a hurricane hunter flight reported that the system no longer had a low @-@ level circulation late on August 15 . As a result , the NHC discontinued advisories on the system and declared it an open tropical wave . While not entirely sure , it is suspected that the fast motion of the cyclone attributed to its dissipation . The remnant wave eventually entered the eastern Pacific Ocean , developing into Hurricane Frank by August 23 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Following the development of Tropical Storm Earl , tropical storm watches were issued for Barbados , St. Vincent , and St. Lucia . This watch was modified to a tropical storm warning by August 14 at 2100 UTC , with the addition of the islands of the Grenadines , Trinidad , Tobago , and Grenada . The tropical storm warning for Barbados was changed to a tropical storm watch the following day at 1200 UTC , and all tropical cyclone watches and warnings were discontinued by 1800 UTC . In preparation of the storm , several hundred people in Grenada evacuated from low @-@ lying areas to schools set up as shelters . Shopkeepers boarded windows , while airports were temporarily shut down across the Leeward Islands . Initial forecasts predicted that Earl would strengthen considerably into a hurricane and head towards Florida once in the Caribbean Sea , a state already impacted heavily earlier in the month by Hurricane Charley . The local officials urged residents to exercise caution , but not panic due to the large errors in long @-@ range forecasts . These warnings eased upon the system 's degeneration into an open tropical wave . 
 In Grenada , Earl produced heavy rains and strong winds that caused moderate damage . On the main island , roofs were blown off twelve homes while three others were partially damaged ; twelve trees and six power poles were also knocked down by the winds . The heavy rain associated with the tropical storm triggered nine mudslides and three rockslides on the island . Nearby , six homes had their roofs completely blown off while thirteen others were damaged . Flooding was also reported on both islands ; however , no known damage resulted from them . During the storm , a nursing home had to be evacuated due to significant damage to the structure . On St Vincent and the Grenadines , at least two homes had their roofs blown off and banana crops sustained moderate damage . In Tobago , numerous trees and power lines were downed throughout the island , cutting power to 90 % of the island . The highest surface sustained winds in relation to Earl occurred on the morning of August 15 in Barbados and St. Lucia ; winds were reported at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . One person was killed by the storm and nineteen others were listed as missing . 
 Following the storm , Grenada requested assistance from the United States Agency of International Development . Local crews worked quickly to cover broken roofs and repair other structural damage . The National Emergency Relief organization were sought for assistance . 
 = Xeromphalina setulipes = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes is a species of fungus of the family Mycenaceae . First collected in 2005 , it was described and named in 2010 by Fernando Esteve @-@ Raventós and Gabriel Moreno , and is known only from oak forests in Ciudad Real Province , Spain . The species produces mushrooms with dark reddish @-@ brown caps up to 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) across , dark purplish @-@ brown stems up to 45 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in height and distinctive , arched , brown gills . The mushrooms were found growing directly from the acidic soil of the forest floor , surrounded by plant waste , during November . 
 Morphologically , the dark colour of the gills and stem , lack of a strong taste , and characters of the cystidia ( large cells found on the mushrooms ) are the most distinguishing characteristics of X. setulipes . These features allow the species to be readily distinguished from other , similar species , including X. cauticinalis and X. brunneola . Its ecology and habitat are also distinct , but it is unclear whether they can serve as certain identifying characteristics . Within the genus Xeromphalina , X. setulipes is classified in the section Mutabiles , along with several other species . It seems most closely related to X. fraxinophila , X. cornui , X. campanelloides and X. cauticinalis , but , according to Esteve @-@ Raventós and colleagues , further analysis is required to accurately judge the relationships between the species of Xeromphalina . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes was first described in 2010 in an article in Mycological Progress by Fernando Esteve @-@ Raventós and Gabriel Moreno , both of the University of Alcalá . The description was based on specimens collected during 2005 field work in Ciudad Real Province , Spain . The type specimen was collected on 17 November , and was found 770 metres ( 2 @,@ 530 ft ) above sea level . The specific epithet setulipes is from the Latin <unk> , meaning " stiff hair " , and pes , meaning " foot " , in reference to the bristly hairs that cover the stem . 
 Within Xeromphalina , X. setulipes is part of the section Mutabiles , which also contains X. campanelloides , X. cauticinalis , X. <unk> , X. cornui , and X. fraxinophila . Phylogenetic analysis performed by Esteve @-@ Raventós and colleagues concluded that X. setulipes appears to be most closely related to X. fraxinophila , X. cornui , X. campanelloides and X. cauticinalis , the five of which are clearly separate from the group containing X. <unk> , X. kauffmanii , X. brunneola , and , possibly , X. <unk> . Data from the large subunit ( <unk> ) of the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene suggests that the species is most closely related to X. campanelloides , while internal transcribed spacer ( ITS ) data place it closest to a clade containing X. cauticinalis and X. aff. parvibulbosa ( an unidentified species similar , but not identical , to X. parvibulbosa ) . Further research , analysing the ITS or <unk> loci , could serve to help clarify the precise relationships of species and positions of clades within the genus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes produces basidiocarps in the form of mushrooms . Each mushroom has a flattened @-@ convex cap of between 8 and 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 and 0 @.@ 59 in ) in diameter with a depressed centre . It is not particularly hygrophanous ( it does not change color as it loses or absorbs water ) , and , unlike the caps of related species , is neither grooved nor translucent at the margin . The cap is dark brown , sometimes with reddish colouration . It becomes paler , turning tobacco @-@ brown , when it dries ; this change is more noticeable at the cap margin . The caps of young mushrooms are smooth and hairless , but they wrinkle as they age ; however , fine , soft hairs are sometimes visible towards the margin ( which is rolled inwards ) when the cap is dry . The margin is typically not smooth ; instead , it undulates . 
 The cylindrical stem measures between 30 and 45 mm ( 1 and 2 in ) in length by 1 and 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 and 0 @.@ 08 in ) in width , though it is slightly thicker at the very bottom . It is stiff , but can be somewhat flexible . The colour is a dark brown , sometimes approaching black , with purplish hints . It appears smooth , but is actually covered in minute tufts . The hairs at the base of the stem are somewhat more visible , and are an amber colour . The gills are subdistant ( neither close to , nor distant from , one another ) and are of a distinctive shape ; they are decurrent , that is , they extend down the stem , and are noticeably arched . The gills can be up to 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick , and sometimes split into two . The gills are a tobacco @-@ brown no matter the age of the mushroom , though the edges can be paler ( sometimes whitish ) and crenulate . The flesh is firm but flexible , and the same colour as the surface . It has an indistinct smell , and a taste that is not bitter . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes has smooth , ellipsoid to somewhat cylindrical spores that measure from 5 @.@ 0 to 7 @.@ 3 micrometres ( μm ) by 2 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 7 μm . They are amyloid , meaning that they stain a dark colour in Melzer 's reagent or Lugol 's solution , and have thin cell walls . The four @-@ spored ( occasionally two @-@ spored ) basidia are shaped like narrow clubs , sometimes approaching cylindrical , and measure between 21 and 30 μm long by 4 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 5 μm wide . The sterigmata , the narrow prongs that connect the spores to the basidia , can measure up to 3 μm in length . The edge of the gill is primarily made up of cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) but there are also some basidia . The hyaline ( translucent ) cheilocystidia have an irregular , sometimes vaguely cylindrical shape , and measure between 30 and 80 μm by 3 to 7 μm . They are packed together , extending outwards from the gill in a manner reminiscent of coral , as is sometimes seen in members of the genus Mycena . The abundant caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) project prominently , and are visible to the naked eye as the minute hairs on the stem . They measure between 30 and 60 μm by 5 to 10 μm . They are swollen in the middle , tapering at each end , but are irregular in shape and are often curved . The particularly thick cell walls can be as much as 2 @.@ 5 μm wide . The caulocystidia are yellowish @-@ brown . There are a large number of <unk> ( cystidia found on the margin of the cap ) , which are similar to the cheilocystidia . They typically have thick cell walls , and numerous projections of various sorts grow from their sides . The <unk> form a mass reminiscent of coral . 
 The flesh in the gills is composed of cylindrical hyphae measuring between 4 and 8 μm thick that run parallel to one another . The hyphae typically have fairly thin , smooth walls , but they can have a small amount of brown pigment , which stains orange @-@ brown in potassium hydroxide . The pileipellis , the uppermost layer of hyphae in the cap , forms a cutis made up of cylindrical , slightly thicker @-@ walled hyphae of between 5 and 10 μm wide . They can be interwoven or primarily extending from the margin to the centre . The pigmentation is yellowish @-@ brown and stains reddish @-@ brown in potassium hydroxide . The hyphae below the pileipellis run parallel to one another and measure between 4 and 8 μm in width . Their yellowish @-@ brown pigment stains orange @-@ brown in potassium hydroxide . The stipitipellis , the uppermost layer of hyphae on the stem , also forms a cutis . The cylindrical hyphae run parallel to one another and have thick cell walls . They have a dark red @-@ brown pigment , which stains darker still in potassium hydroxide . Clamp connections are present . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes shows some similarities to X. cauticinalis . They share the amber @-@ coloured hair towards the base of the stem and both grow on soil , as opposed to directly onto wood . Further , X. cauticinalis can display caulocystidia of the same distinctive shape as those of X. setulipes ( though these are mixed with the other shapes more typical of the genus ) . X. cauticinalis mushrooms are typically of a different colour ; for instance , the area at the top of the stem is paler than the rest , compared to the entirely dark stem of X. setulipes . Furthermore , X. cauticinalis has a very bitter taste . X. setulipes shares with X. brunneola its dark colouration and some microscopic traits . However , the two clearly differ in the shape of both the cheilocystidia and the pileocystidia , the width of the spores ( the spores of X. brunneola measure between 2 and 3 μm in width ) and the fact it is found specifically in softwood woodland . Furthermore , the two do not appear to be closely related . 
 Other species within Mutabiles include X. campanelloides , which can be differentiated by the shape of the thin @-@ walled caulocystidia and yellow flesh in the stem . X. cornui grows in softwood forests with Sphagnum moss . Both the cap and the top of stem sport yellow grains . X. fraxinophila produces larger mushrooms and has yellow gills . X. parvibulbosa , while potentially featuring similar caulocystidia to X. setulipes , has a bitter or sour taste . 
 = = Habitat , distribution and ecology = = 
 Xeromphalina setulipes is only known from the type locality in the province of Ciudad Real , Spain . Members of the Mycenaceae are saprotrophic , and X. setulipes was found in woodland made up of cork oak ( Quercus suber ) and Portuguese oak ( Quercus <unk> ) , with undergrowth consisting of gum rockrose ( Cistus <unk> ) , prickly juniper ( Juniperus oxycedrus ) , and various heathers ( Erica species ) . The mushrooms were growing in clusters on the forest floor from acid soil , surrounded by dead plant matter . The species 's ecological patterns may be useful identifying characteristics , distinct from other , similar species . The mushrooms were found in autumn , and collected in November . 
 = National Police Memorial = 
 The National Police Memorial is a memorial in central London , commemorating about 4000 police officers killed in the course of their duties in the United Kingdom . It was designed by Lord Foster of Thames Bank and Per <unk> and unveiled in 2005 . The Project Architect for Foster was Peter Ridley . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 In 1984 , following the shooting of Yvonne Fletcher , film director Michael Winner founded the Police Memorial Trust . Initially the Trust concentrated on erecting smaller monuments at the points where officers had died on duty . From the mid @-@ 1990s the Trust also lobbied and raised funds for a single , larger scale memorial to commemorate all police officers who had died in the course of their duties . Winner stated that " Memorials to soldiers , sailors and airmen are commonplace , but the police fight a war with no beginning and no end " . 
 Winner donated £ 500 @,@ 000 of his own money to the campaign for a national memorial and the remainder of the total cost of £ 2 @.@ 3 million was met by a public collection . After a ten @-@ year campaign , Westminster City Council granted planning permission in October 2002 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The Memorial was built to a design by Lord Foster of Thames Bank and Danish designer Per <unk> , on the corner of The Mall and Horse Guards Road , directly outside the Old Admiralty Building . The site was occupied at the time by an air shaft on the Bakerloo line of the London Underground . 
 On 22 July 2004 a symbolic groundbreaking ceremony took place on the site , performed by Prime Minister Tony Blair , Michael Winner , and officers from the Metropolitan Police and Greater Manchester Police , representing the two forces with the highest number of officers killed in the line of duty . 
 The Memorial was formally unveiled on 26 April 2005 by Queen Elizabeth and Tony Blair . Michael Howard and Charles Kennedy , the leaders of the UK 's other leading political parties at the time , were also present . A guard of honour was provided by 56 officers wearing the uniforms of each of the UK 's police forces . The Queen stated that " It is surely appropriate that this should be positioned in The Mall - an area of London so often associated with our national way of life . When people pass by the memorial , I hope they will pause and reflect on the proud traditions that it represents . The courage and personal sacrifice recorded here will , I am certain , serve as an inspiration to us all . " 
 Despite concerns over the potential cost , construction of the Memorial eventually came in at £ 400 @,@ 000 under budget , in part because a number of the contractors concerned carried out their work free of charge . 
 The Memorial was a winner of the Royal Institute of British Architects award for 2006 . Michael Winner publicly voiced some surprise at the structure being included in the " Arts and Leisure " classification . 
 = = Architectural elements = = 
 The Memorial consists of two distinct architectural elements , linked by a terrace of Purbeck stone . A black rectangular creeper @-@ covered enclosure surrounds the air shaft , forming a single block . The northern face of the enclosure is kept free of creepers , and is inscribed with the police badge of office and the text " The National Police Memorial : Honouring Those Who Serve " . This face also includes a <unk> in which the Roll of Honour is displayed . 
 Immediately north of the block , a glass column is sited in a reflecting pool . The column is internally illuminated by fibre optic cables with a faint blue light , symbolising the blue lamp which traditionally hangs outside police stations in the United Kingdom . The column is intended to screen the <unk> from passing traffic on The Mall . The column is <unk> high , consisting of 622 stacked sheets of glass ( a total surface area of <unk> ) , weighing 28 @.@ 6 tonnes . 
 = = Roll of Honour = = 
 The Memorial contains an inscribed roll of honour behind a glass panel , containing the names of approximately 1600 officers killed whilst on duty , in the course of effecting an arrest or whilst carrying out hazardous duties . The earliest entry is that of an unknown constable killed in 1680 . The book is compiled from the approximately 4000 names recorded by the Police Roll of Honour Trust , listing all officers who have died in the line of duty . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The Memorial attracted criticism from some families of officers killed in the line of duty , regarding the high cost , and that the roll of honour lists only those officers killed during arrests or as a result of criminal acts , rather than all officers killed in the line of duty ; also that , with the book being behind glass , friends and relatives of the deceased are not able to view the relevant page . Before construction , objections were also raised to the Memorial 's construction by the London Historical Parks Group and the local residents ' association . Concern was also raised by some Irish republicans that the Memorial includes the names of those RUC officers killed in The Troubles . 
 = HMS Griffin ( H31 ) = 
 HMS Griffin ( H31 ) was a G @-@ class destroyer , built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . In World War II she took part in the Norwegian Campaign of April – May 1940 and the Battle of Dakar in September before being transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in November . She generally escorted larger ships of the Mediterranean Fleet as they protected convoys against attacks from the Italian Fleet . Griffin took part in the Battle of Cape Matapan in March 1941 and the evacuations of Greece and Crete in April – May 1941 . In June she took part in the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign and was escorting convoys and the larger ships of the Mediterranean Fleet until she was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in March 1942 . 
 Griffin saw no action in the Japanese Indian Ocean raid in April , but was escorting convoys for most of her time in the Indian Ocean . In June she returned to the Mediterranean to escort another convoy to Malta in Operation Vigorous . Beginning in November 1942 , she was converted to an escort destroyer in the United Kingdom and was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy on 1 March 1943 . The ship , now renamed HMCS Ottawa , was assigned to escort convoys in the North Atlantic until she was transferred in May 1944 to protect the forces involved with the Normandy Landings . Working with other destroyers , Ottawa sank three German submarines off the French coast before she returned to Canada for a lengthy refit . After the end of the European war in May 1945 she was used to bring Canadian troops until she was paid off in October 1945 . Ottawa was sold for scrap in August 1946 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Griffin displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . She had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Griffin carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Her complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but in increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Griffin had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 Beginning in mid @-@ 1940 , her anti @-@ aircraft armament was increased although when exactly the modifications were made is not known . The rear set of torpedo tubes was replaced by a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ( 12 @-@ pounder ) AA gun and the quadruple .50 @-@ calibre Vickers mounts were replaced by 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon autocannon . Two more Oerlikon guns were also added in the forward superstructure . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Griffin was laid down by Vickers @-@ Armstrongs Naval Construction Works at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness on 20 September 1934 , launched on 15 August 1935 , and completed on 6 March 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment such as armament , she cost £ 248 @,@ 518 . Griffin joined her sisters and was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . She escorted the ocean liner SS Strathnaver between Malta and Alexandria in the Munich Crisis in September 1938 . She then escorted the light cruiser Arethusa on her voyage to Aden . She collided with the target destroyer Shikari on 2 February 1939 and her repairs were completed five days later . 
 = = = With the Royal Navy , 1939 – 1942 = = = 
 On 3 September 1939 Griffin was in Alexandria and still assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla . In October she was transferred to home waters . On 7 October she was escorting the 7 @,@ 289 GRT troopship Mohamed Ali El @-@ Kebir from Avonmouth bound for Gibraltar when the German submarine U @-@ 38 torpedoed the troopship in the Western Approaches about 230 nautical miles ( 430 km ) west of Bloody Foreland in Ireland . 96 people were killed but Griffin attacked and chased away the submarine with depth charges and then rescued 766 survivors , whom she landed at Greenock on the Firth of Clyde on 9 October . 
 She rejoined her flotilla at Harwich in November , where they patrolled the North Sea and escorted local convoys . She rescued survivors from her sister Gipsy after that ship struck a mine off Harwich on 21 November . She was damaged the same month and was under repair until 6 December . In preparation for the Norwegian Campaign , Griffin was transferred to the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow in April 1940 . 
 Griffin escorted the capital ships of the Home Fleet as they sortied into the North Sea on 7 April and continued that duty for the next several weeks . On 24 April , Griffin and the destroyer Acheron captured the German trawler Schiff 26 , bound for Narvik with a cargo that included mines and torpedoes . She evacuated British and French troops from Namsos , and rescued survivors from the destroyer Afridi after she was sunk by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers on 3 May . The Stukas also attacked Griffin , without success . Griffin was then transferred to the 13th Destroyer Flotilla of the North Atlantic Command at Gibraltar . She escorted the capital ships of Force H in the Battle of Dakar on 23 September , but was not engaged . On 20 October , with her sisters Gallant and Hotspur , she sank the Italian submarine Lafolè off Melilla . Griffin escorted the battleship Barham and the cruisers Berwick and Glasgow in Operation Coat in early November as they joined the Mediterranean Fleet . Griffin herself was transferred to the 14th Destroyer Flotilla in Alexandria and took part in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November in Operation Collar . 
 In Operation Excess , Gallant struck a mine off Pantellaria on 10 January 1941 and Griffin rescued most of the survivors . In February 1941 she was transferred to the Red Sea where she escorted the aircraft carrier Formidable in the latter 's operations in support of the military offensive in Italian Somaliland ( " Operation Canvas " ) . Griffin escorted the capital ships of the Mediterranean Fleet in the Battle of Cape Matapan on 28 / 29 March . With her sister Greyhound , she attacked some of the Italian destroyers , but lost them when they passed through their own smokescreen . Griffin , the Australian destroyer Stuart , and the gunboat Gnat bombarded Axis positions near Sollum in northwestern Egypt on 15 April . She took part in the evacuation of British , Australian and New Zealand troops from Greece at the end of April . On 27 April she rescued 50 survivors from the destroyers Diamond and Wryneck , which had been sunk by German aircraft in the Sea of Crete . She again escorted the capital ships of the Mediterranean Fleet as they covered a convoy from Alexandria to Malta on 8 May . In the evacuation of Crete at the end of May , Griffin evacuated 720 men from Souda Bay . 
 During Operation Exporter , the ship escorted the Australian light cruiser Perth as she bombarded Vichy French positions in Lebanon on 2 July . Griffin escorted convoys to and from Tobruk from July to November . On 25 November she was escorting the battleships of the Mediterranean Fleet when Barham was torpedoed by German submarine U @-@ 331 . She escorted the light cruiser Naiad when that ship bombarded Derna in early December and was transferred to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla later that month . Griffin escorted convoys to Malta in January and February 1942 @.@ until she was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean in late February . Griffin was assigned to Force A of the fleet in the Indian Ocean raid by the Japanese in early April 1942 . She returned to the Mediterranean to take part in Operation Vigorous , another convoy from Alexandria to Malta , in June . She rejoined the Eastern Fleet afterwards and escorted convoys there until ordered home to begin conversion to an escort destroyer in September . 
 = = = Refit and transfer to Canada , 1942 – 1946 = = = 
 Work on the conversion began on 2 November in Southampton and included the removal of two 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns and the 12 @-@ pounder AA gun , and their replacement with a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine mortar forward and additional depth charges aft . Type 286 and 271 radar sets were fitted , as well as additional 20 mm Oerlikon AA guns . While still refitting , on 1 March 1943 , Griffin was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy , and commissioned on 20 March , four days before her conversion was finished . The ship was renamed Ottawa on 10 April to commemorate an earlier HMCS Ottawa which had been sunk . After working up at Tobermory , she sailed for Canada , and was gifted to the Canadians on 15 June . Ottawa became the senior ship of Escort Group C5 which worked between St. John 's , Newfoundland , and Derry , Northern Ireland until May 1944 when she became the senior ship of the 11th Escort Group . The 11th consisted of the Canadian destroyers Kootenay , Chaudière , Gatineau , and St. Laurent and were tasked to protect the invasion forces for D @-@ Day . On 6 July 1944 , Ottawa , Kootenay , and the British frigate Statice sank U @-@ 678 off Beachy Head , Sussex . Ottawa and Chaudière sank U @-@ 621 on 16 August near La Rochelle and two days later they sank U @-@ 984 west of Brest . 
 Ottawa was refitted in St. John 's between 12 October 1944 and 26 February 1945 . On 11 March she collided with the Canadian minesweeper Stratford off Halifax and was under repair until 30 April . After the end of the war in May she ferried Canadian troops back to Canada until she was paid off on 31 October . Ottawa was sold to the International Iron and Metal Company in August 1946 and subsequently broken up . 
 = Minas Geraes @-@ class battleship = 
 The Minas Geraes class , spelled Minas Gerais in some sources , consisted of two battleships built for the Brazilian Navy in the early twentieth century . Named Minas Geraes and São Paulo , the ships were intended to be Brazil 's first step towards becoming an international power , and they consequently initiated a South American naval arms race . 
 In 1904 , Brazil began a major naval building program that included three small battleships . Designing and ordering the ships took two years , but these plans were scrapped after the revolutionary " dreadnought " concept rendered the Brazilian design obsolete — two dreadnoughts were instead ordered from the United Kingdom instead , making Brazil the third country to have ships of this type under construction — before traditional powers like Germany , France , or Russia . As such , the ships created much uncertainty among the major countries in the world , many of whom incorrectly speculated the ships were actually destined for a rival nation . Similarly , they also caused much consternation in Argentina and consequently Chile . 
 Soon after their delivery in 1910 , both Minas Geraes and São Paulo were embroiled in the Revolt of the Lash ( Revolta da Chibata ) , in which the crews of four Brazilian ships demanded the abolition of corporal punishment in the navy . The mutineers surrendered after four days , when a bill was passed granting amnesty to all those involved . In 1922 , the two battleships were used to help put down a revolt at Fort Copacabana . Two years later , lieutenants on São Paulo mutinied but found little support from other military units , so they sailed to Montevideo , Uruguay , and obtained asylum . Minas Geraes was modernized in the 1930s , but both battleships were too old to participate actively in the Second World War , and instead were employed as harbor defense ships in Salvador and Recife . São Paulo was sold in 1951 to a British shipbreaker , but was lost in a storm north of the Azores while being towed to its final destination . Minas Geraes was sold to an Italian scrapper in 1953 and towed to Genoa the following year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brazil 's navy fell into obsolescence after an 1889 revolution , which deposed Emperor Dom Pedro II , and an 1893 civil war . Meanwhile , an Argentine – Chilean dispute over the boundary of Patagonia and control of the Beagle Channel kindled a naval arms race between the two beginning in the late 1880s and lasting until 1902 . Restrictions were placed on the navies of both countries and major vessels under construction in both navies were sold as part of the British @-@ mediated three pacts which ended the dispute , but both countries retained the numerous vessels built in the interim . As such , by the turn of the 20th century the Brazilian Navy lagged far behind the Chilean and Argentine navies in quality and total tonnage , despite Brazil having nearly three times the population of Argentina and almost five times the population of Chile . 
 Soaring demand for coffee and rubber brought Brazil an influx of revenue in the early 1900s . Simultaneously , there was a drive on the part of prominent Brazilians , most notably the Baron of Rio Branco , to have the country recognized as an international power . A large naval acquisition program was drawn up and passed by the National Congress of Brazil in October 1904 in accordance with their belief that a powerful navy would be crucial to the achievement of this goal , but it was two years before any ships were ordered . 
 Two factions argued over the types of ships to be ordered . One favored a navy centered on a small number of large warships , while the other preferred a larger navy of smaller warships . The latter originally prevailed with a bill authorizing the construction of three small battleships , three armored cruisers , six destroyers , twelve torpedo boats , three submarines , and two river monitors . Though the Brazilian government later eliminated the armored cruisers for monetary reasons , the Minister of the Navy , Admiral Júlio César de Noronha , signed a contract with Armstrong Whitworth for three battleships on 23 July 1906 . While the first designs for these ships were derived from the Norwegian coastal defense ship Norge and the British ( originally Chilean ) Swiftsure class , the contracted ships were to follow Armstrong Whitworth 's Design 439 ( Design 188 in Vickers ' files ) . They would displace 11 @,@ 800 long tons ( 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ) , have a speed of 19 knots ( 22 mph ; 35 km / h ) , and be protected by belt armor of 9 inches ( 23 cm ) and deck armor of 1 @.@ 5 in ( 3 @.@ 8 cm ) . Each ship would be armed with twelve 10 @-@ inch ( 25 cm ) guns mounted in six twin turrets . These turrets would be mounted in a hexagonal configuration , similar to the later German Nassau @-@ class battleships . 
 Alarmed , the American ambassador to Brazil sent a cablegram to his Department of State in September 1906 , warning them of the destabilization that would occur if the situation devolved into a full naval arms race . At the same time , the American government under Theodore Roosevelt tried using diplomatic means to coerce the Brazilians into canceling their ships , but the attempts were dismissed , with the Baron of Rio Branco remarking that caving to the American demands would render Brazil as powerless as suzerain Cuba . The President of Brazil , Afonso Pena , supported the naval acquisitions in an address to the National Congress of Brazil in November 1906 , as in his opinion the ships were necessary to replace the antiquated and obsolete vessels of the current navy . 
 = = Bidding and construction = = 
 Design 439 was modified before these ships were laid down , increasing the displacement to 14 @,@ 334 long tons ( 14 @,@ 564 t ) and making them slightly longer and wider . Two of these ships were laid down by Armstrong at Elswick in Newcastle upon Tyne ( Minas Geraes and Rio de Janeiro ) , while the other was subcontracted out to Vickers in Barrow ( São Paulo ) . However , the new dreadnought concept , which was showcased upon the completion of the namesake ship in December 1906 , rendered the Brazilian ships obsolete . A transition to a few large warships was finalized with the selection of Rear Admiral Alexandrino Faria de Alencar for the powerful post of minister of the navy . The money authorized for naval expansion was redirected by de Alencar to building two dreadnoughts , with plans for a third dreadnought after the first was completed , two scout cruisers ( which became the Bahia class ) , ten destroyers ( the Pará class ) , and three submarines . The three battleships on which construction had just begun were demolished beginning on 7 January 1907 . 
 An entirely new design incorporating the latest dreadnought technology was drawn up by J.R. Perret , the head of Elswick Ordnance Company , and approved by the Brazilian government on 20 February 1907 . Argentina and Chile immediately annulled the 1902 treaty that had ended their naval arms race , and both planned to expand their own navies , though Chile was delayed by a financial depression in 1907 and a major earthquake the next year . 
 Minas Geraes , the lead ship , was laid down by Armstrong on 17 April 1907 , while its sister ship São Paulo followed thirteen days later at Vickers . Construction of the partial hull needed to launch Minas Geraes was delayed by a four @-@ month strike to 10 September 1908 , and São Paulo followed on 19 April 1909 . Both were christened in front of large crowds by the wife of Francisco Régis de Oliveira , the Brazilian ambassador to the United Kingdom . After multiple trials of the speed , endurance , efficiency , and weaponry of the ship , Minas Geraes was completed and handed over to Brazil on 5 January 1910 . São Paulo followed in July , after its own trials . The third dreadnought , which would have been named Rio de Janeiro and was provided for in the original contract , was laid down on 16 March , but as the ship had already been eclipsed by new naval technology ( chiefly the advent of super @-@ dreadnoughts , beginning with the British HMS Orion ) , the Brazilian government canceled its on 7 May and asked Armstrong to prepare a new design . 
 At this time , the dreadnought design had not been fully validated , despite the success of the British namesake ; for example , there were still concerns that the Minas Geraes class ' superfiring turret arrangement — which had not been utilized on the original Dreadnought , but was also being installed on the American South Carolina class — would cause blast to hurt the crew in the lower turret . Any immediate concerns , however , were mitigated during the firing tests when no ill effects were observed , though the Times ( London ) reported that there were still concerns registered during São Paulo 's gun trials in June 1910 . 
 = = International reaction = = 
 The start of work on Minas Geraes meant that Brazil had become the third country — behind the United Kingdom and the United States but ahead of major powers such as Germany , France , Russia and Japan — to have a dreadnought under construction . 
 The order for the dreadnoughts caused an immediate stir in the United States and Europe ; in the words of the British Navy League Annual , they " astonished the naval world " . The American New York Times opened an article on Minas Geraes ' launch with " What on paper at least is the most powerful warship ever built for any navy ... " , while Scientific American called Minas Geraes " the last word in heavy battleship design and the ... most powerfully armed warship afloat . " Some publications , like the American Advocate of Peace , decried the dreadnought purchase for its cost , calling it " a showy and pretentious naval policy seemingly for the sheer indulgence of national pride " and continuing with " [ sinking ] money into useless warships when , it is understood , foreign money has had to be borrowed for city improvements in Rio de Janeiro is pitiful politics . " 
 The British House of Commons debated purchasing the ships in March 1908 to bolster the Royal Navy while simultaneously ensuring they would not be sold to a foreign rival . The topic arose again in July and September , when Arthur Lee expressed his discomfort at the possible final dispositions of the Brazilian ships , as any sale had the potential to disrupt their " Two @-@ Power Standard " . International Marine Engineering analyzed the effect of a sale to Japan , stating that the total broadside weight of Japan 's line of battle would be increased by 31 @.@ 6 % , and the only ships capable of matching the Minas Geraes ' in the near future would be the American Delaware and German Nassau classes . 
 Newspapers and journals around the world speculated that Brazil was acting as a proxy for a naval power which would take possession of the two dreadnoughts soon after completion , as they did not believe that a previously insignificant geopolitical power would contract for such powerful armament . The evidence for a sale seemed strong , as Brazilian attempts to float a multi @-@ million @-@ dollar loan against the value of their coffee crop in 1908 were unsuccessful . With three dreadnoughts planned ( including the upcoming Rio de Janeiro ) , a Spanish naval journal stated " it was only natural that rumors [ would begin ] to circulate supporting the argument that Brazil acted as an intermediary for some great power which would acquire them before they terminate their construction . " Various British papers speculated that either the Germans , Japanese , or Americans were actually buying the ships , while naval experts in Germany thought the Americans , British , or Japanese were going to take them over . On the other side of the Atlantic , some American papers theorized that the ships would be sold to the United Kingdom , Germany , or Japan . The Brazilian government was forced to deny these spurious allegations several times . The New York Times remarked : 
 The rumor is that the three warships ... ordered [ in Britain ] two years ago will be launched from English shores only to fly the German flag . It is asserted that these ships , which are named the Sao Paulo , the Minas <unk> [ sic ] and the Rio de Janeiro , and all of which will be completed by next fall , will be conveyed to the German government on the payment of $ 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 It may be recalled that when orders were placed for the ships ... there was much speculation as to the destiny of the vessels , as no naval expert could understand how a second @-@ rate power like Brazil needed such formidable engines of war which would represent absolutely the latest stages of naval construction and armament . Meanwhile , it had been reported that the ships were being built for the Japanese government , which had a secret understanding with Brazil . But this theory was soon discarded by the fact that relations between these two countries were not extremely cordial on account of the attitude of Brazil toward the immigration of Japanese laborers . Then it was semi @-@ officially stated that the ships would never leave the ways except to fly the British flag , but the money for such a purpose could only be raised by a loan or the Admiralty getting the sum from the sinking fund — contingencies which would naturally become public property long before they could be carried out . ( " Germany May Buy English Warships , " New York Times , 9 August 1908 , C8 ) 
 Despite the speculation , the United States quickly began courting Brazil as an ally ; caught up in the spirit , US naval journals began using terms like " Pan Americanism " and " Hemispheric Cooperation " . 
 In South America , the ships came as a rude shock and kindled a naval arms race among Brazil , Argentina , and Chile . The 1902 treaty between the latter two was canceled upon the Brazilian dreadnought order so both could be free to build their own dreadnoughts . Argentina in particular was alarmed at the possible power of the ships . The Minister of Foreign Affairs , Manuel Augusto Montes de Oca , remarked that either Minas Geraes or São Paulo could destroy the entire Argentine and Chilean fleets . While this may have been hyperbole , either one was much more powerful than any single vessel in the Argentinian fleet . As such , the Argentines quickly responded to the dreadnoughts with an order to the United States for two of their own , the Rivadavia class , while Chile ordered two of the Almirante Latorre class from the United Kingdom . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service histories = = 
 After completion , both Minas Geraes and São Paulo sailed to other countries before arriving in Brazil . Minas Geraes left the Tyne on 5 February 1910 and traveled to Plymouth before beginning a voyage to the United States on 8 February . The ship was assigned to escort the American armored cruiser North Carolina , carrying the body of the former Brazilian ambassador to the United States Joaquim Nabuco , to Rio de Janeiro . They arrived in the city on 17 April 1910 . São Paulo left Greenock on 16 September 1910 , and stopped in Cherbourg , France , to embark the Brazilian President Hermes da Fonseca . Departing on the 27th , São Paulo voyaged to Lisbon , Portugal , where Fonseca was a guest of Portugal 's King Manuel II . Soon after they arrived , the 5 October 1910 revolution began . Although the President offered political asylum to the King and his family , the offer was refused . There was a rumor that the King was on board and revolutionaries attempted to search the ship , but were denied permission . They also asked for Brazil to land marines " to help in the maintenance of order , " but this request was also denied . São Paulo left Lisbon on 7 October for Rio de Janeiro , and docked there on 25 October . 
 = = = Revolt of the Lash = = = 
 Soon after São Paulo 's arrival , a major rebellion known as the Revolt of the Lash , or Revolta da Chibata , broke out on four of the newest ships in the Brazilian Navy . The initial spark was provided on 16 November 1910 when Afro @-@ Brazilian sailor Marcelino Rodrigues Menezes was brutally flogged 250 times for insubordination . Many Afro @-@ Brazilian sailors were sons of former slaves , or were former slaves freed under the Lei Áurea ( abolition ) but forced to enter the navy . They had been planning a revolt for some time , and Menezes became the catalyst . Further preparations were needed , so the rebellion was delayed until 22 November . The crewmen of Minas Geraes , São Paulo , the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Deodoro , and the new Bahia quickly took their vessels with only a minimum of bloodshed : two officers on Minas Geraes and one each on São Paulo and Bahia were killed . 
 The ships were well @-@ supplied with foodstuffs , ammunition , and coal , and the only demand of mutineers — led by João Cândido Felisberto — was the abolition of " slavery as practiced by the Brazilian Navy " . They objected to low pay , long hours , inadequate training for incompetent sailors , and punishments including <unk> ( being struck on the hand with a ferrule ) and the use of whips or lashes ( chibata ) , which eventually became a symbol of the revolt . By the 23rd , the National Congress had begun discussing the possibility of a general amnesty for the sailors . Senator Ruy Barbosa , long an opponent of slavery , lent a large amount of support , and the measure unanimously passed the Federal Senate on 24 November . The measure was then sent to the Chamber of Deputies . 
 Humiliated by the revolt , naval officers and the president of Brazil were staunchly opposed to amnesty , so they quickly began planning to assault the rebel ships . The former believed such an action was necessary to restore the service 's honor . Late on the 24th , the President ordered the naval officers to attack the mutineers . Officers crewed some smaller warships and the cruiser Rio Grande do Sul , Bahia 's sister ship with ten 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns . They planned to attack on the morning of the 25th , when the government expected the mutineers would return to Guanabara Bay . When they did not return and the amnesty measure neared passage in the Chamber of Deputies , the order was rescinded . After the bill passed 125 – 23 and the president signed it into law , the mutineers stood down on the 26th . 
 During the revolt , the ships were noted by many observers to be well @-@ handled , despite a previous belief that the Brazilian Navy was incapable of effectively operating the ships even before being split by a rebellion . João Cândido Felisberto ordered all liquor thrown overboard , and discipline on the ships was recognized as exemplary . The 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns were often used for shots over the city , but the 12 @-@ inch were not , which led to a suspicion among the naval officers that the rebels were incapable of using the weapons . Later research and interviews indicate that Minas Geraes ' guns were fully operational , and while São Paulo 's could not be turned after salt water contaminated the hydraulic system , British engineers still on board the ship after the voyage from the United Kingdom were working on the problem . Still , historians have never ascertained how well the mutineers could handle the ships . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Three years after the mutiny , Minas Geraes was used to transport Brazilian Minister of Foreign Affairs Lauro Müller to the United States . The ship returned on 16 July and arrived in Rio de Janeiro on 16 August . In September both Minas Geraes and São Paulo participated in a major exercise with most of the Brazilian Navy . The need for more modern fire control system was identified as early as late 1913 , but no action was taken . When Brazil entered the First World War in 1917 , they were offered to the United Kingdom for service in the Grand Fleet , but the British declined due to the condition the ships were in . They had not been modernized since entering service , and maintenance had been neglected ; to illustrate the problem , when Brazil sent São Paulo to the United States for a modernization in June 1918 , fourteen of the eighteen boilers that powered the ship failed . The ship only finished the voyage to New York with the assistance of the American battleship Nebraska and cruiser Raleigh . Minas Geraes followed after its sister 's return , and the modernization was done between 1 September 1920 and 1 October 1921 . 
 São Paulo made two trips to Europe in 1920 . The first conveyed King Albert I and Queen Elisabeth of Belgium to Brazil for the centennial celebrations . After São Paulo brought them home , the ship traveled to Portugal to take the bodies of the formerly @-@ exiled Emperor Pedro II and his wife , Teresa Cristina , back to Brazil . In July 1922 , both battleships helped to quash the first of the Tenente revolts ( <unk> <unk> ) , in which the garrison of Rio de Janeiro 's Fort Copacabana rebelled and began bombarding the city . São Paulo shelled the fort , and the rebels surrendered shortly thereafter ; Minas Geraes did not fire its guns . In 1924 , three lieutenants , including Hercolino Cascardo , took over São Paulo with other crewmen . They were unsuccessful in swaying any other ships to their cause , except for an old torpedo boat , and soon sailed out of the harbor after firing a six @-@ pounder gun at Minas Geraes . Short of food and with condensers in poor condition , the rebels sailed to Montevideo , where they received asylum . Minas Geraes followed São Paulo , arriving on 11 November and taking back possession of the ship . 
 Minas Geraes was modernized at the Rio de Janeiro Naval Yard from June 1931 to 1938 , while São Paulo led a naval force that broke the naval blockade of Santos during the Constitutionalist Revolution of 1932 . Though Brazil had also intended to modernize São Paulo , its poor condition — she was only able to make 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) instead of its designed speed of 21 knots ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) — made such action uneconomical . Soon after Brazil 's entrance into the Second World War on 21 August 1942 , São Paulo was moved to Recife on 23 August to defend that port as a harbor defense ship ; Minas Geraes played a similar role at Salvador . Even with the modernization , Minas Geraes was simply too old and vulnerable to actively participate in the war . 
 Both ships were decommissioned after the war , São Paulo on 2 August 1947 and Minas Geraes on 31 December 1952 . The former was sold to a British shipbreaker and was towed out of Rio de Janeiro on 20 September 1951 . When north of the Azores in a strong storm , the tow line snapped . Though multiple searches were mounted by American and British aircraft , the ship was never found . Minas Geraes was sold to an Italian company in 1953 and towed to Genoa from 11 March 1954 to 22 April . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The two ships of the Minas Geraes class were 543 feet ( 166 m ) overall , 530 feet ( 160 m ) at the waterline , and 500 feet ( 150 m ) between perpendiculars . They had a beam of 83 feet ( 25 m ) , a mean draft of 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) , a maximum draft of 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) , a normal displacement of 18 @,@ 976 long tons ( 19 @,@ 281 t ) , and a displacement of 20 @,@ 900 long tons ( 21 @,@ 200 t ) at full load . At the beginning of their careers , the ships were crewed by about 900 men . 
 Minas Geraes and São Paulo were originally armed with twelve 12 @-@ inch / 45 caliber , twenty @-@ two 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch / 50 caliber , and eight 3 @-@ pounder naval guns . The main battery was arranged with four superfiring turrets , two each fore and aft , and two placed en echelon . The 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch secondary guns were placed in casemates along the side of the ship . 
 The propulsion of the two ships was provided by Vickers vertical triple expansion engines instead of the steam turbines being used to power most contemporary dreadnoughts . Eighteen boilers provided power to the engines , which in turn rotated the two three @-@ bladed propellers with 23 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower . Their designed top speed was 21 knots ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) , though this was frequently unattainable in their later careers owing to substandard maintenance and neglect . The ships could carry 2 @,@ 350 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 310 long tons ) of coal and 400 tonnes ( 390 long tons ) of oil , and their original endurance was 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 mi ; 19 @,@ 000 km ) when traveling at 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . During its trials , Minas Geraes was able to steam at 22 @.@ 29 knots ( 25 @.@ 65 mph ; 41 @.@ 28 km / h ) . 
 The main armor belt was Krupp cemented and nine inches ( 230 mm ) thick , but narrowed to six and three inches ( 150 and 76 mm ) closer to each end of the ships . The barbettes were protected by nine @-@ inch armor , while the turret had a twelve @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) front , eight @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) sides , and a two- to three @-@ inch ( 51 to 76 mm ) top , and the conning tower had twelve @-@ inch armor . The deck armor had multiple decks of one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to two inches ( 38 to 51 mm ) , one inch ( 25 mm ) , and one inch . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Benjamin Ogle Tayloe House = 
 The Benjamin Ogle Tayloe House is a Federal @-@ style house located at 21 Madison Place NW in Washington , D.C. , in the United States . The house is on the northeast corner of Madison Place NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW , directly across the street from the White House and the Treasury Building . Built in 1828 by Benjamin Ogle Tayloe , son of Colonel John Tayloe III ( who built the famous Octagon House ) , the house became a salon for politically powerful people in the federal government . 
 Phoebe Tayloe inherited the house upon Tayloe 's death in 1868 . After she died in 1881 , more than 200 marble statues , bronze sculptures , fine furniture , and paintings in the house were donated to the Corcoran Gallery of Art . Phoebe Warren Tayloe 's niece , Elizabeth H. Price , inherited the house in 1882 and later sold it to Senator Don Cameron of Pennsylvania for $ 60 @,@ 000 in 1887 . In around 1896 , the U.S. Senate passed legislation which would have made the building the official residence of the Vice President of the United States , but the House of Representatives failed to act on the bill . Cameron leased the house to Vice President Garret Hobart from March 1897 until the fall of 1899 and the press and public nicknamed the house the " Historic Corner " and the " Cream White House " for the large number of politically important visitors and meetings held on the premises , with esteemed guests such as the International Boundary Commission and Prince Albert of Belgium . Hobart 's failing health led the family to leave the Tayloe House in the fall of 1899 and Cameron then leased the home to Republican Senator Mark Hanna from January 1900 to 1902 . Hanna 's important political discussions of the moment with William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt over substantial breakfasts of corned beef hash and pancakes became famous . 
 The Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage leased the house in the fall of 1915 , and made the building its headquarters for two years . The Cosmos Club had considered purchasing the house from the Tayloe family in 1885 and eventually bought it in December 1917 . They vacated it in 1952 to move to their new headquarters ; the building was purchased by the U.S. government and used for offices . From October 1958 until November 1961 , the house was the headquarters of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) . 
 Nearly razed to the ground in 1960 along with other buildings on Lafayette Square , successful lobbying and support from the newly elected Kennedy administration in 1961 led to the original proposals to gut the building being dropped . First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was instrumental in persuading architect John Carl Warnecke , a friend of her husband , to create a design that would incorporate the new buildings with the old , based on the architectural theory of contextualism . The Cutts @-@ Madison House , Cosmos Club building , and Benjamin Ogle Tayloe House were joined , and a courtyard built between them and the National Courts building . The building has remained part of the National Courts building complex ever since , and is now protected by the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Benjamin Ogle Tayloe married Julia Maria Dickinson on November 8 , 1824 . Although Tayloe preferred to live at Windsor , his estate in King George County , Virginia , his wife asked that they move into the city , where she was more comfortable . The house was constructed on Lots 10 and 11 in Square 221 . At the time of the building 's construction in 1828 , the expanse of the city from 15th Street NW ( one block east of the home ) to 17th Street NW from the White House north to H Street NW was a flat field bare of trees and shrubs . 
 As originally built , the Federal @-@ style house had three stories . The completed house had four or five parlors . It was built of unpainted , cream @-@ colored brick . The entrance was level with the ground , with an oriel window above it on the second floor and a Palladian window on the third floor above that . An oval portico protected visitors arriving at the front doors . 
 = = Tayloe years = = 
 The house was completed in 1828 , but not immediately occupied . Tayloe had a strong political disagreement with the newly elected President , Andrew Jackson , and refused to move into the home . Tayloe leased the building to Thomas Swann , Sr. , a lawyer ( and the father of Thomas Swann , Jr . , who became Governor of Maryland in 1866 ) . Swann vacated the home in November 1829 , at which time Tayloe and his wife occupied it . The house was an important social gathering place for important Washingtonians in the four decades following its construction . In 1829 , when Henry Clay left the office of Secretary of State , much of the furniture in his home was acquired by the <unk> and used to decorate their home . Tayloe House was the last house in Washington visited by President William Henry Harrison before he death in 1841 . 
 Julia Tayloe died on July 4 , 1846 . Tayloe married Phoebe Warren on April 17 , 1849 . 
 Tayloe House was the scene of a murder in 1859 . Philip Barton Key II was the son of Francis Scott Key and the nephew of Chief Justice Roger B. Taney . In the spring of 1858 , Key began having an affair with Teresa <unk> Sickles , the wife of his friend Daniel Sickles . On February 26 , 1859 , Sickles learned of the affair . The following day , he saw Key in Lafayette Square signalling to his wife . Sickles rushed out into the park , drew a single pistol , and shot the unarmed Key three times while the other man pleaded for his life . Key was taken into the nearby Tayloe House and died moments later . Key 's spirit , eyewitnesses and authors claim , now haunts Lafayette Square and can be seen on dark nights near the spot where he was shot . 
 The Tayloe house became a noted meeting place for many of the leading political figures of early 19th @-@ century American politics . Tayloe was one of the most influential and active members of the Whig Party in the District of Columbia . Among the many frequent visitors to the house were Chief Justice John Marshall , Senator and Secretary of State Henry Clay , Senator and Secretary of State Daniel Webster , Vice President and Secretary of State John C. Calhoun , Senator Henry Clay , Senator and Secretary of State Lewis Cass , Secretary of State Edward Livingston , Speaker of the House and Senator Robert Charles Winthrop , General Winfield Scott , Senator and Secretary of State Edward Everett , Senator and Secretary of State William H. Seward , Associate Justice Joseph Story , and many others . Presidents John Quincy Adams , Martin Van Buren , William Henry Harrison , Zachary Taylor , and Millard Fillmore also were frequent guests . Anthony Trollope spent much of his free time being entertained by the <unk> at their home during his visit to Washington , D.C. , in the winter of 1862 . 
 Benjamin Ogle Tayloe died on February 28 , 1868 , and Phoebe Tayloe inherited the house . After she died in 1881 , more than 200 marble statues , bronze sculptures , items of fine furniture , and paintings in the house were donated to the Corcoran Gallery of Art . Phoebe Warren Tayloe 's niece , Elizabeth H. Price , inherited the house in 1882 . 
 In April 1885 , the Cosmos Club considered purchasing the house from the Tayloe family . The influential club already owned most of the block north of the Tayloe House , and was expanding rapidly . It valued the home at $ 60 @,@ 000 and the furnishings at an additional $ 5 @,@ 000 . The Cosmos Club declined to buy the home after an investigation found that the cost of upgrading the Tayloe property for its use would be too costly . 
 = = Cameron years = = 
 Senator Don Cameron of Pennsylvania purchased the Benjamin Ogle Tayloe House for $ 60 @,@ 000 in 1887 , and resided there for a time . Cameron expanded the home significantly , almost entirely rebuilding its interior . After the renovation , the front entrance opened onto a square entrance hall . A fireplace adorned the hall . Large rooms on either side of the entrance hall were used as office space . A broad staircase led from the entrance hall up to the second floor , where there were four large rooms . The rooms opened on to one another , permitting the second floor to be opened up into something approaching a single large ballroom . The windows on the second floor reached to the floor . An iron veranda ran around the entire second floor . The home contained a total of 30 rooms after the renovation . Cameron did not , however , renovate the exterior , which remained much the same as it always had . Henry Adams was a frequent guest of the Camerons , playing often with their daughter Martha to alleviate his bouts of depression . 
 About 1896 , the U.S. Senate passed legislation which would have made the building the official residence of the Vice President of the United States , but the House of Representatives failed to act on the bill . 
 Cameron leased the house to Vice President Garret Hobart from March 1897 until the fall of 1899 . No other Vice President had ever lived so close to the White House , and this close proximity helped boost Hobart 's access to and influence with the President so much that he was called " Assistant President " and is now considered one of the most powerful Vice Presidents in U.S. history . On several occasions Hobart entertained the entire U.S. Senate at the house , as well as President William McKinley . The International Boundary Commission ( which established much of the water and land boundary between the U.S. and Canada ) dined in the house at a formal dinner hosted by Hobart , as did Prince Albert of Belgium . The press and public nicknamed the house the " Historic Corner " and the " Cream White House " ( a reference to the color of its brickwork ) for the large number of politically important visitors and meetings held on the premises during Hobart 's tenure there . Hobart 's failing health led the family to leave the Tayloe House in the fall of 1899 and return to New Jersey ( where Hobart died on November 21 ) . 
 Cameron then leased the home to Senator Mark Hanna from January 1900 to 1902 . Hanna developed his plans for the re @-@ election of President McKinley while resident in the house , plans which gave rise to the first " big money " presidential election in U.S. history . The home was also host to Hanna 's famous large breakfasts of corned beef hash and pancakes , over which the most important political decisions of the moment would be made . These meals were so politically important that President Theodore Roosevelt breakfasted with Hanna every Sunday . McKinley and other politically powerful people visited the home so much that it became known as the " Little White House . " It was at just such a breakfast on March 10 , 1902 , that J. P. Morgan asked Senator Hanna whether the United States government had any intention of filing an antitrust lawsuit against the recently formed Northern Securities Company . Hanna said the government would not file suit against the trust . When the government filed suit hours later , Morgan accused Hanna of betraying him , and Hanna accused Roosevelt of betraying him . Hanna died in office on February 15 , 1904 . 
 The Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage leased the house in the fall of 1915 , and made the building its headquarters for two years . The group rented the house in order to emphasize their importance in the fight for women 's suffrage . 
 = = Cosmos Club and federal government ownership = = 
 The Cosmos Club finally purchased the house on December 1 , 1917 . It used the home as its women 's annex , and converted the stables into a meeting hall . 
 The Cosmos Club vacated the Tayloe House in 1952 to move to new headquarters in the Townsend Mansion at 2121 Massachusetts Avenue NW , at which time the building was purchased by the U.S. government and used for offices . From October 1958 until November 1961 , the headquarters of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) were in the Tayloe House . T. Keith <unk> , the first Administrator of NASA , also had his office in the structure . 
 In 1960 , the Tayloe House was nearly razed . The impetus for tearing down nearly all the historic structures on Lafayette Square began 60 years before . In 1900 , the United States Congress passed a resolution establishing the U.S. Senate Park Commission ( also known as the " McMillan Commission " because it was chaired by Michigan 's republican Senator James McMillan ) . The Park Commission 's charge was to reconcile competing visions for the development of Washington , D.C. , and in particular the National Mall and adjacent areas . The Park Commission 's proposals , which came to be known as the " McMillan Plan , " proposed that all the buildings around Lafayette Square be razed and replaced by tall , Neoclassical buildings clad in white marble for use by executive branch agencies . For a time , it appeared that the Cutts @-@ Madison House would not survive . William Wilson Corcoran 's Corcoran House at 1615 H Street NW was torn down in 1922 and replaced with the Neoclassical United States Chamber of Commerce headquarters . The Hay @-@ Adams Houses were razed in 1927 by real estate developer Harry <unk> , and the Hay – Adams Hotel built on the site . At nearby 1616 H Street NW , the Brookings Institution purchased the rear garden from the private owners of the Decatur House and built an eight @-@ story Modernist office building there . Several million dollars were spent in the late 1950s on designs to raze all the buildings on the east side of Lafayette Square and replace them with a white , modernist office building which would house judicial offices . 
 Opposition to the demolition of the Tayloe House and other buildings on Lafayette Square began forming shortly after the plan to raze the structures was announced . Senators James E. Murray and Wayne Morse , several members of the House of Representatives , and citizens of the District of Columbia lobbied to defeat the legislation authorizing the demolition of the buildings . The American Institute of Architects ( AIA ) devoted the February 1961 issue of its journal to a " Lament for Lafayette Square . " The AIA established a committee to develop plans to save the buildings and adapt the new structures so that they incorporated the style and feel of the older homes . 
 The newly elected Kennedy administration indicated on February 16 , 1961 , that it was anxious to retain the existing historic homes on Lafayette Square . In November , the Committee of 100 on the Federal City ( an influential group of city leaders ) asked President Kennedy to save and restore all the remaining buildings on Lafayette Square . In February 1962 , First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy lobbied General Services Administration ( GSA ) director Bernard L. Boutin to stop the demolition and adopt a different design plan . " The wreckers haven 't started yet , and until they do it can be saved , " she wrote . Mrs. Kennedy enlisted architect John Carl Warnecke , a friend of her husband 's who happened to be in town that weekend , to create a design which would incorporate the new buildings with the old . Warnecke conceived the basic design over that weekend , and worked closely with Mrs. Kennedy over the next few months to formalize the design proposal . The design was presented to the public and the Commission of Fine Arts ( which had approval over any plan ) in October 1962 , and with Mrs. Kennedy 's backing the Commission adopted the revised Warnecke design proposal . 
 Warnecke 's design for the square was based on the architectural theory of contextualism . Not only did Warnecke 's design build the first modern buildings on Lafayette Square , but they were the first buildings in the city to utilize contextualism as a design philosophy . Warnecke 's design for the Markey National Courts Building was to create tall , flat structures in red brick which would serve as relatively unobtrusive backgrounds to the lighter @-@ colored residential homes like the Cutts @-@ Madison House . The Cutts @-@ Madison House , Cosmos Club building , and Benjamin Ogle Tayloe House were joined , and a courtyard built between them and the National Courts building . 
 The Tayloe House has remained part of the National Courts building complex ever since . 
 = A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia = 
 A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia is a 1989 video game developed by Imagineering for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . The video game was published by Absolute Entertainment in North America and Europe and by Jaleco in Japan . A Boy and His Blob follows an unnamed , male protagonist and his shapeshifting blob friend on their adventure to save the planet of Blobolonia from the clutches of an evil emperor . 
 A Boy and His Blob is a platform @-@ puzzle game that puts the player in control of the boy ; its gameplay revolves around feeding his blob companion different flavored jelly beans to change its shape into various tools in order to overcome obstacles and traverse the game 's world . A Boy and His Blob was designed and programmed by David Crane . Licensed by Nintendo in the summer of 1989 , development began and was completed in an intense six @-@ week period . Crane has described the game 's overall concept of a boy accompanied by a morphing blob as unconventional and wanted to try his own hand at implementing useful tools for the player . 
 Critical reception for A Boy and His Blob has been largely mixed . Though most reviewers agreed the gameplay was original , some felt it was poorly executed . The game won the 1989 Consumer Electronics Show ( CES ) " Best of Show " and a 1990 Parents ' Choice Award . A Boy and His Blob was followed by a sequel on the Game Boy titled The Rescue of Princess <unk> . After two failed attempts to bring the series to Nintendo 's other handhelds over the years , a re @-@ imagining of Trouble on Blobolonia was developed by WayForward Technologies and released by Majesco on the Wii in 2009 . That same year , the original NES game was re @-@ released on the Wii Virtual Console service in North America and PAL regions . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia is a platform @-@ puzzle game . The plot involves a young boy and his alien blob friend on a quest to save the latter 's home planet of Blobolonia , which has been taken over by an evil emperor who only allows his subjects a diet of sweets . The boy and Blobert must traverse the subways and caves beneath the Earth and gain the necessary items before traveling to Blobolonia and defeating the emperor . They must evade dangerous obstacles like falling rocks , stalactites , and stalagmites , as well as deadly , snake enemies . A Boy and His Blob is not a side @-@ scrolling game , but rather presents the player with a series of single , interconnected screens . Despite being a platform game , the player @-@ controlled boy is limited to simply running left or right . The player cannot jump or swim , and if the boy falls too long of a distance , he will die on impact . 
 Though the player directly controls the boy , Blobert is controlled by the computer AI . The player must rely on the shapeshifting blob to cross gaps , reach higher platforms , and overcome the obstacles and enemies . Blobert can change into several different tools when the player feeds him flavored jelly beans . A licorice jelly bean , for instance , will change Blobert into a ladder , while an apple jelly bean will turn him into a jack . Whistling at Blobert causes him to change back to his original shape and continue following the boy . The player is encouraged to experiment with the jelly beans and their effects to navigate the puzzling game world . Scattered throughout Earth 's caverns are various treasures and diamonds that increase the player 's score and can be used to purchase vitamins at a drugstore located within the game world . Vitamins can be used in conjunction with a special " <unk> " gun , which is in turn used on Blobolonia to complete certain tasks . Also found on the map are extra jelly beans and <unk> , which increase the player 's lives . 
 = = Development = = 
 A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia was developed by Imagineering , the in @-@ house developer of Absolute Entertainment . The game was chiefly designed and programmed by David Crane with help from his former Activision colleague Garry Kitchen . Kitchen was the president of the Activision spin @-@ off company Absolute , which began self @-@ publishing in 1988 ; Crane joined Kitchen at Absolute around the same time . Crane described the concept of a boy accompanied by a shapeshifting blob as " an off @-@ the @-@ wall idea " . Crane stated that Blobert 's design was heavily influenced by the characters Gloop and <unk> from the Hanna @-@ Barbera cartoon The <unk> . In terms of gameplay , Crane 's goal was to advance the adventure genre as he had done with the Atari 2600 game Pitfall ! . Since the release of the sequel Pitfall II : Lost Caverns , adventure games on the market had grown to include useful tools for players to collect and utilize in their environments . However , Crane found displayed tool inventories " not very elegant " and decided to implement tools in a different way . After coming up with the game 's premise , a <unk> of the blob 's object transformations was written and brainstormed with artists , who then converted them to computer graphics . Transformations were chosen based on how they would appear on screen due to the NES 's graphical resolution . According to Crane , objects such as the bridge and ladder were " a must " , but many ideas were scrapped because their nature would not be immediately obvious to the player . Puzzles that could be solved using the objects were created after the various shapes were finalized . 
 A total of 14 <unk> flavors were implemented in the game . To ease the game 's difficulty level , the flavors were named specifically as either puns or alliteration to help the player remember them . For instance , the punch @-@ flavored jelly bean transforms Blobert into a hole , a play on the term " hole punch " . A grape @-@ flavored bean listed in the game 's manual was only present in the version submitted to Nintendo . This flavor transformed the blob into a wall ( " grape wall " , a pun of Great Wall of China ) which would repel enemies . A Boy and His Blob proved to be " one of the most played games at Nintendo " once it was submitted to the company . In this earlier version , the player character could potentially become separated from the blob , thus making it impossible to proceed . A senior management member of Nintendo viewed this as a bug , so Crane substituted the grape bean for a ketchup @-@ flavored bean that would instead summon the blob to the boy 's location . 
 A Boy and His Blob was officially licensed by Nintendo in the summer of 1989 . Though standard NES games took six to eight months to develop , Imagineering completed A Boy and His Blob in a mere six weeks . Crane himself rented a room in a flophouse near his office and put in several 16- to 20 @-@ hour days of the work on the project . After going without sleep for 48 hours in its last two days of earnest development , Crane flew to the CES in Chicago for trade demonstrations , then spent nights at his hotel fixing bugs . The game was released just prior to Christmas in 1989 as Absolute 's first game on the NES . Crane recalled the development process for Absolute 's early games to be enjoyable , but explained that " under the rule of Nintendo , the publishing side of the game business was really tough " , emphasizing how frequently game publishers went out of business in those years . The team was originally in talks with a writer @-@ producer of the Transformers animated features to simultaneously launch the A Boy and His Blob video game with a tie @-@ in toy and a film . However , the plans never came to fruition due to deadlines and difficulty in dividing production resources three ways between a game , toy , and movie . When A Boy and His Blob was released in Japan by Jaleco in November 1990 , it was retitled Fushigi na Blobby : <unk> no Kiki ( <unk> <unk> , lit . " Mysterious Blobby : The Crisis of <unk> " ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia has been mixed . Many reviews published during the game 's original release positively regarded the game 's premise of a boy advancing by using a blob companion as a tool @-@ set . Staff for the magazines Mean Machines and Dragon and Edward J. Simrad of the The Milwaukee Journal all remarked the game as having fun , challenging gameplay and being a creative and original idea . The two reviewers of Mean Machines gave praise to the graphical quality of A Boy and His Blob , commenting , " Some of the backdrops are digitized and superbly coloured . The boy moves smoothly [ and ] realistically and the Blob himself is a masterpiece of animation . " Simrad , who labeled the game as updated version of Crane 's previous work Pitfall ! , was not as impressed by the graphics , claiming that the programmer always preferred to use the available memory for the size of the maze . 
 The four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly found A Boy and His Blob to be strictly average due to its few enemies and a lack of scrolling screens . Although they made similar , positive comments about its unique gameplay formula , one of the writers felt it " never fully realizes its potential " . This opinion was echoed by Lucas M. Thomas of IGN , who gave a more negative review of the game . " While the idea behind A Boy and His Blob was certainly unique , even praiseworthy , " he explained , " the execution of the concept didn 't exactly make for a very fun game . " Thomas faulted the game 's controls ; its vast , empty environments ; and a limited number of essential jelly beans to advance , leaving the player with " just the core gameplay gimmick of the blob 's different transformations " . 1UP.com contributor Jeremy Parish predicted that the game 's potentially frustrating , trial @-@ and @-@ error mechanics could subside once the player is over the learning curve and masters the limited toolset and simple interface . 
 As reported by Stuart Hunt of Retro Gamer , " A Boy and His Blob proved to be a phenomenal success for Absolute Entertainment , going on to become one of the company 's biggest hits and exceeding all the team 's expectations . " The game won " Best of Show " award for its debut at the 1989 CES . The advocacy group Parents ' Choice Foundation awarded A Boy and His Blob with a Parents ' Choice Award in 1990 for " portraying ' Positive human values ' , ' High quality software ' , ' Intelligent design ' , and the ' Ability to hold the player 's interest ' . " Designer David Crane was particularly proud of the latter honor , which he appreciated both before and after becoming a parent himself . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since the original release of the game , A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia has received miscellaneous recognition from the media . In 2005 , University of Houston newspaper columnist Jason Poland attributed the inspiration of game 's premise , in which a young boy befriends an <unk> being , to the central theme found in a slew of 1980s films including E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial and The Last Starfighter . The writer found this especially true for the former of the two features , in which the earthling protagonist supplies his alien cohort with candy . " Although free from any Jelly Belly product placement , " Poland explained , " A Boy and His Blob encompasses plot devices from every ' 80s buddy sci @-@ fi film and acts as an end cap to the entire film genre . " The website GamesRadar noted A Boy and His Blob as a milestone in gaming for having the first recognizable instance of an AI @-@ controlled partner . Despite giving it such a low review score , IGN listed A Boy and His Blob as the 74th @-@ best game on the NES , owing its inclusion to creative gameplay mechanics and a healthy mixture of action @-@ adventure and platforming . 
 A sequel to A Boy and His Blob was released for the Game Boy under the name The Rescue of Princess <unk> . The game once again follows the title characters as they attempt to save a princess jailed within a castle tower . Majesco bought the rights to A Boy and His Blob after Absolute 's closure . A Game Boy Advance incarnation of the series titled A Boy and His Blob : Jelly 's Cosmic Adventure was announced by Majesco in 2001 . The game was ultimately cancelled . Majesco announced another sequel in 2005 as being in development for the Nintendo DS by <unk> Technologies , a company formed by Crane and Kitchen in 1995 . The game 's story was to take place six years after the conclusion of the NES release . It was to feature 3D models , between 15 and 20 differently colored jelly beans , 15 levels , and a DS touchscreen feature for managing jelly bean inventory . However , Majesco 's financial troubles delayed the game 's release indefinitely . 
 A Wii re @-@ imagining of A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia simply titled A Boy and His Blob was developed by WayForward Technologies and published by Majesco in 2009 . Crane was not involved in the new game 's creation . That same year , A Boy and His Blob : Trouble on Blobolonia was re @-@ released on the Wii Virtual Console service in both North America and PAL regions . Another new title in the series was listed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 2010 as being in development for the Nintendo 3DS . WayForward later issued a statement that the listing was a mistake and that no new A Boy and His Blob was in production . 
 = Human tooth = 
 The human teeth function is mechanically breaking down items of food by cutting and crushing them in preparation for swallowing and digestion . There are four different types of teeth , namely incisors , canines , molars and premolars . Each type of tooth has a different job . The incisors cut the food , the canines tear the food and the molars and premolars crush the food . The roots of teeth are embedded in the maxilla ( upper jaw ) or the mandible ( lower jaw ) and are covered by gums . Teeth are made of multiple tissues of varying density and hardness . 
 Teeth are among the most distinctive ( and long @-@ lasting ) features of mammal species . Humans , like other mammals , are <unk> , meaning that they develop two sets of teeth . The first set ( called the " baby " , " milk " , " primary " , or " deciduous " set ) normally starts to appear at about six months of age , although some babies are born with one or more visible teeth , known as neonatal teeth . Normal tooth eruption at about six months is known as teething and can be painful . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Dental anatomy is a field of anatomy dedicated to the study of tooth structure . The development , appearance , and classification of teeth fall within its field of study , though dental occlusion , or contact among teeth , does not . Dental anatomy is also a taxonomic science as it is concerned with the naming of teeth and their structures . This information serves a practical purpose for dentists , enabling them to easily identify teeth and structures during treatment . 
 The anatomic crown of a tooth is the area covered in enamel above the cementoenamel junction ( CEJ ) or " neck " of the tooth . Most of the crown is composed of dentin ( dentine in British English ) with the pulp chamber inside . The crown is within bone before eruption . After eruption , it is almost always visible . The anatomic root is found below the CEJ and is covered with cementum . As with the crown , dentin composes most of the root , which normally has a pulp canals . A tooth may have multiple roots or just one root ( single @-@ rooted teeth ) . <unk> and most premolars , except for maxillary first premolars , usually have one root . Maxillary first premolars and mandibular molars usually have two roots . Maxillary molars usually have three roots . Additional roots are referred to as supernumerary roots . 
 Humans usually have 20 primary ( deciduous , " baby " or " milk " ) teeth and 32 permanent ( adult ) teeth . Teeth are classified as incisors , canines , premolars ( also called bicuspids ) , and molars . Incisors are primarily used for biting pieces from foods such as raw carrots or apples and peeled but uncut bananas , while molars are used primarily for grinding foods after they are already in bite size pieces inside the mouth . 
 Most teeth have identifiable features that distinguish them from others . There are several different notation systems to refer to a specific tooth . The three most common systems are the FDI World Dental Federation notation , the universal numbering system , and Palmer notation method . The FDI system is used worldwide , and the universal is used widely in the United States . 
 = = = Primary teeth = = = 
 Among deciduous ( primary ) teeth , ten are found in the maxilla ( upper jaw ) and ten in the mandible ( lower jaw ) , for a total of 20 . The dental formula for primary teeth is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 22 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 . 
 In the primary set of teeth , there are two types of incisors – <unk> and laterals , and two types of molars – first and second . All primary teeth are normally later replaced with their permanent counterparts . 
 = = = Permanent teeth = = = 
 Among permanent teeth , 16 are found in the maxilla and 16 in the mandible , for a total of 32 . The dental formula is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 . 
 The maxillary teeth are the maxillary central incisor , maxillary lateral incisor , maxillary canine , maxillary first premolar , maxillary second premolar , maxillary first molar , maxillary second molar , and maxillary third molar . The mandibular teeth are the mandibular central incisor , mandibular lateral incisor , mandibular canine , mandibular first premolar , mandibular second premolar , mandibular first molar , mandibular second molar , and mandibular third molar . Third molars are commonly called " wisdom teeth " and may never erupt into the mouth or form at all . If any additional teeth form , for example , fourth and fifth molars , which are rare , they are referred to as supernumerary teeth ( <unk> ) . Development of fewer than the usual number of teeth is called <unk> . 
 = = Parts = = 
 = = = Enamel = = = 
 Enamel is the hardest and most highly mineralized substance of the body . It is one of the four major tissues which make up the tooth , along with dentin , cementum , and dental pulp . It is normally visible and must be supported by underlying dentin . 96 % of enamel consists of mineral , with water and organic material comprising the rest . The normal color of enamel varies from light yellow to grayish white . At the edges of teeth where there is no dentin underlying the enamel , the color sometimes has a slightly blue tone . Since enamel is semitranslucent , the color of dentin and any restorative dental material underneath the enamel strongly affects the appearance of a tooth . Enamel varies in thickness over the surface of the tooth and is often thickest at the cusp , up to <unk> , and thinnest at its border , which is seen clinically as the CEJ . The wear rate of enamel , called attrition , is 8 micrometers a year from normal factors . 
 Enamel 's primary mineral is hydroxyapatite , which is a crystalline calcium phosphate . The large amount of minerals in enamel accounts not only for its strength but also for its brittleness . Dentin , which is less mineralized and less brittle , compensates for enamel and is necessary as a support . Unlike dentin and bone , enamel does not contain collagen . Instead , it has two unique classes of proteins called <unk> and <unk> . While the role of these proteins is not fully understood , it is believed that they aid in the development of enamel by serving as framework support among other functions . 
 = = = Dentin = = = 
 Dentin is the substance between enamel or cementum and the pulp chamber . It is secreted by the odontoblasts of the dental pulp . The formation of dentin is known as <unk> . The porous , yellow @-@ hued material is made up of 70 % inorganic materials , 20 % organic materials , and 10 % water by weight . Because it is softer than enamel , it decays more rapidly and is subject to severe cavities if not properly treated , but dentin still acts as a protective layer and supports the crown of the tooth . 
 Dentin is a mineralized connective tissue with an organic matrix of collagenous proteins . Dentin has microscopic channels , called <unk> tubules , which radiate outward through the dentin from the pulp cavity to the exterior cementum or enamel border . The diameter of these tubules range from 2 @.@ 5 μm near the pulp , to 1 @.@ 2 μm in the <unk> , and 900 nm near the <unk> @-@ enamel junction . Although they may have tiny side @-@ branches , the tubules do not intersect with each other . Their length is dictated by the radius of the tooth . The three dimensional configuration of the <unk> tubules is genetically determined . 
 = = = Cementum = = = 
 Cementum is a specialized bone like substance covering the root of a tooth . It is approximately 45 % inorganic material ( mainly hydroxyapatite ) , 33 % organic material ( mainly collagen ) and 22 % water . Cementum is excreted by cementoblasts within the root of the tooth and is thickest at the root apex . Its coloration is yellowish and it is softer than either dentin or enamel . The principal role of cementum is to serve as a medium by which the periodontal ligaments can attach to the tooth for stability . At the cementoenamel junction , the cementum is acellular due to its lack of cellular components , and this acellular type covers at least ⅔ of the root . The more permeable form of cementum , cellular cementum , covers about ⅓ of the root apex . 
 = = = Pulp = = = 
 The dental pulp is the central part of the tooth filled with soft connective tissue . This tissue contains blood vessels and nerves that enter the tooth from a hole at the apex of the root . Along the border between the dentin and the pulp are odontoblasts , which initiate the formation of dentin . Other cells in the pulp include fibroblasts , <unk> , macrophages and T lymphocytes . The pulp is commonly called " the nerve " of the tooth . 
 = = Development = = 
 Tooth development is the complex process by which teeth form from embryonic cells , grow , and erupt into the mouth . Although many diverse species have teeth , non @-@ human tooth development is largely the same as in humans . For human teeth to have a healthy oral environment , enamel , dentin , cementum , and the <unk> must all develop during appropriate stages of fetal development . Primary teeth start to form between the sixth and eighth weeks in utero , and permanent teeth begin to form in the twentieth week in utero . If teeth do not start to develop at or near these times , they will not develop at all . 
 A significant amount of research has focused on determining the processes that initiate tooth development . It is widely accepted that there is a factor within the tissues of the first branchial arch that is necessary for the development of teeth . 
 Tooth development is commonly divided into the following stages : the bud stage , the cap , the bell , and finally maturation . The staging of tooth development is an attempt to categorize changes that take place along a continuum ; frequently it is difficult to decide what stage should be assigned to a particular developing tooth . This determination is further complicated by the varying appearance of different histologic sections of the same developing tooth , which can appear to be different stages . 
 The tooth bud ( sometimes called the tooth germ ) is an aggregation of cells that eventually forms a tooth . It is organized into three parts : the enamel organ , the dental papilla and the dental follicle . The enamel organ is composed of the outer enamel epithelium , inner enamel epithelium , stellate reticulum and stratum intermedium . These cells give rise to <unk> , which produce enamel and the reduced enamel epithelium . The growth of cervical loop cells into the deeper tissues forms Hertwig 's Epithelial Root <unk> , which determines a tooth 's root shape . The dental papilla contains cells that develop into odontoblasts , which are dentin @-@ forming cells . Additionally , the junction between the dental papilla and inner enamel epithelium determines the crown shape of a tooth . The dental follicle gives rise to three important entities : cementoblasts , osteoblasts , and fibroblasts . <unk> form the cementum of a tooth . <unk> give rise to the alveolar bone around the roots of teeth . <unk> develop the periodontal ligaments which connect teeth to the alveolar bone through cementum . 
 = = Eruption = = 
 Tooth eruption in humans is a process in tooth development in which the teeth enter the mouth and become visible . Current research indicates that the periodontal ligaments play an important role in tooth eruption . Primary teeth erupt into the mouth from around six months until two years of age . These teeth are the only ones in the mouth until a person is about six years old . At that time , the first permanent tooth erupts . This stage , during which a person has a combination of primary and permanent teeth , is known as the mixed stage . The mixed stage lasts until the last primary tooth is lost and the remaining permanent teeth erupt into the mouth . 
 There have been many theories about the cause of tooth eruption . One theory proposes that the developing root of a tooth pushes it into the mouth . Another , known as the cushioned hammock theory , resulted from microscopic study of teeth , which was thought to show a ligament around the root . It was later discovered that the " ligament " was merely an artifact created in the process of preparing the slide . Currently , the most widely held belief is that the periodontal ligaments provide the main impetus for the process . 
 The onset of primary tooth loss has been found to correlate strongly with somatic and psychological criteria of school readiness . 
 = = Supporting structures = = 
 The <unk> is the supporting structure of a tooth , helping to attach the tooth to surrounding tissues and to allow sensations of touch and pressure . It consists of the cementum , periodontal ligaments , alveolar bone , and gingiva . Of these , cementum is the only one that is a part of a tooth . Periodontal ligaments connect the alveolar bone to the cementum . <unk> bone surrounds the roots of teeth to provide support and creates what is commonly called an alveolus , or " socket " . Lying over the bone is the gingiva or gum , which is readily visible in the mouth . 
 = = = Periodontal ligaments = = = 
 The periodontal ligament is a specialized connective tissue that attaches the cementum of a tooth to the alveolar bone . This tissue covers the root of the tooth within the bone . Each ligament has a width of 0 @.@ 15 – <unk> , but this size decreases over time . The functions of the periodontal ligaments include attachment of the tooth to the bone , support for the tooth , formation and resorption of bone during tooth movement , sensation , and eruption . The cells of the periodontal ligaments include osteoblasts , osteoclasts , fibroblasts , macrophages , cementoblasts , and epithelial cell rests of <unk> . Consisting of mostly Type I and III collagen , the fibers are grouped in bundles and named according to their location . The groups of fibers are named alveolar crest , horizontal , oblique , <unk> , and <unk> fibers . The nerve supply generally enters from the bone apical to the tooth and forms a network around the tooth toward the crest of the gingiva . When pressure is exerted on a tooth , such as during chewing or biting , the tooth moves slightly in its socket and puts tension on the periodontal ligaments . The nerve fibers can then send the information to the central nervous system for interpretation . 
 = = = <unk> bone = = = 
 The alveolar bone is the bone of the jaw which forms the alveolus around teeth . Like any other bone in the human body , alveolar bone is modified throughout life . <unk> create bone and osteoclasts destroy it , especially if force is placed on a tooth . As is the case when movement of teeth is attempted through orthodontics , an area of bone under compressive force from a tooth moving toward it has a high <unk> level , resulting in bone resorption . An area of bone receiving tension from periodontal ligaments attached to a tooth moving away from it has a high number of osteoblasts , resulting in bone formation . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The gingiva ( " gums " ) is the mucosal tissue that overlays the jaws . There are three different types of epithelium associated with the gingiva : gingival , junctional , and <unk> epithelium . These three types form from a mass of epithelial cells known as the epithelial cuff between the tooth and the mouth . The gingival epithelium is not associated directly with tooth attachment and is visible in the mouth . The junctional epithelium , composed of the basal lamina and <unk> , forms an attachment to the tooth . The <unk> epithelium is <unk> stratified squamous tissue on the gingiva which touches but is not attached to the tooth . 
 = = Tooth decay = = 
 = = = Plaque = = = 
 Plaque is a biofilm consisting of large quantities of various bacteria that form on teeth . If not removed regularly , plaque buildup can lead to periodontal problems such as gingivitis . Given time , plaque can mineralize along the gingiva , forming tartar . The microorganisms that form the biofilm are almost entirely bacteria ( mainly streptococcus and anaerobes ) , with the composition varying by location in the mouth . Streptococcus mutans is the most important bacterium associated with dental caries . 
 Certain bacteria in the mouth live off the remains of foods , especially sugars and starches . In the absence of oxygen they produce lactic acid , which dissolves the calcium and phosphorus in the enamel . This process , known as " <unk> " , leads to tooth destruction . Saliva gradually neutralises the acids which cause the pH of the tooth surface to rise above the critical pH . This causes ' <unk> ' , the return of the dissolved minerals to the enamel . If there is sufficient time between the intake of foods then the impact is limited and the teeth can repair themselves . Saliva is unable to penetrate through plaque , however , to neutralize the acid produced by the bacteria . 
 = = = <unk> ( cavities ) = = = 
 Dental caries ( cavities ) , described as " tooth decay " , is an infectious disease which damages the structures of teeth . The disease can lead to pain , tooth loss , and infection . Dental caries has a long history , with evidence showing the disease was present in the Bronze , Iron , and Middle ages but also prior to the neolithic period . The largest increases in the prevalence of caries have been associated with diet changes . Today , caries remains one of the most common diseases throughout the world . In the United States , dental caries is the most common chronic childhood disease , being at least five times more common than asthma . Countries that have experienced an overall decrease in cases of tooth decay continue to have a disparity in the distribution of the disease . Among children in the United States and Europe , 60 – 80 % of cases of dental caries occur in 20 % of the population . 
 Tooth decay is caused by certain types of acid @-@ producing bacteria which cause the most damage in the presence of fermentable carbohydrates such as sucrose , fructose , and glucose . The resulting acidic levels in the mouth affect teeth because a tooth 's special mineral content causes it to be sensitive to low pH . Depending on the extent of tooth destruction , various treatments can be used to restore teeth to proper form , function , and aesthetics , but there is no known method to regenerate large amounts of tooth structure . Instead , dental health organizations advocate preventative and prophylactic measures , such as regular oral hygiene and dietary modifications , to avoid dental caries . 
 = = Tooth care = = 
 Oral hygiene is the practice of keeping the mouth clean and is a means of preventing dental caries , gingivitis , periodontal disease , bad breath , and other dental disorders . It consists of both professional and personal care . Regular cleanings , usually done by dentists and dental hygienists , remove tartar ( mineralized plaque ) that may develop even with careful brushing and <unk> . Professional cleaning includes tooth scaling , using various instruments or devices to loosen and remove deposits from teeth . 
 The purpose of cleaning teeth is to remove plaque , which consists mostly of bacteria . Healthcare professionals recommend regular brushing twice a day ( in the morning and in the evening , or after meals ) in order to prevent formation of plaque and tartar . A toothbrush is able to remove most plaque , except in areas between teeth . As a result , <unk> is also considered a necessity to maintain oral hygiene . When used correctly , dental floss removes plaque from between teeth and at the gum line , where periodontal disease often begins and could develop caries . 
 Electric toothbrushes are a popular aid to oral hygiene . A user without disabilities , with proper training in manual brushing , and with good motivation , can achieve standards of oral hygiene at least as satisfactory as the best electric brushes , but untrained users rarely achieve anything of the kind . Not all electric toothbrushes are equally effective and even a good design needs to be used properly for best effect , but : " Electric toothbrushes tend to help people who are not as good at cleaning teeth and as a result have had oral hygiene problems . " The most important advantage of electric toothbrushes is their ability to aid people with dexterity difficulties , such as those associated with rheumatoid arthritis . 
 Fluoride therapy is often recommended to protect against dental caries . Water fluoridation and fluoride supplements decrease the incidence of dental caries . Fluoride helps prevent dental decay by binding to the hydroxyapatite crystals in enamel . The incorporated fluoride makes enamel more resistant to demineralization and thus more resistant to decay . Topical fluoride , such as a fluoride toothpaste or mouthwash , is also recommended to protect teeth surfaces . Many dentists include application of topical fluoride solutions as part of routine cleanings . 
 = = Restorations = = 
 After a tooth has been damaged or destroyed , restoration of the missing structure can be achieved with a variety of treatments . Restorations may be created from a variety of materials , including glass <unk> , amalgam , gold , porcelain , and composite . Small restorations placed inside a tooth are referred to as " <unk> restorations " . These restorations may be formed directly in the mouth or may be cast using the lost @-@ wax technique , such as for some inlays and <unk> . When larger portions of a tooth are lost , an " <unk> restoration " may be fabricated , such as an artificial crown or a veneer , to restore the involved tooth . 
 When a tooth is lost , dentures , bridges , or implants may be used as replacements . Dentures are usually the least costly whereas implants are usually the most expensive . Dentures may replace complete arches of the mouth or only a partial number of teeth . Bridges replace smaller spaces of missing teeth and use adjacent teeth to support the restoration . Dental implants may be used to replace a single tooth or a series of teeth . Though implants are the most expensive treatment option , they are often the most desirable restoration because of their aesthetics and function . To improve the function of dentures , implants may be used as support . 
 = = Abnormalities = = 
 Tooth abnormalities may be categorized according to whether they have environmental or developmental causes . While environmental abnormalities may appear to have an obvious cause , there may not appear to be any known cause for some developmental abnormalities . Environmental forces may affect teeth during development , destroy tooth structure after development , discolor teeth at any stage of development , or alter the course of tooth eruption . Developmental abnormalities most commonly affect the number , size , shape , and structure of teeth . 
 = = = Environmental = = = 
 = = = = Alteration during tooth development = = = = 
 Tooth abnormalities caused by environmental factors during tooth development have long @-@ lasting effects . Enamel and dentin do not regenerate after they mineralize initially . Enamel hypoplasia is a condition in which the amount of enamel formed is inadequate . This results either in pits and grooves in areas of the tooth or in widespread absence of enamel . Diffuse opacities of enamel does not affect the amount of enamel but changes its appearance . Affected enamel has a different translucency than the rest of the tooth . <unk> opacities of enamel have sharp boundaries where the translucency decreases and manifest a white , cream , yellow , or brown color . All these may be caused by nutritional factors , an <unk> disease ( chicken pox , congenital syphilis ) , undiagnosed and untreated celiac disease , hypocalcemia , dental fluorosis , birth injury , preterm birth , infection or trauma from a deciduous tooth . Dental fluorosis is a condition which results from ingesting excessive amounts of fluoride and leads to teeth which are spotted , yellow , brown , black or sometimes pitted . In most cases , the enamel defects caused by celiac disease , which may be the only manifestation of this disease in the absence of any other symptoms or signs , are not recognized and mistakenly attributed to other causes , such as fluorosis . Enamel hypoplasia resulting from syphilis is frequently referred to as Hutchinson 's teeth , which is considered one part of Hutchinson 's triad . Turner 's hypoplasia is a portion of missing or diminished enamel on a permanent tooth usually from a prior infection of a nearby primary tooth . <unk> may also result from antineoplastic therapy . 
 = = = = Destruction after development = = = = 
 Tooth destruction from processes other than dental caries is considered a normal physiologic process but may become severe enough to become a pathologic condition . Attrition is the loss of tooth structure by mechanical forces from opposing teeth . Attrition initially affects the enamel and , if unchecked , may proceed to the underlying dentin . <unk> is the loss of tooth structure by mechanical forces from a foreign element . If this force begins at the cementoenamel junction , then progression of tooth loss can be rapid since enamel is very thin in this region of the tooth . A common source of this type of tooth wear is excessive force when using a toothbrush . Erosion is the loss of tooth structure due to chemical dissolution by acids not of bacterial origin . Signs of tooth destruction from erosion is a common characteristic in the mouths of people with bulimia since vomiting results in exposure of the teeth to gastric acids . Another important source of erosive acids are from frequent sucking of lemon juice . <unk> is the loss of tooth structure from flexural forces . As teeth flex under pressure , the arrangement of teeth touching each other , known as occlusion , causes tension on one side of the tooth and compression on the other side of the tooth . This is believed to cause V @-@ shaped depressions on the side under tension and C @-@ shaped depressions on the side under compression . When tooth destruction occurs at the roots of teeth , the process is referred to as internal resorption , when caused by cells within the pulp , or external resorption , when caused by cells in the periodontal ligament . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> of teeth may result from bacteria stains , tobacco , tea , coffee , foods with an abundance of chlorophyll , restorative materials , and medications . Stains from bacteria may cause colors varying from green to black to orange . Green stains also result from foods with chlorophyll or excessive exposure to copper or nickel . <unk> , a common dental restorative material , may turn adjacent areas of teeth black or gray . Long term use of <unk> , a mouthwash , may encourage extrinsic stain formation near the gingiva on teeth . This is usually easy for a hygienist to remove . Systemic disorders also can cause tooth discoloration . Congenital erythropoietic porphyria causes porphyrins to be deposited in teeth , causing a red @-@ brown coloration . Blue discoloration may occur with <unk> and rarely with Parkinson 's disease . <unk> <unk> and biliary atresia are diseases which may cause teeth to appear green from the deposition of <unk> . Also , trauma may change a tooth to a pink , yellow , or dark gray color . Pink and red discolorations are also associated in patients with <unk> leprosy . Some medications , such as tetracycline antibiotics , may become incorporated into the structure of a tooth , causing intrinsic staining of the teeth . 
 = = = = Alteration of eruption = = = = 
 Tooth eruption may be altered by some environmental factors . When eruption is prematurely stopped , the tooth is said to be impacted . The most common cause of tooth impaction is lack of space in the mouth for the tooth . Other causes may be tumors , cysts , trauma , and thickened bone or soft tissue . Tooth ankylosis occurs when the tooth has already erupted into the mouth but the cementum or dentin has fused with the alveolar bone . This may cause a person to retain their primary tooth instead of having it replaced by a permanent one . 
 A technique for altering the natural progression of eruption is employed by <unk> who wish to delay or speed up the eruption of certain teeth for reasons of space maintenance or otherwise preventing crowding and / or spacing . If a primary tooth is extracted before its succeeding permanent tooth 's root reaches ⅓ of its total growth , the eruption of the permanent tooth will be delayed . Conversely , if the roots of the permanent tooth are more than ⅔ complete , the eruption of the permanent tooth will be accelerated . Between ⅓ and ⅔ , it is unknown exactly what will occur to the speed of eruption . 
 = = = Developmental = = = 
 = = = = Abnormality in number = = = = 
 <unk> is the total lack of tooth development . 
 <unk> is the presence of a higher @-@ than @-@ normal number of teeth . 
 <unk> is the lack of some teeth . Usually : 
 <unk> refers to the lack of development of one or more teeth 
 <unk> may be used to describe the absence of 6 or more teeth . 
 Some systemic disorders which may result in <unk> include <unk> syndrome , <unk> <unk> , <unk> syndrome , Ehlers – Danlos syndrome , Gardner syndrome , and Sturge – Weber syndrome . Some systemic disorders which may result in <unk> include <unk> syndrome , <unk> dysplasia , Ehlers – Danlos syndrome , and Gorlin syndrome . 
 = = = = Abnormality in size = = = = 
 <unk> is a condition where teeth are smaller than the usual size . 
 <unk> is where teeth are larger than the usual size . 
 <unk> of a single tooth is more likely to occur in a maxillary lateral incisor . The second most likely tooth to have <unk> are third molars . <unk> of all the teeth is known to occur in pituitary gigantism and pineal hyperplasia . It may also occur on one side of the face in cases of <unk> hyperplasia . 
 = = = = Abnormality in shape = = = = 
 <unk> occurs when a developing tooth incompletely splits into the formation of two teeth . 
 Fusion is the union of two adjacent teeth during development . 
 <unk> is the fusion of two separate teeth only in their cementum . 
 Accessory cusps are additional cusps on a tooth and may manifest as a Talon cusp , Cusp of <unk> , or Dens <unk> . 
 Dens <unk> , also called Dens in <unk> , is a deep invagination in a tooth causing the appearance of a tooth within a tooth . 
 <unk> enamel is enamel found in an unusual location , such as the root of a tooth . 
 <unk> is a condition where the body of the tooth and pulp chamber is enlarged , and is associated with <unk> syndrome , <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ osseous syndrome , Triple X syndrome , and <unk> syndrome . 
 <unk> is excessive formation of cementum , which may result from trauma , inflammation , acromegaly , rheumatic fever , and Paget 's disease of bone . 
 A <unk> is a bend in the root which may have been caused by trauma to the tooth during formation . 
 Supernumerary roots is the presence of a greater number of roots on a tooth than expected . 
 = = = = Abnormality in structure = = = = 
 <unk> imperfecta is a condition in which enamel does not form properly or at all . 
 <unk> imperfecta is a condition in which dentin does not form properly and is sometimes associated with osteogenesis imperfecta . 
 Dentin dysplasia is a disorder in which the roots and pulp of teeth may be affected . 
 Regional <unk> is a disorder affecting enamel , dentin , and pulp and causes the teeth to appear " ghostly " on radiographs . 
 = = = Lists = = = 
 List of basic dentistry topics 
 List of oral health and dental topics 
 = I Never Liked You = 
 I Never Liked You is a graphic novel by Canadian cartoonist Chester Brown . The story first ran between 1991 and 1993 under the title Fuck , in issues # 26 – 30 of Brown 's comic book Yummy Fur ; published in book form by Drawn and Quarterly in 1994 . It deals with the teenage Brown 's introversion and difficulty talking to others , especially members of the opposite sex — including his mother , to whom he is unable to express affection even as she lies dying in the hospital . The story has minimal dialogue and is sparsely narrated . The artwork is amongst the simplest in Brown 's body of work — some pages consist only of a single small panel . 
 Brown established his reputation in the early alternative comics scene of the 1980s with the surreal , taboo @-@ breaking Ed the Happy Clown . He brought that story to an abrupt end in 1989 when , excited by the autobiographical comics of Joe Matt and Julie Doucet , he turned towards personal stories . The uncomplicated artwork of his friend and fellow Toronto cartoonist Seth inspired him to simplify his own . Brown intended I Never Liked You as part of a longer work with what became his previous book , The Playboy ( 1992 ) , but found the larger story too complex to handle at once . I Never Liked You was the last work of Brown 's early autobiographical period . 
 I Never Liked You was well received , and its influence can be found in the work of cartoonists such as Jeffrey Brown , Ariel Schrag and Anders Nilsen . The book appeared amid the early 1990s trend in autobiographical alternative comics , and Brown was one of a prominent trio of Toronto @-@ based autobiographical cartoonists , with Seth and Joe Matt . Brown originally set the panels against black page backgrounds , which he replaced with white for an annotated " New Definitive Edition " in 2002 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brown grew up in Châteauguay , a Montreal suburb with a large English @-@ speaking minority ; he does not speak French . He described himself as a " nerdy teenager " attracted to comic books from a young age , and sought a career in superhero comics , but was unsuccessful in finding work with Marvel or DC after graduating from high school . He moved to Toronto and discovered underground comix and the small @-@ press community . From 1983 he self @-@ published a minicomic titled Yummy Fur . 
 From 1986 Toronto @-@ based Vortex Comics began publishing Yummy Fur . After making a name for himself in alternative comics with the surreal serial Ed the Happy Clown , Brown turned to autobiography under the influence of the work of Julie Doucet and Joe Matt . During his autobiographical period , Brown gradually simplified his style , inspired by the example of his friend and fellow Toronto cartoonist Seth . He began tentatively with a pair of short tales , and gradually became freer with his panel layouts and simpler in his artwork . 
 Brown had switched publishers to the Montreal @-@ based Drawn and Quarterly by the time he completed his first autobiographical graphic novel , The Playboy , in 1992 . At first , he intended The Playboy and I Never Liked You to form one story , but found it too complex to handle when he started to plan it out . The Playboy deals with Brown 's guilt over his teenage obsession with masturbating over pornography . The book gained praise from fans , critics , and other cartoonists , and won a Harvey Award . It received criticism from those who saw it as objectifying women and glorifying pornography ; Playboy publisher Hugh Hefner wrote to Brown voicing concern that Brown would feel such guilt in a post @-@ sexual revolution world . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story is set during Brown 's 1970s adolescence in Châteauguay , a suburb of Montreal . Chester — " Chet " for short — is a thin , long @-@ haired teenager who is awkward , introverted , and better able to express himself through drawing than speaking . He constantly and inexplicably turns away girls , even though he is interested in them and they in him . Except in his imagination , Chet has difficulty expressing affection even for his mother . She talks to Chet and his younger brother Gord about issues that embarrass them , and the religious teaching she has instilled in them has rendered Chet unable to bring himself to swear , for which he is teased and goaded at school . 
 Chet plays games such as hide @-@ and @-@ seek with the neighbourhood children . One girl , Carrie , has a crush on Chet and invites him to her house each day to wash the dishes . He and Carrie 's older sister Connie , a bossy blonde a year his senior , often hide during hide @-@ and @-@ seek games in tall grass where they spend the time talking with each other , though they have little in common . Connie asks him to the movies , but he sits away from her when he spots boys from his school ; he fears he will be teased for being on a date . When the film ends , they walk home in silence . 
 Chet is interested in Sky , a large @-@ breasted dark @-@ haired girl two years younger who lives next door , about whom he has masturbatory fantasies . He confesses his love but immediately regrets it , unable to express his feelings . She connects with Chet and tries to develop a relationship , but he is unable to deal with his emotions and avoids spending time with her . He draws her a picture of a skeleton symbolizing himself reaching for a bird signifying Sky herself . When Carrie deciphers it correctly he denies that he uses symbolism in his drawings , and the confrontation escalates to minor violence when Carrie proclaims to him , " I never liked you ! " 
 Chet and his brother rarely visit their mother after she checks into hospital , and when they do Chet cannot bring himself to tell her he loves her . She suffers a fall down a flight of stairs there when confusedly wandering around and dies after being bedridden and incoherent for a short time . Chet makes excuse after excuse to turn Sky away when she tries to spend time with him . The story ends with Chet refusing to accompany Sky to the fair because he says he would rather listen to his new Kiss album . 
 = = Publication = = 
 I Never Liked You was originally serialized under the title Fuck , in issues # 26 – 30 of Yummy Fur , between October 1991 and April 1993 . Unlike his earlier works , according to Brown there was " very little improvisation in I Never Liked You . It was quite planned out , even if I didn 't write a full script . " 
 Drawn and Quarterly issued a collected edition in 1994 , changing the title from Fuck to I Never Liked You . Brown rearranged the page layouts , removing panels , most significantly those in the prologue where Chet explains his motivations . 
 A " New Definitive Edition " appeared in 2002 , with two added pages of contextual endnotes , something he had been increasingly doing from 1995 with his cartoon essay " My Mom Was a Schizophrenic " . In the 1994 collection the backgrounds were black ; he changed them to white and rearranged the panels for the " New Definitive Edition " . He explained : " I like austerity . The white background looks more austere to me . " The edition included a short appendix for readers " wondering when and where things happened " . 
 Brown announced in Louis Riel # 7 a recall of the first 600 copies of the edition , citing that the paper it was printed on was too transparent . The recalled copies also had a panel captioned " I decide to say nothing " ; the caption did not appear in copies that were not recalled . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 Academic Charles Hatfield finds " an abiding interest in the ways people are shaped by their environment " in Brown 's autobiographical work , and believes the stories demonstrate " the urgency of Justin Green and the mundane particularity of Harvey Pekar " , two influential creators known for their revealing autobiographical comics . Brown is unsparing in his depictions of social awkwardness of his teenage years . Despite the 1970s adolescent backdrop , sex and drugs are absent ; his life is shaped by his strictly religious parents and introversion . 
 Brown 's mother ( 1923 – 76 ) suffered from schizophrenia . This is not made explicit , but hinted at in scenes where she approaches awkward subjects with Chet and his brother Gord ; the boys ' unsupportive responses feed the discomfort . Brown addresses his mother 's mental health in his 1995 cartoon essay " My Mom Was a Schizophrenic " , in which he takes an anti @-@ psychiatric stance . 
 Chet 's face is near expressionless throughout . The characters are distanced from the reader , inviting neither empathy nor identification . To cartoonist and critic Pepo Pérez , this is a challenge to readers to understand the characters . In the appendix to the " New Definitive Edition " , Brown declares the dialogue is filtered through his memory and likely did not occur as recorded , and that locations and other details are also subject to lapses of memory . To academic Elisabeth El <unk> this transparency on Brown 's part is " a deeper and more sincere form of authenticity " . Reviewer C. Max Magee found the tone of awkwardness and emotional emptiness comparable to works by contemporaries such as Daniel Clowes and Chris Ware . 
 The story unfolds in vignettes , with little setup or context given to any scene . To Hatfield , they " [ pop ] out of nowhere as a dreamlike series of pulses ... The effect is sometimes eerie ... despite the grounding of the story in mundane everyday stuff . " Unlike in his previous graphic novel , The Playboy , Brown makes limited use of a narrator in I Never Liked You . The story is told almost entirely through its pictures and sparse dialogue . The page layouts are also sparse , sometimes limited to a single , small panel on a page , sometimes up to seven or eight . The layout and repetition of panels affects pacing , slowing or quickening scene . 
 Brown abandoned the grid layout he had used in earlier works for more varied , organic layouts . Backgrounds establish the mood of a scene , harmonizing or contrasting with the action — as when Chet and Connie return from the movies amongst a romantic snow @-@ covered , starry landscape , against an awkward silence accentuated by panel that grow , making the figures appear ever more insignificant . 
 The cartooning is far looser than in Brown 's earlier work , and concerned more with gesture and expression than literal detail . They are rendered with a brush , and amongst the simplest and sparsest in his body of work . There is nonetheless a significant amount of hatching , and the backgrounds are naturalistic , in contrast to the thin , distorted figures . Brown had been paring his artwork since the Playboy stories , as he was not happy with his style and sought " to rebuild [ his ] style in a way that [ he ] would like " . He continued this with I Never Liked You , where he has said he was " trying to get even more pared down than The Playboy " . Certain inanimate objects receive a focus imbuing them with special significance , such as Chet 's habitual after @-@ school package of soda crackers or the Brown family home — a house that , to reviewer Darcy Sullivan , " is as much a character [ in I Never Liked You ] as in The Playboy " . 
 Brown drew the pictures before laying down the panel borders , which conform to the shapes of the pictures they enclosed and are drawn in a wobbly free @-@ hand much like in the artwork of the Los Bros Hernandez or Robert Crumb . He drew each panel individually , assembling them into pages afterwards . In the original serialization and first collected edition , they were placed on black backgrounds . He changed to white backgrounds for the 2002 edition . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Brown 's autobiographical work developed from a scene that had been developing since the 1970s and which had reached a peak in the late 1980s and early 1990s . Brown 's open and self @-@ deprecating example left an impact on cartoonists such as Jeffrey Brown and Ariel Schrag , and his sparse layouts on the likes of Anders Nilsen . Upon the serial 's conclusion , reviewer Darcy Sullivan called it " a major step forward for the artist , a leading light in adult comics " . American cartoonist Gilbert Hernandez hailed The Playboy and I Never Liked You as " probably the best graphic novels next to Maus " ; British cartoonist Eddie Campbell called them " the most sensitive comics ever made " ; and American comics writer Heidi MacDonald called I Never Liked You " a masterpiece " that is " the equal of any ' coming of age ' movie " . 
 Charles Hatfield praised Brown 's honesty , keen observation , and narrative strength , and called the " hide with me " page as one of his favourites . Critic Óscar Palmer described the work as " an example of sobriety and restraint , and one of the harshest , most hopeless teenage portraits ... in any medium " . Scripter and critic <unk> Bermúdez wrote the book demonstrates Brown a master of his medium . Norwegian cartoonist Jason calls I Never Liked You a favourite autobiographical work . 
 Alongside Seth 's It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken and Joe Matt 's The Poor Bastard — works by Brown 's Toronto @-@ based friends and Drawn and Quarterly stablemates — I Never Liked You is seen as a prominent example of the 1990s autobiographical comics trend . As one of " The Autobiographical Stories from Yummy Fur " , it ranked 38th on The Comics Journal 's list of the top 100 English @-@ language comics of the 20th century . In 2001 Stephen Weiner included I Never Liked You in his book The 101 Best Graphic Novels , recommending it to those who enjoy J. D. Salinger 's novel The Catcher in the Rye . 
 I Never Liked You was the last work from his autobiographical period that started in 1990 with Helder in Yummy Fur # 19 . Yummy Fur continued for two more issues before Drawn and Quarterly publisher Chris Oliveros convinced Brown to publish his next serial , Underwater , under its own title in 1994 . In 2011 Brown returned to autobiography and his relations with women with the graphic novel Paying for It , a polemic arguing for the decriminalization of prostitution . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 124 = 
 Route 124 is a state highway in the northern part of New Jersey in the United States that is 14 @.@ 74 mi ( 23 @.@ 72 km ) long . It is the eastern section of what used to be Route 24 before that road was realigned to its current freeway alignment . The western end is at an intersection with U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) and County Route 510 ( CR 510 ) in Morristown , Morris County ; the eastern end continues as CR 603 on Springfield Avenue at the border between Maplewood and Irvington in Essex County . The route runs through suburban areas of Morris County , passing through Madison and Chatham . It interchanges with Route 24 on the border of Millburn , Essex County and Summit , Union County and serves as a frontage road for that route . Upon splitting from Route 24 , Route 124 continues east through Springfield Township , Union Township , and Maplewood to its eastern terminus . 
 The alignment of today ’ s Route 124 was first designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 in 1916 , a route that was to run from Delaware , Warren County to Newark . In 1927 , this portion of the route became a part of Route 24 , a route that was to run from Phillipsburg to Newark . A freeway , which is the current alignment of Route 24 , was proposed for this portion of the route in the 1950s that was approved in 1960 . Route 24 was moved to the new freeway between the John F. Kennedy Parkway on the Millburn / Summit border and Interstate 78 ( I @-@ 78 ) in 1972 , with Route 124 being designated along the former alignment of Route 24 east of this point . In 1992 , the Route 24 freeway was completed between I @-@ 287 in Hanover Township and the John F. Kennedy Parkway . As a result , Route 124 was extended west along the former Route 24 to U.S. Route 202 in Morristown . 
 = = Route description = = 
